s/z 
~ItS BY ROlAND MaTHBI 
A &niles R-*r 
c.mc.. LwitJJ, 
CriIiaIJ &s.,s 
TAe Eiffel T-.w .. 0Mer Myt/IoIofies 
EIerrtnIIs of ~ 
TAe &.pire of SipI 
TAe FtuIIitM s,nn. 
TAe c;,.;" of '* y­
I ..... -Mruie-Tat 
A Ltwer's Dist:owse 
MidINI 
Myt/IoIofies 
New CriIiaIJ &s.,s 
0. RMiIre 
TAe Pkruwe of '* Tat 
TAe~ofFomu 
RoItmJ &niles 
TAe RIISIIe of ~ 
s.Je / Fowier / LoyoM 
TAe Semiotic CWienfe 
S/Z 
Writing Degrw Zero 
s/z 
Roland Barthes 
TRANSLATED BY 
R.idYtrl Miller 
PREFACE BY 
Ridunl HowanJ 
• A Blackwell 
Translation © 1974 by Farrar, Straus and Giroux, Inc. 
Originally published in French as S/Z 
Copyright © 1973 by Editions du Seuil, Paris 
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148-5018, USA 
108 Cowley Road, Oxford OX4 UF, UK 
550 Swanston Street, Carlton South, Melbourne, Victoria 3053, Australia 
Kurfllrstendamm 57, 10707 Berlin, Germany 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, 
photocopying, recording or otherwise, except as permitted by the UK Copyright, Designs, 
and Patents Act 1988, without the prior permission of the publisher. 
Published by arrangement with 
Hill and Wang, a division of Farrar, Straus & Giroux, Inc. 
19 Union Square West 
New York, NY 10003, USA 
First published in the United Kingdom 1990 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd 
Reprinted 1992, 1993, 1995, 1996, 1998, 2000, 2002 
ISBN 0·631·17607·1 (paperback) 
A catalogue record for this title is available fi"om the British Library. 
Printed and bound in the United Kingdom 
by Athena:um Press Ltd, Gateshead, Tyne & Wear 
For further information on 
Blackwell Publishing, visit our website: 
http://www.blackwellpublishing.com 
S/Z 3 
APPENDICES Contents 
I SamlSine, by Honore de Balzac zn 
n Sequence of Actions z 5 5 
m Summary of Contents z60 
IV Key zli9 
This book is the trace of work done during a two-year seminar 
(1968-1969) at ~ Ecole pratique des Hautes Etudes. 
I hope that the students, auditon, and friends who took pert 
in this seminar will accept this dedication of a krt 
which was written according to their attention to it. 
A Note onS/Z 
-It will afford profit and pleasure to that numerous class of persons 
who have no instinctive enjoyment of literature," writes a British 
Jr:Viewer of the French text of S/Z. Irwtinctiw mjoynwnt rIf liNnI­
.... , Surely all of Roland Bartha's len books esist to unmask such 
ID eKpression, to ezpose such a myth. It is precisely our "inst:iDctive 
~joyment" which is acculturated, detenDined, in bondage. Only 
when we mow-and it is a knowledge pined by taking pains, by 
_unclng what Freud calls instinctual gratification-what we are 
fIaing when we read, are we free to enjoy what we read. As long as 
@ ~joyment is-or is said to be-instinctive it is not enjoyment, 
it is terrorism. For literature is like love in La Rochefoucauld: no .-would ever have &:Kperienced it if he had not first read about it 
• books. We require an education in literature as in tftc senti­
.alb in order to discover that what we assumed-with the com­
fIicity of our teachers-was nature is in fact culture, that what was 
,;wn is DO more than a way of taking. And we must learn, when 
,We take, the cost of our participation, or else we shan pay much 
JIIIR. We shall pay our capacity to read at aU. 
\ Barthes calls his study an essay, and in it a consideration of more 
.-.n just the tale by Balzac is desirable if we hope to discern what 
:J iI that is being tried here. For the work on the text by Balzac. the 
:6Iection-into 561 numbered fragmenb, or lems, varying in 
:....... from one word to several lines-of Sclmuinc, is not per­
,...." for the sake of identifying the five notorious codes (her-
vii 
meneutic, semantic, proairetic, cultural, and symbolic), or even 
for the sake of discriminating the classical text (with its ptlTsimoni­
ow plurality of interpretation and its closure of significance) from 
the modem text which has no such restrictions, no such closure 
(for the final closure of the modem text is suspension). Rather, 
the work so joyously performed here is undertaken for the sake of 
the 93 divagations (I use MaUarme's term advisedly, for it is with 
Mallarme, Barthes has said, that our "modernity" begins) identified 
by Roman numerals and printed in large type. amounting in each 
case to a page or two. These divagations, taken together, as they 
interrupt and are generated by the lexias of the analyzed text, con­
stitute the most sustained yet pulverized meditation on reading 1 
know in all of Western critical literature. They afford-though 
Barthes can afford them only because of the scrupulous density of 
his attention, his presence of mind where one is used to little more 
than pasturage-a convinced. euphoric, even a militant critique of 
what it is we do when we read. For reading is still the principal 
thing we do by ounelves in culture, and it has too long been granted 
-as when Valery Larbaud calls it the one unpunished vice-the 
amnesty of our society. We have "forgiven" masturbation in our 
erotic jurisdiction, but have we even learned to "indict" reading? 
"What do you read now?" the hungry interviewer asked the 
famous writer, a woman of commercial success in the theater whose 
autobiography has defined a character of considerable literary s0-
phistication. And the famous writer answered: 
1 don't read novels any more, I'm sorry to say. A writer should 
read novels. When 1 d'o, 1 go back to the ones I've read before. 
Dickens. Balzac 1 find now when I go to get a book off 
the shelf, I pick something I've read before, as if 1 didn't dare 
try anything new. 
Aside from the underlining fact that it is a writer speaking, this is 
a familiar experience, this preference for what Barthes calls the 
redderly over what he calls the writerly (I believe Richard Miller 
has been both plausible and adroit in his translation of lisible and 
viii 
ICrifJtibk; the dilemma is characteristic of the problem any trans­
lator of Barthes confronts, and the solution is characteristic of Mr. 
Miller, properly concerned with his reader's comprehension, not 
his comfort). I t is a familiar experience because only what is au­
thentically writerly can become readerly. If we were to set out to 
Mite a readerly text, we should be no more than hacks in bad 
faith; yet, as readers, how hard it is to face the open text, the plu­
mlity of signification, the suspension of meaning. It explains that 
hesitation at the bookshelf, the hand falling on the Balzac story, 
the known quantity. Known How often we need to be as­
sured of what we know in the old ways of knowing-how seldom 
we can afford to venture beyond the pale into that chromatic fan­
tasy where, as Rilke said (in 1908!), "begins the revision of cate­
pies, where something past comes again, as though out of the 
future; something formerly accomplished as something to be com­
pleted." (A perfect description, by the way, of the book in hand.) 
Why we read in this repressed and repressive way; what it is, in 
the very nature of reading, which fences us in, which closes us off, 
it is Barthes's genius to explore, not merely to deplore. His re­
lmIChes into the structure of narrative have granted him a convic­
tion (or a reprieve), a conviction that all telling modifies what is 
king told, so that what the linguists call the message is a param­
eRr of its performance. Indeed, his conviction of reading is that 
what is told is always the telling. And this he does not arraign, he 
"alcbrates. 
So exact are Barthes's divagations, so exacting are their discover­
.. about the nature of reading, that we may now and again be 
l4ismayed-if we are in the main readers of the readerly-by the 
:tams he has come to (he usually assumes Greek has a word for it) 
• which they must be rendered. For Barthes's text is writerly-at 
~ ... his divagations are. This criticism is literature. It makes upon 
~. strenuous demands, exactions. And because of them, precisely, 
;;~ too are released, reprieved; we are free to read both the readerly 
,(_ can we ever again read Balzac in aU innocence? can we ever _t to?) and the writerly, en conrutissance de CdU8e, knowing the 
~~n why. Essentially an erotic meditation, then, because it con­
~ what is inexpressible (which is the essence of eros), Barthes's 
IX 
essay is the most useful, the most intimate, and the most suggestive 
boole I have ever read about why I have ever read a boolc. It is, by 
the way, useful, intimate, and suggestive about Balzac's tale Sdr· 
rdline, which the reader of the readerly will find reassembled at the 
end of this writerly book, en .".~, as the French say. 
RJCa.uD HOWAD 
s/z 
I. EVALUATION 
There are said to be certain Buddhists whose ascetic practices 
enable them to see a whole landscape in a bean. Precisely what 
the first analysts of narrative were attempting: to see all the 
world's stories (and there have been ever so many) within a 
single structure: we shall, they thought, extract from each tale 
its model, then out of these models we shall make a great nar­
rative structure, which we shall reapply (for verification) to 
anyone narrative: a task as exhausting (ninety-nine percent 
perspiration, as the saying goes) as it is ultimately undesirable, 
for the text thereby loses its difference. This difference is not, 
obviously, some complete, irreducible quality (according to a 
mythic view of literary creation), it is not what designates the 
individuality of each text, what names, signs, finishes off each 
work with a Bourish; on the contrary, it is a difference which 
does not stop and which is articulated upon the infinity of 
texts, of languages, of systems: a difference of which each text 
is the return. A choice must then be made: either to place all 
texts in a demonstrative oscillation, equalizing them under the 
scrutiny of an in-<lifferent science, forcing them to rejoin, in­
ductively, the Copy from which we will then make them de­
rive; or else to restore each text, not to its individuality, but to 
its function, making it cohere, even before we talk about it, by 
the infinite paradigm of difference, subjecting it from the out­
set to a basic typology, to an evaluation. How then posit the 
value of a text? How establish a basic typology of texts? The 
primary evaluation of all texts can come neither from science, 
3 
for science does not evaluate, nor from ideology, for the ideo­
logical value of a text (moral, aesthetic, political, alethiologi­
cal) is a value of representation, not of production (ideology 
"reflects," it does not do work). Our evaluation can be linked 
only to a practice, and this practice is that of writing. On the 
one hand, there is what it is possible to write, and on the other, 
what it is no longer possible to write: what is within the prac­
tice of the writer and what has left it: which texts would I 
consent to write (to re-write), to desire, to put forth as a force 
in this world of mine? What evaluation finds is precisely this 
value: what can be written (rewritten) today: the writerl)'. 
Why is the writerly our value? Because the goal of literary 
work (of literature as work) is to make the reader no longer 
a consumer, but a producer of the text. Our literature is char­
acterized by the pitiless divorce which the literary institution 
maintains between the producer of the text and its user, be­
tween its owner and its customer, between its author and its 
reader. This reader is thereby plunged into a kind of idleness 
-he is intransitive; he is, in short, serious: instead of function­
ing himself, instead of gaining access to the magic of the sig­
nifier, to the pleasure of writing, he is left with no more than 
the poor freedom either to accept or reject the text: reading 
is nothing more than a referendum. Opposite the writerly text, 
then, is its countervalue, its negative, reactive value: what can 
be read, but not written: the recuferl),. We call any readerly 
text a classic text. 
II. INTERPRETATION 
There may be nothing to say about writerly texts. First of all, 
where can we find them? Certainly not in reading (or at least 
very rarely: by accident, fleetingly, obliquely in certain limit-
4 
works): the writerly text is not a thing, we would have a hard 
time 6nding it in a bookstore. Further, its model being a pro­
ductive (and no longer a representative) one, it demolishes 
any criticism which, once produced, would mix with it: to 
rewrite the writerly text would consist only in disseminating it, 
in dispersing it within the 6eld of in6nite difference. The 
writerly text is a perpetual present, upon which no consequent 
language (which would inevitably make it past) can be super­
imposed; the writerly text is ourselves writing, before the in­
finite play of the world (the world as function) is traversed, 
intersected, stopped, plasticized by some singular system (Ide­
ology, Genus, Criticism) which reduces the plurality of en­
trances, the opening of networks, the infinity of languages. 
'!fie writerly is the novelistic without the novel, poetry with­
out the poem, the essay without the dissertation, writing with­
out style, production without product, structuration without 
structure. But the readerly texts? They are products (and not 
productions), they make up the enormous mass of our litera­
ture. How differentiate this mass once again? Here, we require 
a second operation, consequent upon the evaluation which 
has separated the texts, more delicate than that evaluation, 
based upon the appreciation of a certain quantity~f the 
more or less each text can mobilize. This new operation is 
interpretation (in the Nietzschean sense of the word). To 
interpret a text is not to give it a (more or less justi6ed, more 
or less free) meaning, but on the contrary to appreciate what 
plural constitutes it. Let us 6at posit the image of a trium­
phant plural, unimpoverished by any constraint of representa­
tion (of imitation). In this ideal text, the networks are many 
and interact, without anyone of them being able to surpass 
the rest; this text is a galaxy of signi6m, not a structure of 
signi6eds; it has no beginning; it is reveaible; we gain access to 
it by several entrances, none of which can be authoritatively 
declared to be the main ODe; the codes it mobilizes extend dB 
5 
far as the eye can reach, they are indetenninable (meaning 
here is never subject to a principle of detennination, unless by 
throwing dice); the systems of meaning can take over this ab­
solutely plural text, but their number is never closed, based as 
it is on the infinity of language. The interpretation demanded 
by a specific text, in its plurality, is in no way liberal: it is not 
a question of conceding some meanings, of magnanimously 
acknowledging that each one has its share of truth; it is a ques­
tion, against all in-difference, of asserting the very existence of 
plurality, which is not that of the true, the probable, or even 
the possible. This necessary assertion is difficult, however, for 
as nothing exists outside the text, there is never a whole of the 
text (which would by reversion fonn an internal order, a rec­
onciliation of complementary parts, under the paternal eye 
of the representative Model): the text must simultaneously 
be distinguished from its exterior and from its totality. All of 
which comes down to saying that for the plural text, there 
cannot be a narrative structure. a grammar, or a logic; thus, if 
one or another of these are sometimes pennitted to come for­
ward, it is in proportion (giving this expression its full quanti­
tative value) as we are dealing with incompletely plural texts, 
texts whose plural is more or less parsimonious. 
III. CONNOTATION: AGAINST 
For these moderately plural (i.e., merely polysemous) texts, 
there exists an average appreciator which can grasp only a cer­
tain median portion of the plural, an instrument at once too 
delicate and too vague to be applied to univocal texts, and too 
poor to be applied to'multivalent texts, which are reversible 
and frankly indetenninable (integrally plural texts). This 
modat instrument is connotation. For Hjelmslev, who has 
6 
defined it, connotation is a secondary meaning, whose signifier 
is itself constituted by a sign or system of primary signification, 
which is denotation: if E is the expression, C the content, and 
R the relation of the two which establishes the sign, the for­
mula for the connotation is: (ERC) R C. Doubtless because it 
has not been limited, subjected to a typology of texts, conno­
tation has not had a good press. Some (the philologists, let us 
say), ~eclaring every text to be univocal, possessing a true, ca­
nonical meaning, banish the simultaneous, secondary mean­
ings to the void of critical lucubrations. On the other hand, 
others (the semiologists, let us say) contest the hierarchy of 
denotated and connotated; language, they say, the raw ma­
terial of denotation, with its dictionary and its syntax, is a 
system like any other; there is no reason to make this system 
the privileged one, to make it the locus and the nonn of a 
primary, original meaning, the scale for all associated mean­
ings; if we base denotation on truth, on objectivity, on law, it 
is because we are still in awe of the prestige of linguistics, 
which, until today, has been reducing language to the sentence 
and its lexical and syntactical components; now the endeavor 
of this hierarchy is a serious one: it is to return to the closure 
of Western discourse (scientific, critical, or philosophical), to 
its centralized organization, to arrange all the meanings of a 
text in a circle around the hearth of denotation (the hearth: 
center, guardian, refuge, light of truth) . 
IV. CONNIDATION: FOR, EVEN SO 
This criticism of connotation is only half fair; it does not take 
into account the typology of the texts (this typology is basic: 
no text exists without being classified according to its value); 
~or if there are readerly texts, committed to the closure system 
7 
of the West, produced according to the goals of this system, 
devoted to the law of the Signified, they must have a particu­
lar system of meaning, and this meaning is based on connota­
tion. Hence, to deny connotation altogether is to abolish the 
differential value of the texts, to refuse to define the specific 
appar.ltus (both poetic and critical) for the readerly texts-it 
is to make the limited text equal to the limit-text, to deprive 
oneself of a typological instrument Connotation is the way 
into the polysemy of the classic text, to that limited plural on 
which the classic text is based (it is not certain that there are 
connotations in the modem text). Connotation must there­
fore be rescued from its double contestation and kept as the 
namable, computable trace of a certain plur.ll of the text (that 
limited plUr.l1 of the classic text). Then, what is a connota­
tion? Definitionally, it is a detennination, a relation, an anaph-
013, a feature which has the power to relate itself to anterior, 
ulterior, or exterior mentions, to other sites of the text (or of 
another text): we must in no way restrain this relating, which 
can be given various names (function or index, for example), 
except that we must not confuse connotation with association 
of ideas: the latter refers to the system of a subject; connota­
tion is a correlation immanent in the text, in the texts; or 
again, one may say that it is an association made by the text­
as-subject within its own system. Topically, connotations are 
meanings which are neither in the dictionary nor in the gram­
mar of the language in which a text is written (this is, of 
course, a shaky definition: the dictionary can be expanded, the 
grammar can be modified). Analytically, connotation is deter­
mined by two spaces: a sequential space, a series of orders, a 
space subject to the successivity of sentences, in which mean­
ing proliferates by layering; and an agglomer.ltive space, cer­
tain areas of the text correlating other meanings outside the 
material text and, with them, fonning "nebulae" of signifieds. 
Topologically, connotation makes possible a (limited) dis, 
8 
~mination of meanings, spr<:ad like gold dust on the apparent 
surface of the text (meaning is golden). SemiologicaUy, each 
connotation is the starting point of a code (which will never 
be reconstituted), the articulation of a voice which is woven 
into the text. Dynamically, it is a subjugation which the text 
must undergo, it is the possibility of this subjugation (mean­
ing is a force). Historically, by inducing meanings that are 
apparently recoverable (even if they are not lexical), connota· 
tion establishes a (dated) Literature of the Signified. Func­
tionally, connotation, releasing the double meaning on -prin­
ciple, corrupts the purity of communication: it is a deliberate 
"static," painstakingly elaborated, introduced" into the fictive 
dialogue between author and reader, in short, a countercom­
munication (Literature is an intentional cacography). Struc­
tural1y, the existence of two supposedly different systems­
denotation and connotation-enables the text to operate like 
a game, each system referring to the other according to the re­
quirements of a certain illusion. Ideologically, finally, this 
game has the advantage of affording the classic text a certain 
innocence: of the two systems, denotative and connotative, 
one turns back on itself and indicates its own existence: the 
system of denotation; denotation is not the first meaning, but 
pr~tends to be SO; ~nder this illusion, it is ultimately no more 
;tJ:1~n the ldst of the connotations (the one which seems both 
to establish and to close the reading), the superior myth by 
which the text pretends to return to the nature of language, to 
language as nature: doesn't a sentence, whatever meaning it 
releases, subsequent to its utterance, it would seem, appear to 
be telling us something simple, literal, primitive: something 
true, in relation to which all the rest (which comes afterwtITtU, 
on tOf') is literature7 This is why, if we want to go along with 
the classic text, we must keep denotation, the old deity, watch­
ful, cunning. theatrical, foreordained to represent the collec­
tive innocence of language. 
9 
v. READING, FORGETI'ING 
I re4d the text. This statement, consonant with the "genius" . . -
of the language (subject, verb, complement), is not always 
true. '[!te more plural the text, the less it is written before I 
read it; I do not make it undergo a predicative operation, con­
sequent upon its being, an operation known as redding, and I 
is not an innocent subject, anterior to the text, one which will 
subsequently deal with the text as it would an object to dis­
mantle or a site to occupy. This "I" which approaches the text 
is already itself a plurality of other texts, of c;Qd~ which are 
infinite or, more precisely, lost (whose origin is IQst). Objec­
tivity and subjectivity are of course forces which can take over 
the text, but they are forces which have no affinity with it. 
Subjectivity is a plenary image, with which I may be thought 
to encumber the text, but whose deceptive plenitude is merely 
the wake of all the codes which constitute me, so that my sub­
jectivity has ultimately the generality of stereotypes. Objec­
tivity is the same type of replenishment: it is an imaginary 
system like the rest (except that here the castrating gesture is 
more fiercely characterized), an image which serves to name 
me advantageously, to make myself known, "mismown," even 
to myself. Reading involves risk$ of objectivity or subjectivi~ 
(both are imaginary) only insofar as we define the text as an 
expressive object (presented for our own expression), subli­
mated under a morality of truth, in one instance laxist; in the 
other, ascetic. Yet reading is not a parasitical act, the reactive 
complement of a writing which we endow with all the glamour 
of creation and anteriority. It is a form of work (which is why 
it would be better to speak of a lexeological act-even a lexco­
graphical act, since I write my reading), and the method of 
this work is topological: I am not hidden within the text, I am 
simply irrecoverable from it: my task is to move, to shift sys­
tems whose perspective ends neither at the text nor at the "I": 
10 
in operational tenns, the meanings I find are established not 
by "me" or by others, but by their systenuJtic mark: there is no 
other proof of a reading than the quality and endurance of its 
systematics; in other words: than its functioning. To read, in 
f~ct, is a labor of langua&e. To read is to find meanings, and to 
find meanings is to name them; but these named meanings are 
swept toward oth~r P!lJIlC;:S; names call to each other, reassem­
ble, and their grouping calls for further namin.g: I name, I un­
name, I rename: so the text passes: it is a nomination in the 
course of becoming, a tireless approximation, a metonymic 
labor. -With regard to the plural text, forgetting a meaning 
cannot therefore be seen as a fault. Forgetting in relation to 
what? What is the sum of the text? Meanings can indeed be 
forgotten, but only if we have chosen to bring to bear upon the 
text a singular scrutiny. Yet reading does not consist in stop­
ping the chain of systems, in establishing a truth, a legality of 
the text, and consequently in leading its reader into "errors"; 
it consists in coupling these systems, not according to their 
finite quantity, but according to their plurality (which is a 
being, not a discounting): I pass, I intersect, I articulate, I 
release, I do not count. Forgetting meanings is not a matter 
for excuses, an unfortunate defect in performance; it is an 
affirmative value, a way of asserting the irresponsibility of the 
text, the pluralism of systems (if I closed their list, I would 
inevitably reconstitute a singular, theological meaning): it is 
precisely because I forget that I read. 
VI. STEP BY STEP 
If we want to remain attentive to the plural of a text (how­
ever limited it may be), we must renounce structuring this 
text in large masses, as was done by classical rhetoric and by 
11 
5eCOndary-school explication: no construction of the text: 
everything signifies ceaselessly and several times, but without 
being delegated to a great final ensemble, to an ultimate struc­
ture. Whence the idea, and so to speak the necessityJ of a 
gradual analysis of a single text. Whence, it would seem, sev­
eral implications and several advantages. The commentary on 
a single text is not a contingent activity, assigned the reassur­
ing alibi of the "concrete": the single text is valid for all the 
texts of literature, not in that it represents them (abstracts and 
equalizes them), but in that literature itself is never anything 
but a single text: the one text is not an (inductive) access to 
a Model, but entrance into a network with a thousand e!1-
trances; to take this entrance is to aim, ultimately, not at a_ 
legal structure of norms and departures, a namtive or poetic 
Law, but at a perspective (of fragments, of voices hom other 
texts, other codes), whose vanishing point is nonetheless cease-~ 
lessIy pushed back, mysteriously opened: each (single) text is 
the very theory (and not the mere example) of this vanishing, 
of this difference which indefinitely returns, insubmissive. 
Further, to study this text down to the last detail is to take up 
the structural analysis of namtive where it has been left till 
now: at the major structures; it is to assume the power (the 
time, the elbow room) of worlcing back along the threads of 
meanings, of abandoning no site of the signifier without en­
deavoring to ascertain the code or codes of which this site is 
perhaps the starting point (or the goal); it is (at least we may 
hope as much, and work to this end) 19 s'"ubstitute for the sim­
ple representative model another model, whose very gradual­
ness would guarantee what may be productive in the classic 
t~t; for the step-by-step method, through its very slowness 
and dispersion, avoids penetrating, reversing the tutor text, giv­
ing an internal image of it: it is never anything but the decom­
position (in the cinematographic sense) of the work of read­
ing: a slow motion, so to spealc, neither wholly image nor 
wholly analysis; it is, finally, in the very writing of the com­
mentary, a systematic use of digression (a fonn ill-accommo­
dated by the discourse of knowledge) and thereby a way of 
observing the reversibility of the structures from which the text 
is woven; of course, the classic text is incompletely reversible 
{it is modestly plural) : the reading of this text occurs within a 
necessary order, which the gradual analysis will make precisely 
its order of writing; but the step-by-step commentary is of ne­
cessity a renewal of the entrances to the text, it avoids structur­
ing the text excessivel)" avoids giving it that additional structure 
which would come from a dissertation and would close it: it 
stars the text, instead of assembling it. 
VII. THE STAlUlED TEXT 
We shall therefore star the text, separating, in the manner of a 
minor earthquake, the blocks of signification of which reading 
grasps only the smooth surface, imperceptibly soldered by the 
movement of sentences, the flowing discourse of narration, the 
"naturalness" of ordinary language. The tutor signifier will be 
cut up into a series of brid, contiguous fragments, which we 
shall call ~, since they are units of reading. This cutting 
up, admittedly, will be arbitrary in the extreme; it will imply 
no methodological responsibility, since it will bear on the sig­
nifier, whereas the proposed analysis bears solely on the signi­
fied. The lexia will include sometimes a few words, sometimes 
several sentences; it will be a matter of convenience: it will 
suffice that the lexia be the best possible space in which we can 
observe meanings; its dimension, empirically determined, esti­
mated, will depend on the density of connotations, variable 
according to the moments of the text: all we require is that 
each lexia should have at most three or four meanings to be 
enumerated. The text, in its mass, is comparable to a sky, at 
once flat and smooth, deep, without edges and without land­
marks; like the soothsayer drawing on it with the tip of his 
staff an imaginary rectangle wherein to consult, according to 
certain principles, the flight of birds, the commentator traces 
through the text certain zones of reading, in order to observe 
therein the migration of meanings, the outcropping of codes, 
the passage of citations. The lexia is only the wrapping of a 
semantic volume, the crest line of the plural text, arranged like 
a berm of possible (but controlled, attested to by a systematic 
reading) meanings under the flux of discourse: the lexia and 
its units will thereby form a kind of polyhedron faceted by the 
word, the group of words, the sentence or the paragraph, i.e., 
with the language which is its "natural" excipient. 
VIII. THE BROKEN TEXT 
What will be noted is, across these artificial articulations, the 
shifting and repetition of the signifieds. Discerning these sig­
nifieds systematically for each lexia does not aim at establish-
,; ing the truth of the text (its profound, strategic structure), but 
;' its plurality (however parsimonious )'; the units of meaning 
(the connotations), strung out separately for each lexia, will 
not then be regrouped, provided with a metameaning which 
would be the ultimate construction to be given them (we shall 
merely reconnect, as an appendix, certain sequences which 
might have become lost in the unraveling of the tutor text). 
We shall not set forth the criticism of a text, or a criticism of 
this text; we shall propose the semantic substance (divided but 
not distributed) of several kinds of criticism (psychological, 
psychoanalytical, thematic, historical, structural); it will then 
be up to each kind of criticism (if it should so desire) to come 
14 
into play, to make its voice heard, which is the hearing of one 
of the voices of the text. What we seek is to sketch the stereo­
graphic space of writing (which will here be a classic, readerly 
writing). The commentary, based on the affinnation of the 
plural, cannot therefore work with "respect" to the text; the 
tutor text will ceaselessly be broken, interrupted without any 
regard for its natural divisions (syntactical, rhetorical, anec­
dotic); inventory, explanation, and digression may deter any 
observation of suspense, may even separate verb and comple­
ment, noun and attribute; the work of the commentary, once 
it is separated from any ideology of totality, consists precisely 
in mdnlumdling the text, interrupting it What is thereby de­
nied is not the qlUllity of the text (here incomparable) but its 
"naturalness. " 
IX. HOW MANY READINCS? 
We must further accept one last freedom: that of reading the 
text as if it had already been read. Those who like a good story 
may certainly tum to the end of the book and read the tutor 
text first; it is given as an appendix in its purity and continuity, 
as it came from the printer, in short, as we habitually read it. 
But for those of us who are trying to establish a plural, we can­
not stop this plural at the gates of reading: the reading must 
also be plural, that is, without order of entrance: the "first" 
version of a reading must be able to be its last, as though the 
text were reconstituted in order to achieve its artifice of con­
tinuity, the signifier then being provided with an additional 
feature: shifting. Rereading, an operation contrary to the com­
mercial and ideological habits of our society, which would 
have us "throwaway" the story once it has been consumed 
("devoured"), so that we can then move on to another story, 
buy another book, and which is tolerated only in certain mar­
ginal categories of readers (children, old people, and profes­
sors), rereading is here suggested at the outset, for it alone 
saves the text from repetition (those who fail to reread are 
obliged to read the same story everywhere), multiplies it in its 
variety and its plurality: rereading draws the text out of its in­
ternal chronology ("this happens before or ttfter that") and 
recaptures a mythic time (without before or after); it contests 
the claim which would have us believe that the 6rst reading is 
a primary, naive, phenomenal reading which we will only, after­
wards, have to "explicate," to intellectualize (as if there were 
a beginning of reading, as if everything were not already read: 
there is no first reading, even if the text is concerned to give us 
that illusion by several operations of rusfJenSe, artifices more 
spectacular than persuasive); rereading is no longer consump­
tion, but play (that play which is the return of the different). 
If then, a deliberate contradiction in terms, we immedidtely 
reread the text, it is in order to obtain, as though under the 
effect of a drug (that of recommencement, of difference), not 
the re4l text, but a plural text: the same and new. 
X. SARRASINE 
The text I have chosen (Why? All i know is that for some 
time I have wanted to make a complete analysis of a short 
text and that the Balzac story was brought to my attention 
by an article by Jean Reboul,. who in tum is supposed to 
have been inspired by Georges Bataille's reference; and thus 
I was caught up in this "series" whose scope I was to dis­
cover by means of the text itself) is Balzac's StzrrdBine.1 
1 'can Reboul: "Salmine ou ]a castration penonnific!e," in c"m.,. flour 
r Andi)'ll, March-April, 1967. 
I ~ de I/J Vii P/ll'ilNnu. 
( 1) SARRASINE • The title raises a question: Wildt iI s.. 
raine? A DOun? A name? A thing? A man? A woman? This ques­
tion will not be answered until much later, by the biography of 
the sculptor named Samsine. Let us designate as Mrnwrwutic 
cod. (HER) all the units whose function it is to articulate in 
various ways a question, its response, and the variety of chance 
events which can either formulate the question or delay its 
answer; or even, constitute an enigma and lead to its solution. 
Thus, the title SarrllliM initiates the first step in a sequence which 
will not be mmpleted until No. 153 (HER. Enigma I-the story 
will contain others-: question). .. The word Smram. has an 
additional connotation, that of femininity, which will be obvious 
to any French-speaking person, since that language automatically 
takes the final "e" as a specifically feminine linguistic property, 
particularly in the case of a proper name whose masculine form 
(Scmcuin) exists in French onomastics .. femininity (connoted) is 
a signifier which will occur in several places in the text; it is a 
shifting element which can combine with other similar elements 
to create characters, ambiances, shapes, and symbols. Although 
every unit we mention here will be a signifier, this one is of a very 
special type: it is the signifier par excellence because of its emma­
tation, in the usual meaning of the term. We shall call this element 
a signifier (without going into further detail), or a II ..... (semanti­
cally, ~ seme is the unit of the signifier), and we sball indicate 
these units by the abbreviation SEM, designating each time by 
an approximate word the connotative signifier referred to in the 
lcxia (SEM. Femininity). 
(2) I Well dufJ in OM of thole dttydredml • There will be noth· 
ing wayward about the daydream introduced here: it will be solidly 
constructed along the most familiar rhetorical lines, in a series of 
antitheses: garden and salon, life and death, cold and heat, outside 
and interior. The lexia thus lays the groundwork, inintrociuctory 
form, for a vast symbolic sbucture, since it can lend itself to many 
IObstitutions, variations, which will lead us hom the garden to the 
castrato, from the salon to the girl with whom the narrator is in 
love, by way of the mysterious old man, the full·bosomed Mme de 
Lanty, or Vien's moonlit Adonis. Thus, on the symbolic level, an 
immense province appears, the province of the antithesis, of which 
17 
this forms the first unit, linking at the start its two adversative 
terms (AlB) in the word daydredm. ( We shall mark all the units 
in this symbolic area with the letters SYM. Here-SYM. An­
tithesis: AB.) ** The state of absorption formulated here (I WdS 
deep in ) already implies (at least in "readerly" discourse) 
some event which will bring it to an end (. when 1 WdS roused 
by d conveTSdtion No. H). Such sequences imply a logic in 
human behavior. In Aristotelian terms, in which prdXia is linked to 
pro4irem, or the ability rationally to determine the result of an 
action, we shall name this code of actions and behavior prOdiretic 
(in narrative, however, the discourse, rather than the characters, 
determines the action). This code of actions will be abbreviated 
ACT; furthermore, since these actions produce effects, each effect 
will have a generic name giving a kind of title to the sequence, and 
we shall number each of the terms which constitute it, as they 
appear (ACT. "To be deep in": 1: to be absorbed). 
( 3) which overtdke even the shdllowut of men. in the midst of the 
TJ10Bt tumultuous parties. * The fact "there is a party" (given 
here obliquely), soon to be followed by further data (a private 
house in the Faubourg Saint-Honore), forms a pertinent signi6er: 
the wealth of the Lanty family (SEM. Wealth). ** The phrase 
is a conversion of what might easily be a real proverb: "Tumul­
tuous parties: deep daydremrut." The statement is made in a col­
lective and anonymous voice originating in traditional human 
experience. Thus, the unit has been formed by a gnomic code, and 
this code is one of the numerous codes of knowledge or wisdom to 
which the text continually refers; we shall call them in a very gen­
eral way culturdl codes (even though, of course, all codes are cul­
tural), or rather, since they afford the discourse a basis in scienti6c 
or moral authority, we shall call them reference codes (REF. 
Gnomic code) . 
XI. THE FIVE CODES 
As chance would have it (but what is chance?), the first three 
lexias-the title and the first sentence of the story-have al-
18 
ready provided us with the five major codes under which all 
the textual signifiers can be grouped: without straining a point, 
there will be no other codes throughout the story but these 
five, and each and every lexia will fall under one of these five 
codes. Let us sum them up in order of their appearance, with­
out trying to put them in any order of importance. Under the 
herm~ut!~c.04e, we list the various (fonnal) terms by which 
·an enigmii'can be distinguished, suggested, formulated, held in 
suspense, and finally disclosed (these tenns will not always 
occur, they will often be repeated; they will not appear in any 
fixed order). As for the ~es, we merely indicate them-with­
out, in other words, trying either to link them to a character 
( or a place or an object) or to arrange them in some order so 
that they form a single thematic grouping; we allow them the 
instability, the dispersion, characteristic of motes of dust, 
Rickers of meaning. Moreover, we shall refrain from structur­
ing the symbolic grouping; this is the place for multivalence 
and for reversibility; the main task is always to demonstrate 
that this field can be entered from any number of points, 
thereby making depth and secrecy problematic. Actions (tenns 
of the proairetic code) can fall into various sequences which 
should be indicated merely by listing them, since the proairetic 
_sequence is never more than the result of an artifice of reading: 
whoever reads the text amasses certain data under some ge­
neric titles for actions (stroU, murder, rende:cvous), and this 
-ti!le embodies the seq,~enc~; the sequence exists when and be-
cause it can be given a name, it unfolds as this process of nam­
ing takes place. as a title is sought or confinned; its basis is 
therefore more empirical than rational, and it is useless to 
attempt to force it into a statutory order; its only logic is that 
of the "already-done" or "already-read" -whence the variety of 
sequences (some trivial, some melodramatic) and the variety 
of terms (numerous or few); here again, we shall not attempt 
to put them into any order. Indicating them (externally and 
19 
intema1ly) will suffice to demonstrate the plural meaning en­
tangled in them. Lastly, ~e c~tural codes are references to a 
science or a body of knowledge; in drawing attention to them, 
we merely indicate the type of knowledge (physical, physio­
logical, medical, psychological, literary, historical, etc.) re­
ferred to, without going so far as to construct (or reconstruct) 
the culture they express. 
XlI. TIlE WEAVING OF VOICES 
The five codes create a kind of network, a tapas through which 
the entire text passes (or rather, in passing, becomes text). 
Thus, if we make no effort to structure each code, or the five 
codes among themselves, we do so deliberately, in order to 
assume the multivalence of the text, its partial reversibility. 
We are, in fact, concerned not to manifest a structure but to 
produce a structuration. The blanks and looseness of the 
analysis will be like footprints marking the escape of the text; 
for jf the text is subject to some form, this form is not unitary, 
architectonic, finite: it is the fragment, the shards! t:)l~ br9ken 
or obliterated networi-=-~l the mo_y'~rgCDt$ and in8ections of 
a vast "dissoly~" which permits both overlapping 1l!1~10S5 of 
messages. Hence we use Code here not in the sense of a list, a 
paradigm that must be reconstituted. The code is a perspective 
of quotations, a mirage of structures; we know only its depar­
tures and returns; the units which have resulted from it (those 
we inventory) are themselves, always, ventures out of the text, 
the mark, the sign of a virtual digression toward the remainder 
of a catalogue (The KidTUJPfJing refers to every kidnapping 
ever written); they are so many fragments of something that 
has always been alreddy read, seen, done, experienced; the code 
is the wake of that alreddy. Referring to what has been written, 
20 
i.e., to the Book (of culture, of life, of life as culture), it makes 
the text into a prospectus of this Book. Or again: each code is 
one of the forces that can take over the text (of which the text 
is the network), one of the voices out of which the text is 
woven. Alongside each utterance, one might say that off-stage 
voices can be heard: they are the codes: in their interweaving, 
these voices (whose origin is '1ost" in the vast perspective of 
the tIlreGdy-written) de-originate the utterance: the conver­
gence of the voices (of the codes) becomes wdtini. a stereo­
paphic space where the five codes. the five ~cs, intersect: 
the Voice of Empirics (the proairetisms), the Voice of the 
Person (the semes), the Voice of Science (the cultural codes) , 
the Voice of Truth (the hermeneutisms), the Voice of 
Symbol. 
( .. ) Midnight htld jU8t BOUnded from the cloc1c of the Elysk-Bour­
bon. * A metonymy leads from the Elysee-Bourbon to the seme 
WfkIlth, since the Faubourg Saint-Honore is a wealthy neighbor­
hood. This wealth is itself connoted: a neighborhood of nouvedUX 
riches, the Faubourg Saint-Honore refers by synechdoche to the 
Paris of the Bourbon Restoration, a mythic place of sudden for­
tunes whose origins are suspect; where gold is produced without an 
origin, diabolically (the symbolic definition of speculation) (SEM. 
Wealth). 
(5) Se4ted in a window recess * The development of an antith­
Gis normally includes the exposition of each of its parts (A. B). 
A third term is possible: a joint presentation. This term can be 
purely rhetorical, if we are concerned to introduce or mmmtll'iu 
the antithesis; but it can also be literal, if we are concerned to 
denote the physical conjunction of antithetical sites: a function 
which here devolves upon recesa, an intermediate place between 
prden and salon, death and life (SYM. Antithesis: mediation). 
(6) and hidden behind the sinuous folds of a Bille curtain, * ACf. 
-nMIing place": I: to be hidden. 
(7) I could contemplate at my leisure the garden of the mansion 
where I was spending the evening. * I could contemplate means 
I am going to describe. The first term of the antithesis (garden) is 
introduced here from a rhetorical viewpoint (according to the 
code): there is a manipulation of the discourse, not of the story 
(SYM. Antithesis: A: introduction). We may note here, to return 
to it later, that contemplation, a visual posture, the arbitrary de­
limitation of a field of observa"tion (the templum of the augurs), 
relates the whole description to the model of painting. ** SEM. 
Wealth (a party, the Faubourg Saint-Honore, a mansion). 
XIII. CITAR 
The Party, the Faubourg, the Mansion are anodyne data, 
seemingly lost in the natural How of the discourse; in fact, they 
are touches designed to bring out the image of Wealth in the 
tapestry of the daydream. Thus, on several occasions the seme 
is "cited"; we would like to give this word its tauromachian 
meaning: the citar is the stamp of the heel, the torero's arched 
stance which summons the bull to the banderilleros. Similarly, 
!m.e cites the signified (wealth1 to make it come forth, \\,!!i!~ 
avqiding it in the discourse. This Heeting citation, this surrepti­
tious and discontinuous way of stating themes, this alternating 
of Hux and outburst, create together the allure of the conno­
tation; the semes appear to float freely, to form a galaxy of 
triHing data in which we read no order of importance: the nar­
rative technique is im'press~onistic: it ll.!'eaks ~ the signifier 
iI!~~ parti~!es of verbaLmatter~~~!1l_:lk~ s~ns~~!!lyJ)l'_~'!-: 
alescing: it plays with the distribution of a discontinuity (thus 
creating a character's "personality"); the greater the syntag­
matic distance between two data, the more skillful the narra­
tive; the performance consists in manipulating a certain degree 
of impressionism: the touch must be light, as though it weren't 
22 
worth remembering, and yet, appearing again later in another 
guise, it must already be a memory; the readerly is an effect 
based on the operations of solidarity (the readerly "sticks"); 
but the more this solidarity is renewed, the more the intelli­
gible becomes intelligent. The (ideological) goal of this tech­
!!ique is to naturalize meaning and thus to give credence to the 
reality of the story: for (in the West) meaning (system), we 
are told, is antipathetic to nature and reality. This naturaliza­
tion is possible only because the significant data released-or 
summoned-in a homeopathic rhythm are carried, borne along, 
by a purportedly "natural" medium: language: paradoxically, 
language, the integral system of meaning, is employed to de­
systematize the secondary meanings, to naturalize their pro­
duction and to authenticate the story: connotation. is con­
cealed beneath th~ ~lar s01,1nd QfJhc. "sentences':~."we.altb.:~m 
beneath .YtLeili' na~tax (subi~t ~nd _adverbi~l. Ql>iect.).. 
which says that a ~!!Y ~ ~iQg.g:i.ven in a_IDiIl.s.tQD which is 
)ocate<Jl~~~Erticular n~~ghborhood. 
(8) The trees, partitJUy covered with snow, stood out dimly cJgainst 
the grayish bdc1cground of d cloudy sky, btuely whitened by the 
moon. Sun amid these ftl1ltcJStic WTToundings, they vdguely re­
aembled ghosts ludf out of their shrouds, d gigcJntic representtttion 
of the fcJmoUB DcJnce of the Dettd. * SYM. Antithesis: A: the out­
doors. -** The snow here refers to cold, but this is not inevi­
table, it is even rare: the snow, a soft, downy cloak, rather connotes 
the wannth of homogeneous substances, the protection of a shelter. 
Here the cold is created by the partial nature of the snow covering: 
it is not the snow but the partialness that is cold; the sinister fonn 
is the partially covered fonn: the plucked, the skinned, the patchy, 
everything left of a wholeness preyed on by a nothingness (SEM. 
Cold). The moon, too, contributes to this deficiency: frankly sin­
ister here, fonning a defect in the landscape it lights; we will come 
apon it again endowed with an ambiguous softness when, in the 
23 
(9) Then, tuming in the other direction, * Here the passage from 
one term of the Antithesis (outside, the garden) to the other (in­
side, the salon) is a bodily movement; thus it is not an artifice of 
discourse (part of the rhetorical code) but a physical act of con­
junction (part of the symbolic level) (SYM. Antithesis: media­
tion) . 
( 10) 1 could culmire the DClnce of the Living' * The Dance of the 
Dead (No.8) was a stereotype, a fixed syntagm. Here, dlis syntagm 
is divided, a new syntagm is created (the DtmCe of the Living). 
Two codes are simultaneously understood: a code of connotation 
(in the dcJnce of death the meaning is universal, arising from a 
coded knowledge, that of art history) and a code of denotation (in 
the dcJnce of the living, each word, according to its dictionary 
meaning, is added to its predecessor); this divergence, this sort of 
double vision, defines the play on words. This play on words is 
constructed like a diagram for an Antithesis (a form whose sym­
bolic importance we know): a common stem, dcJnce, is diversified 
into two opposing syntagms (death/life), just as the nanator's 
body is the unique dividing line between the garden and the 
salon (REF. Play on words). ** 1 could contemplClte set forth 
the first part (A) of the Antithesis (No.7). "I could CldrniTe" 
symmetrically announces the second (B). The contemplation had 
reference to an actual painted picture; admiration, bringing forth 
shapes, colors, sounds, and scents, makes the description of the 
salon (still to come) like a theatrical scene (the stage). We wiD 
2.4 
return to this subjection of literature (particularly in its "realist" 
form) to other representational codes (SYM. Antithesis: B: state­
ment). 
( II) 4 ,plendid Sdlon decorated in Bilver cJnd gold, with glittering 
ch4ndeliers, spcalcling with Cdndks. There, milling dbout, whirling 
ClrOUoo, flitting here 400 there, were the most bedutiful women of 
Paris, the richest, the noblest, donling, stately, resplendent with 
dUlmonds, flower, in their Mir, on their bosoms, on their heCJdB, 
Jtrewn over dresses or in gdrlands at their feet. Light, rustling move­
ments, 'Voluptuous steps, rntlde the lcIces, the Billc broc4des, the 
fIl'J%G, flo4t Clrouoo their delicelte forms. Here 4nd there, some 
O'Veny 4nimated gUmces dtJrled forth, eclipsing the lights, the fire 
of the dUtmonds, 400 stimulttted 4MW some tOCHtrdent hedrts. One 
might also catch movements of the he4d me4ningful to lo'Vers, 400 
... pve gestures for husbdnds. The BUdden outbursts of the gam­
blers' VOK:a cit eoch unexpected tum of the dice, the clinic of gold, 
mingled with the mu.ic 4nd the murmur of con'VerSCItion, 4nd to 
oomplste the giddiness of this m48B of people intoxicated by every­
dUng seductive the world can hold, a Iuue of perfume 400 general 
inebridtion pUzyed upon the fevered mind. * SYM. Antithesis: 
B: indoors. ** The women are transformed into flowers (they 
me wearing them everywhere); this seme of (lor4 will later be at­
tached to the woman the narrator is in love with (whose outlines 
IK "verdant"); further, flora connotes a certain conception of life 
iD its pure state (because organic) which forms an antithesis with 
die dead "thing" the old man will represent (SEM. F1ora). The 
_ling of laces, the gauzy floatings, the haze of perfumes, evoke 
JItc seme Y4/lOr9JP, antithetical to 4nguldr (No. SO), to the g~ 
.mical (No. 76), the wrinkled (No. 82), all of which are forms 
which will be semes for the old man. In the old man, by way of 
CllDtrast, what is intended is the nJIIChine; can we conceive (at least 
• n:aderly discourse) of a 'Vaporous J1UJChine? (SEM. Vaporous.) 
,"'" SEM. Wealth. **** Allusively, an adulterous ambiance is 
Alaignated; it connotes Paris as an immoral city (Parisian fortunes, 
•• Lantys' included, are immoral) (REF. Ethnic psychology: 
Iaris). 
1 
f,(U) Thus, on my right, the ddrlc and silent im4ge of deelth; on my 
,.". the seemly b4cchanali.cls of life: here, cold nclture, dull, in 
25 
mourning; there, hunutn beings enjoying themselves. * SYM. An­
tithesis: AS: resume. 
( 13 ) On the borderline between these two so different scenes, 
which, a thousand times reputed in various guises, make Paris the 
world's most amusing and most philosophical city, I WClS making 
for myself a moral nwcedoine, half plecasant, half funerul. With 
my left foot I beat time, and I felt dB though the other wre in the 
grave. My leg WClS in fact chilled by one of those insidious drttfts 
which freeu half our bodies while the other half feels the humid 
heat of rooms, em occurrence rather freq~nt at balls. * Mace­
doine connotes a composite, the mixture without combination of 
disparate elements.,This seme will move from the narrator to Sar­
rasine (No. 195). thus weakening the notion that the narrator is _ 
~rely a secondary, introductory character: symbolically, the two , 
are equals. The composite is set against a condition which will 
have vast importance in Sarrasine's story, since it will be .linked 
with the discovery of his first pleasure: the lubricdted (No. 213). 
The failure of the narrator and of Sarrasine is the failure of a sub­
stance which does not "take" (SEM. Composite). ** Two cul­
tural codes make their voices heard here: ethnic psychology (REF. 
"Paris") and popular medicine ("an easy way to catch cold is to 
stand in a window recess") (REF. Medicine). *** The narrator's 
participation in the profound symbolism of the Antithesis is here 
made ironic, trivialized, minimized by reference to a physical caus­
ation which is vulgar, contemptible: the narrator pretends to reject 
the symbolic, which in his eyes is a "draft"; however, he will be 
punished for his disbelief (SEM. Asymbolism). 
XIV. ANTITHESIS I: THE SUPPLEMENT 
The several hundred figures propounded by the art of rhetoric 
down through the centuries constitute a labor of classification 
intended to name, to lay the foundations for, the world. 
Among all these figures, one of the most stable is the Antithe­
sis; its apparent function is to consecrate (and domesticate) 
by a name, by a metalinguistic object, the division between 
%6 
opposites and the very irreducibility of this division. The an­
tithesis separates for eternity; it thus refers to a nature of oppo­
sites, and this nature is untamed. Far from differing merely by 
the presence or lack of a simple relationship (as is ordinarily 
the case with paradigmatic opposites), the two terms of an 
antithesis are each marked: their difference does not arise out 
of a complementary, dialectical movement (empty as opposed 
to full) : the antithesis is the battle between two plenitudes set 
ritually face to face like two fully armed warriors; the Antithe­
sis is the figure of the given opposition, eternal, eternally recur­
rent: the figure of the inexpiable. Every joining of two anti­
thetical terms, every mixture, every conciliation-in short, 
every passage through the wall of the Antithesis-thus consti­
tutes a transgression; to be sure, rhetoric can reinvent a figure 
designed to name the transgressive; this figure exists: it is the 
pu4doxism (or alliance of words): an unusual figure, it is the 
code's ultimate attempt to affect the inexpiable. Hidden in the 
NCeSS, between outside and inside, installed at the interior 
limit of adversation, spanning the wall of the Antithesis, the 
aarrator brings this figure into play: he induces or supports a 
bansgression. This transgression is in no way catastrophic, for 
the moment; ironized, trivialized, tamed, it is the object of an 
iDnocuous word, without relationship to the horlOr of the 
symbol (to the symbol as horror); and yet its outrageousness is 
immediately clear. How? Rhetorically, the antithesis of garden 
ad salon has been saturated: the whole (AB) has been stated, 
each term has been individually introduced and described, and 
Ihen once again, to sum up, the whole antithesis has been re­
capitulated in a harmoniously closed loop: 
Now an element has thrust itself into this group which has 
been (rhetorically) completed. This element is the narrator's 
position (encoded as "mediation"). 
AS 
/:~~ 
mediation '" A I B 
~4'oo;/ 
AS 
I 
mediation 
Mediation upsets the rhetorical-or paradigmatic-harmony of 
the Antithesis (ABI A/BI AB) and this difficulty arises not out 
of a lack but out of an excess: there is one element in exc~ 
and this ~ard supplement is the body (of the narrator). 
~ supplement. the body is the site of the transp:ssion e!­
h;cted by the narrative: it is at the level of the body that th~ 
two inconci1itJbilitJ of the Antithesis (outside and inside, cold 
and heat. death and life) are brought together, are made to 
touch, to mingle in the most amazing of figures in a composite 
substance (without holding together), here whimsical (the 
mactdoine) and later chimerical (the arabesque created by 
the old man and the girl when seated side by side). I t is bI.. 
way of this excess which enters the discoUrse after rbetoricJlu... 
properly saturated it that something can be told and the nar:.­
rative begin. 
XV. THE FULL SCORE 
The area of the (readerly) text is comparable at every point to 
a (classical ) musical score. The divisions of the syntagm (in its 
2.8 
gradual movement) correspond to the divisions of the sonic 
flow into measures (one is hardly more arbitrary than the 
other). What stands out, what flashes forth, what emphasizes 
and impresses are the semes, the cultural citations and the 
symbols, analogous in their heavy timbre, in the value of their 
discontinuity, to the brass and percussion. What sings, what 
80ws smoothly, what moves by accidentals, arabesques, and 
controlled ritardandos through an intelligible progression (like 
the melody often given the woodwinds) is the series of enig­
mas, their suspended disclosure, their delayed resolution: the 
development of an enigma is really like that of a fugue; both 
contain a subject, subject to an exposition, a development 
(embodied in the retards, ambiguities, and diversions by 
which the discourse prolongs the mystery), a siretto (a tight­
ened section where scraps of answers rapidly come and go), 
and a conclusion. Finally, what sustains, flows in a regular way, 
brings everything together, like the strings, are the proairetic 
sequences, the series of actions, the cadence of familiar ges­
tures: 
LEXIAS 1 2 3 i 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Semes ~ ~ ~ ..h m m n 
Cultural codes )\ ~ ~ ~ n 
Alltithesis j J J J J J J j J 
Enigma 1 .'" .... -.... ';J", 
~inu r--... i-" 
"'Hidden" j". t--........ 
The analogy can be carried even further. We can attribute to 
two lines of the polyphonic table (the hermeneutic and the 
proairetic) the same tonal detennination that melody and 
hannony have in classical music: the readerly text is a toJ14l 
text (for which habit creates a reading process just as condi­
tioned as our hearing: one might say there is a reading eye as 
there is a tonal ear, so that to unlearn the readerly would be 
the same as to unlearn the tonal), and its tonal unity is basi­
cally dependent on two sequential codes: the revelation of 
truth and the coordination of the actions represented: there is 
the same constraint in the gradual order of melody and in the 
equally gradual order of the narrative sequence. Now, it is 
precisely this constraint which reduces the plural of the classic 
text. The five codes mentioned, frequently heard simultane­
ously, in fact endow the text with a kind of plural quality (the 
text is actually polyphonic), but of the fixe codes. only three 
~tablish pennutable, reversible connections, outside the con­
.straint of time (the semic, cultural, and symbolic codes); the 
other two impose their tenns according to an irreversible order 
(the henneneutic and proairetic codes). The classic text, there­
fore, is actually tabular (and not linear), but its tabularity is 
vectorized, it follows a logico-temporal order. It is a multiva­
lent but incompletely reversible system. What blocks its revers­
ibility is just what limits the plural nature of the classic text. 
These blocks have names: on the one hand, truth; on the 
other, empiricism: against~r between-them, the modern 
text comes into being. 
(H) "Monsieur de lARty lutsn't owned this howe for very long. 
Iuts her' 
"Oh yes. Mareclull Cariglidno sold it to him nearly ten years 
ago." 
"M/" 
"These people must have a huge fortune." 
"They must have." 
"Wlutt a partyllt's shockingly elegant." 
"Do you thinJr they're dB rich dB M. de Nucingen or M. de Gon­
dreviller' * ACf. "To be deep in": 2: to come back again. ** 
REF. Chronological code (ten years .. ). *** Here the Lantys' 
wealth (already indicated by linking the party, the mansion, and 
the neighborhood) is openly stated; and since this wealth will be 
the subject of an enigma (where does it come from?), the lexia 
must be regarded as a term of the hermeneutic code; we shall desig­
nate as theme the object (or subject) of the enigma; the enigma is 
not yet formulated, but its theme has already been introduced, or, 
if we prefer, speaking casually, brought out (HER. Enigma 2: 
theme). 
(15) "You mean you don't knowr' 
I stuck my head out and recognized the two sf>eakeTS dB mem­
bers of tlutt strange race which, in Paris, deals exclusively with 
"whys" mad "hows," with "Where did they come from?" "Wlutt's 
~ngr' "WIutt hdB she doner' They lowered their voices and 
WtJlJted off to talk in greater comfort on some isolated sofa. Never 
Itdd a richer vein been offered to seekers after mystery. * ACI' . 
..... iding place: 2: to come out of hiding. ** REF. Ethnic psy­
chology ( Paris, worldly, slanderous, ta1etelling). *** Here we 
have two further terms of the hermeneutic code: the proposal of 
fIae enigma each time the discourse tells us, in one way or another, 
"'There is an enigma," and the avoided (or suspended) answer: for 
bad the discourse not moved the two speakers off to a secluded 
sofa, we would have quickly learned the answer to the enigma, the 
JOUI'CC of the Lanty fortune (however, then there would have been 
DO story to tell) (HER. Enigma 2: proposal and suspended answer) . 
(16) Nobody knew wlutt country the Lanty family came from, * Ii. new enigma, thematized (the Lantys are a family), proposed 
(there is an enigma), and formulated (What is their origin?): 
these three morphemes are here combined in a single phrase (HER. 
Enigma 3: theme, proposal, and formulation) . 
(17) or from wlutt buBineu, wlutt plunder, wlutt piratical activity, 
,. wlutt inheritance derived a fortune estimated at several millions. * HER. Enigma 2: (the Lanty fortune) : formulation. 
( 18) All the members of the family spoke I talian, French, Spanish, 
English, and Germ4n perfectly enough to create the belief that they 
must have spent a long tilTUt among these various peoples. Were 
they gypsia? Were they freebooters? * A seme is hinted at here: 
the international character of the Lantys, who speak the five culti­
vated languages of the day. This seme points to the truth (the 
great-uncle is a former international star and the languages men­
tioned are those of musical Europe), but it is far too soon for it to 
serve in unveiling it: the important thing, for the morale of the 
discourse, is that the seme not contradict the truth prospectively 
(SEM. Internationalism). ** Narratively, an enigma leads from a 
question to an answer, through a certain number of delays. Of 
these delays, the main one is unquestionably the feint, the mislead­
ing answer, the lie, what we will can the snme. The discourse has 
already lied by preterition, by omitting from among the possible 
sources of the Lantys' fortune (commerce, plunder, piracy, inheri­
tance) the real one, which is the stardom of an uncle, a famous 
and kept castrato; here the discourse lies positively by means of an 
enthymeme with a false premise: 1. Only gypsies and freebooters 
speak several languages. 2. The Lantys are polygot. 3. The Lantys 
are gypsies or freebooters (HER. Enigma 3: snare, set by the dis­
course for the reader) . 
(19) "Even if it's the devil," SOITUt young politici4ns said, "they 
give a marvelous party." 
"Even if the Count tU Ldnty IuJd robbed a btlnk, I'd m.tIIT)' hiI 
daughter any tilTUt'" crUd a philosopher. * REF. Ethnic psychol­
ogy: cynical Paris. 
(20) Who wouldn't lutve ~d Marianina, a girl of sixteen 
whose beauty embodied the fabled imaginings of the Eastern 
poets' Like the sultan's daughter, in the story of the Magic Lmnp, 
she should lutve been kept veiled. Her linging put into the sluuJe 
the partial talents of Malibran, Sontdg, and Fodor, in whom one 
dominant quality has IIlways excluded over~ perfection; whertuIB 
MarUmina was able to bring to the smne level purity of sound, 
sensibility, rightness of mO'VelTUtnt and pitch, soul and ~nce, cor­
rectness and feeling. This girl was the embodilTUtnt of that secret 
poetry, the common bond among IIll the arts, which always eluda 
those who SUTch for it. Sweet and modest, edUCllted tmd witty, no 
one could eclipse Maridni1Ul, save her mother .• REF. Chronol­
ogy (Marianina was six years old when her father purchased the 
Carigliano mansion, etc.) .•• REF. Gnomic code ("There is in 
every tilt," etc.) and literary code (Oriental poets, The ThoUSdnd 
and One Nights, Aladdin) .... Why is Marianina's musicianship 
so perfect? because she unites talents which are usually scattered. 
Similarly, why does Sarrasine find La Zambinella so seductive? be­
cause her body unites perfections the sculptor has only seen divided 
among many models (No. 220). In both cases, we have the theme 
of the dismembered body-or the body as a whole (SYM. The re­
assembled body) ..... The young girl's beauty is referred to a 
cultural rode, in this instance literary (it can elsewhere be picto­
rial or sculptural). This is a vast commonplace of literature: the 
Woman copies the Book. In other words, every body is a citation: 
of the "already-written." The origin of desire is the statue, the 
I!linting, the book (Sarrasine will be identified with Pygmalion, 
No. 229) (SYM. Replication of bodies). 
XVI. BEAUTY 
Beauty (unlike ugliness) cannot really be explained: in each 
part of the body it stands out, repeats itself, but it does not 
describe itself. Like a god (and as empty), it can only say: I 
dm wluzt I ctm. The discourse, then, can do no more than assert 
the perfection of each detail and refer "the remainder" to the 
code underlying all beauty: Art. In other words, beauty cannot 
assert itself save in the fonn of a citation: that Marianina re­
tcmbles the sultan's daughter is the only way something can 
be said about her beauty; it derives from its Model not only 
beauty but also language; left on its own, deprived of any an­
terior code, beauty would be mute. Every direct predicate is 
dcmed it; the only feasible predicates are either tautology (d 
lJerfectly oval idee) or simile (lovely Q8 d &phul MtUlonJUJ, 
33 
like d dredm in stone, etc.); thus, beauty is referred to an infin­
ity of codes: lovely CIS Venus? But Venus lovely as what? As 
herself? As Marianina? There is only one way to stop the repli­
cation of beauty: hide it, return it to silence, to the ineffable,_ 
to aphasia, refer the referent back to the invisible, veil the sUl­
tan's daughter, affinn the code without realizing (without 
compromising) its original. There is ODe rhetorical figure 
which fills this blank in the object of comparison whose exis­
tence is altogether transferred to the language of the object to 
which it is compared: catachresis (there is no other possible 
word to denote the "wings" of a house, or the "anns" of a 
chair, and yet "wings" and "anns" are instdntly, dlrecJdy meta­
phorical): a basic figure, more basic perhaps than metonymy, 
since it speaks around an empty object of comparison: the fig­
ure of beauty. 
(21) Have you ever encountered one of those women whose strik­
ing bedut)' defies the inroads of age and who seem at thirty-six 
more desirable than they could have been fifteen years earlier? 
Their visdge is a vibrant BOul, it glows; edCh fedture sparleles with 
intelligence; eQCh pore has a specitJl briUiance, especially in arti{icitJl 
light. Their seductive eyes refwe, attract, sfJedlc or renunn silent; 
their walle is innocently lcnowledgetJble; their voices employ the 
melodious wealth of the most coquettishly soft and tender notes. 
&sed on comparisons, their praises flatter the self-love of the most 
sentient. A movement of their eyebrows, the ledBt rJ.ance, their 
pursed lips, fill with a kind of terror those whose life and happiness 
depend upon them. Inexperienced in love and influenced by words, 
(l young girl can be seduced; for this leind of woman, however, a 
mtln must know, like M. de Taucourt, not to cry out when he is 
hiding in a closet and the maid brealcs two of his fingers as she 
shuts the door on them. In lC?Ving these powerful sirens, one gam­
bles with one's life. And this, perhaps, is why we love them so /JtU­
sionettely. Such was the Countess de IAnt)' .• REF. Chronology 
H 
(Mme de Lanty is thirty-six when the infonnation is either 
functional or signifying, as it is here). ** REF. The legends of love 
(M. de Jaucourt) and the amorous typology of women (the ma­
ture woman as superior to the inexperienced virgin). *** Maria­
nina copied The ThoUStJnd and One Nights. Mme. de Lanty's body 
is drawn from another Book, the Book of Life ("Have you ever 
encountered one of those women ."). This book was written by 
men (like M. de Jaucourt) who are themselves a part of the 
legend, a part of what must be read in order for love to be spoken 
(~YM. Replication of bodies) .... * In contrast to her daughter, 
Mme de Lanty is described so that her symbolic role is clear: the 
biological axis of the sexes (which would force us, quite pointlessly, 
to put all the women in the story in the same class) is replaced by 
the symbolic axis of castration (SYM. Axis of castration) . 
XVII. THE CASTRATION CAMP 
At fint glance, SdrrClSine sets forth a complete structure of the 
sexes (two opposing tenos, a mixed and a neuter). This struc­
ture might then be de6ned in phallic tenns: (1) to be the 
phallus (the men: the namttor, M. de Lanty, Sarrasine, Bou­
chardon); (2) to have it (the women: Marianina, Mme de 
Lanty, the girl the namttor is in love with, Clotilde); (3) to 
have it and not to be it (the androgynous: Filippo, Sappho); 
not to have it or to be it (the castrato). Now this distribution 
is unsatisfactory. The women, though they belong to the same 
biological class, do not have the same symbolic role: the mother 
and the daughter are opposites (as the text tells us often 
enough), Mme de Roche6de is divided, alterna tely child and 
queen, Clotilde is a nothing; Filippo, who has both feminine 
and masculine features, has no relationship to the Sappho who 
terri6es Samtsine (No. +13); 6nally, and most notably, the 
men in the story do badly where fuU virility is concerned: one 
is shrunken (M. de Lanty) , another is maternal (Bouchardon), 
3S 
the third is in thrall to the Queen-Woman (the narrator), and 
the last (Sarrasine) "run down" to the point of castration. 
Thus, sexual classification is not the right one. Another perti­
nence must be found. I t is Mme de Lanty who reveals the 
proper structure: in opposition to her (passive) daughter, 
Mme de Lanty is totally active: she dominates time (defying 
the inroads of age); she radiates (radiation is action at a dis­
tance, the highest form of power); bestowing praises, making 
comparisons, instituting the language in relation to which 
man can recognize himself, she is the primal Authority, the 
Tyrant, whose silent numen decrees life, death, storm, peace; 
finally and above all, she mutilates man (M. de Jaucourt loses 
his "finger" because of her). In short, the precursor of Sappho 
who so terrifies Sarrasine, Mme de Lanty is the castrating 
woman, endowed with all the hallucinatory attributes of the 
Father: power, fascination, instituting authority, terror, power 
to castrate. Thus, the symbolic field is not that of the biologi­
cal sexes; it is that of castration: of CtlStrdting/ CtJStrdted, c­
tive/ fJdSSive. It is in this field, and not in that of the biological 
sexes, that the characters in the story are pertinently distrib­
uted. On the side of active castration, we must include Mme 
de Lanty, Bouchardon (who keeps Sarrasine away from sexu­
ality), and Sappho (a mythic figure threatening the sculptor). 
On the passive side, whom do we find? the "men" in the story: 
Sarrasine and the narrator, both led into castration, which the 
former desires and the latter recounts. As for the castrato him­
self, we would be wrong to place him of necessity among the 
castrated: he is the blind and mobile flaw in this system; he 
moves back and forth between active and passive: castrated, he 
castrates; the same is true of Mme de Rochefide: contami­
nated by the castration she has just been told about, she impels 
the narrator into it. As for Marianina, her symbolic existence 
could not be defined apart from that of her brother Filippo. 
( 22 ) FiliPPO, MtJrianiJ14' s brother, shared with his Bister in the 
Countess's marvelous beduty. To be brief, this young I'J14n WCIS a 
living inwge of ARtinous, even more slender. Yet how weU these 
thin, delicate proportions are suited to young people when an olive 
complexion, strongly defined eyebrows, and the fire of velvet eyes 
give promise of future male /JCIBBion, of brave thoughts, If Filippo 
resided in every girrs heart CIS an ideal, he also resided in the mem­
ory of every mother CIS the best catch in France. * REF. Antique 
art. ** SEM. Wealth (the best catch in France), and Mediter­
ranean type (olive complexion, velvet eyes). *** Young Filippo 
exists only as a copy of two models: his mother and Antinous: the 
biological, chromosomatic Book, and the Book of statuary (with­
out which it would be impossible to speak of beauty: Antinous, 
"to be brief': but what else is to be said? and what then to be said 
about Antinous?) (SYM. Replication of bodies). **** SYM. 
Axis of castration. Filippo's feminine features, although quickly 
amended by euphemism (atrongly defined eyebrows, male pas­
lions), since saying a boy is handsome is already sufficient to femi­
nize him, place him in the women's camp, on the side of active 
castration: however, Filippo plays no part in the story: then what 
purpose, symbolically, can Marianina and Filippo serve? 
XVIII. THE CASTRATO'S POSTERITY 
In the story, neither Marianina nor Filippo serve much pur­
pose: Marianina only provides the minor episode of the ring 
(an episode intended to deepen the Lanty mystery) and Fi­
lippo has no semantic existence other than to form a link (by 
.1Iis ambiguous physique, his tender and concerned treabnent 
of the old man) with the women's camp. As we have seen, this 
amp is not one of biological sex, but of castration. Now, 
~ther Marianina nor Filippo have the characteristics of cas­
.tors. Then what symbolic purpose do they serve? This one: 
W feminine, brother and sister create a feminine progeny 
:Iar Mme de Lanty (their maternal atavism is emphasized); in r 
37 
......... ,. I.. ZrImbinell4 (whose niece Mme de Lanty 
it): ~ aiIt to embody a kind of explosion of Zambinellan 
( _ .-·-'tt. The meaning is as follows: if La Zambinella had 
... c:IaiIckm (a paradox indicative of the deficiency which 
__ her what she is), they would have been these hereditar­
ily :md delicately feminine creatures, Marianina and Filippo: 
as though in La Zambinella there had been a dream of nor­
mality, a teleological essence from which the castrato had been 
excluded, and this essence was femininity itself, a realm and 
posterity reconstituted in Marianina and Filippo above the 
blank of castration. 
(23) The betlUty, the fonuM, the wit, the chttnns of these two 
children. Cdme lIOlely from their rnotMr. * What is the source of 
the Lanty fortune? To this enigma 2, there is now an answer: the 
countess, the woman. Thus, acoording to the henneneutic code, 
there is a solution (partial, at least), a scrap of an answer. Yet the 
truth is submerged in a list whose parataxis sweeps it along, hides 
it, holds it back. and 6nally does not reveal it at all: thus there is a 
deroy, a snare, an obstacle (or a delay) in the solving. We will caU 
this mixture of truth and snare, this ineffective solving, an equivo­
ctttion (HER. Enigma 2: equivocation). ** (SYM. Replication 
of bodies) (the bodies of the children copy their mother's). 
(2i) The Count die IAnty WdB B1JIIIll, ugly, and poc1c-rrIIIT1ced; dttr1c 
dB d 5pttnidrd, dull dB d banker. However, he WCIB tdlten to be d deep 
politicitm, perh4pB bectIUIe he rmely 1.tDJghed, dnd WdS tIlways quot­
ing Mettemich or Wellington. * REF. Psychology of peoples and 
professions (Spaniard, banker). ** Monsieur de Lanty's role is 
small; as a banker, host of the party, he links the story to the myth 
of Parisian High Finance. His function is symbolic: his deprecatory 
portrait excludes him from the heritage of La Zambinella (from 
femininity); he is a negligible, lost father, and joins the discarded 
men of the story, aU castrated, cut off from pleasure; he helps 611 
out the paradigm CtJStrttting/ CdBtrdted (SYM. Axis of castration). 
38 
(25) This mysterious {dmily had all the ap/Jedl of one of Lord 
Byron's poems, whose difficulties eoch person in the fashionable 
world interpreted in a different way: an obscure and sublime song 
in every stropM. * REF. Literature (Byron). ** HER. Enigma 
3: theme and proposal ("this mysterious family"). *** The fam­
ily, out of the Byronic Book, is itself a book, set forth strophe by 
strophe: the realistic author spends his time referring back to 
books: reality is what has been written (SYM. Replication of 
bodies). 
(26) Til. reserve rnainttlined by M. and Mme de !Anty about 
their origin, their past life, and their reldtionship with til. four 
corners of til. globe IuJd not l4sted long as a subject of astonish­
ment in Paris. Nowhere perhaps is Ve8f>t1SUJn's axiom better under­
stood. There, even bloodstained or filthy money betrays nothing 
41Id stdnds for everything. So long as high society knows til. amount 
of your fortune, you are cLused among those luNing tin eqUtJl 
tJmount, and no one asks to see your family tree, because everyone 
knows how much it cost. In a city where social problems are solved 
Wee tJlgebraic equtltions, tldventurers have every opportunity in 
their fdVor. Even supposing this fdmily were of gypsy origin, it was 
so we4lthy, so tJttrdCtive, that society IuJd no trouble in forgiv­
ing its little secrets. * REF. Gnomic code (Non olet, the Latin 
supplement of a dictionary) and the mythology of Parisian Gold. ** SEM. Internationality. *** HER. Enigma 3 (origin of the 
Lantys): proposal (there is a mystery) and snare (the Lantys are 
perhaps of gypsy origin). **** HER. Enigma 2 (source of the 
fortune) : proposal (no one knows where this fortune comes from). 
XIX. INDEX, SIGN, MONEY 
In the past (says the text), money "revealed"; it was an index, 
it furnished a fact, a cause, it had a nature; today it "repre­
sents" (everything): it is an equivalent, an exchange, a repre­
sentation: a sign. Between index and sign, a common mode, 
that of inscription. Shifting from a monarchy based on land to 
39 
an industrial monarchy, society changed the Book, it passed 
from the Letter (of nobility) to the Figure (of fortune), from 
title deeds to ledgers, but it is always subject to a writing. The 
difference between feudal society and bourgeois society, index 
and sign, is this: the index has an origin, the sign does not: to 
shift from index to sign is to abolish the last (or first) limit, 
the origin, the basis, the prop, to enter into the limitless proc-
~ ess of equivalences, representations that nothing will ever stop, 
orient, fix, sanction. Parisian indifference to the origin of 
money equates symbolically with the non~rigin of money; a 
money that has no smell is money withdrawn from the basic 
order of the index, from the consecration of origin: this money 
is as empty as being-astrated: for Parisian Gold, what corre­
sponds to the physiological impossibility of procreating is the 
impossibility of having an origin, a moral heredity: the signs 
(monetary, sexual) are wild because, contrary to the indices 
(the meaningful regime of the old society), they are not based 
on an original, irreducible, incorruptible, immovable otherness 
of their component parts: _in the index, what is indicated (no­
bility) is of a different nature from what indicates (wealth): 
there is no possible mingling; in the sign, which establishes an 
order of representation (and no longer of determination, of 
creation, as does the index), the two elements interclumge, 
signified and signifier revolving in an endless process: what is 
bought can be sold, the signified can become signifier, and so 
on. Replacing the feudal index, the bourgeois sign is a me­
tonymic confusion. 
(27) Unfortunately, however, the myrtery of the !Antys presented 
d continuing source of curiosity, rdiher Wee thdt contdined in the 
nove" of Ann Rtadcliffe. * REF. Literature (Ann Radcliffe). ** 
HER. Enigma 3 (where do the Lantys come from?) : proposal. 
( 28 ) Observers, people who J7'Idlce it a point to know in what .hop 
you buy )'Our candlesticks, or who ask the amount of ),our rent 
when they find ),our apmtment attractive, had noticed, now and 
then, in the midst of the Countess's fHlrlia, concerts, bolls, and 
routs, the af'Pearance of a strange personage. * REF. Code of 
Novelists, Moralists, Psychologists: observation of those who ob­
serve. ** Here a new enigma is proposed (a strange feeling) and 
thematized (a personage) (HER. Enigma": theme and proposal). 
(29) It was a man. * The old man, in fact, is not a man: here, 
the discourse is misleading the reader (HER. Enigma .. : snare). 
XX. THE DISSOLVE OF VOICES 
Who is speaking? Is it a scientific voice which from the type 
"personage" infers, in passing, a species, "man," in order later 
to give it another species, "castrato"? Is it a phenomenalist 
l'Oice naming what it sees, the wholly masculine garb of the 
old man? Here it is impossible to attribute an origin, a point of 
view, to the statement. Now, this impossibility is one of the 
ways in which the plural nature of a text can be appreciated. 
~Jn...9~_~I!.d.e.~~l!JljrulteJhe origin of the statement, the more 
plural the text. In modem texts, the voices are so freatedlliat 
any reference is' impossible: ~ the discourse, or better, the lan­
pje, spealcs: nothing mo~.: By contrast, in the classic text 
the majority o.f the utterances are assigned an origin, ~e can 
1iJcntlfy their parentage, who is speaking: either a conscious­
lIaS (of a character, of the author) or a culture (the anony­
IDOUS is still an origin, a voice: the voice we find, for example, 
in the gnomic code); however, it may happen that in the classic 
Iat, always haunted by the appropriation of speech, the voice 
Fb lost, as though it had leaked out through a hole in the 
discourse. The best way to ~nccille the clagical plural is then 
~. listen t~ tne text as an iridescent exchange carried on by 
41 
multiple voices, on different wavelengths and subject fr.ol!!­
tim~_tQ t:ime to a sudden dissolve, leaving a gap which enables 
the utterance to shift from-one pOint ot" vieW to anothc:~~ wi~..: 
out warning: the writing -is set -up across this tonal insta1>uity 
-"(which in the modern text becomes atonality), which makes 
it a glistening texture of epbemeral origins. 
( 30) The first time he htld apf:Je4red in the mansion WdS during d 
concert, when he seemed to have been drawn to the Bdlon by Mmitt­
Rind" enchtmting voice. * SEM. Musicianship (the seme is a 
truthful indicator, since the old man is a former soprano, but it 
lacks as yet the strength to reveal the whole truth) . 
(31) "1Jl of d rudden, I'm cold," d lttdy htld Bttid who WdS Bttmd­
ing with d friend by the door. 
The stranger, who WdI rtdnding next to the womm, went 
t1Way. 
"Thttt', oddl I'm WClml now," ,he Bttid, after the strttnger htld 
gone. "And )'ou'U BIl'I fm mttd. but I CdIl't help thinking thttt my 
neighbor, the mdn dressed in bl4c1c who just left, WdS the CdUBe of 
my chill." * SEM. Cold (first proposed in the garden, the migrat­
ing signifier has attached itself to the old man). ** SYM. Antith­
esis: cold/hot (the antithesis of garden and salon, animate and 
inanimate, repeated a second time) . 
( 32) Before long, the extJggeration ntttive to those in high society 
gave birth to ttnd dCCUmuloted the most mnusing ided8, the most 
outrageous expressions, the most ridiculous d1UlCdotes ttbout this 
mysterious persondf,e. * REF. Worldliness. ** HER. Enigma i 
(who is the old man?): false replies: statement. As a term in the 
hermeneutic code, the f. reply differs from the snare in that 
error is distinguished as such by the discourse. 
(33) Although not d vdmpire, d ghoul. or dn ttrtificiol mtln, d 
lind of FdUBt or Robin CoodfeUow, people fond of fdntdB)' Bllid 
he htld something of ttll these dnthropomorphic ndtures ttbout 
him. * HER. Enigma i: false reply No.1. ** SEM. Extra-
.p 
terrestrial and extra-temporal (the old man is death itself, who 
alone does not die: in the dead man who does not die there is an 
extra, supplemental death) . 
( 34) Here dM there, one Cdme QCTOBS some Germclns who tlC­
cepted CI8 ftJCt these clever witticisms of Pd7'isidn settndtd-monger­
ing. * REF. Ethnic psychology: a paradigm of the period: the 
naive Gennan, the witty Parisian. 
(35) The mcmger Wdl merely em old mdn. * HER. Enigma i: 
snare (the stranger is not "merely" an old man). ** The narrator 
(or the discourse?) reduces the mysterious to the simple; he stands 
as the defender of fact, dismisses any recourse to fable, myth, sym­
bol, renders language useless by means of a tautology (the old man 
WC18 em old man): the narrator (or discourse) here resorts to an 
irMginmy figure: asymbolism (SEM. Asymbolism) . 
( 36) Many of the young men who were in the hdbit of settling 
tM future of Europe every morning in d few elegtmt PhrCl8el 
would Iutve Weed to '" in this manger some great crimintll, the 
poausor of l'CI8t wealth. Some storytellers recounted the life of 
this old mdn d1Id provided reCllly curious detdils dbout the tltrocities 
he htul committed while in the service of the MdhtJrdjd of 
Mysore. Some bdnkers, more fJoBitive by rutture, invented d ftJblc 
tIbout money. "Bdh," they Sdid, shrugging their shoulders in pity, 
"this poor old man is d tlte genaise/" * HER. Enigma i: false 
replies Nos. 2, 3, and i (the false replies derive from cultural 
codes: cynical youths, storytellers, bankers). ** SYM. Wealth. 
(37) "Sir, without being indiscreet, could you pletlse teU me 
whdt you medn by d tite g~noise?" 
"A mdR, sir, with dn enormous lifetime cdfJitol dM whose 
ftnnily's income doubtless depends on his good health." * True, 
there is a link between the fortune of the former star and the --
Lantys' fortune; it is doubtful that the family's affection for the 
old man is an interested one, however: the whole creates an 
ambiguity (HER. Enigma i: equivocation). 
(38) I remember having heard at M me cf Esparcf s d hypnotist 
/lroving on highly SU8pect historicol d4td that this old mdR, 
43 
preserved under gl4ss, was the famous Balsamo, Jmown as Caglio&­
tro. According to this contemporary alchemist, the Sicilian ad­
venturer hdd e8Caped death and passed his tinw fttbricating gold 
for his grandchildren. lAst, the Ixtiliff of Ferette mtJintained that 
he hdd recognized this odd persoruJge as the Count of Sdint­
Germain. * HER. Enigma 4: false reply No.5. ** SEM. Beyond 
time. Two (weakened) accessory connotations are heard here: 
under rJ.oss recalls the revulsion some people feel at the sight of a 
mummy, an embalmed, preserved body; and alchemist's gold is 
empty gold, without origin (the same gold as the gold of specu­
lators) . 
( 39) These ltupidities, spolen in witty accents, with the mocling 
air chartICteri8tic of atheistic society in our dtty, lept alive vap 
suspicions ilbout the Ltmty farnUy. * REF. Psychology of peoples: 
cynical Paris. ** HER. Enigma 3: proposal and thematization 
(there is an enigma, and it concerns the Lanty family). *** HER. 
Enigma 4: false response No.6. In the hermeneutic sequence, the 
false replies create a byte (a basic or subroutine configuration in 
cybernetic language); this byte is itself subject to a rhetorical code 
(the code of exposition): a statement (No. 32), six false replies, a 
resume (No. 39). 
XXI. IRONY, PARODY 
Stated by the discourse itself, the ironic code is, in principle, an 
explicit quotation of what someone has said; however, irony 
acts as a signpost, and thereby it destroys the multivalence we 
might expect from quoted discourse. ~ mu'ti-J.Ienn:CSir can­
carry ou! _i~ .basic-duplicity _Q!llf if it subv~ the oppositiOR­
between true and false, if it fails to attribute quotation.!i~en 
when seeking to discredit them) to explicit -authoPiies. if it 
80uts all respect for origin, paternity, propriety, if it destroys 
the voice which could give the text its ("organic") unity, in 
short, if it coldly and fraudulently abolishes quotation marks 
44 
which must, as we say, in all honesty, enclose a quotation and 
juridically distribute the ownership of the sentences to their 
respective proprietors, like subdivisions of a field. For mul­
t:ivalence (contradicted by irony) is a transgression of owner­
ship. The wall of voices must be passed through to reach the 
writing: this latter eschews any designation of ownership and 
thus can never be ironic; or, at least, its irony is never certain 
(an uncertainty which marks several great texts: Sade, Fourier, 
Flaubert). Employed in behalf of a subject that puts its imag­
inary elements at the distance it pretends to take with regard 
to the language of others, thereby making itself even more 
securely a subject of the discourse, parody, or irony at work, is 
always cl4ssic language. What could a parody be that did not 
advertise itself as such7 This is the problem facing modem 
writing: how breach the wall of utterance, the wall of origin, 
the wall of ownership7 
(10) FiMll)', through" str"nge combincrtion of cUcumstcrnces, the 
members of this fermil), ~d everyone' B conjectures by behtrv­
in& BOrnewlutt m)'steriousl)' towcrrd this old mcrn, whole life Well 
IDJ1Iehow hidden from crll investigcrtion. * HER. Enigma 4: pro­
posal. The "mystery" surrounding the old man's identity will be 
anbodied in a certain number of actions, in themselves mysterious. 
(41) Whenever this person croued the threshold of the room he 
Well supposed to inhcrbit in the Lcrnty mcrnsion. his ttplJetlf"nce crl­
Wd)'B created " gredt senscrtion ermong the f"mil),. One might htrve 
CtIlkd it ern event of grecrt imfJort4nce. Filif'/JO, Mcrrianincr, Mme a lARty, crnd ern old serv"nt were the only persons privileged to 
GIist the old mcrn in wcrlking, rising, sitting down. EtJch of them 
wtched over his slightest movement. * SYM. The feminine 
camp ... HER. Enigma 4: proposal (enigmatic behavior). 
("2) It seemed thcrt he WCII ern enchcrnted being ufJon whom de­
#Jtmded the hcrppinetl8, the life, or the fortune of them crll. * SEM. 
45 
Fascination. This signifier could lead to the truth, it being the cas­
trato's nature to enclumt, like a supernatural medium: thus Fari­
nelli, who cured, or at least assuaged, the morbid melancholia of 
Philip V of Spain by singing to him daily (always the same melody 
for years on end) . 
( H) W CIS it affection or (em7 Those in society were ufUlble to dis­
cover any clue to Mlp them solve this problem. • HER. Enigma 
.. : proposal and jamming of the answer. 
( .... ) Hidden for whole months in the dept'" of d secret SttnCtuary, 
this fdmily gem. would BUddenly come forth, unexpect.dly, dnd 
would d/JIJe4r in the midIt of the Sdlons lilt. those fairies of bygone 
dttys who dacended from flyin& drtJgOns to interrupt the rita to 
which they hdd not been invited .• SEM. Fascination. ** REF. 
FaiJy tales. 
("5) Only the most avid onlooltm were then db,. to perceive the 
unedliness of the hectdI of the hOUle, who could concetd their fee'­
ings with unuswd slrill. • HER. Enigma .. : proposal (enigmatic 
behavior). 
(46) Sometimea, however, while d4ncin& d quttdrille, Mari4nintJ, 
ndive CIS she WdB, would C4Bt d t~d gl4nce tit the old nurn when 
.he spied him dmDn& the crowd. Or .,. Filippo would .lip quiclr.ly 
through the thron& to his side dnd would Bttty netIT him, tender dnd 
attentive, dB though conttJct with othen or the Ilightut breath 
would destroy this stTdflBe creatur,. The Countess would mdIr., d 
point of drcrwin& netlf, without _mUng to have tnry intention of 
joinin& them; then, tlmJmin& d nurnMr dnd exfJraBion of rervitude 
mixed with tenderness, submission, tJnd power, .he would Ny d 
few words, to which the old mcm netlTly dlwd)'S deferred, dnd he 
would disdpfJetJr, led off, or, more precisely, CtI1ried off, by her . 
• SEM. Fragility and childishness. ** HER. Enigma .. : proposal 
(enigmatic behavior). *** Since the old man is a castrato and 
the castrato is outside the sexes, he should be refclled to in the 
neuter; however, since there is no neuter in French, the discourse, 
when it is trying not to "lie," denotes the castrato in ambiguous 
tenns: nouns morphologically feminine, semantically applicable to 
46 
both sexes (both masculine and feminine simultaneously): thus 
the word crellture (and further, this feminine orgdniution) (SYM. 
The neuter of castration) . 
(i7) If Mme de lAnty were not present, the Count used d thou­
SdfId mtJtttgems to retJCh his side; however, he seemed to lutve diffi­
culty mtJking himself hetJrd, dnd tretJted him like d sfJoiled child 
whose mother gives in to his whims in order to avoid d scene. * 
HER. Enigma i: proposal (enigmatic behavior). ** The Count 
is excluded from the women's camp: their elegant and successful 
actions are contrasted to his, which are laborious and ineffectual. 
M. de Lanty (the man of the family) is not a descendant of La 
Zambinella. Yet once again the symbolic distnbution is set forth: 
the woman (Mme de Lanty) has the effective conhol, that of the 
father; it is the man (M. de Lanty) who exercises a haphazard and 
disregarded authority, that of the mother (SYM. Axis of castIa­
tion). 
(i8) Some bolder persons having thoughtlessly ventured to ques­
tion the Count de Lmaty, this cold, reserved rrum Iuld ~ed 
never to underrttJnd them. And 10, ttfter mtJn)' tries, till futile be­
CtJuse of the cUcumspection of the entire fllmily, everyone napped 
trying to f«hom such a weU-lcept secret. WetJr)' of trying, the com-
1Jdni0ntJble spies, the idly curious, tlnd the l'Olitic tJll gave up both­
ering tJbout this mystery. * The discourse declares the enigma it 
has proposed to be unresolved: in the hermeneutic code, this is 
jamming (frequent in detective fiction) (HER. Enigma i: jam­
ming). 
(-i9) However, even now perhdps in these glittering I4lons there 
were some philosophers who, whik etJting tin ice or d sherbet, or 
/ll4cing tMir empty punch tJ.oss on d side ttIble, were saying to 
eeh other: "It wouldn't surprise me to letJrn tIult those fJeofJk tUe 
crooks. The old mdn who hides dnd only mtJIces his tJPPedrtUlCe on 
the first dtty of spring or winter, or « the IOlstices, loob to me like 
.Iciller " 
"Or d confidence mtJn .. 
"It's mmoBt the same thing. Killing d mtJn's fortune is some­
times worse than killing the mdn." * REF. Psychology of peoples 
47 
(Paris) and gnomic code ( Killing cl mean', fortune . ). ** 
SEM. Fascination (the old man is said, albeit ironically, to appear 
at the magical times of the year, like a sorcerer). 
(50) "Sir, 1 have bet twenty louis, 1 ,hould get bDck forty." 
"But, sir, there care onl), thirty on the table." 
"M weU, ),ou see how mixed the crowd is, here. It's impossible 
to play." 
"True But it's now nurl)' six months since we've seen the 
Spirit. Do ),ou think he', recall)' calive?" 
"Hcaht at best " 
These lttst words were spoken nscar me by people 1 did not know, 
as they were moving off, * SEM. Supernatural (out of the world 
and ultra-temporal). ** That which disappears in the gaming as 
though blown away is symbolically equivalent to the gold which 
appears without anyone's knowing or trying to find out its origin: 
without source and without destination, (Parisian) Gold is a sub­
stitute for the emptiness of castration (SYM. Gold. emptiness) . 
( 51) clnd as 1 was resuming. in dn d/terthought, m)' mixed thoughts 
of white dnd black, life dnd death. M)' vivid imtJgination as weU as 
m)' eyes looked btJck cand forth from the 1JdrfY. which head reClChed 
the height of its splendor, dnd the somber seens in the gcardens. * SYM. Antithesis: AB: resume. 
( 52) 1 do not know how long 1 meditated on these two ftlCU of 
the humean coin; * ACI'. "To meditate": 1: to be in the process 
of meditation. .. The coin is symbolic of the incommunicability 
of the two sides: like the paradigmatic slash marlc of an antithesis, 
metal cannot be traversed: yet it will be, the Antithesis will be 
transgressed (SYM. Antithesis: AB: double participation). 
( 53) but dU dt once 1 was dWdlcensd b)' the stifled laugh of d 
)'Dung womean. * ACf. "To meditate": 2: to stop meditating . .. ACI'. "To laugh": 1: to burst out laughing. 
( 54) 1 was stunned by the dfJPeclrdRCe of the imcage which carose 
before me. * The image: a generic term which announces (rhe­
torically) a third version of the antithesis: after the contrast of 
garden and party, heat and cold. we have here the groundwork for 
48 
the contrast of the girl and the old man. Like the other forms of 
Antithesis, this one is also corporeal: the image will be that of two 
mingled antithetical bodies. Now, this carnal antithesis is revealed, 
called forth, by a carnal act: laughter. A substitute for the cry, an 
hallucinatory agent, laughter breaches the wall of the Antithesis, 
removes from the coin the duality of reverse and obverse; erases the 
paradigmatic slash mark "reasonably" separating cold and heat, 
life and death, animate and inanimate. In addition, in the story it­
self, laughter is linked to castration: La Zambinel1a, "for a laugh," 
participates in the farce prepared by her friends at Sarrasine's ex­
pense; in the face of laughter, Sarrasine protests his virility (SYM. 
Antithesis: AB: statement). 
(55) By one of those tricks of rutture, the htUf-moumful thought 
tuming in my mind IuJd emerged, dnd it apfJetJred living before me, 
it IuJd sprung like Minervd from the hetJd of Jove, tdll dnd Btrong, it 
WdS tJt once d hundred yetUS old tJnd twenty-two years old; it Well 
alive dnd dedd. * SYM. Antithesis: AB: mingling (the wall of 
Antithesis is breached) ... REF. Mythology. What is amazing in 
the myth of Minerva is not that the goddess sprang from her fa­
ther's head but that she emerged "tall and strong," already fully 
armed and fully developed. The (hallucinatory) image for which 
Minerva serves as model is not elaborated upon: we encounter it 
abruptly, as a reality, in the salon; when born, it is tdretJdy written: 
there is only a shift of writings, trans-saiption, without maturation, 
without organic origin. * .. REF. Chronology. The girl is twenty­
two, the old man is one hundred. Twenty-two: this precise figure 
produces the effect of reality; metonymically, this precision leads 
us to believe that the old man is euctly one hundred yean old 
(rather than being somewhere around one hundred). 
( 56) Escdped from his room like d lunCJtic from his cell, the little 
old mtJn htJd obviously slipped behind d hedge of people who were 
listening to MtJridnintJ', voice, finishing the CdVatintJ from Tan­
credi. * SEM. Supernature (madness is outside "nature") ... 
SEM. Musicianship .... REF. Music history (Rossini). 
(57) He seemed to htJve come out from underground, impelled by 
some p~ce of stdge 7ntJChinery. * SEM. Machine, mechanical-
49 
ness (likened to a machine, the old man is a part of the extra­
human, of the inanimate) . 
(58) Motionless tmd somber, he stood for d moment gtlring tit the 
party, the noiles of which held perh4f1s retlChed his e4TB. His edmon 
soJTl1UJ1flbullltory preoccupation WClS so concentrated on things thdt 
he WClS in the world without seeing it .• SEM. Supemature, out­
of-the-world ... SYM. Antithesis: A: the old man. 
(59) He hdd unceremoniously sprung up next to one of the mort 
ravishing women in PtJris, • SYM. Antithesis: AB: mixture of 
elements. The mixing of bodies (transgression of the Antithesis) is 
signified not by proximity (next to) but by sudden appearance. 
This implies that the space in which one appears was not expecting 
one, that it was completely occupied by something other: the 
young woman and the old man both find themselves occupying the 
same area. which was intended for only one of them. 
(60) d young tmd elegdnt dtmcer, delicately foT'f'Md, with one of 
those fdCel CIS frah lIB thIIt of d child, pinJc tmd white, so frml tmd 
trtm8fJllTent thdt d mem', fJ4nce seemB to penetrate it liie d rei)' of 
sunlight going through ice. • SYM. Antithesis: B: the young 
woman. .. The body is a duplicate of the Book: the young 
woman originates in the Book of Life ("one of those ftICes ". 
the plural refers to a total of stored-up and recorded experiences) 
(SYM. Replication of bodies) .... It is premature to place the 
young girl in the symbolic field: her (semic) portrait has just be­
gun. Moreover, it will vary: the child-woman, transparent, fragile, 
fresh, will hemme, in No. 90, a fully drawn woman, outgoing 
rather than receptive, in short, fICtive (whereupon, as we have seen, 
she wiD join the castrators); for the moment, probably due to the 
needs of the Antithesis, the discourse can only contrast the old 
man-machine with the child-woman (SYM. child-woman). 
(61) They were both there before me, together, united, dnd so 
close thdt the rtrtJnger bf'U8'hed ttgtJinrt her, her gdU%)' dress, her 
gtJrlanch of flowers, her softly curled 1uDr, her flotJting Bt1Bh .• The 
mingling of the two bodies is signified by two connotators: on the 
one hand, the staccato rhythm of the short syntagms (both/t<> 
gether/urdted/dnd so Cw.), which are built up diagrammatically, 
so 
describes the breathless pressure of bodies; and on the other hand, 
the image of a supple material (gauze, gar14nd, curled hair, flOtlting 
1tIIh) has something of the vegetal in its development (SYM. An­
tithesis: AB: mingling). ** Symbolically, we here witness the cas­
trato's marriage: opposites come together, the castrato has talcen 
the woman (who, with equivocal fascination which win be empha­
sized later, bends toward him): an active metonymy through 
which castration will contaminate the young woman, the nar­
rator, and Sarrasine (SYM. Marriage of the castrato). 
(62) I hdd brought thu young wonurn to Mme de Lmty', bdU. 
Since thu WdS her first visit to the howe, I forgave her her stifled 
Ltugh, but I quickly gave her a signal which completely silenced 
her tIJId fiUed her with awe for her neighbor. * SYM. The child­
woman (the young woman is treated like a child who has been 
naughty). ** ACT. "To laugh": 2: to stop. 
XXII. VEIlY NATUllAL ACTIONS 
There is a belief that great structures, serious symbols, grand 
meanings are built upon an unimpressive foundation of ordi­
IW}' acts that the discourse notes as a matter of form, "to 
speak truly": all criticism therefore rests on the notion that 
the text contdins insignificdnt elements or, in elect, nature: 
the meaning is supposed to take its preeminence from an "over 
meaning," which is noted, whose subordinate role is supposed 
to be purely by way of contrast. Now, the notion of structure 
does not support the separation of foundation and design, in­
significant and significant; structure is not a design, a schema, 
a diagram: everything signifies something. For proof, we have 
only to examine the basic (and thus seemingly unimportant) 
proairetisms, the usual paradigm of which is something like 
begin/ end, continue/stop. In these common examples (in the 
present text: to l4ugh, to be deep in, to hide, to medit4te, to 
join, to thre4fen, to undertake, etc.), the nature of the phe-
nomenon established by the notation is capped by a conclu­
non and consequently seems to be subject to some logic (as 
long as temporality appears: the classic narrative is basically 
subject to the logico-temporal order) . Writing "the end" (a 
phrase which is precisely both temporal and logical) thus p0s­
its everything that has been written as having been a tension 
which "naturally" requires resolution, a consequence, an end, 
i.e., something like a criBiB. The crisis is a cultural model: the 
same model that has marked Western thinking about the 
organic (with Hippocrates), the poetic and the logical (Aristo­
telian Cdtluusis and syllogism), and more recently the socio­
economic. By participating in the need to set forth the end of 
every action (conclusion, inteauption, closure, denouement), 
the readerly declares itself to be hish-ncal. In other words, it 
can be subverted, but not without scandal, since it is the 
Mture of the discourse which then appears to have been be­
trayed: the girl Cdn not stop laughing, the narrator Cdn never 
be aroused from his daydream, or at least the discourse could 
suddenly think of something else, abandon its obsession with 
telling the whole story, change direction in order to produce a 
more effective network; curiously, we call the knot (of the 
story) what needs to be unknotted (dbwuement), we situate 
the knot at the peak of the crisis, not at its outcome; yet the 
knot is what closes, tenninates, concludes the action in prog­
ress, like a Bourish below a signature; to deny this 6nal word 
( to deny the end as a word) would in fact scandalously dismiss 
the sigrulture we seek to give each of our "messages." 
(63) She Idt down next to me. * ACT. "To join": 1: to sit down. 
(64) The old mdn did not Wdnt to leave this lowl, CTedtuTe, to 
whom he htul dtttIched hinuelf with that Bilent cmd werningl, 
btuelea rtubbomnea to which the ertrmwl, old dr. Fane, dnd 
which mtJIca them dfJPe4r childUh. * REF. Psychology of the old. 
** SEM. Childishness. *** The cabato is attracted to the young 
woman, opposite to opposite, the reverse of the coin by its obverse 
(SYM. Marriage of the castrato). 
(65) In ordM to lit ,.". Mr, he h4d to flIlce a folding clutir. Hil 
Ilightut movements wr8 full of thdt cold hettvinea, the rtufJid i~ 
da:iIion, chmtICteristic of the gatura of a pardlytic. H. I4t BlowZy 
dawn on hilMIt, with cirr:urrupection, * ACT. "To join": 2: to 
sit next to. ** REF. Psychology of the old. 
(66) muttmng 10,. unint.lligiIM wardl. Hil worn-out voice Well 
lile. the round rratUI. by a stone ftllling down a MD. * The noise 
of a stone falling down a well is not a "worn-out sound"; however, 
the chain of connotation of the sentence is more important than 
the exactitude of the simile; this chain links the following ele­
ments: the inanimate inertia of the stone, the sepulchral depth of 
the well, the discontinuity of the aged voice, antinomic to the per­
fect, unified, "lubricated" voice: the signified is the "thing," arti­
ficial and aeaky as a machine (SEM. Mechanicalness). 
(67) The young WOmdn held my htmtl tightly, ell if ... Jting 
fJrot«tion on 10,. ~, tI1Id ".. ahiwrwd when thil mdn tit 
whom"" WCllloolOng * SEM. Fascination. 
(68) turned ufJon Mr two eyes without WtImIth, f!}Aut:ou8 .,., 
which could only be comfJtlred to dull motMr-of-fJUr1. * Worse 
than cold: chilled (dulled). The lexia connotes the corpse, death 
in human form, by bringing out what is most disquieting about 
him: his open ~.. (to close the eyes of the dead is to exorcise 
whatever life remains, to make the dead die for good, to make the 
dead totally dead). As for fPrucOUl, it has no denotative impor­
tance here (the exact color of gltlucoUl is not important); conno­
tatively (culturally), it is the color of a blind eye, a dead eye: a 
death of color which is yet not colorless (SEM. Cold) . 
(69) "I'm tJfrtJid," ,he said, ledning toward my ear. * SEM. Fasci­
nation. 
(70) "Yau can WJc," I aruwered. "H. iI very hard of """118." 
"Do you inow himl" 
S3 
"Yea." * The old man's deafness (justified by his great age) 
serves the following purpose: it informs us (obliquely) that the 
narrator holds the key to the suspended enigmas: hitherto pre­
sented to us merely as the "poet" of the Antithesis, the narrator is 
here presented as being in a position to narrate. A proairetism is 
opened: "to bow tM nory/to t.ll it," etc. Taken as a whole, this 
proairetism will, as we shall see, be heavily laden with symbolism" 
(ACT. "To narrate": 1: to know the story). 
(71) Thereupon, me gathered up enough courtJge to looJt for CI 
moment at thiI credtur. for which th. hurntJn l.tmgwJgc held no 
ncune, CI form without rubmmce, CI being without """ or CI life 
without CICtion. * The neuter, the gender proper to the castrato, is 
signified by lack of a soul (or animation: the inanimate, in the 
Indo-European languages, is the determinant of the neuter): the 
privative repetition (without ..) is the diagrammatical form of 
castration, the appearance of life in one lacking life (SYM. The 
neuter). ** The old man's portrait, which will follow and which 
is here rhetorically indicated, takes form within a frClffWWOrJt estab­
lished by the young woman (gClthered up enough courage to look 
), but by means of a dissolve of the original voice, the de­
scription will be carried out by the discowse: the body of the old 
man copies a painted model (SYM. Replication of bodies). 
XXIII. PAINTING AS A MODEL 
Every literary descriptiOIl is a view: It could be said that the 
speaker, before describing, stands at the window, not so much 
to see, but to establish what he sees by ib very frame: the win· 
dow frame creates the scene. To describe is thus to place the 
empty frame which the realistic author always carries with him 
(more important than his easel) before a collection or con­
tinuum of objecb which cannot be put into words without this 
obsessive operation (which could be as laughable as a "gag"); 
in order to speak about it, the writer, through this initial rite, 
first transforms the "real" into a depicted (framed) object; 
having done this, he can take down this object, remove it from 
his picture: in short: de-depict it (to depict is to unroll the 
carpet of the codes, to refer not from a language to a referent 
but from one code to another). Thus, realism (badly named, 
at any rate often badly interpreted) c.onsists not in copying 
the real but in copying a (depicted) copy of the real: this 
famous reality, as though suffering from a fearfulness which 
keeps it from being touched directly, is set farther awczy, post­
poned, or at least captured through the pictorial matrix in 
which it has been steeped before being put into words: code 
upon code, known as realism. This is why realism cannot be 
designated a "copier" but rather a "pasticheur" (through sec­
ondary mimesis, it copies what is already a copy); naive or 
shameless, Joseph Brideau has no scruple about painting a 
Raphael (since the painter too must copy another code, an 
anterior code), any more than Balzac has in declaring this 
pastiche to be a masterpiece. Once the infinite circularity of 
codes is posited, the body itself cannot escape it: the real body 
.( fictionally given as such) is the replication of a model set 
forth by that code of the arts, so that the most "natural" of 
bodies, that of Balzac's crayfish-gatherer (La Rttbouilleu.se), is 
always only the promise of the artistic code from which it has 
previously issued ("The doctor, who was enough of an anato­
mist to recogniu a delectable figure, understood cdl thdt the 
arts would lose, if this chdrming model were destroyed by 
working in the fields"). Thus, even within realism, the codes 
never stop: bodily replication cannot be interrupted save by 
leaving nature: either toward Superlative Woman (the "mas­
terpiece") or toward the sub-human (the castrato). All of 
which raises a twofold problem: first, where and when did this 
preeminence of the pictorial code in literary mimesis begin? 
Why has it disappeared? Why has the writer's dream of paint­
ing died out? What has replaced it? Nowadays, the representa-
55 
tional codes are shattered to make room for a multiple space 
no longer based on painting (the "picture") but rather on the 
theater (the stage), as Mallarme predicted, or at least wished. 
And then: if literature and painting are no longer held in a 
hierarchical reRection, one being the rear-view mirror for the 
other, why maintain them any longer as objects at on~e united 
and separate, in short, classed together? Why Dot wipe out the 
difference between them (purely one of substance)? Why not_ 
forgo the plurality of the "arts" in order to affirm more power-
fully the plurality of "texts"? _.-,' 
(72) She was under the spell of tlutt timorous curiosity which 
Iuds women to seell out dangerous emotions, to go see clunned 
tigers, to look at boa constrictors, frightening themselves because 
they are separttUd from them onl)' b)' weal! fences. * SEM. Fasci­
nation. ** The Woman and the Snalce. 
(73) Although the little old mdn's bdell was Btooped like a 14-
borer's, one could ed8il)' teU tlutt he muBt Me hdd at one time a 
nonnlll shaf>e. His excesBive thinness, the delictlC)' of his limb" 
proved tlutt he hdd always been slender. * REF. Rhetorical code: 
prosopography (the "portrait" was a rhetorical genre particularly 
in favor in the neo-rhetoric of the second century A.D., a brilliant 
and detachtJble fragment which the discourse will here imbue with 
semic intentions). ** SEM. Beauty (past). 
(74) He was dressed in bUlcll Billl trousers which feU about his 
bon)' thighs in folds, like an empty sail. * SEM. Emptiness. The 
image of the empty sail adds a connotation of default; in other 
words, of temporality: the wind, the life have departed. 
(75) An anatomist would Me promptl), recognized the symptoms 
of galloping consumption by looking at the sltinn)' legs supporting 
this strange body. * SEM. Monster (Extra·nature ). ** HER. 
Enigma 4: theme and proposal (because of his body, the old man 
is the subject of an enigma) . 
(76) You would have Bdid they were two bones crossed on a tomb­
Itons. * SEM. Death (the signifier connotes the angular, the geo­
metrical, the broken line, a fonn antithetical to gauzy or vegetal, 
i.e., to life) . 
(77) A feeling of profound horror for fJUJnkind gri"".d the heart 
when ons SdW the mdrks that decrepitude had left on this fragile 
mtlChins. * SEM. Mechanicalness. 
(78) The stranger was wedTing an old-fashionsd gold-embroidered 
white waistcoat, and his linsn was dtuzlingly white. A frill of some­
what yeUowed 14ce, rich enough for a queen's envy, feU into ruffles 
on his breast. On him, however, this ltJce seemed more like a rag 
than like an ommnent. Centered on it was a fabulous diamond 
which glittered like the sun. * SEM. Superannuation, Femininity 
(coquetry), Wealth. 
(79) This outmoded luxury, this pttrticulm and tasteless jewel, 
made the strange cretlture's face even more striking. * HER. 
Enigma .. (Who is the old man?): theme and purpose. The lack of 
taste refers to his dress, in which the feminine essence and wealth 
are displayed, with no concern for whether it is asethetically pleasing 
or socially fitting (the "particular jewel"): similarly, vulgarity suits 
a transvestite's dress more strikingly than distinction, because it 
makes femininity into an essence, not a value; vulgarity is on the 
side of the code (which enables it to be fascinating), distinction 
on the side of performance. 
(SO) The setting was worthy of the portrait. This dark face was 
angular and all sunk in. The chin WCII sunken, the temples were 
sunken; the eyes were lost in yeUowish sockets. The jawbonss stood 
out because of his indescribable thinnsBB, creating cavities in the 
center of e«h ch_k. * REF. Rhetorical code: the portrait. ** 
The old man's extreme thinness is an index of age, but also of 
emptiness, of reduction through deficiency. This latter seme is ob­
viously in contrast to the stereotype of the fat, bloated eunuch, 
puffed up with empty pride; this is because in this instance the 
connotation can lead in two directions: syntagmatically, emptiness 
ought not contradict the lines of old age; paradigmatically, thin-
57 
ness seen as emptiness is in contrast to the strong, vegetal, full 
bloom of the young woman (SEM. Emptiness). 
(81) These defomumons, more or less illuminated b)' the cdndles, 
fJroduCf8d shadows and strange reflections which succeeded in eras­
ing an)' human chmClCferistics from his fdee. * SEM. Out of the 
World. 
( 82 ) And the ),ears 1uuf glued the thin, ),ellow skin of his fdee so 
closel)' to his skull tlult it was covered till over with a multitude of 
circular wrinlcles, like the rifJfJles on d pond into which a child has 
thrown II pebble, or star-8hafJed, lUte d cracked window(JaJUl, but 
everywhere deefJ lind close-set as the edges of pages in d closed 
book. • SEM. Superannuation (the excessively wrinkled, the 
mummy)_ 
XXIV. TRANSFORMATION AS GAME 
The excess of metaphor (water, windowpane, book) is a game 
played by the discourse. The game, which is a regula~ activ­
ity and always subject to return, consists then not in piling up 
words for mere verbal pleasure (logorrhea) but in multiplying 
one form of language (in this case, comparison), as though in 
an attempt to exhaust the nonetheless infinite variety and in­
ventiveness of synonyms, while repeating and varying the sig­
nifier, so as to affirm the plural existence of the text, its return. 
Thus, in the elevator at Balbec, where Proust's narrator wants 
to initiate a conversation with the young operator, the latter 
does not reply, "either bectlU8e of d8tonishment at my words, 
attention to his work, " regClTd for etiquette, hctrdness of heCIT­
ing, respect for the surroundings, feCIT of ddnger, slow-witted­
ness, or orders from the marutger." The game here is gr~~­
matical in essence (and therefore much more exemplary): it 
consists in presenting. acrobatically, for as long as possible, the 
58 
plural diversity of possibilities within a singular syntagm, to 
"transfonn" the verbal proposition behind each cause ("be­
cause he was hard of hetJring") into a double substantive 
("hardness of hetJring"); in short, to produce a constant model 
carried out to infinity, which is to constrain language as one 
wishes: whence the very pleasure of power. 
( 8 3) SoJ1lfl old peopk have presented more hideous portrtJits; what 
contributed til. most, however, in lending the tlfJpettrdnce of dn 
dTtificidl creature to the specter which hdd risen up before us WdS 
til. red lind white with which II. glistened. Til. eyebrows of his 
mask took from the light d luster which revfkJled thdt they were 
ptJinted on. F ortul14fely for til. eye depressed by the sight of ruch 
ruin, his cdd4verous shU WdS covered by d blond wig whose innu­
merctble curls were evidence of dn extrdordindry pretension. * REF. 
The physique of the aged. ** SEM. Outside nature. Femininity. 
Thing. Beauty, as we have seen, cannot be induced through cata­
chresis other than from some great cultural model (written or pic­
torial): it is stated, not described. Contrariwise, ugliness can be 
abundantly descnDed: it alone is "realistic," confronting the refer­
ent without an intermediate code (whence the notion that realism, 
in art, is concerned solely with ugliness). Yet here we have a turn­
ing back. a reversion to the code: the old man is himself "very well 
painted"; thus he is reintegrated with the replication of bodies; he 
is his own double: like a mask, he copies from himself whdt is 
undernedth; only, since he is his own copy, his duplication is tauto­
logical, sterile as the duplication of painted things. 
(84 ) For the rest, til. feminine coquetry of this phdntdSmdgoric4l 
persondge WclS rdther strongly emphdSiud by til. gold orndJ1lflnts 
hcmging from his ems, by the rings whose fine stones glittered on 
his bony fingers, dnd by d wdtch dunn which shimJ1lflred like the 
brilliltnts of d choker mound d WOmdn's neck. * SEM. Femininity. 
Out of the world. Wealth. 
(85) Findlly, this sort of Jdf'dnese idol * The Japanese idol (per­
haps, strangely enough, Buddha) connotes an inhuman mixture of 
59 
impassivity and malee-up: it designates the mysterious insensibility 
of the thing, the thing copying life and making life into a thing 
(SEM. Thing). 
( 86 ) htul on hil blwh lii" d fiud dRd frozen mUle, impLlcdble 
cuuJ mociing, Wee d 1Itull. * The fixed, frozen smile leads to the 
image of stretched skin (as in plastic surgery), of life lacking that 
minimum skin which is the very stuff of life. In the old man, life 
is endlessly copied, but the copy always offers the less of casbation 
(as in his lips, which lack the fresh red of life) (SEM. Fantastic. 
Out of the world). 
(87) Silent dnd motionless til d ~, it exuded the I'I'W8t)' odor 
of old clotlJa which the hein of lOme duchea ftIlce out for inwn­
tory. * SEM. Thing, Superannuation. 
(88) Although the old mdR tumed his eyes towdrd the crowd, it 
seemed tlutt the mol'emenfl of thole or"', incdlJdble of right, were 
dCCOmplilhed only by med1I8 of some irnpm:eptible tJrtifice; dRd 
when the eyes cmne to rat on IOmething, dRYORe loolcing dt them 
would have concluded thdt they htul not moved dt dU. * SEM. 
Cold, artifice, death (the eyes of a doll). 
xxv. THE POIlT1\AIT 
M~n!.~gs_3:~..!l~~_~1! t~C:J~Clr~i~'proliferating through a f~~ 
which nonetheless disciplines them: this form is both a rhe­
torical· order (declaration and detail) and an anatomical cata­
loguing (body and face); these two protocols are also codes; 
these codes are superimposedE..I!!J1~_.aoarchy of signifiers, they 
appear as the operators of natur~r of "rationality." The ulti­
mate image afforded by the discourse (by the "portrait") is 
that of a natural form, pregnant with meaning, as though 
meaning were merely the ulterior predicate of a primal body. 
Indeed, the naturalness of the portrait arises from the fact that 
60 
in their superimposition the multiple codes undergo a shift: 
their units are no longer in the same place, do not have the 
same size, and this disparity, built up unevenly, produces what 
we shall call the "shifting" of the discourse-its fUlturcJlness: 
when two codes function simultaneously but according to un­
equal wavelengths, they produce an image of movement, an 
image of life-at this juncture, a portrait The portrait (in the 
present text) is not a realistic representation, a related copy, 
an idea such as we might get from figurative painting; it is a 
scene made up by blocks of meaning, at once varied, repeated ... 
and discontinuous (outlined); out of the arrangement of these 
blocks comes a diagram of the body, not its copy (in which the 
portrait remains totally subject to a linguistic structure, lan­
guage recognizing only diagrammatical analogies: analogies in 
the etymological sense: proportions): the old man's body is 
not "detached" like a real referent from the background of the 
words or of the salon; it is itself the semantic space-becoming 
meaning, it becomes space. In other words, the reading of the 
"realistic" portrait is not a realistic reading: it is a cubist read­
ill{: the meanings are cubes, piled up, altered, juxtaposed, and 
yet feeding on each other, whose shift produces the entire 
space of a painting and makes this very space into a IlUI'PW­
mentary meaning (accessory and atopical): that of the human 
body: the figure is not the sum, the frame, or the support of the 
meanings; it is an additional meaning, a kind of diacritical 
paradigm. 
XXVI. SIGNIFIED AND TRUTH 
~} the signifiec!~ w~ich c0!D~ tb.e. portrait. ~~e "true," for. 
they "i"reall part of the definition of the old In.aIl: the Empty, 
tfi~lDan~~~te, t~e Feminine~ the Superan.nuated. ~e Mon-
61 
strous, the Wealthy, each of these semes stands in a congruent 
relationship to the demonstrative truth of the old man, who 
is an extremely old castrato, a fabulously wealthy ex-inter­
national star; all these semes distinguish the truth, but even 
when taken together, they do not suffice to name it (and this 
failure is fortunate, since from the point of view of the story, 
the truth must not be revealed prematurely). Thus, clearly, 
the signified has a henneneutic value: every actio~ of th~ 
m~ning is an action of truth: in the classic text (dependent 
upon an historical ideology), meaning is mingled with truth, 
signification is the path of truth: .if we succeed in denoting the 
old man, his truth (castration) is immediately revealed . .Y.' e!.t. 
in the henneneutic system, the connotative signified occupies 
a special place: it brings into being an insufficient half truth, 
powerless to name itself: it is the incompleteness, the insuffi­
ciency, the powerlessness of truth, and this partial deficiency 
has a qualifying value; this birth defect is a coded factor, a 
henneneutic morpheme, whose function is to thicken the 
enigma by outlining it: a powerful enigma is a dense one, so 
that, provided certain precautions are taken, the more signs 
there are, the more the truth will be obscured, the harder one 
will try to figure it out. The connotative signified is literally an 
index: it points but does not tell; what it points to is the name, 
the truth as name; it is both the temptation to name and the 
impotence to name (induction would be more effective than 
designation in producing the name)-:,.i1is the tip of the tongqe 
from which the name, the truth, will later fall. Thus, with its 
designating, silent movement, a pointing finger always accom­
panies the classic text: t!te truth is thereby long desired and 
avoided, kept in a kind of pregnancy for its full term';"a preg­
nancy whose end, both liberating and catastrophic, will bring 
about the utter end of the discourse; and the character, the 
very arena of these signifieds, is only the enigma's passage, the 
passage for this nominative form of the enigma with which 
61 
Oedipus (in his debate with the Sphynx) mythically impreg­
nated all Western discourse. 
(89) To see, next to this humtln wreckage, a young womtln * 
SYM. Antithesis: B: (young woman): introduction. 
(90) whose rwck, bosom, and tIT1TJ8 were bare and white, whose 
figure was in the fuU bloom of its beauty, whose hair rose from her 
al4bttster forehead and inspired love, whose eyes did not receive but 
gave off light, who was soft, fresh, and whose floating curls and 
BWUt breath seemed too heavy, too hard, too powerful for this 
sJuulow, for this man of dust: * SEM. Antithesis: B: (the young 
woman). ** SEM. Vegetality (organic life). *** The young 
woman was at the outset a child-woman, passively penetrated by 
the man's gaze (No. 60). Here, her symbolic situation is reversed; 
we find her in the field of action: "her eyes did not receive but 
gave off light"; she joins the Castrating Woman, of whom Mme 
de Lanty was the first example. This mutation can be explained 
by the purely paradigmatic needs of the Antithesis: in No. 60, as 
opposed to the petrified old man, it required a fresh young woman, 
frail, 80real; here, as opposed to "human wreckage," it requires a 
powerful vegetality that reassembles, that unites. TIlls new para­
digm, which turns the young woman into a castrating figure, WIll 
gradually establish itself and draw the narrator himself into its 
orbit; he will no longer have control over the young woman (as in 
No. 62), but, reversing his own symbolic role, he will shortly ap­
pear in the passive position of a dominated subject (SYM. The 
queen-woman) . 
(91) ah! here were death dnd life indeed, I thought, in a fantastic 
arabesqwe, half hideous chimera, divinely feminine from the waist 
up. 
"Yet there are rntrrridges lib that often enough in the world," I 
B4id to myself. * From a realistic viewpoint, the old man and the 
young woman, pressed close together into a single fantastic crea­
ture, ought to be vertically bipartite, like Siamese twins. Yet the 
force of symbolism reverses-or redresses-this meaning: their bi-
63 
partite nature is seen as horizontal: the chimera (half lion, half 
goat) has opposing top and bottom-leaving the castrated zone, 
of course, in its proper anatomical position ("female from the 
waist up") (SYM. Marriage of the castrato). ** REF. Code of 
marriages. 
(92) "He BJ'JWUs like d graveytJTd," cried the terrified young WOmdn, * SEM. Death. 
(93) pressing ttgmnst me for protection, tmd whose uneasy m(We­
ments told me she wets frightened. * SYM. The child-woman (the 
symbolic mutation has not yet been stabilized: the discourse re­
turns from the queen-woman to the child-woman) . 
(9'l) "Whttt d horrible Bight," .he went on. "I CdR't st4y here tmy 
longer. If I look dt him ttgctin, I .1uJIl believe thttt death itself hlI8 
come looking for me. I. he tdiver' * SEM. Death. ** "I. he 
ttlive?" The question could be purely rhetorical, merely varying the 
funereal signified in the old man. Now, by an unexpected tum, the 
question (which the young woman is asking herself) becomes a 
literal one and calls for an answer (or verification) (ACT. "Ques­
tion": I: to ask oneself a question) . 
(95) She redChed out to the phenomenon * ACT. "Question": 
2: to verify (ACT. "To touch": I: touching). 
(96) with thttt boldness women Cdn summon up out of the strength 
of their desires; * REF. Female psychology. 
(97) but .he broke into d cold sweat, for no sooner httd ,he 
touched the old mttn thttn .he hedrd II cry like d rtlttle. This .hllTp 
voice, if voice it wets, issued from d nedrly dried up thrOdt. * ACT. 
"To touch": 2: reaction. ** The rattle connotes a granular, dis­
continuous sound; the shaking voice, a problematical humanity; 
the dried-up throat, a de6ciency of a kind specific to organic life: 
the lubricated (SEM. Extra-natural). *** SYM. Marriage of the 
castrato (here: its catastrophic conclusion). 
(98) Then the .ound wets quiclcly foUowed by d litt", convulsive, 
childilh cough of d peculitJT 'OROTOumeBI. * SEM. Childishness 
(the convulsive once again connotes an evil, funereal discontinuity, 
contrasted to the unified life uno tenore) . 
XXVII. ANTITIlESIS II: TIlE MARRIAGE 
The antithesis is a wall without a doorway. Leaping this wall 
is a transgression. Subject to the antithesis of inside and out­
side, heat and cold, life and death, the old man and the young 
woman are in fact separated by the most inflexible of barriers: 
that of meaning. Thus, anything that draws these two anti­
pathetic sides together is rightly scandalous (the most blatant 
scandal: that of form). It was already shocking ("one of those 
rare tricks of ""ture") to see the two terms of the antithesis so 
closely linked, pressed together, the young woman's body and 
the old man's; however, when the young woman touches the 
old man, there is a paroxysm of transgression; it is no longer 
~tricted spatially, it becomes substantial, organic, chemical. 
The young woman's gesture is an acting out: whether taken as 
conversion hysteria (a substitute for orgasm) or as a breaching 
of the Wall (of Antithesis and of hallucination), the physical 
contact between these two completely separate substances, the 
woman and the castrato, the animate and the inanimate, pro­
duces a catastrophe: there is an explosive shock, a paradig­
matic conflagration, a headlong flight of the two bodies 
brought together in so unseemly a manner: each of the part­
ners forms the locus of an overt physiological revolution: sweat 
and exclamation: each, by the other, is reversed; touched by an 
extraordinarily powerful chemical agent (for the castrato, the 
woman; for the woman, castration), the depths are emptied, as 
in vomiting. This is what happens when the arcana of mean­
ing are subverted, when the sacred separation of the paradig­
matic poles is abolished, when one removes the separating bar­
rier, the basis of all "pertinence." The marriage of the young 
65 
woman and the castrato is doubly catastrophic (or, if we pre­
fer, it creates a double-entry system): symbolically, it affirms 
the non-viability of the dual body, the chimeric body, doomed 
to the dispersion of its parts: when a supplementary body is 
introduced, added to the distribution of opposites already ef­
fected, this supplement (ironically posited in No. 13, which 
is there intended to exorcise it) is dammed: the excess ex­
plodes: gathering becomes scattering; and structurally, as we 
know, the major figure of rhetorical wisdom, Aotithqis, ~_ 
not be transgressed wi~ impunity: meaning (and if;$ classify­
ing basis) is a question of life or death: similarly, in copjing 
woman, in assuming her position on the other side of the sex­
ual barrier, the castrato will transgress morphology, gramma~­
discourse, and because of this abolition of meaning Samsine' 
will die. 
(99) At tlUs sound, Maridni1Jd, Filippo, and Mme de lAnty 
looked in our direction, and their tJ.ances were like boltl of light­
ning. The young wonutn wished ,he were tit the bottom of tluI 
Seine. * ACf. "To touch": 3: generalized reaction. ** The 
feminine camp, its exclusive relationship to the old man, is here 
reaftinned: Mme de Lanty, Marianina, Filippo, all of La Zambi­
nella's feminine lineage (SYM. Axis of castration). 
(100) She took my tlTm and led me into a side room. Men, women, 
everyone nutde way for us. At the end of the public 1OOms, we 
came into a sJ7U1ll, semicircuUJr chamber. * ACf. "To touch": .. : 
to See. ** Worldly intelligence: others make way for the blunder­
ers; symbolic meaning: castration is contagious: the young woman 
who has made contact with it is marked (SYM. Contagion of castra­
tion). The semicircular shape of the chamber connotes a theatrical 
site, where the Adonis can fittingly be "contemplated." 
(101) My companion threw herself onto" divan, trembling with 
fright, oblivious to her surroundings. * ACT. "To touch": 5: to 
hide. 
66 
(102) "MaddJ'J'UI, you are mad," I soid to her. * SYM. The child­
woman. The narrator scolds the young woman as if she were an 
irresponsible child; in another sense, however, the young woman's 
madness is literal: her gesture, touching, is indeed the eruption of 
the signifier into reality through the wall of symbolism: it is a 
psychotic act. 
(103) "But," she replied, after a mOJ'J'UInt's silence, during which 
I gaud at her in admiration, * The narrator's symbolic role is 
beginning to change: first presented as some sort of patron to the 
young woman, here he admires her, is silent, and desires her: he 
now has something to ask (SYM. The man-subject). 
( 1M) "is it my fault? Why does Mme de Lanty allow ghosts to 
wander about in her house?" * SEM. Supemature. 
(105) "COJ'J'UI," I replied, "you are being ridiculous, taking a little 
old man for a ghost." * The narrator's imaginary world, i.e., the 
symbolic system in which he does not know his own position, has 
exactly this asymbolic character: he is, he says, the one who does 
not believe in stories (symbols) (SEM. Asymbolism). ** SYM. 
The child-woman. 
XXVIII. CHARACTER AND FIGURE 
When identical semes traverse the same proper name several 
times and appear to settle upon it, a character is created. Thus, 
the character is a product of combinations: the combination 
is relatively stable (denoted by the recurrence of the semes) 
and more or less complex (involving more or less congruent, 
more or less contradictory figures); this complexity determines 
the character's "personality," which is just as much a combina­
tion as the odor of a dish or the bouquet of a wine. The proper 
name acts as a magnetic field for the semes; referring in fact to 
a body, it draws the semic configuration into an evolving (bio-
graphical) tense. In principle, the character who says "I" has 
no name (Proust's narrator is an outstanding example); in 
fact, however, I immediately becomes a name, his name. In 
the story (and in many conversations), I is no longer a pro­
noun, but a name, the best of names: to say I is igcvitably to 
attribute signifieds to oneself; further, it gives one a biographi­
cal duration, it enables one to undergo, in one's imagination, 
an intelligible "evolution," to signify oneself as an object with 
a destiny, to give a meaning to time. On this level, I (and no­
tably the narrator of Scmasine) is therefore a character. The 
figure is altogether different: it is not a combination of seIIl§ 
concentrated in a legal Name, nor can biography, psychology, 
or time encompass it: it is an illegal, impersonal, anachronistic 
configuration of symbolic relationships. As figure, the char­
acter can oscillate between two roles, without this oscillation 
having any meaning, for it occurs outside biographical time 
(outside chronology): the symbolic structure is completely 
reversible: it can be read in any direction. Thus, the child­
woman and the narrator-father, momentarily effaced, can re­
turn, can overtake the queen-woman and the narrator-slave. As 
a symbolic ideality, the character has no chronological or bio­
graphical standing; he has no Name; he is nothing but a site 
for the passage (and return) of the figure. 
(106) "Be Bfil~" .he said, with tlutt forceful and moclting criT all 
women .0 ettBil)' CJS8Ume when they want to be in the right. * The 
queen-woman orders silence (all domination begins by prohibiting 
language), she forces (placing her partner in a subject position), 
she mocb (denies the narrator as father) (SYM. The queen­
woman). ** REF. Feminine psychology. 
(107) "Wlutt a pretty room'" .he cried, loolting mound. "Blue 
satin alwtt)'. mtUces such wonderful wall httngings. How refreshing 
it is' * ACT. "Tableau": 1: to look around. Blue satin, freshness, 
68 
can either create a mere effect of reality (to create "truth," one 
must be at once precise and insignificant), or they can connote the 
8ightiness of the young woman's words, speaking of furnishings a 
moment after having indulged in an outlandish act, or they pave 
the way for the euphoric state in which the portrait of Adonis will 
be read. 
( 108) Oh! wh4t a bedutiful painting!" she went on, getting up and 
going to stmJd before a painting in a magnificent frame. 
W II stood fOT a moment in contemplation of this nuJrvel, * 
ACT. "Tableau": 2: to perceive. 
( 109) which seemed to have been painted by some supenuttural 
brush. * Metonymically, the trans-natural element in the referent 
(La Zambinella is outside nature) enters into both the picture's 
subject (Adonis is "too beautiful for a man") and its fabrication 
(the "sufJenultural brush" suggests that the painter's hand was 
guided by some god: so Christ, when the picture was completed, 
descended from heaven to superimpose himself on the icon which 
the Byzantine artist had just completed) (SYM. Supemature). 
(110) The picture WdB of Adonis lying on a lion', .kin. * The 
portrait of Adonis is the theme (subject) of a new enigma (the 
fifth) which will shortly be formulated: of whom is this Adonis 
the portrait? (HER. Enigma 5: thematization). ** The "lion's 
skin" of this Adonis harks back to countless academic representa­
tions of Greek shepherds (REF. Mythology and painting). 
( Ill) The lamp lumging from the ceiling of the room in an ala­
bcuter globe illuminated this canvdB with a .oft glow which enabled 
UI to make out all the beauties of the painting. 
XXIX. THE ALABASTER LAMP 
The light diffused by the lamp is outside the picture; however, 
metonymically, it becomes the interior light of the painted 
scene: alabaster (soft, white)-a conducting rather than an 
emitting substance, a luminous and cold re8ection-this bou­
doir alabaster is in fact the moon which illuminates the young 
shepherd. Thus Adonis, which No. 547 will tell us inspired 
Girodet in painting his Endymion, becomes a lunar lover. 
Here there is a threefold inversion of the codes: Endymion 
transmits his meaning, story, and reality to Adonis: Endymion 
is read with the same words which describe Adonis; Adonis is 
read according to the situation of Endymion. In Endymion­
Adonis, everything connotes femininity (cf. description in No. 
113) : the "exquisite grace," the "contours" (a word used only 
for the 8accid academic paintings of romantic women or myth­
ological ephebes), the elongated pose, slightly turned, open to 
possession, the pale and diffuse color-white (beautiful women 
of the period were always very white), the abundant, curling 
hair, "everything, in short"; this final attribute, like any et 
cetertJ, censors what is not named, that is, what must be both 
concealed and pointed out: the Adonis is placed on the back 
wall of a theater (the semicircular chamber) and the Endym­
ion is discovered, uncovered by a Cupid who pulls back the 
curtain of greenery, like the curtain of a stage, thus focusing on 
the very center of what must be seen, inspected: the sexual 
member, shadowed in the Girodet, as it is in La Zambinella, 
mutilated by castration. In love with Endymion, Selena visits 
him; her active light caresses the sleeping and unprotected 
shepherd and steals into him; although feminine, the Moon is 
active; although masculine, the boy is passive: a double inver­
sion, that of the two biological sexes and of the two terms of 
castration throughout the story, in which the women are cas­
trators and the men castrated: thus music will insinuate itself 
into Sarrasine, lubricating him, giving him the most intense 
pleasure, just as the moonlight possesses Endymion, in a kind 
of insinuating bath. This is the exchange which controls the 
symbolic interplay: a terrifying essence of passivity, castration 
is paradoxically superactive: its nothingness contaminates 
everything it encounters: deficiency makes everything radiant. 
Now, by a final-and curious-cultural reversal, we can see all 
this (and not merely read it); the Endymion in our text is the 
same Endymion which is in a museum (our museum, the 
Louvre), so that, retracing the duplicative chain of bodies and 
copies, we possess the most literal image of La Zambinella: a 
photograph. ~ince reading is a traversal of codes, nothing can 
stop its journey; the photograph of the fictitious castrato is 
part of the text; retracing the line of the codes, we are entitled 
to go to the Bulloz establishment in the rue Bonaparte and ask 
to be shown the box (most likely filed under "mythological 
subjects") in which we will discover the castrato's photograph. 
( 112) "Does such d perfect creature exist?" she Cl8ked me, * HER. 
Enigma 5: fonnulation (does the model for the painting exist in 
"nature"?). ** SEM. Supemature (Outside of nature) . 
XXX. BEYOND AND SHORT 
Perfection is one end of the Code (origin or terminus, which­
ever); it exalts (or euphorizes) insofar as it puts a stop to the 
leak of replications, wipes out the distance between code and 
performance, between origin and result, between model and 
copy; and since this distance is part of the human condition, 
perfection, which annuls it, lies outside of anthropological 
limits, in supernature, where it joins the other, inferior, trans­
gression: more and less can be generically placed in the same 
class, that of excess, what is beyond no longer differs from 
what is short of a limit; the essence of the code (perfection) 
has in the end the same status as what is outside the code (the 
monster, the castrato), for life, the norm, mankind, are but 
intermediary migrations in the field of replications. Thus, La 
Zambinella is Super-Woman, essential, pedect woman (in any 
theology, perfection is the essence, and Zambinella is a "mas­
terpiece"), but at the same time, by the same impulse, she is 
sub-man, castrated, deficient, definitively less; in her, abso­
lutely desirable, in him, absolutely execrable, the two trans­
gressions are united. This confusion is wamnted because trans-._ 
gression is actually a Tn4rk (La Zambinella is marked both by 
pedection and by deficiency); it enables the discourse to en­
gage in a game of equivocations: to speak of the "supernatu­
ral" perfection of the Adonis is also to speak of the "sub-natu­
ral" deficiency of the castrato. 
( 113) after httving, with d soft smile of contentment, atlrrUrwd 
the exquisite grtlCe of the contours, the pose, the color, the 1uJir; in 
short, the entire picture. * SEM. Femininity. ** Described in 
this way, the picture connotes a whole atmosphere of fulfillment, 
of sexual gratification: a harmony, a kind of erotic fulfillment 0c­
curs, between the painted Adonis and the young woman, who ex­
presses it by a "soft smile of contentment." Now, through the de­
vices of the story, the young woman's pleasure is drawn from three 
different sources, superimposed in the Adonis: (1) d nuln: Adonis 
himself, the mythological subject of the painting; the narrator's 
jealousy will be aroused by this interpretation of the young woman's 
desire; (2) d WOmdn: the young woman perceives the feminine na­
ture of the Adonis and feels herself in harmony, complicity, even 
Sapphism, in any event once again frustrating the narrator, who is 
denied access to the glamorous field of femininity; (3) d CdStrttto: 
who obviously continues to fascinate the young woman (SYM. 
Marriage of the castrato) . 
(114) "He is too beautiful for d nuln," .he ddded, after dn exmni­
ntttion IUCh dB she mi&ht Iutve nuule of some rivttl. * The bodies 
in Stm08irw, oriented-or disoriented-by castration, cannot with 
any certainty be situated on either side of the sexual paradigm; 
72. 
implicit in it are a Female beyond (perfection) and a Male short 
of it (being-castrated). To say that the Adonis is not a man is to 
refer both to the truth (he is a castrato) and to a false clue, a 
snare (he is a woman) (HER. Enigma 5: truth and snare: equivo­
cation). 
(115) Ohl how jealous 1 then felt; something * SYM. Narrator's 
desire. 
( 116) in which a poet had vainly tried to make me believe, the 
jealousy of engrttvings, of pictures, wherein ttrtists eXtJggerttte hu­
mdn beauty QCCording to the doctrine which leads them to idealiu 
everything. * REF. Literary code of passion (or code of literary 
passion). ** SYM. Replication of bodies (to be in love with a 
copy: this is the theme of Pygmalion, developed in just this way in 
No. 229). 
( 117) "It's a portrait," 1 replied, "the product of the talent of 
Vien. * SYM. Replication of bodies. 
(118) But that great pmnter never saw the original and rruzybe 
you'd admire it less if you knew that this d4ub was copied from the 
statue of a woman." * SYM. Replication of bodies (the duplica­
tion of bodies is linked to the instability of the sexual paradigm, 
which makes the castrato waver between boy and woman). ** 
The picture was copied from a statue: true, but this statue was 
copied from a false woman; in other words, the statement is true 
with regard only to the statue and false with regard to the woman; 
the lie is carried along by the sentence, made a part of the truth 
with which it begins, as the genitive is a part of the statue: how 
can a simple genitive lie? (HER. Enigma 5: equivocation). 
XXXI. THE DISTURBED REPLICATION 
Without the-always anterior-Book and Code, no desire, no 
jealousy: Pygmalion is in love with a link in the code of statu­
ary; Paolo and Francesca love each other according to the pas-
73 
sion of Lancelot and Guinevere (Dante, Infemo, V): itself a 
lost origin, writing becomes the origin of emotion. Into this­
organized drift, castration brings disturbance: emptiness per­
turbs the chain of signs, the engendering of replications, the 
regularity of the code. Deceived, Sarrasine sculpts La Zambi­
nella as a woman. Vien transforms this woman into a boy and 
thereby returns to the original sex of his model (a Neapolitan 
TagClUO): in a final reversal, the narrator arbitrarily stops the 
chain at the statue and makes the original a woman. Thus 
three trajectories intersect: an operative trajectory, a "real" 
producer of copies (retracing from the male Adonis to the 
female statue, then to the transvestite boy); a mystifying tra­
jectory, deviously drawn by the jealous narrator (retracing 
from the male Adonis to the female statue and then, implic­
itly, to the female model); a symbolic trajectory, which passes 
only through femininities: that of Adonis, that of the statue, 
that of the castrator: this is the only homogeneous a~~1 within 
which no one tells a lie. This confusion has a hermeneutic 
role: the narrator knowingly distorts the true origin of th~ 
Adonis; he produces a snare designed for the young woman­
and for the reader; symbolically, however, this same 'lamtor; 
through his bad faith, indictztes (by referring it to a womant_. 
the model's lack of virility; his lie is thus an inductor of truth. 
(119) "But who is it?" 
1 hesitated. 
"I want to know," she added, impetuously. * SYM. The queen­
woman (the narrator desires the young woman, the young woman 
desires to know who the Adonis is; the terms of a contract are sug­
gested). ** HER. Enigma 5: formulation (who is the model for 
the Adonis?) . 
(120) '" believe," , replied, "thot this Adonis is a a rellltive 
of Mme de unty." * ACT. "To narrate": 2: to know the story 
7 .. 
(we know that the nanator mows the old man's identity from No. 
70; here we learn that he also mows the origin of the Adonis: thus, 
lac has the power to solve the enigmas, to tell the story). •• HER. 
Enigma 5: suspended answer. *** SYM. Taboo on the noun 
castrato. 
XXXII. DELAY 
Truth is brushed past, avoided, lost. This accident is a struc­
tural one. In fact, the henneneutic code has a function, the 
one we (with Jakobson) attribute to the poetic code: just as 
~yme (notably) structures the poem according to the expec­
tation and desire for recurrence, so the henneneutic tenns 
structure the enigma according to the expectation and desire 
for its solution. The dynamics of the text (since it implies a 
truth to be deciphered) is thus paradoxical: it is a static dy­
namics: the problem is to mtJintdin the enigma in the initial 
void of its answer; whereas the sentences quicken the story's 
"unfolding" and cannot help but move the story along, the 
henneneutic code perfonns an opposite action: it must set up 
delays (obstacles, stoppages, deviations) in the Bow of the dis­
course; its structure is essentially reactive, since it opposes the 
ineluctable advance of language with an organized set of stop­
pages: between question and answer there is a whole dilatory 
area whose emblem might be named "reticence," the rhe­
torical figure which interrupts the sentence, suspends it, turns 
it aside (Virgil's Quos ego ). Whence, in the henneneu­
tic code, in comparison to these extreme tenns (question and 
answer), the abundance of dilatory morphemes: the mare (a 
bnd of deliberate evasion of the truth), the equivocation (a 
mixture of truth and snare which frequently, while focusing on 
the enigma, helps to thicken it), the partitJI. answer (which 
only exacerbates the expectation of the truth), the suspended 
answer (an aphasic stoppage of the disclosure), and iamming 
75 
(acknowledgment of insolubility). The variety of these te,rms 
(their inventive range) attests to the considerable labor the dis­
course must accomplish if it hopes to tJrrest the enigma, to 
keep it open. Expectation thus becomes the basic condition 
for truth: truth, these narratives tell us, is what is tJt the end 
of expectation. This design brings narrative very close to the 
rite of initiation (a long path marked with pitfalls, obscurities, 
stops, suddenly comes out into the light); it implies a return 
to order, for expectation is a disorder: disorder is supplemen­
tary, it is what is forever added on without solving anything, 
without finishing anything; order is complementary, it com­
pletes, fills up, saturates, and dismisses everything that risks 
adding on: truth is what completes, what closes. In short, 
based on the articulation of question and answer, the her­
meneutic narrative is constructed according to our image of 
the sentence: an organism probably infinite in its expansions, 
but reducible to a diadic unity of subject and predicate. To 
narrate (in the classic fashion) is to raise the question as if it 
were a subject which one delays predicating; and when the 
predicate (truth) arrives, the sentence, the narrative, are over, 
the world is adjectivized (after we had feared it would not be) . 
Yet, just as any grammar, however new, once it is based on 
the diad of subject and predicate, noun and verb, can only be 
a historical grammar, linked to classical metaphysics, so the 
hermeneutic narrative, in which truth predicates an incom­
plete subject, based on expectation and desire for its imminent 
closure, is dated, linked to the kerygmatic civilization of mean­
ing and truth, appeal and fulfillment. 
XXXIII. AND/OR 
When the narrator hesitates to tell us who the Adonis is (and 
dislocates or drowns the truth), the discourse mixes two codes: 
the symbolic code-from which is derived the ban on the noun 
castrato, the aphasia this word provokes whenever anyone 
risks saying it-and the henneneutic code, according to which 
this aphasia is merely a suspension of the answer, required by 
tile dilatory structure of the narrative. Of these two codes, 
simultaneously referred to in the same words (the same sig­
nifier), is one more important than the other? Or, more pre­
cisely: ~f we want to "explicate" the sentence (and conse­
quently the narrative), must we decide on one code or the 
other? Ought we to say that the narrator's hesitation is deter­
mined by the constraint of the symbol (according to which 
the castrato must be censored), or by the finality of the dis­
closure (according to which this disclosure must be at once 
suggested and delayed)? Nobody in the world (no knowing 
subject, no god of narrative) can decide this. In narrative (and 
this is perhaps its "definition"), the symbolic and the opera­
tive are non-decidable, subject to the rule of an tmd/ or. Thus, 
to choose, to decide on a hierarchy of codes, on a predetenni­
~tion of messages, as in secondary-school explications, is im­
~nent, since it overwhelms the articulation of the writing 
by a single voice, here psychoanalytic, there poetic (in the 
Aristotelian sense). Furthermore, to miss the plurality of the 
~es is to censor the work of the discourse: non-decidability 
defines a prtJXis, the perfonnance of the narrator: just as a suc­
cessful metaphor affords, between its terms, no hierarchy and 
removes all hindrances from the polysemic chain (in contrast 
to the comparison, an originated figure), so a "good" narrative 
ful61ls both the plurality and the circularity of the codes: cease­
lessly correcting the causalities of the anecdote by the me­
tonymy of the symbols and, inversely, the simultaneity of the 
meanings by the operations which lead on and use up expecta­
tion to its end. 
77 
(121) 1 had the pain of seeing her rll/1t in the contemplation of 
tlUs figure. She sat in Bilence; I sat down next to her and tooA: her 
hdnd without her being awtlTe of itt Forgott.,. for tI painti~1 * 
SYM. Marriage of the castrato (here. the union of the young 
woman and the castrato is euphorized: we know that the symbolic 
configuration is not subject to a diegetic development: what has 
exploded catastrophically can return peacefully united). ** SYM. 
Replication of bodies (to be in love with a portrait, like Pygmalion 
with a statue) . 
( 122) At this moment, the light footstep, of tI WOmdn in tI rustling 
dress broA:e the rilence. * The short episode which begins here 
(and which will end at No. 137) is a byte (in computer terminol­
ogy), a section of program fed into the machine, a sequence equiva­
lent, as a whole, to only one signified: the gift of the ring reopens 
Enigma 4: who is the old num1 This episode includes several pro­
airetisms (ACT. "To enter": 1: to announce oneself by a sound). 
(123) Young MttrUmintJ Cdme in, and her innocent expression 
nwde her even more ttlluring tlum did her grtlCe and her lovely 
dress; ,he WtIB wttllting slowly lind escorting with mtttemttl CtlTe, 
with filitJl solicitude, the costumed Bf'eCter who had nwde us fIa 
from the nWIic room, * ACT. "To enter": 2: the entr.lnce itself. 
** HER. Enigma 3: proposal and formulation (enigmatic as they 
are, the relations between Marianina and the Old Man strengthen 
the enigma of the Lanty family: where do they come from? who 
are they?). *** SEM. Childishness. 
(124) and whom ,he WtIB lud.ing, wtJtching with what seemed to 
be concern til he slowly tldwmced on his feeble feet. * HER. 
Enigma 3: formulation (What can be the motive for Marianina's 
anxious solicitude, what relationship between them? Who are the 
Lantys?) 
XXXIV. THE PR.AITLE OF MEANING 
For any fictional action (given in the discourse of the classic 
novel) there exist three possible realms of expremon. Either 
78 
the meaning is stated, the action named but not detailed (to 
accompany with dnxious solicitude). Or, while the meaning is 
being set forth, the action is more than named, it is described 
(to wdtch with concern the ground where the person one is 
guiding is setting his feet). Or else the action is described, but 
its meaning is kept tacit: the action is merely connoted (in the 
strict sense of the word) from an implicit signified (to wdtch 
the old man slowly ddvdnce on his feeble feet). The first two 
realms, in terms of which signification is excessively named, 
impose a dense plenitude of meaning or, if one prefers, a cer­
tain redundancy, a kind of semantic prattle typical of the 
archaic-or infantile-era of modem discourse, marked by the 
excessive fear of failing to communicate meaning (its basis); 
whence, in reaction, in our latest-or "new" -novels, the prac­
tice of the third system: to state the event without accompany­
ing it with its signification. 
( 125) They went together with some difficulty to d door hid­
den behind d tdpestry. * Acr. "Door I" (there will be other 
"Doors") : 1: to reach a door (moreover, the hidden door connotes 
a mysterious atmosphere, which restates Enigma 3). 
(126) There, MarkmiT14 knocked softly. * Acr. "Door 1": 2: to 
knock. 
(127) At once, as if by magic, d taU, stem 7Tl4n, alcind of family 
genie, appetl1ed. * Acr. "Door I": 3: to appear at a door (that 
is, to open it). ** REF. The novelistic (the appearance of a 
"genie"). The tall, stem man is the servant mentioned in No. 41, 
associated with the female clan protecting the old man. 
( 128) Before entrusting the old 7Tl4n to the care of his mysterious 
guardian, * Acr. "Farewell": 1: to entrust to another (before 
leaving). 
79 
( 129) the child respectfully kissed the walking corpse, and her 
chaste caress WClS not devoid of that grdCeful cajolery of which some 
privileged women possess the secret. * ACf. "Farewell": 2: to 
embrace. ** HER. Enigma 3: proposal and formulation (what 
kind of relationship can a "chaste caress," a "graceful cajolery" 
imply? family? conjugal?). *** REF. Code of proverbs: Superior 
Women. 
( 130) .. Addio, "ddio," she said, with the prettiest inflection in her 
youthful voice. * ACf. "Farewell": 3: to say farewell. ** SEM. 
Italianness. 
( 131) She added to the final '1Uable " JTUlTVelously well-executed 
triU, but in " soft voice, CIS if to give poetic expression to the em0-
tions in her heart. * SEM. Musicality. 
XXXV. TIlE REAL, THE OPERABLE 
What would happen if one actually perfonned Marianina's 
"tJddio" as it is described in the discourse? Something incon­
gruous, no doubt, extravagant, and not musical. More: is it 
really possible to perfonn the act described? This leads to two 
propositions. 1Jlc. .fiI:stis th31.the di.KQurs~..bas no res~nsibil­
iry vis-a-vis ~e lcoV: in the mostu:alisticn9vel~'~the r~f~t 
has no "reality": suffice it to imagine the disorder the most 
orderly narrative would create were its descriptions taken at 
face value, converted into operative programs and simply exe­
cuted. In short (this is the second proposition), what we call 
"real" (in the theory of the realistic text) is never more than a 
code of representation (of signification): it is never a code of 
execution: the nov.elistic retJl is not o.P.!rC!l]le. To identify-as it 
would, after all, be "realistic" enough to do-the real with the 
operable would be to subvert the novel at the limit of its genre 
(whence the inevitable destruction of novels when they are 
80 
transferred from writing to film, from a system of meaning to 
an order of the operable) . 
(132) Suddenly muck by some memory, the old mdn rtood on 
the threshold of this reern hidetrway. Then, thTough the ri1ence, 
we hetlrd the heavy sigh that came from his chert: * SEM. Musi­
cality (the old man remembers having been a soprano). ** ACf. 
"Gift": 1: to incite (or be incited) to the gift. 
( 133) he took the mort buutiful of the ringt which ddomed 
his skeletal fingers, mad fJl4ced it in Mdri4nin4s boIOm. * ACf. 
"Gift": 2: to give the gift. 
( 1:W) The young girl broke into laughter, tOGA: the ring, mad 
Ilipped it onto her finger over her glow; * Aer. "Gift": 1: to 
accept the gift (the laugh, the glove, are effects for the sake of 
reality, notations whose very insignificance authenticates, signs, sig­
nifies "reality") . 
( 135) then she walked quickly towtlTd the salon, from which tiler. 
could be hetlTd the O/Jening metlBUres of d quddrilI.. * Aer. "To 
leave": 1: to want to leave. 
(136) She ItIW UI: 
"All, you were here," she StJid, blUlhing. 
After htrving seemed dB if tJbout to question UI, * ACf. '70 
leave": 2: to delay . .As if is the basic operator of meaning, the key 
that introduces the substitutions, the equivalences, that takes us 
from action (to look tJt questioningly) to its manner (QI if tJbout 
to question), from the operable to the signifier. 
(137) she rdn to her partner with the CtlTelea petulttnce of youth. * ACf. "To leave": 3: to leave again. 
8. 
XXXVI. FOLDING, UNFOLDING 
What is a series of actions? the unfolding of a name. To enter? 
I can unfold it into "to appear" and "to penetrate." To leave? 
I can unfold it into "to want to," "to stop," "to leave again." 
To give?: "to incite," "to return," "to accept." Inversely, to 
establish the sequence is to find the name: the sequence is the 
currency, the exc1umge vdlue of the name. By what divisions is 
this exchange established? What is there in "Farewell," 
"Door," "Gift"? What subsequent, constitutive actions? Along 
what folds can we close the fan of the sequence? Two systems 
of folding (two "logics") seem to be required alternately. The 
first breaks down the title (noun or verb) according to its con­
stituent moments (the articulation can be orderly: begin/ 
continue or confused: begin/stop / letJve ). The second system 
attaches contingent actions to a guide word (to say fdTeweU/to 
confide/ to embrdce). These systems, one analytical, the other 
catalyticalJ one definitiODar,fhe-other metonymica~JJ~a~ 
fact no logic other than that of the diredd),-seen, dlretlfll.-reddL 
dlredd)'-dOne: that ofempirics and culture. Th~ _unfol~g ~t 
the sequence, O!!..!~verse1y, its .f<!Tding, occu~!?y and th!~ 
the authori-tjt-of the great models, cultural (to give thtmb for 
d-gift), Q.rganiCi (iodisturb the course of dn dCtion), ~r plle-­
nomenal( the sound precedes the phenomenon), etc. :!Jle pr~ 
aire.ti,~'!.~~ce i~ in~eed2~~' i.e.t~·.~ multi'pli~,ty ~s­
iog a rule of orde.t~J Leibnitz ), bl!t th~. ru1e._~f ~n!er .h~~ is 
cultural' (hdbitJii shorth-and ling1,1i.~~c (!h~ ~~ibil!!y,«?Lthe 
~ord, the wor(fpr~nt with its possibilities). Similarly, se­
quences can be ariangedaiiiong-tJiemseIveS'Toonverged, articu­
lated) in such a way as to form a kind of network, a table (as 
in the sequences "To enter," "Door," "Farewell," "To leave"), 
but the "luck" of this table (narratively, this episode) is linked 
to the possibility of a metaname (the metasequence of the 
Ring, for example). Thus, to read (to perceive the redderl)' -. 
aspect of the text) is to proceed from name to name, from fold 
to fold; it is to fo~~taccording to one name and t:J!~}0_ 
un~~~~ i.~~ong ~e_ ne~ folds of t~is_~~~e. This is proairetllin: 
an ar!!6~]Or aI!~f reading that seeks out names, that tell(l$. 
t()ward them: an act-of lexIcal transcendence, a labor of c1assi-
lcation carried out on the basis of the classification Qf l;m­
~e-:-a mtJ)'~~~tiVity, as the Buddhists would say, an accoun! 
o!. ap~~E~-, bu~as~iscontinuous forms, as names. 
( 138) "What did that f'lWanl" my young companion asked me. 
"Is he her husband? * HER. Enigma 3: fonnulation (What is 
the family relationship of the Lantys and the old man?). ** Even 
if false, the hypothesis provides a name, that is, a way out, for the 
symbol: it once again marries the castrato to youth, to beauty, to 
life: a marriage achieved either with the young woman or with 
Marianina :_~~e symbol has no regard for persons (SYM. Marriage 
of the castrato) . 
( 139) I must be clremning. Where am Ir' 
"You," I ref'l"d, "you, J1I4dame, superior as you are, ),ou who 
understand so weU the mOBt hidden feelings, who know how to 
inspire in a J1I4n's heart the most delicate of feelings without blight­
ing it, without breaking it at the outset, you who pity heartoche 
and who combine the wit of a ParisWnne with a passioMte soul 
worthy of Italy or spain-" 
She perceived the bitter irony in my speech; then, without seem­
ing to have heard, she interrupted f'lW: "Oh, you fashion me to your 
own taste. What tyranny I You don't want me for myselfl" 
"Ah, I want nothing," I cried, taken aback by her severity. * 
Here there are two cultural codes, one controlling the other: 1) 
"Flirtatious and witty conversation," all the more coded for being 
labored, due either to voluntary parody on the narrator's part or 
to a Balzacian conception of the "lightness" of worldly conversa­
tion. 2) Irony, equally labored, probably for the same reasons 
(REF. "Flirtatiousness, irony"). ** REF. Marivaudage, South­
ern passion *** The narrator, at first fatherly, is here entirely the 
suitor; the Woman has him in her power; at the slightest word 
83 
from his mistress (spoken "without seeming to have beard"), the 
subject-male beats a retreat, emphasizing a subjection necessary 
for the (immediate) continuation of the story (SYM. The Queen­
Woman and the nanator-subject). 
(110) "I. it true, at '*-, tlutt you "';01 hearing noria of tho. 
vivid fNlSSWru tlutt ravishing Southern wornen i •• in our heQlUr' * The narrator knows the story of the enigmatic old man and the 
mysterious Adonis (Nos. 70 and 120); for her part, the young 
woman is interested in hearing it (No. 119): the conditions are 
met for a narrative contract. We now come to an explicit proposi­
tion of narrative. This proposition will fint of all (here) be tanta­
mount to a propitiatory gift meant to compensate for the narrator's 
offense against the Queen-Woman, who must be mollified. The 
imminent narrative is henceforth constituted as an offering, before 
beooming merchandise (in a transaction to be explained later on) 
(Aer. "To narrate": 3: to offer to tell). ** REF. Passion (the 
delights of analogy: a hotter sun creates burning passions, love 
being a fI4me). Meridionality, already connoted in Filippo's olive 
complexion, is the genus containing the species "Italy" in advance. 
*** The utterance proposes a false enthymeme: (1) the story to 
be told is the story of a woman; (2) it will be the story of La lam­
binella; (3) thus, La Zambinella wiD be a woman. The narrator 
sets a snare for his listener (and the reader): even before the nar­
rative begins, a false clue is given for Enigma 6 (Who il14 Zmra­
binell41) (HER. Enigma 6: thematization and snare). 
XXXVII. THE HERMENEUTIC SENTENCE 
The proposition of truth is a "well-made" sentence; it contains 
a subject (theme of the enigma), a statement of the question 
(formulation of the enigma), its question mark (proposal of 
the enigma), various subordinate and interpolated clauses and 
catalyses (delays in the answer), all of which precede the ulti­
mate predicate (disclosure). Canonically, Enigma 6 (Who is 
La Zctmbi~?) would be set forth as follows: 
Question: "TIW u La ZambinelltJ. Who u she 
Delays: (subject, theme) (formulation) 
'" will teU you: 
(promise of answer) 
d 
(suspended answer) 
no one A:noWB. 
(jammed answer) d WOmdn, 
(snare) 
reldtive of 
tM Lantys, 
(partial answer) 
Answer: A C46trato dressed dB d WOrruln. 
( disclosure) ? 
(proposal) 
d creature 
outside nature 
(ambiguity) 
This canon can be modified (just as there are several kinds of 
sentence), provided that the principal hermeneutemes (the 
"knots" or "kernels") are present at some point in the dis­
course: the discourse can condense several henneneutemes 
ioto a single statement (into a single signifier) by making 
some of them implicit (thematization, proposal, and fonnula­
tion); it can also invert the terms of the henneneutic order: 
an answer can be given before the question has been asked (it 
is suggested that La Zambinella is a woman even before she 
appears in the story); or a snare can remain set after the truth 
has been revealed (Sarrasine continues to ignore La Zambi­
nella's true sex even though it has been revealed to him). 'I'his 
~~m gf ~e herm,~_~lltic !~t.~ce (which is something lik~ 
!:be h~Qm Qf tb~Jl~()na! ~t~~)em.q~~~ ~ ~s­
~t-namtiv~ combi~~ ~o points ofyiew (~. pertinenccs) : 
a rule ~f co_IDmunication, which keeps the net;wO.Ib Qf 4_C$tina­
ti~D"·separa.te, so that each one can continue to operate even if 
i~ neighbor is already "burned out" (Samsine can continue 
to receive a false message although the reader's circuit is al­
ready saturated: the sculptor's blindness becomes a new mes­
sage, object of a new system henceforth destined solely for the 
reader); and a pseudo-logical rule, whicb tolerates a certain 
85 
freedom in the order in which predicates are presented, once 
the subject has been proposed: this freedom actually reinforces 
the preeminence of the subject (of the star), whose perturba­
tion (literally, whose jeopardy) seems accidental and provi­
sional; or rather: from the question's pr(:>visio"-al _~~~~_reJ we 
infer its accidents: once the subject is proyjd.edwith its "true" 
predicate, everything falls into place, the sentence can end. 
(141) "Yes, so?" 
"So, I'll call tomorrow around nine and reveal this mystery to 
you." * In the sequence "To narrate" we could set up a sub-se­
quence or byte, "Rendezvous" (suggested/refused/accepted), in­
asmuch as the Rendezvous is a common weapon in the novelistic 
arsenal (there is another later on in the story, given Sarrasine by 
the duenna [No. 288]). Nevertheless, since this rendezvous, in its 
specific structure (refused/accepted), diagrammatically represents 
the bargain struck between the narrator and the young woman con­
cerning the subject "Story," we shall integrate it directly into the 
"To narrate" sequence, where it will become an intermediate term: 
ACT. "To narrate": 4: to suggest a rendezvous for the undisturbed 
telling of a story (a fairly frequent act in the code of everyday life: 
"I'll tell it to you " ) . 
( 142 ) " No," she replied, "I want to know now." 
"You haven't yet given me the right to obey you when you S4f: 
I want to." * ACT. "To narrate": 5: to discuss the time of the 
rendezvous. ** The Queen-Woman appears to be demanding an 
immediate narration out of pure caprice-a way of connoting her 
domination-but the narrator reminds her of the precise-and seri­
ous-nature of the bargain: you haven't yet given me anything, and 
thus I am not obligated to you. Which means: if you give yourself 
to me, I will tell you the story: tit for tat: a moment of love in 
exchange for a good story (SYM. The Queen-Woman and the sub­
ject-narrator) . 
(143) "At this moment," she replied with maddening coquetry, 
"I have the most burning desire to know the secret. Tomorrow, I 
86 
might not even listen to you * SYM. The (capricious) 
Queen-woman. To demand delivery of the goods on the spot (nar­
ration of the story) is to scant the other half of the bargain, since 
the narrator's desire cannot be fulfilled in the Lantys' salon: the 
young woman has some desire to "cheat." 
( 1 +4) She smiled and we parted; she ;ust as proud, ;ust as forbid­
ding, and I ;ust as ridiculous as ever. She had the audacity to waltz 
with a young aide-de-camp; and I was left in turn angry, pout­
ing, admiring, loving, ;ealous. * SEM. The Queen-Woman and 
subject-narrator. Here, the symbolic situation of the partners is 
transcribed by one of the interested parties in a psychological meta­
language. 
(145) "Till tomorrow," she said, around two in the morning, as 
the left the btIll. * ACT. "To narrate": 6: to agree to the rendez­
vous. 
(146) "I won't go," I thought to myself. "I'll give you up. You 
tlTe more capricious, perhaps a thoUSdnd times more fanciful 
than my imagination." * ACT. "To narrate": 7: to reject the 
rendezvous. The complicated maneuver of the rendezvous (refused 
by one, agreed to by the other, and vice versa) diagrammatically 
embodies the very esseoce of the bargain, which is a seesaw of pro­
posals and refusals: through the rendezvous episode, a very precise 
economy of exchange is established. -Th~ _stol}'_ of La Zambinella, 
the narrator informs us in passing. is perhaps fict!tious, in the fie­
b~ri itself: counterfeit money surreptiously put in circulation. 
(147) The next evening, we were both seated before a good fire * 
ACT. "To narrate": 8: to have accepted the rendezvous. 
( 1 is) in a small, elegant salon, she on a low sofa, I on cushions al­
most at her feet, and my eyes below hers. The street was quiet. The 
14mp shed a soft light. It was one of those evenings pleasing to the 
JOUl, one of those never-to-be-forgotten moments, one of those 
hours spent in peace and desire whose charm, later on, is a matter 
for constant regret, even when we met)' be happier. Who can erase 
the vivid imprint of the first feelings of love? * SYM. The Queen-
87 
Woman and the subject-narrator ("lIlmoBt tit her feet, and my eya 
below hers" ) . ]'he decor (a good fire, comfortable furnishings, soft 
light) is ambivalent:lt is as propiti~us for th~tdlip, of a ~ 
stt~!L~~itis fo~a~!~~of_lov= ** REF. Code of Passion, R 
e c. 
(149) "Well," she Sdid, "I'm listening." * ACT. "To narrate": 
9: to command to tell. 
(150) "I don't dttre begin. The story hdS some dangerous ptJsstJgu 
for in teUer.If I become too moved, you muBt stop me." * ACT. 
"To narrate": 10: to hesitate to tell. Perhaps a special morpheme 
should be constituted for this final hesitation of the discourse in 
beginning a story, a suspense which is purely discursive, analogous 
to the final moments of a striptease ... SYM. The ~~!_!od_ 
castrati()n, R..llD11ing_~risk, as he says, of becoming too mJWed,­
the narrator identifies himself in advance witlnii(rrilSine's "passion" 
for La Zambinella-and, consequently, with the castratiori-whiClds 
at stake. 
(151) "TeU." * ACT. "To narrate: 11: to repeatthe command to 
tell. 
(152) "I wiU obey." * ACT. "To narrate": 12: command ac­
cepted. By this final word, the narrative which now begins comes 
under the sign of the Queen-Woman, the Castrating Figure. 
XXXVIII. CONTRACT-NARRATIVES 
~! the origin <?LNarrative, desire. To produce narrative, how­
ever, desire must vmy~usteiiter into a system of equivalents 
and m.etonymies; or: In order to be produced, narrative ni~t-­
be susceptible ot chtmge, must subject itself to an economiC~ 
system. In StJrrasine, for example: the secret of the Adonis-lias 
to do with his body; a knowledge of this secret is access to that 
88 
body: the young woman desires the Adonis (No. 113) and its 
story (No. 119): a first desire is posited that detennines a sec­
ond, through metonymy: the narrator, jealous of the Adonis 
by cultural constraint (Nos. 115-16), is forced to desire the 
young woman; and since he knows the story of the Adonis, the 
conditions for a contract are met: A desires B, who desires 
something A has; and A and B will exchange this desire and 
this thing, this body and this narrative: a night of love for a 
good story. Narrative: legal tender, subject to contract, eco­
Domic stakes, in short, merclumdise, barter which, as here, can 
turn into haggling, no longer restricted to the publisher's office 
but represented, en abyme, in the narrative. This is the theory 
SamlBine offers as a fable. This is the question raised, perhaps, 
by every narrative. ~~t. rJao~_~ th~~1ffiY.~.~ ~~'¥f4 
for? What is the ntUTative "worth"? Here, the narrative is 
exchanged for a-body lacontract-of prostitution); elsewhere it 
can purchase life itself (in The ThoU8(llld and One Nights, 
one story of Scheherazade equals one day of continued life); 
IDd elsewhere, in Sade, the narrator systematically alternates, 
as in a gesture of purchase, an orgy for a dissertation, in other 
words, for meaning (philosophy is equivalent to sex, the bou­
doir): by a dizzying device, narrative becomes the representa­
tion of the contract upon which it is based: in these exemplary 
fictions, narratiO&-.i.t_the..(ecopomic) ijIeory of narra~o~: ODe 
does not ':!ll~!~ to_ "~muse," to "instruct," or t() ~ti~fy a eer: 
~~n. a_~~!()pol~gical func~o~ of "!~_~i3i .~~e ~rrates in order 
to obtain by exchanging; and it is this exchange that"is-repre­
sented in the narrative itself: narrative is bOth product-and 
production, merchandise and commerce, a stake and the bearer 
of that stake: a dialectic even more explicit in SirraiiiJe since 
'the very "contents" of the Narrative-as-Merchandise (a story 
of castration) will prevent the bargain from being completed: 
the young woman, upset by the narrated castration, will with­
draw from the transaction without honoring her pledge. 
u " XXXIX. THIS IS NOT AN EXPUCATION DE TEXTE 
Since narrative is both merchandise and the relation of the 
contract of which it is the object, there can no longer be any 
question of setting up a rhetorical hierarchy between the two 
parts of the tale, as is common practice: the evening at the 
Lanty mansion is not a mere prologue, and Sanasine's adven­
ture is not the main story: the sculptor is not the hero and the 
narrator is not a mere protactic character: _Stl!r~~.ii Dot the 
story of a castrato, but of a contract; it is the s~IY ~!..~for~ 
"( the-narrative)"· and the action of this force on .!1:!~.Ym' .tQ~ 
trac:t ~ntrolling it. Thus, the two parts of the text are not 
detached from one another according to the so-called prin­
ciple of "nested narratives" (a narrative within the narrative). 
The nesting of the bloclcs of narrative is not (merely) ludic 
but (also) economic. Narrative does not engender itself by 
metonymic extension (subject to its passage through the stages 
of desire), by paradigmatic alternation: narrative is deteI.:;. 
mined not by a desire to narrate but by a deSire to exchange: it 
is a mediu",!-of exclumge, an agent, a currency. a gold s1a!ndird.­
~at accounts for this central equiva1en~ is_ n.~t the "plan" 
of SturdSine, but its structure. The structure is no~·~-pfOLOJ ~ 
pl~Q. Therefore, this is Dot an "explication de texte." 
( 153) EmeBt-Jedn Smrasine was the only son of d l4wyer in til. 
Franche-Comte, I went on, after a pause. His fdiher IuuI tIJTItISSed 
six or eight thoUltDld livres of income honutly enough, a ,,",fe. 
Biorull's fortune which di that time, in the FOvinces, was consid­
ered to be colossal. The elder SmraBine, having but one child and 
tmXiow to overlooJc nothing where his educdtion was concerned, 
hoped to nuzke a nwgistrdte of him, tII'Id to live long enough to sec, 
in his old age, the grandson of Matthieu Sdrrasine, ftJTTner of Saint· 
00, sedied beneath the lilies and Rdl'Ping through some tritIl for 
the greater glory of the l4w; however, hedven did not hold thiI 
90 
fJtIt-nue in store for the l4wyer. * A question was posed by the 
limy's vel}' title (No.1): What is SmTClSine? Now that question 
lias been answered (HER. Enigma 1: answer). ** SYM. Father 
aad son: Antithesis: A: the favored son (he will be accuned in 
No. 168). The antithesis corresponds to a cultural code: Magis­
IDle-Father, Artist-Son: by this inversion, societies are dissolved. *** In this family chronicle, one place is empty: that of the 
.ather (SYM. Father and son: the absent mother). 
(1 H) The younger SmTdSine, entrusted to the Jesuits at (In emly .' * ACf. "Boarding school": 1: to go away to boarding school. 
(ISS) evidenced (In u1UJSlUJl turbulence. * SEM. Insubordina­
tion. Denotatively, turbulence is a character trait; here, however, 
this trait refers to a larger, vaguer, and more fonnal signified: the 
@te of a substance ~~at _~~n) "~k.~" QJCanDQ~ -be §lt~~ecI. a!ld 
=i~:_~~~l=ii~~~:~~G~;li:~~o~;-~:~ ~ifa~~~~ 
iJiC etyDl9.!~ql !!l~!li!t.&of the word ~urbulence which is its con­
~meanin~. 
(156) He Iuul the childhood of d FnIIn of ftIlent. * SEM. Vocation 
(inde6nite for the moment) . 
(157) He would study only what pletJsed him, frequently rebelled, 
_ sometimes spent hours on end plunged in confused thought, 
c:uf1ied at times in watching his comrtJdes at pl4y, at times drum­
iIIg of Homeric heroes. * SEM. Unsociability. ** SEM. Voca· 
tioo (artistic: perhaps literary?). 
(158) Then, if he mtlde up his mind to dmuse himself, he threw 
IWruelf into gttmel with dn extr(lordi1Jtl:ry mdor. When d faght 
.... e out between him dnd (I friend, the battle rcuely ended with­
out bloodBhed. If he WdS the weder of the two, he would bite. * 
SEM. Excess (what exceeds nature). ** SEM. Femininity (to 
lite, rather than to use the ..E~all~ ~"s1 is a connotator of feminin­
ity). The appearance ofbrOOCffn tTie sculptor's childhood already 
dramatizes his fate, however remotely. 
( 159) Both active dnd /JdSSive by tums, without aptitude and not 
overly intelligent, his biztJrre coordCter * SEM. The composite. 
This maleficent seme has already appeared in other forms througla~ 
the first part of the text: the compoBite (in romantic terminolOCJ~ ~ 
the bWme), connoted by the alternation of opposites, designatlS J 
an inability to attain the homogeneity or unity whose model iI ~ 
organic cohesion, in a word the lubric4ted (No. 213); not that j 
Sarrasine laclcs virility (energy, independence, etc.), but such ~ , 
ity is unstable, and instability leads the sculptor outside a plenuy.' 
reconciled unity toward defeat, toward deficiency (or signifies it). : 
XL. THE BIRTH OF THEMATICS 
To state that Sanasine is "dCtive or fJtI8Bive by ~" is t~~!:.. 
tempt to locate something in his character "whlclt ~oesn'.!.. 
take," to attempt to name that something. Thus begins a proc­
ess of nomination which is the essence of the readers activirii 
to read is to struggle to name, to subject the sentences of the 
text to a semantic transformation. This transformation- is ei-­
ratic; it consists in hesitating among several names: if we are 
told that Sanasine had "one of those strong wills tlutt know 
no obsftJcle," what are we to read? will, mergy, obstinttcy, ~ 
bomness, etc.? The con nota tor refers not so much to a name 
as to a synonymic complex whose common nucleus we sense 
even while the discourse is leading us toward other possibili­
ties, toward other related signifieds: thus, rea~ing is absorbed.. 
in a ltipq, Qf.metonymic Ilj~. ~c!t syno~ym ~dding to its 
nei&hbor SQ.IJ1e new trait, some new departure: ~e old m~1L 
who was fiDt~nl!o.ted as frdgile is soon said to be "of g~"; an 
image containing signifieds of rigidity, immobility, and dry, 
cutting frangibility. This expansion is the very movement of 
meaning: !!te mea.,ning s~d~1 r~v~ itsel!! a..~~ a.d--y~~~ si.: 
multaneously; far from analyzing it, we should rather describe_ 
tt through its expansions, lexical ~nscenden~~- ~_e.'p~ric. 
WO.rdit copJi!lu!IJly.atteInEl! .to jQ~!l: tJte obiect 91 _~~!ltics 
·"mId be the synthesis of meanings, not the analysis of words. 
r~~ay, thii~emantics_!lf_~m~iOI!s ~l~~dy exi~~: it is 
-alled Thematics. To thematize is, on the one hand, to leave r.-dictionary behind, to follow certain synonymic chains 
.~ (turbulent, murky, unstable, unresolved), to yield to an ex­
. pnding nomina tion (which can proceed from a certain sensual-
iIm) , and, on the other, to return to these various substantive 
ltations in order to create some constant form ("which doesn't 
.. e"), for the exchange value of a seme, its ability to partici­
pate in a thematic economy, depends on its repetition: in Sar­
asine's aggressivity, it is worth noting a tendency (a repeated 
due) toward petty destructiveness, since this element will crop 
up in other signifiers; similarly, the old man's fctntdStic quality 
has no semantic value unless the exceeding of human limits, 
which is one of the primitive "components" of the word (one 
of its other "names"), can recur elsewhere. To read, to under­
sta~~, to thematize (at least a classic text), is therefore to 
.!!'Iettt from name to name, starting from the signifying thrust 
(thus we retreat from Sarrasine's violence at least to the point 
of excess, a clumsy name for wluJt exceeds the limits cmd trdfl­
tcends nature). ~is r~treat is of course c~ed: when the UD­
Des~ng of na~~ ~.f ~ criticallevc;l is ~~J?l~hed, the work 
~ closed, the language by which the semantic. tran~formati()n 
is ended becomes nature, truth, the work's secret. Only an 
infin~~e thematics, open to endless nomination, can respect th~ 
enduring character of language, the production of reading, and 
;;a"longer the list of its products. However, the metonYmic 
produ~C:>1l of lanFge is not.Es~lat~ ~n the ci~~~_ t~:f 
wDence the inevitability of a dice throw which can arrest and 
fix the skid of names: this is thematics. 
(160) rruule his teachers tIS weary of him tIS were his cl4ssf11ltter . 
• SEM. Danger. 
93 
(161) Instead of ledming the ekments of Greek, he drew the 
Reverend Father as he expUJined a passage in Thucydides to them, 
sketched the mathematics teacher, the tutors, the Father in chmge 
of discipline, and he scribbkd shapekBS designs on the walls. * 
SEM. Unsociability (Sanasine acts inappropriately, outside the 
norms, outside the limits of "nature"). ** SEM. Vocation (draw­
ing). The signified is deduced from a cultural code: the inspired 
dunce succeeds outside regulated class activities. 
( 162) Instead of singing the Lord's praises in church, he distracted 
himself during services by whittling on a pew; * SEM. Impiety. 
Impiety here is provocation, not indifference: Sanasine is (and 
thus will be) a transgressor. Transgression consists not in ignoring 
the service but in replacing it (in parodying it) with an inverted 
activity, erotic and hallucinatory: whittling. ** SEM. ~i~!y"~~ 
The._~~truction of the whole obi~t. ~he(d~libexa~J_~I~n_ 
toward the partial object, the halluc:ination of~gme~t.~!!~~!Jh~ 
quest for a fetish, win r~ppeaJ when SamLsiJl~ ~deavors to un­
dfess La Zambinena mentally in order to draw her body:-' ------..-
XLI. TIlE PROPER NAME 
We occasionally speak of Sarrasine as though he existed, as 
thougf~iha§a ful11fe.!. anun~~nscioys. a saW; h.owe.v~~b~L 
we a.re talking about is his figure (an impersona! nc:.twork of 
symbols combined under-the proper name "Sa~"!., not. 
~is pers~n (a moral freedom endowed with motives and an 
overdetermination of meanings): we are develosconnqta­
tiEn~~ot pUf!.uing in!estigatioos; wea-ie notsea.rching tQ[Jhe 
truth of ~~~asi~e, but for the systematics of a (transitory) si~e 
of the text: we mark this site (under the name Sarrasine) so it 
will take its place among the alibis of the narrative operation, 
in the indeterminable network of meanings, in the plurality of 
the codes. By restoring to the discourse its hero's proper name, 
we are merely acting in accordance with the economic nature 
of the Name_: ... i!!.th~novelistic regime (and elsewhere?), it is 
an f~.trum.eDtof cxch-ange: it allows the substitution of a 
nominal unit for a collection of characteristics by establishing 
an equivalent relationship between sign and sum: it is a book­
keeping method in which, the price being equal, condensed 
merchandise is preferable to voluminous merchandise. Except 
that the economic function (substitutive, semantic) of the 
Name is stated with varying degrees of frankness. Whence the 
variety of patronymic codes. To call characters, as Furetiere 
does, /dYotte, Nicodeme, Beltlstre is (without keeping com­
pletely aloof from a certain half-bourgeois, half<lassic code) 
to emphasize the structural function of the Name, to state its 
arbitrary nature, to depersonalize it, to accept the currency of 
the Name as pure convention. To say SarrctSine, Rochefide, 
Lanty, ZambinelUJ (not to mention Bouchardon, who really 
existed) is to maintain that the patronymic substitute is filled 
with a person (civic, national, social), it is to insist that appel­
lative currency be in gold (and not left to be decided arbi­
trarily). All subversion, or all novelistic submission, thus be­
gins with the Proper Name: specific-as well specified-as is 
the Proustian narrator's social position, his perilously main­
tained lack of a name creates a serious deflation of the realistic 
illusion: the Proustian I is not of itself a name (in contrast to 
the substantive character of the novelistic pronoun, XXVIII); 
because it is undermined, troubled by the disturbances of age, 
it loses its biographical tense by a certain blurring. What is 
obsolescent in today's novel is ~ot the QQyeHstic, it is the char­
~ctei;-whaf can no lonj~.r ~ ~t;t.en is the Proper Name. 
(163) or wlum he IuJd stolen (J piece of wood, he carved some holy 
figure. If he IuJd no wood, /Jdper, or pencil, he reproduced his idedS 
with brud crumbs. * SEM. Vocation (sculptor). The kneading 
of bread crumbs, prefiguring the moment when Sarrasine kneads 
95 
the clay in which he copies Ul Zambinella's body, has a dual value: 
informative (the definition of Sarrasine is created by resbiction 
from the genus "Artist" to the species "Sculptor"); symbolic (re­
ferring to the onanism of the solitary viewer, returned to in the 
scene on the sofa in No. 267) . 
(164) Whether copying the chtITtJCters in the pictures thttt deco­
rated the choir, or improvising, he alwctys left behind him 'Omll 
gross sketches whose licentiousness shocked the youngest F tithers; 
evil tongues nurintained tlult the older Jesuits were dJ1W/ll8d by 
them. * SEM. Licentiousness (kneading is an erotic activity). ** 
REF. Psychology of ages (the young are strict; the old, permissive) . 
(165) Finally, if we tlTe to believe school gossip, he WdS apelkd * ACT. "Boarding school": 2: to be expelled. 
( 166) for lutving, while dWditing his tum tit the confessional on 
Good Friday, shdped d big rtick of wood into the form of Chrirt. 
The impiety with which this st4fue WdS endowed WdS too blttttmt 
not to 1utve mllrited punishmllnt of the tDtirt. Hdd he not hdd the 
dUddcity to pldCe this Bomewhttt cynicdl figure on top of the 
tdberRllCleI * SEM. Vocation (sculptor). ** SEM. Impiety (the 
transgression links religion and the erotic, cf. No. 162). 
(167) SttrrtlBine BOUght in PttriB d refuge from the effects * ACT. 
"Career': I: to go to Paris. 
(168) of d father', cuneo * SYM. Father and SOD: Antithesis: B: 
the accursed SOD. 
(169) Having one of those rtrong wills thdt brook no obltdcle, he 
obeyed the commdnds of his genius dnd entered Bouclutrdon', stu­
dio. * SEM. Obstinacy (Sarrasine will also insist on loving La 
Zambinella, then on deceiving himself as to her nature; his "01>­
stinacy" is only the protection of his illusions). ** ACT. "Ca­
reer": 2: to study with a great master. 
(170) He worked all day, dRd in the evening went out to beg for 
his living. * REF. Stereotype: the poor, courageous artist (earning 
his living by day, creating at night or, as here, vice versa) . 
( 171) Monished at the yourIB artist'. progr"' and intelli&ence, 
Bouchttrdon * SEM. Genius (genius crowns the artist's vocation, 
cf.No.173). 
(172) BOOn became aware of his pupil'. pcyerty; he helped him, 
grew fond of him, and treated him liIte his own son. * Bouchar­
don replaces not the father but the mother, whose absence (No. 
153) has led the child into licentiousness, excess, anomie; like a 
mother, Bouchardon understands, cares for, helps (SYM. Mother 
and son). 
(173) Then, when SarrClSiM'. genius was revealed * SEM. Ge­
nius. Sanasine's genius is, three times over, necessary ("credible"): 
according to the cultural (romantic) code, it makes Sanasine a 
singular being, outside the norms; according to the dramatic rode, 
it exposes the wicked fate which "exchanges" a great artist's death 
for a castrato's life, that is, everything for nothing; according to the 
narrative code, it justi6es the perfection La Zambinella's statue will 
have, the source of the desire transmitted to the Adonis. 
(174) in one of those works in which future talent struggles with 
the effervescence of youth, * REF. Code of ages and code of Art 
(talent as discipline, youth as effervescence) . 
XLII. CODES OF CLASS 
~~t ~s th~ \l~ of trying to reconstruct a cultural code, since 
the regulations governing it are never more than a prospect (to 
quote Poussin)? And yet the locus of an epoch's codes forms a 
kind of scientific vulgate which it will eventually be valuable to 
describe: what do we know "naturally" about art?-"it is a 
constraint"; about youth?-"it is turbulent," etc. If we collect 
all such knowledge, all such vulgarisms, we create a monster, 
and this monster is id~lo&y. As a fragment of ideiJogy, the 
cultural code inverts its class origin (scholastic and social) into 
97 
a natural reference, into a proy~ialstat~I!!~t .. !.ike .~da~tj~_ 
language and political language, whic~ ~Js~ nev~ question ~c:. 
-repetition of their utterances (their stereotypic essence),. ~ 
cultural proverb vexes,.provokes an intolerant readinS!~e BaI:. 
zacian -text is clotted with It: because of its cultural codes, it .. . ..... --... _-'" -.,,-. 
stales, rots, excludes itself from writing (which is always a 
contempordry task): it is the quintessence, the residual co~-_ 
densate of what cannot be rewritten. This extrusion of the 
stereotype is scarcely averted 'by irony, for, as we have seen 
(XXI), irony can only add a new code (a new stereotype) to 
the codes, to the stereotypes it claims to exorcise. The writer's 
only control over stereotypic vertigo (this vertigo is also that 
of "stupidity," "vulgarity") is to participate in it without quo­
tation marks, producing a text, not a parody. This is what 
F1aubert did in Bou'VtJrd et Pkuchet: the two copyists are co~ 
iers of codes (they are, one may say, stupid), but since they 
too confront the class stupidity which surrounds them, the 
text presenting them sets up a circularity in which no one (not 
even the author) has an advantage over anyone else; and _ th~, 
is in fact the function of writing: to make ridiculous,_t~ ~!mYl 
the power (the intimidation) of one language over ~~Oth~!l 
t~dissolve any metalanguage as soon as it is constituted. 
( 175) the wtJnJ1hearted Bouchardon erukavored to reatore him to 
the old lllwyer's good grClCes. Before the authority of the fctmow 
sculptor, the pmental dnger rubsided. AIl BescJ",on rejoiced tJt httv­
ing given birth to d gretJt mtJn of the future. In the fim throes of 
the ecstasy produced by his fl4ttered vanity, the miserly lllwyer gave 
his son the means to cut a good figure in society. * We have noted 
the paradigm: favored/ClCCUrsed. We might conceive here a third 
term: reconciled. However, this dialectic is unacceptable, for it is 
valid only on the anecdotal, not the symbolic, level, where the 
curse (the casting out) exists outside time. This reconciliation is 
significant because of its agent, thereby confirmed in his maternal 
nature: as the stake of the struggle, the mother can resolve the 
con8ict between father and son (later we will see Bouchardon, like 
a mother, protecting Sarrasine from sexuality) (SYM. Mother and 
son). 
( 176) For tJ long time, the lengthy tJnd ltzboriOU8 studies demtJnded 
by sculpture * REF. Code of Art (the difficult apprenticeship of 
sculpture). Sculpture is said to struggle with matter, not with rep­
resentation, as in the case of painting; it is a demiurgic art, an art 
which extracts rather than covers. an art of the hand that takes 
hold. 
( 177 ) ttJrned StJrrtJSine's impetuous rutture tJnd wild genius. Bou­
chardon, foreseeing the violence with which the fxt8Bions would 
erupt in this young soul, * SEM. Excess (the excessive, out of 
bounds). 
( 178) which WdB perhtJps dB predisposed to them tJS Micheldngelo's 
htJd been, * REF. Art history, the psychological typology of a 
great artist (if Sarrasine had been a musician and Balzac had been 
born fifty years later, it would have been Beethoven; in literature, 
Balzac himself. etc.) . 
(179) chtJnneled his energy into consttJnt ldbor. He succeeded in 
keeping SorrtJBine's exUtJOrdinmy impetuosity within limits by for­
bidding him to work; by suggesting distractions when he SCIW him 
being cmried away by the fury of some idetJ, or by entrusting him 
with import4nt work when he seemed on the point of CJbtJndon­
ing himself to dissifJtJtion. * SEM. Excess. ** Like a bourgeois 
mother who wants her son to become an engineer. Bouchardon 
keeps an eye on Sarrasine's work (but also, like the same bourgeois 
mother, on his sexual activities) (SYM. Mother and son). 
( 180) However, gentleness was tJlways the most powerful of weap­
ons where this fxt8Biorutte soul was concerned, tJnd the master htJd 
no greater control over his student thtJn when he inspired his 
grtJtitude through fJttfernal kindness. * Gentleness is a maternal 
weapon: symbolically, a gentle father is the mother (SYM. Mother 
and son). ** REF. Gnomic code ("" soft answer tumeth away 
wrtJth"). 
99 
XLIII. STYLISTIC TRANSFORMATION 
The utterances of the cultural code are implicit proverbs: they 
are written in that obligative mode by which the disCOUISC 
states a general will, the law of a society, making the proposi­
tion concerned ineluctable or indelible. Further still: it is be­
cause an utterance can be transformed into a proverb, a maim, 
a postulate, that the supporting cultural code is discoverable: 
stylistic transformation "proves" the code, bares its structure, 
reveals its ideological perspective. What is easy for proverbs 
(which have a very special syntactical, archaistic form) is 
much less so for the other codes of discouISe, since the sen­
tence-model, the example, the paradigm expressing each of 
them has not (yet) been isolated. Nevertheless, we ~~ con­
ceive that stylistics, which has hitherto been concerned only 
with departures and expressive phrases-in other words, with 
verbal individtultions, with an author's ideolects-wiIl radi­
cally change its object and concern itself essentially with iso­
lating and classifying models (patterns) of sentences, clauses, 
armatures, deep structures; in short, we can conceive that ~­
listics, t()O., will become transformational; thereby it would 
cease to be a minor subdivision of literary analysis (limited to 
a few individual syntactical and lexical constants) and, tran­
scending the opposition of form and content, would become 
an instrument of ideological classification; for, once these 
models are found, we could then, in the course of the text. ex­
pose each code as it occurs. 
( 181) At twenty-two, Samuine was neceSSllTily removed from the 
Bdlutary influence Bouchmdon Iuu1 aercised over his morah and 
his hamt8. * REF. Chronology (Sarrasine is twenty-two when he 
leaves for Italy). ** ACT. "Career": 3: to leave the master. *** 
Since Sarrasine is "licentious," Bouchardoo's "salutary io8uence," 
100 
even though finally for art's sake, must be a moral one: the son's 
sexuality is protected, preserved, annulled by the mother. Seques­
tration from sex designates, in Sarrasine, ctphdnisis, castration, to 
which he was subject well before knowing La Zambinella: the cas­
trato appears to rescue him from it for a time (thus Sarrasine's 
"first" pleasure in the theater), only to subject him to it defini­
tively ("You helve drctgged me down to your leYel," No. 525); thus, 
in the end, La Zambinella will be for Samasine only the conicioUs­
nallof what "he has " been all along (SYM: Aphanisis) . 
(182) He rectped the fruits of his genius by winning the sculpture 
prize * ACT. "Career": 4: to win a prize. 
(183) est4blished by the Mctrquis de Mctrigny, the brother of Mme 
de Pompadour, who did so rrwch for the arts. * REF. History 
(Mme de Pompadour) . 
(184) Diderot Iutiled the st4tue by Bouchctrdon's pupil CIS ct master­
pUzce. * ACT. "Career": 5: to be pr.aised by a great critic. ** 
REF. History of liter.ature (Diderot as art critic) . 
XLIV. THE HISTORICAL CHARACTER 
In The Guemutnfes Wd)', Proust writes: "We see in a 
gazetteer of the works of Balzac, where the most illustrious 
personages figure only according to their connexion with the 
COl11Bdie hUnuJine, Napoleon occupy a space considerably 
less than that allotted to Rastignac, and occupy that space 
solely because he once spolce to the young ladies of Cinq­
Cygne." It is precisely this minor importance which gives the 
historical character its exlICt weight of reality: this minor is the 
measure of authenticity: Diderot, Mme de Pompadour, later 
Sophie Arnould, Rousseau, d'Holbach, are introduced into 
the fiction laterally, obliquely, in passing, painted on the scen­
ery, not represented on the stage; for if the historical character 
101 
were to asswne its real importance, the discourse would be 
forced to yield it a role which would, paradoxi~iy: make it 
less real (thus the characters in Balzac's Ctltherine de Medicis, 
Alexandre Dumas's novels, or Sacha Guitry's plays: absurdly 
improbable): they would give themselves away. Yet if they are 
merely mixed in with their fictional neighbors, mentioned as 
having simply been present at some social gathering, their 
modesty, like a lock between two levels of water, equalizes 
novel and history: they reinstate the novel as a family, and 
like ancestors who are contradictorily famous and absurd, J:ttey 
give the novel the glow of reality, not of glory: they are superla­
tive effects of the real. 
(185) The King's sculptor, not without great SOrTOW, saw off to IttUy 
"young mcln * ACf. "Career": 6: to leave for Italy. ** Bouchar­
don's sorrow, his fear, is that of a mother who has lcept her son a 
virgin and who suddenly finds him sent off to do his military service 
in some hot-blooded country (SYM. Protection against sexuality). 
(186) whom he htJd kept, tIS " matter of principle, in tottU igno­
r"nee of the ftICts of life. * The generous but abusive mother (abu­
sive by her very generosity) has denied her son knowledge of the 
"facts of life" by overwhelming him with work (though allowing 
him a few social outings); Bouchardon has condemned Sarrasine 
to virginity and has played the role of his castrator (SYM. Protec­
tion against sexuality) . 
(187) For six ye"rs, SmrtlSine htJd boorded with Bouchtlrdon. * 
REF. Chronology (Sarrasine came to Bouchardon at the age of 
sixteen) . 
( 188) As ftlnatic in his tJTt tIS OIno)l" WtIS letter to be, he tlrGSe at 
dawn, went to the studio, did not emerge until nightfcdl, * SEM. 
Excess. ** REF. History ofart (Canova). 
102 
(189) tJnd lived only with his Muse. * SYM. Protection against 
sexuality. ** SYM. Pygmalion. There is a dual (contradictory) 
connotation: Sarrasine never makes love, he is in a state of aphan­
isis (or loss of sexuality); like a Pygmalion, Sarrasine sleeps with 
his statues, he puts his eroticism into his art. 
( 190) If he went to the Comedie-FrtJ~, he WdS ttJken by his 
master. He felt so out of ploce at M~ Geoffrin's and in high society, 
into which BouchllTdon tried to introduce him, that he preferred 
to be 1Il0M, and shunMd the pletJsures of that licentious Bra. * 
REF. Historical code: the century of Louis XV. ** SYM. Pro­
tection against sexuality. 
(191) He IuuI no other mistress but sculpture * Redundance of 
No. 189. ** SYM. Protection against sexuality. *** SYM. Pyg­
malion. 
(192) tmd Clotilde, OM of the lumiFlllries of the opera. * ACf: 
"Liaison": I: to have a liaison. 
(193) And n'en this affair did not ltIst. * ACf: "Liaison": 2: 
indication of the end of the liaison. The indication is interior to 
the discourse, not to the story (to the liaison itself), in which case 
one would have been given the facts which led to the break: it is 
therefore a rhetorical indication. The brevity of the liaison (signi­
fied by the "And even") connotes its insignificance: Sanasine's 
sexual exile has not ended. 
(19+) StmdSiM was rather ugly, lIlwqs Ixully dres84ld, tmd so free 
in his nature, so irreguLu in his private life, * Romantically (that 
is, by virtue of the romantic code), ugliness connotes genius, by the 
intermediary stage of a sign, a sign of exclusion (SEM. Genius). 
~~like _~_u!l'1- ugIin~ replicat~ no model, has no metonymic 
oripl; its only reference (its only Authority) is the word ugliness, 
w1iich_ct~o~ Jt. 
( 195) that the celebrClfed nymph, fearing BO~ catastrophe, soon 
relinquished the sculptor to hiB love of the Arts. * ACf. "Liai­
son": 3: end of the liaison. 
103 
XLV. DEPRECIATION 
To begin cJ lilJison/to indicate its end/to end it: the asyndeton 
signifies the adventure's absurd brevity (whereas ordinarily 
"liaison" is open to a thousand novelistic expansions and inci­
dents). Basically, by its very structure (clearly revealed in the 
utter simplicity of the sequence). proairetism comparatively 
depreciates language ("action," it is said, speaks louder than 
"words" ): once restored to its proairetic essence, the operative 
mocks the symbolic, dismisses it. By the asyndeton of behav­
ioral statements, human action is trivialized, reduced to a 
horizon of stimulus and responses, the sexual is mechanized, 
voided. Thus, by the mere form of its sequence, the liaison of 
Sarrasine and Clotilde keeps the sculptor away from sex: prQ: 
;liretism, when reduced to its essential tenos, like so -many 
knives (the knives of asyndeton), it:seH be<:om.eS an -instrument 
" ..... , 
of castration, applied by the discourse to Sanasine. 
( 1(6) Sop,,", J.mould JTIlIde one of Mr witticinn8 on this rubject. 
She confeaed Mr rurprise, I believe, that her frWnd held J1'Ul1IIJged 
to triumfJh OWl" rtdttuIry. * REF. Historical code: the century of 
lDuis XV (licentious and witty). ** SYM. Sequestration from 
sex. *** Pygmalion. 
(197) SarrcJBiM left for ItcJly in 1758. * ACT. "Journey": 1: to 
depart (for Italy). ** REF. Chronology (Sarrasine is twenty-two 
in 1758, d. No. 181). 
( 198) During the journey, his vivid inurgination ettught pre be­
nectth CI brillUJnt .ky cJnd CIt the Bight of the wonderful monuments 
which tITe to be found in the birthplace of the Arts. He cJdmired the 
BfdtueB, the frescoes, the pe!intings, Clnd thus i11lfJired, * ACT. 
"Journey": 2: to travel (this term in a famous sequence is infi­
nitely catalyzable). ** REF. Art and Tourism (Italy Mother of 
the Arts, etc. ) . 
104 
(199) he came to RoJ'J'lll, • ACT. "Journey": 3: to arrive. 
( 2(0) filled with desiTe to carve his nmrl. between Micheldngelo'. 
tmd M. Bouclutrdon's. Accordingly, at the beginning, he divided his 
tiJ'J1II between studio wb lind exllmining the worb of tII't in which 
RoJ'J'lll ttbounds .• ACT. "Journey": 4: to stay. ** REF. History 
ofM. 
XLVI. COMPLETENESS 
To depart/to travel/to drrive/to ltCI)': the journey is saturated. 
I.~ end, to fill, to join, to unify-one might say that this is the 
basic requirement of the redderly, as though it were prey to 
some obsessive fear: that of omitting a connection. Fear of for­
getting engende_rs_ th~ap~~!l~ _~f ~. IQgic of actions; terms 
and the links between them are posited (invented) in such a 
way that they unite, duplicate each other, create an illusion of 
~ntinuity. The plenum generates the drawing intended to 
"express" it, and the drawing evokes the complement, color­
ing: as if the redderly abhors a vacuum. What would be the 
narrative of a journey in which it was said that one stays some­
where without having arrived, that one travels without having 
departed-in which it was never said that, having departed, 
one arrives or fails to arrive7 Such a narrative would be a scan­
dal, the extenuation, by hemorrhage, of readerliness. 
(201) He IuJd ttlreddy BfJent two wed. in the ecsttztic state which 
overwhelml young minda CIt the sight of the queen of ruins, * 
REF. Ancient Rome ... REF. Chronology. (This notation-two 
weeb-will retroactively match the sculptor's ignorance of Italian 
and Roman customs: an ignorance of capital importance to the 
entire story, since it is the basis for all the snares by which Sana-
105 
sine is sunounded-and by which he surrounds himself-concem­
ing the sex of La Zambinella.) 
(202) when he went one evening to the Teatro Argentind, * 
ACf. "Theater": 1: to enter (the building) . 
(203) before which a huge CTowd was assembled. * Aer. "Ques­
tion" (which will follow): 1: a fact to be explained. 
(204) He inquired as to the causes of this gllthering * ACf. 
"Question": 2: to inquire. 
(205) and everyone CI1I8Wered with two ntmW: ZmnbineUtd 10-
mellil * ACf. "Question": 3: to receive an answer. ** The pre­
ceding proairetism ("Question") has an over-all connotative value; 
it serves to designate La Zambinella as a star; this signified has al­
ready been attached to the old man; it is linked to the international 
character of the Lanty family and is the source of their wealth 
(SEM. International star). *** Who is, or rather: what (sex) 
is La Zambinella7 This is the text's sixth enigma: here it is thema­
tized, since its subject is emphatically introduced. (HER. Enigma 
6: thematization). 
XLVII. s/z 
SClTTaSine: customary French onomastics would lead us to ex­
pect SamtZine: on its way to the subject's patronymic, the Z 
has encountered some pitfall. Z is the letter of mutilation: 
phonetically, Z stings like a chastising lash, an avenging -insecti_ 
graphically, cast slantwise by the hand across the blank regu­
larity of the page, amid the curves of the alpba1?et, like an 
oblique and illicit blade, it cuts, slashes, or, as we say in Fre~cht_ 
zebrQ8; from a Balzacian viewpoint, this Z (which appears in 
Balzac's name) is the letter of deviation (see the story Z. 
MarCdB); finally, here, Z is the first letter of La Zambinella. 
106 
the initial of castration, so that by this orthographical error 
~mrriitted in the middle of his name, in the center of his 
body, Sanasine receives the Zambi~~lla~._~jll its ~e~~~e­
jhew'?i!!!.C!:()fc:lendeniY.-Furthe;., Sand Z are in a relation of 
graphological inversion: the same letter seen from the other 
side of the mirror: Sarrasine contemplates in La Zambinella 
his own castration. Hence the slash (!) confronting the S of 
SarraSine and the Z of Zambinella has a panic function: it is 
the slash of censure, the surface of the mirror, the wall of hal": 
lucination, the verge of antithesis., the abstraction of limit, the' 
obliquity of the signifier, the index of the paradigm, hence of 
meaning. 
XLVIII. THE UNFORMULATED ENIGMA 
ZammneUa can be Bmnbinell4, little baby, or Gtmbinell4, 
little leg, little phallus, each marked by the letter of deviation 
(Z). The name without its article (contrary to what OCCUIS 
throughout the text, where discourse writes: La ZambinelltJ), 
raised to its pure substantive state by the public's outcry, sbll 
avoids sexual snares; a decision will soon have to be made 
whether or not to lie, to say ZmnbinelltJ or La ZmnbinelltJ; for 
the moment there is neither snare nor question but merely the 
emphasis of a subject, affinned before the enigma has been 
proposed or fonnulated; in fact, the enigma never will be pro­
posed; for to ask what someone's sex might be, or even simply 
to hint at its mystery, would in itself be to answer too soon: 
to characterize sex is immediately to make it deviant; until its 
clisclosure, the enigma will therefore be subiect only to snares, 
equivocations. Yet this enigma is already operative; for to pro­
pose a subject, to thematize, to emphasize, to punctuate La 
Zambinella's name with an exclamation point, is to introduce 
107 
the question of its predicate, the uncertainty of its comple­
ment; the henneneutic structure is already wholly contained in 
the predicative cell of the sentence and of the anecdote; to 
speak of a subject ('Zdmbinelldl) is to postulate a truth. Like 
La Zambinella, every subject is a stdT: there is a confusion of 
the theatrical subject, the henneneutic subject, and the logical 
subject 
(206) He entered * ACf. 'Theater": 2: to enter the hall 
(207) dnd toolr. d seat in the orchatrtt, * ACf. "Theater": 3: to 
be seated. 
(208) squuzed between two notdbly fttt abbati; * ACf. "Discom­
fort": 1: to be squeezed, made uncomfortable. (The proairetism 
to be uncomfortttbleito ignore it will be an over-all connotation of 
Sanasine's unawareness, captivated as he is by La Zambinel1a.) ** REF. Italianness (dbbttti, not clerics: local color). 
(209) however, he WdS luclcy enough to be fttirly close to the Bt4ge. * Proximity to the stage, and thus to the desired object, serves at 
a (fortuitous) point of departure for a series of hallucinatory feel­
ings which will lead Sanasine to solitary pleasure (ACf. "Plea­
sure": 1: proximity to the desired object) . 
(210) The curtlIin rOBe. * ACf. "Thearer": 4: curtain up. 
( 211) For the first time in hill life, he hetud thttt mtJ8i.c * ACf. 
"Theater": 5: to hear the overture. ** We are soon to learn (213, 
214, 215) that music has a frankly erotic effect on Sanasine: it 
sends him into ecstasy, lubricates him, loosens the sexual con­
straints under which he has hitherto lived. Sanasine's sexual exile 
is here broken for the first time. The 6rst (sensual) pleasure is 
initiatory: it serves as a basis for memory, repetition, ritual: after­
wards, everything is organized to recapture this fim time (SYM. 
Aphanisis: 6rst pleasure) . 
108 
(212) whose delights M.Tean-Tacqtlfi Rouaeau IuId so eloqwntly 
Imrised to him at one of Bcuon d'Hoibach', evenings. * REF. His­
torical code: the century of Louis XV (Rousseau, the Encyclo­
pedists, the Salons) . 
(213) The young ICUlptor', sensu were, '0 to B(:Ie4k, lubricated by 
the dCCCnts of Tomelli's sublime lutrmony. The lmaguorous novel_ 
of these slriUfuUy mingled IftllUm voices plunged him into d deli­
cious eCBt48y. * Although La Zambinella has not yet appeared, 
structurally Sarrasine's passion has begun, his teduction inaugu­
rated by a preliminary ecstasy; a long series of bodily states will 
lead Sanasine hom capture to conftagration (ACT. "Seduction": 
I: ecstasy). ** REF. Italian music. *** Hitherto, Sanasine has 
been sequestered hom sex; thus, this evening is the firrt time he 
knows pleasure and loses his virginity (SYM. Initiation). 
XLIX. THE VOICE 
I taliao music, an object well defined historically, culturally, 
mythically (Rousseau, Gluckists-and-Piccinists, Stendhal, etc.), 
connotes a "sensual" art. an art of the voice. An erotic sul>­
stance, the Italian voice was produced d contrano (according 
to a strictly symbolic inversion) by singers without 542: this 
inversion is logictll ("Tlutt dngelie voice, tluJt delictlte voice 
would be dn dnoff1llly, coming from dny body but yours," Sar­
rasine says to La Zambinella in No. +45), as though, by selec­
tive hypertrophy, sexual density were obliged to abandon the 
rest of the body and lodge in the throat, thereby draining the 
organism of all that connecf8 it. Thus, ~!~ by a cas~~ 
.body, a wildly erotic frenzy is retum.ed to that body: the star 
castIati are cheered by hysterical audiences, women fall in love 
with them, wear their portraits "one 00 each arm, one at the 
neck hanging from a gold chain, and two on the buckles of 
each slipper" (Stendhal). This music's erotic quality (at-
109 
tached to its vOCtll Mure) is here defined: it is the power of 
lubrication; connection is a specific characteristic of the voice; 
the model of the lubricated is the organic:~ the '1iving," in 
short, seminal fluid (Italian music "floods with pleasure); 
singing (a characteristic generally ignored in aesthetics) has 
something coenesthetic about it, it is connected less to an "im­
pression" than to an internal, muscular, humoral sensuality. 
The voice is a diffusion, an insinuation, it passes over the entire 
surface of the body, the skin; and being a passage, an abolition 
of limitations, classes, names ("His soul fJtI8Sed into his edTS. 
He seemed to hear through every /JOre," No. 215), it possesses 
a special hallucinatory power. Music, therefore, has an effect 
utterly different from sight; it can effect orgasm, penetrating 
Sarrasine (No. 243); and when Sarrasine attempts to acclima­
tize himself (in order to repeat it at will) to the excessive 
pleasure he seeks on the sofa, his hearing is the fiat thing he 
will train; moreover, it is La Zambinella's voice that Sarrasine 
is in love with (No. 277): the vo~ce, tJ.!~di~~ E.roduct of .cas­
~t:iQn, the complete, connected evidence of clefi~iency. The_ 
antonym of lubric«ed (already encountered a n~~ 
times) is discontinuous, divided, creaking, compOSite, biza--"-e~ 
everything that is excluded from the liquid plenitudeo( plc:a­
sure, everything that is unable to unite"With the phrased, a 
preciously ambiguous value, since it is both linguistic ami 
musical, unites in the one plenitude both meaning and sex. 
(2H) He remdind speechlas, motionlesB, not ~en feeling 
crowtkd by the two priuts. * Aer. "Discomfort": 2: to feel 
nothing. 
(215) HiI.oul posaed into his ettrs dM eyes. He .."..d to hem 
through every pore. * Aer. "Seduction": 2: extraversion (the 
body's "passage" toward the object of its desire is prehallucinatory; 
the wall-of reality-is crossed) . 
110 
(216) Suddenly a bum of appl4we which shook the house greeted 
the primtJ donrut's entrance * ACf. "Theater": 6: entrance of 
the star. ** SEM. Star ("Stardom"). *** HER. Enigma 6: 
thematization and snare (prima donna). 
(217) She ccrme coquettishly to the front of the stage and greeted 
the audience with infinite grace. The lights, the general enthusi­
asm, the theatrical illusion, the glamour of a style of dress which in 
those days was quite attractive, all conspired in favor * ACT. 
"Theater": 7: greeting of the star .•• SEM. Femininity. Here the 
discourse is not lying: of course, it treats La Zambinella as a 
woman, but it treats her femininity as an iTR/1Tession, the causes 
for which are indicated. 
(218) of this womtJn. * However, the end of the sentence is a 
snare (the discourse need only have said "artist" to avoid lying); 
truthful at the outset, the sentence ends in a lie: in sumt by the 
~ contir:tuity of i~ info!ctions r the s.enten~ is t:h.aJ ~.!t\1~ ~~~c~ 
controls t~~ mix gE the voia.:s, th~ ~1.~ __ Qf th.e..oricW (HER. 
Enigma 6: snare). 
(219) Smrasine cried out with pleasure .• ACT. "Seduction": 3: 
intense pleasure. 
(220) At that instant he marveled at the ideal beauty he had 
hitherto sought in life, seeking in one often unworthy model the 
roundness of a perfect leg; in another, the curve of a breast; in an­
other, white shoulders; finally taking some girrs neck, some womtJn's 
hands, and some child's smooth knees, • SYM. The body frag­
mented, reassembled. 
L. THE REASSEMBLED BODY 
Young Marianina's (vocal) perfection resulted from her com­
bining in one body partial qualities usually shared among sev­
eral singers (No. 20). The same is true of La Zambinella in 
111 
Sarrasine's eyes: ~~~~t (aside from the insignificant Clo­
tilde episode, XLV) knows the female body only as a division 
and dissemination of-partiaT o'6jectS:-leg, breast, shoulder: 
neck, hands.' FragmenfedWOman-is the object offered to Sar­
wine's love. Divided, anatomized, she is merely a kind of dic­
tionary of fetish objects. This sunder~ dissected body (we are 
reminded of the boy's games at school) is reassembled by the 
artist (and this is the meaning of his vocation) into a whole 
body, the body of love descended from the heaven of art, in 
which fetishism is abolished and by which Sarrasine is cured. 
However, without the subject's realizing it as yet, and although 
the finally reassembled woman is actually there before him, 
near enough to touch, this redeeming body remains a fictive 
one, through the very praises Samsine addresses to it: its 
status is that of a CTe4tion (it is the work of Pygmalion "COnN 
down from its pedestdl," No. 229), of an object whose under­
neath, whose insides will continue to arouse his concern, his 
curiosity, and his aggression: JIlldressing La Zambinella (by 
.!!rawing), qu~ti~I!in&..h~ and himse]~J_~ultimately brelk­
ing the hollow statue, the 'scUlptor vim continue to w1iIftl~ .tbi= 
woman (just as he whittled his pew ill ch~1t .. as!~hl1dl .. -
thereby returning to its (fragmented) fetish con4.ition_~ ~ __ 
whose unity he supposed he had discovered in such am.aze~_ 
ment. 
(221) without ever lutving encountered urum the cold PdTUitm 
,Icy the rich,.weet creations of dncWat Greece. * REF. History of 
Art: classical statuary (art alone can establish the total body). 
(222) lA ZdmbineUd displayed to him. united, living, dRd de1icdte, 
thOle exqui6ite ferruU forms he 10 drdently deriTed, of which d 
• Jeau RebouJ was the first to DOte the prelCDCe of tJUa J...acanjen theme iD 
StIn".;,.. (cf .• ",,,, p. 16). 
112 
ICUlfJtor is tIf once the teNrat and the most ~ ;.mg.. * 
SYM. The reassembled body. ** Psychology of Art (the Woman 
and the Artist) . 
(223) Her mouth WdS exfJressive, her '1" loving, her comf:Jlexion 
dczlingl., white. * SYM. The fragmented body reassembled (be­
ginning of the "inventory"). 
(22+) And ttlong with the. dettJih, which would Iuwe enr4fJfured 
II /JtIinter, • REF. Code of Art: Painting. There is a division of 
labor: to the painter, eyes, mouth, face, in a word lOW, exfJralion, 
i.e., inwardness to be portrayed on the surface; to the sculptor, 
owner of volume, body, matter, sensuality. 
(225) were IIll the wo"'" of thOl8 irJ'ldga of Venul rewr.d and 
muIered by the chiJela of the Gr .. a. * REF. Code of Art: classi­
cal statuary. 
(226) The artist newr lHlIIWd of '"'miring til. inirrait4IU grtICC 
with which the tImII were tlfttlched to tJa. torIo, tJa. rndr'WlouI 
roundnea of the necl, til. harmonioul Ii,.., drtlWn by the ..,... 
brOWl, til. ROle, and the fJerfect ovlll of the ftJt», til. ".,nty of ib 
viWd contOU1J tmd til. effect of the thicl, c:urvcd La,.., which lined 
her 1uutvy and l'OlufJtuoul eyelidI .• SEM. Femininity (heavy 
curved lashes, voluptuous eyelids) ... SYM. The fragmented 
body, reassembled (the "inventory" mntinued). 
LI. THE BLAZON 
The .fJitefulness of UmgutJge: once reassembled, in order to 
utter itself, the total body must revert to the dust of words, 
to the listing of details, to a monotonous inventory of parts, to 
crumbling: l~nguage undoes the body, returns it to the fetish. 
This return is coded under the term blcon. The blazon con­
siSts of predicating a single subiect, beauty, upon a certain 
number f?f anatomical' attributeS: .he WdS beautiful for her 
arms, neclc, eyebrows, nose, eyeltJshes, etc.: the adjective b&­
comes subject and the substantive becomes predicate. Similarly 
with the striptease: an action, denudation, is predicated OD 
the succession of its attributes (legs, arms, bosom, etc.). Stri~ 
tease and blazon refer to the very destiny of the sentence (both 
are constructed like sentences), which consists in this (doomed 
thereto by its structure): the sentence can never constitute .!­
toW; meanings can be listed, not admixed: the totif,the-s~m 
are for language the promised lands, glimpsed cit the end of 
enumeration, but once this enumeration has been completed, 
no feature can reassemble it-or, if this feature is produced, it 
too can only be culded to the others. Thus with beauty: it can_ 
only be tautological (affirmed under the very name of beauty) 
or analytic (if we run through its predicates), never synthetic. 
As a genre, the blazon expresses the belief that a comJUte in­
ventory can reproduce a tot(ll body, as if the extremity of enu­
meration could devise a new category, that of totality: descri~ 
tion is then subject to a kind of enumerative erethism: it 
accumulates in order to totalize, multiplies fetishes in order to 
obtain a total, defetishised body; thereby, description refJre­
sents no beauty at all: no one can see La ZambineU3. i06nitely 
projected as a totality impossible because linguistic, written. 
(227) This was more tlama d WOmdn, this was d mtl8terp;.ccl * 
SYM. Replication of bodies. 
w. THE MASTERPIECE 
The Zambinellan body is a real body; but this real body is 
~otal (glorious, miraculous) only insofar as it des~~ from a 
body already written by statuary (Ancient Greece, Pygma-
lion); it too (like the other bodies in Samuine) is a replica, 
iSiUng from a code. This code is infinite since it is written. Yet 
~e duplicative chain may ~er.t i~ ()rigin and Ute Code de­
~~~ itself grounded~ stoP~l jamme4. TIl~s &I:()~nding. this 
IlEp~B~, this 'jamming of the Code, is tlte 1TIIl$terpiece. Pre­
JeIlted at first as an unprecedented collection of separate parts, 
as a concept induced from a vast number of experiences, the 
masterpiece is actually, according to Sarrasinean aesthetics, 
what the living statue is descended from; by the masterpiece, 
the writing of bodies is finally endowed with a tenn which is at 
the same time its origin. To discover La Zambinella's body is 
therefore to put an end to the infinity of the codes, to find at 
~ the origin (the original) 9.f the copies, to ascc:!t.lin the co!: 
tural starting ~int, to assign perfonnances their supplemen~ 
(~'more tluIl1 a wonum"); in the Zambinellan body as master­
piece, the referent (this actual body to be copied, expressed, 
signified) and the Reference (the beginning which puts an 
end to the infinity of writing and consequently establishes it) 
theologically coincide. 
(228) In thiB unhoped-for creotion could be found d love to enrtJf>­
tuTe dTr/ 11Id7I and belIutia worthy of IdtiBfying d critic. * REF. 
Psychology of the artist. 
(229) With hiB eyes, Sctrrarine deYoured PygmtJlion's statue, COrM 
down from it. peduUd. * SYM. Pygmalion, replication of bodies. 
(230) When L4 Zarnbin.lltJ IlIfI&, * ACT. "Theater": 8: the 
star's aria. 
(231) the effect was delirium. * ACT. "Seduction": .. : delirium 
(the delirium is internalized, it is a coenesthetic state-cold/hot, 
whereas nurdneu-No. 235-entails a minor octing out, which will 
be orgasm). 
(232) Til. tI1tist felt cold; * ACf. "Seduction": 5: Delirium: 
cold. 
( 2 33) tMn II. felt d Iuutt which ruddenly began to f1ric1ck in tIM 
inFl6l'm08t depth of hU being, in whdt we cflll tM Mmt, for ldci of 
may other wordl * ACf. "Seduction": 6: Delirium: heat. .. 
REF. Euphemism ("Heart" can only designate the sexual organ: 
"for l«:i of may otMr wortr': this word exists, but it is indecorous, 
taboo). 
(23+) He did not tJf>Pl4ud, he ItIid nothing, * ACf. "Seduction": 
7: Delirium: silence. The tJ.lirium is broken down into three stages, 
three terms: thus in retrospect it becomes a generic word, the rh~ 
torical statement of a subsequence. at once temporal and analytic 
( definitional) . 
(235) II. ~ lin irrafml-of mtJd,..", * Rhetorically, 
madness intensifies delirium; but whereas delirium is a (classic) 
moment of amorous rapture, madness here denotes one of the 
terms (the second) in a progression which will covertly lead Sar­
mine, seated in close promnity to La Zambinella, to orgasm 
(which occurs in No. 2+4). MtUl,.." is to be cast in various terms 
which will be the conditions, gradually established or clarified. of 
pleasure. ACf. "Pleasure": 2: madness (condition of the dCting 
out). 
(236) d iind of frenzy which overcorna us only when \loW dre tit 
tM ttge when deare htu something frightening dI1d infern4l CIbout 
it. * REF. Psychology of ages. 
(237) Smraine wdnted to lup onto til. rtdge and tdie poaaaion 
of thil WOmdn: hil strength, incred8ed d hundredfold by d mordl 
deprestJion imfJo88ible to expl4in, liRCfl theBe pMnorneflll occur in 
dn dred hidden from hUmdR observcttion, .emed to rfIIInifut itself 
with /Jdinful violence. * ACT. "Pleasure": 3: tension (to want to 
leap, to hold oneself back). The tension is hallucinatory, it coin­
cides with a collapse of moral restraint. The clement of violence, 
aggressiveness, anger, present in this 6rst desire, must be eradicated 
when subsequent desires are to be invoked voluntarily: a ritual will 
116 
satisfy these requirements (No. 270). ** REF. Passion and its 
depths. 
(238) LooJcing tit him, one would have thought him a cold and 
,.,.",z." man. * ACT. "Pleasure": .. : apparent immobility (the 
imminent ang out is secret). 
(239) Fame, Icnowledge, future, existence, Lru,ez., ..verything col­
,.sed. * The act of choosing (love or death) is here preceded by 
• formal phase of mental purification; the "cxCC3ive" (radical, life­
risking) decision presupposes putting other commibnents, other 
connections in parenthesis (ACT. "To decide": 1: mental condi­
tion of the choice) . 
(210) "To be loved by Mr, or to dier' Such WCII tM deeree Sm­
,dIine passed upon hiJNelf. * ACT. "To decide": 2: to propose 
an alternative. The "decision" stops at the alternative, whose two 
tmos are diachronic (to be loved and then., if unsuccessful, to die); 
but the alternative itself, based on these two terms, opens a dou­
ble sequence of features: the will-to-low and the wiIl-to-die. ** 
The will-to-Iove (or to be loved) constitutes an enterprise whose 
principle is given here, but whose development is brought up short: 
to rent a box and gratify oneself by repeating the "first pleasure": 
what follows will no longer be based on the sequence ("events tooJc 
him by nuf1rise ." No. 263) (ACT. "Will-to-lcwe": 1: proposal 
of the enterprise). *** Undoubtedly, once La Zambinella is lost, 
Sarrasine will not choose to die; yet his death, prepared for by a 
.mcs of hints, premonitions, and challenges, hailed by the victim 
himself (No. 510), is suicide, already implicit in the proposed al­
ternative (ACT. "WiD-to-die": 1: proposal of the project). 
(H 1) He was so uturly intoxicated thttt M no longer BdW tit. 
thedter, the spectators, the octo,., 0' hemd the music. * ACT. 
"Pleasure": 5: isolation. 
(2"2) MoreO\le1, tM distance between himself and La Zambinelld 
had ceased to exist, he fJoIstU8ed Mr, his .-ya wer8 rivet. uf'On 
her, he tooJc Mr for his own. An almost diabolicdl power enabled 
him to feel the breath of this 'Voice, to nneU tM scented pow_ 
cowring her hair, to sec the pltma of ,.", face, to count the blue 
veins sMdowing her satin skin. * The proximity of La ZambineDa 
(prepared for by seating the subject close to the stage, No. 209) is 
of an hallucinatory order: it is an aboption of the Wall, identifica­
tion with the object; what is involved is -an-IiaDuonatory" embrace: 
thus, LaammneDa's features are no longer described according tD 
the aesthetic, rhetorical code, but according to the anatomical code 
(veins, planes, hair) (ACf. "Pleasure": 6: embrace). ** SEM. 
Diabolic (this seme has already been attached to Samsine, a trans­
gressor; the "devil" is the name for the minor psychotic impulse 
which overcomes the subject) . 
( 24 3) Lt1st, this ctgile voice, fresh cmd Bilvery in timbre, BUf'JPk III d 
thredd shaped by the slighte8t brettth of ttir, roUing dnd uRTolli,." 
cttSCdding cmd scdttering, this voice attoc1«ed his soul so vividly * 
The voice is descri~ by i~.~~ qf _~~~ti~n, ~uatio~ 
flow; Dufhere it is the man who is penetratCd; like Endymion "re­
ceiving" the light of his beloved, he is visited by an active emana­
tion of femininity, by a subtle force which "attacks" him, seizea 
him, and fixes him in a situation of passivity (ACf. "Pleasure": 7: 
to be penetrated). 
(244) tMt severed ti",," he gave vent to inl'olunt4ry cria tom 
from him by corrvuhive feelings of plusure * ACf. "Pleasure": 
8: ejaculation. Ejaculation was achieved by chance, through a hal­
lucinatory seizure; in the future, this "6rst" ejaculation is to be vol­
untarily repeated (so precious has it been for the subject, who, 
sequestered from ful61led sexuality, has never experienced it) by 
( organized, albeit solitary) sessions on the sofa. 
(2"'5) which Me dll too rarely vouclwted by humcm passions. * 
REF. Human passions. 
(2'16) He WdS presently obliged to ledve the thedter. * ACf. 
'Theater": 9: to leave. 
(2"'7) His trembling legs "'molt refused to BUpport him. He Will 
limp, wedk dB d sensitive mdn who 1uJs given wd)' to overwhelming 
anger. He had experisnced such ple4aure, or perluJps he had auf-
118 
#Ired so keenly, tlutt his life Iuul drdined dWeI)' liJce water from tt 
Iroken VCJSe. He felt empty inside, tt prostration similar to the de­
Witation tlutt overcomes those convttiescing from tt serious illness. 
'* ACf. "Pleasure": 9: emptiness. ** REF. Code of illnesses. 
(Z-t8) Overcome by ttn inexpl.icttble sculness, * ACT'. "Pleasure": 
10: "port coitum" sadness. 
(Z49) he sat down on the steps of tt church. There, leaning bock .,mnst a pill4r, he fell into tt confused meditation, as in a dream. 
He had been smitten by passion. * ACT'. "Pleasure": 11: to re­
cuperate. Recuperation can be read according to various codes: 
psychological (the mind regains control), Christian (sadness of 
the flesh, refuge near a church), psychoanalytical (return to the 
pillar-phallus), trivial (rest post coitum) . 
UII. EUPHEMISM 
Here is one story about Sarrasine: he goes into a theater; the 
beauty, voice, and art of the star enrapture him; he leaves the 
hall overcome, determined to recapture the enchanhnent of 
the 6rst evening by renting a box near the stage for the entire 
season. Now here is another story about Sarrasine: he enters a 
theater by chance (206), by chance he is seated near the stage 
( 209); the sensual music (213), the beauty of the prima donna 
(220) and her voice (231) 611 him with desire; because of his 
proximity to the stage, he 'h~ifuc{~'t~~ im7gines he is pos­
sessing La Zambinella (242); penetrated by the artist's voice 
(243), he achieves orgasm (244); after which, drained (247), 
sad (248), he leaves, sits down and muses (249): this was in 
fact his 6rst ejaculation; he decides to reexperience this solitary 
pleasure every evening, domesticating it to a point where he 
can experience it whenever he wishes. -A diagrammatic rela­
tionship exists between these two stories which assures their 
identity: it is the same story, because it is the same design, the 
same sequence: tension, seizure or possession, explosion, fa­
tigue, conclusion. To read into this scene at the theater a.5.Q!i:_ 
tary orgasm, to substitute an erotic story for the eupl1emis~c 
version, this operation of reading is based not on a lexicon of 
symbols but on a systematic cohesion, a congruence of re~:­
tionships. It ~w~.that the meaning of a text lies Dot in this 
or that interPretation butln-thediagiiimmancfotality -of its 
readings;' in their plural sySlem. ~ome-willSaY' thanhescene in 
thetheater "as told by the cruthor" has the privilege crt lit~f~litY 
: and thus constitutes the "truth," the reality of the text; the 
reading of the orgasm would therefore be a symbolic reading in 
their eyes, an unwarranted elucubration. "The text tmd noth­
ing but the text": this proposition has little meaning except 
intimidation: th.e.htcraJity of the t~xt is ~ ~!~_li!c; any 
other: the litC!~al in Balzac is, after all, notJ:tin& ~ytt~e. 'trim~ 
.scription'~ of ~~~ther literality,.t:ha! of the s)'mQ9J:. ~..E!t~i~_ 
is a language. t~~_ct,Jhe m~.~i~&..of ~.~t ca~.~ n~~~i~.bu! 
the plUJili~..of .itt.mtem!t..its i~~i!e (cir.sular}":'tra!!criba­
~ility''.;. .Qne ~y~tem transcribes another, but reciprocally as 
well: with regarc;1 to ~e text, there is nO'-primarY," "natural," 
"nati~" "J!l9ther" critical language: from the outset: aslt is 
created, the text is multilingual; there is no entrance language 
or exit language for the textual dictionary, since it is ~9t the 
dictionary's (closed) definitional power that the text possesses, 
but its infinite structure. 
(250) Upon returning to his lodgings, * ACf. "Theater": 10: to 
return home. 
(251) he feU into one of those frenzies of activity which ~ose to 
us the presence of new elements in our lives. A prey to this fim 
fever of love derived equoJJ:y from both pleosure ond poin, he tr'Wd 
to appeose hil impatience ond hil ckliTium by drowing Lo Zombi-
uo 
neUa from memory. It was a kind of embodi.d meditdtion. * 
REF. Love sickness. ** ACf. "Will-ta-love": 2: to draw. Here, 
the enterprise of love involves an erratic temporizing activity. *** 
SYM. Replication of bodies: drawing. Drawing, an act which con­
sists in recoding the human body by reintegrating it into a classifi­
cation of styles, poses, stereotypes, is presented by the discourse 
according to a rhetorical schema: a generic activity (drawing) will 
be ttansfonned into three species. 
(252) On one fJdge, LA ZarnbineUa appeared in that apparently 
calm and cool pose favored by Raphael, Giorgione, and every great 
f>dinter. * SYM. Replication of bodies: drawing (1): academic 
(unity is supported by a cultural code, by a Reference: the Book 
of Art). 
(251) On another, she was delictltely tuming her head after IuMng 
prUshed a triU, and af>Petued to be listening to herself. * SYM. 
Replication of bodies: drawing (2): romantic (the most Seeting 
moment of a gesture, copied from the Book of Life). 
(254) Sarrasine sketched his mistress in every pose: he drew her 
unveiled, seated, sflInding, lying down, chaste or amorous, embody­
ing through the delirium of his pencih every capriciow notion that 
can enter our he4d8 when we thinlc intently about a mistress. * 
SYM. Replication of bodies: drawing (3): hallucinated. The 
model is subjected "freely" (that is, in confonnity with a code: 
hallucination) to the manipulations of desire ("every capricious 
notion," "in every pose"). In fact, the preceding drawings are al­
ready hallucinatory: to copy a pose of Raphael's, to imagine an 
unusual gesture, is to indulge in controlled doodling, to manipulate 
the desired body according to "fantasy" (hallucination). Following 
the realist notion of art, all painting can be defined as an enonnous 
gallery of hallucinatory manipulation-whereiJ:t one does with bod­
ies dB one wants, so that gradually they 611 every co.mpamr.ent of 
desire (which is what happens bluntly, that is, exemplarily, in 
Sade's table4ux vivant.). ** REF. Code of Passion. *** SYM. 
Undressing (La Zambinella is imagined unveiled). 
(255) However, his fevered thoughts went beyond drawing. * 
REF. Excess (aggressiveness). ** SYM. Undressing. 
1%1 
LIV. BEHIND, BEYOND 
Continually undressing his model, the sculptor Sanasine an-­
ticipates Freud, who (apropos of Leonardo) identifies sculpture 
with analysis: each is avid di levare, or clearing away. Return­
ing to a gesture of his childhood (he whittled the pews in order 
to carve clumsy figures), the sculptor tears off La Zambinella's 
veils to get at what he believes to be the truth about her body; 
for his part, the subject Sanasine, through repeated snares, 
proceeds ineluctably toward the real condition of the castrato, 
the void which is his center. This dual movement is that of 
the realist ambiguity. The Sarrasinean artist tries to undress 
appearance, tries always to get beyond, behind, according to 
the idealistic principle which identifies secrecy with truth: one 
must thus go into the model, benemh the statue, behind the 
canvas (this is what another Balzacian artist, Frenhofer, aslcs of 
the ideal canvas he dreams of). The same~le holds for the 
realist writer (and his critical posterity): he must go behind 
the paper, must know, for example, the ~£!_rCbtiol,!Ship ~ 
tween Vautrin and Lucien de Rubempre (though what is be­
hind the paper is not reality, the Icfe,cnt, but ~~_P.~ferCl!~~ 
the "subtle immensity of writings"). This impulse, which leads 
Sanasine, the realistic artist, and the critic to tum over the 
model, the statue, the canvas, or the text in order to examine 
its back, its interior, leads to a failure-to FailuIC-()f which 
Smrasine is in a way the emblem: behind the canvas Fren­
~ofer envisions there is still nothing but its surface, scri",,-",,-!~ 
lines, an abstract, undecipbCIab1e writiug. the unknown (~_-_ 
knowable) masterpiece which the inspired painter en4s up 
with and '_vhich is in fact the signal of his death: benHth 4 
Zambinella (and therefore inside her statue) there-is ~e nQth­
ingness of castIation, of which Sarrasine will die after ~yjng 
destroyed in his illusory statue the evidence of his failure: the 
envelope of things cannot be authentica~ed,.thec;lilatory. move­
ment of the signifier cannot be stopped. 
(256) He BdW La Zd1nbiJ'U!Ua, spoke to her, beseecMd her, M 
,..d It thousmul years of life cmd h4PPiJ'U!S8 with her by pldcing 
Iwr in every imagintJble position; * A very precise definition of 
hallucination: the hallucination is a scenario in which the object's 
positions are innumerable ("every imagiruJble sitwltion") but al­
ways related, as in voluptuous manipulation, to the subject:. who is 
at the center of the scene ("he SCJW, he spoke, beseecMd, pttssed") 
(SYM. Hallucinatory scenario). 
(257) in .hort, by Idmpling the future with her. * There is even 
a scenario for the future, the tense proper to hallucination (SYM. 
The hallucinatory future). 
(258) On the following day, he sent his vttlet to rent It box next to 
the Btdge for the mtire settSon. * REF. Chronology ("the follow­
ing day"). ** ACT. "Wil1-to-Iove": 3: to rent a theater box. In 
Sarrasine's case, the amorous undertaking is based on pure impulse: 
what he plans is not the conquest of La Zambinella but the repeti­
tion of his first solitary pleasure; thus, once its beginning has been 
proclaimed ("be loved by her or die"), the sequence has only two 
dilatory terms: to draw, to contemplate; after which the progress of 
events is no longer in Sarrasine's hands, and it is his wiU-to-die, 
which is engaged. *** Proximity to the stage-whose great advan­
tages to pleasure the subject discovered by chance-is now delib­
erately sought, for this pleasure must now be repeated, organized 
every evening throughout the entire season (ACT. "Pleasure": 12: 
conditions for repetition) . 
(259) Then, liIce aU young peofJk with lusty BOub, * REF. Psy­
chology of ages. 
(260) he ~ttted to himself the diffiqlltieB of his undertttking 
ttnd lint fed his pttaion with the /MttSUre of being ttble to ttdmire 
his mUtrea without obstruction. * ACT. "Will-ta-Iove": .. : to 
pause. The pleasure the subject plans to take in his object is more 
hallucinatory than real; he therefore postpones the actual under­
taking and first establishes conditions propitious to an hallucinatory 
manipulation, and as an excuse for this very purposeful impulsivo­
ness he creates the obstacle of difficulties, which he exaggerates be­
cause they are useful to his "dream," which alone interests him and 
which the difficulties excuse. 
(261) This golden age of love, during which we We pletIsure in 
our own feeling and in which we are haf>ITY almOBt by ourselva, * REF. Code of the ages of love. 
(262) was not destined to last long in Sarrasine's case. * REF. 
Chronology . 
(263) Nevertheless, events took him by surprise * Sarrasine ac­
tively directs only his hallucination; anything from outside (from 
"reality") is therefore a surprise to him. The notation thus estah­
lishes the end of the "will-ta-love"; however, since this notation is 
prospective (we must wait for some twenty more lexias before these 
"events" occur, namely the rendezvous with the duenna), the 
pause begun in No. 2'fO can still be turned into a series of halluci­
natory terms (ACT. "Will-ta-Iove": 5: interruption of the under­
taking) . 
( 264) while he was still under the speu of this vernal hallucina­
tion, as ruUve as it WCIB voluptuous. * The pause introduced into 
the amorous undertaking, although we have just been told it is 
over, will be filled with a number of occupations, actions, or im­
pressions; these subsequent terms are here given their generic 
name: voluptuous hallucination (ACT. "Will-ta-Iove": 6: indica­
tion of terms composing the interlude) . 
(265) In a week he lived a lifetime, spending the mornings knead· 
ing the clay by which he would copy La Zambinelld, * REF. 
Chronology (eight days in the box, on the sofa: this places the 
meeting with the duenna, the event which "surprises" Sarrasine, on 
the twenty-fourth day of his stay in Rome-infonnation congruent 
with his ignorance of Roman customs) ... ACT. "Will-ta-Iove": 
7: morning: to sculpt (the first item in voluptuous hallucination). 
12.4 
Kneading, mentioned in No. 163 as one of Sarrasine's adolescent 
activities, symbolically implies the same act as whittling; the hand 
must be thrust in, the envelope penetrated, to apprehend the inte­
rior of a volume, to seize the underMttth, the true. 
(266 ) despite the veils, skirts, corsets, and ribbons which con­
culed her from him. * SYM. Undressing. 
(267) In the evenings, installed in his box edTly, alone, lying on a 
tofa like d Turlt under the influence of opium, he creerted for him­
.af a pleasure as rich dnd varied as he wished it to be. * Aer. 
"Will-to-Iove": 8: evening, the sofa (the second item in the hal­
lucinatory pause). The connotations indicate the nature of this 
pleasure, ritually arranged and repeated by Sarrasine on the basis 
of the "6rst pleasure" he discovered one evening by chance: soli­
tary, hallucinatory (no distance between subject and object), at 
will. As the deliberate, ritual production of a pleasure, it involves a 
kind of ascesis, of labor: it requires purifying pleasure of every ele­
ment of roughness, suffering, violence, excess: whence a technique 
of gradual tempering, intended not to forgo but to control plea­
sure, freeing it from all disparate sensations. This pleasure on the 
sofa will in its tum be transformed into action. 
( 268) First, he gradlUJlly familimized himself with the overly vivid 
emotions his mistress's singing afforded him; * ACf. 'Will-to­
love": 9: to accustom the ear. 
(2fn) he then trained his eyes to see her, and ~nally he could con­
t.mpi4te her * ACf. "Will-to-Iove": 10: to train the eye. 
(270) without feming an outburst of the wild frenzy which held 
leized him on the ~rst day. As his passion becdme calrner, it grew 
deeper. * The dual ascesis, of hearing and sight, produces a more 
pro6table hallucination, freed of its first violence (No. 237: "his 
rtrength . seemed to m4nifest itself with painful violence") 
(ACf. "Will-to-Iove": II: result of the two preceding operations) . 
(271) For the rest, the unsoci4ble sculptor did not allow his friends 
to intrude upon his solitude, which was peopled with images, 
adorned with fant~s of hope, and filled with helppiness. * ACf. 
"Will-to-love": 12: protection of the induced hallucination. -Sar-
us 
rasine's deliberate solitude has a diegegc function: it_ -"~~ins"_ 
how Sanasine, isolated from any society, has -managed to ~I!_ 
ignorant of"i:he fact that in the Papal states, female ~iDP._~~ 
c:astrati; it performs the same function as the brevity of Samsine's 
residence in Rome, which the chronological code stresses on sev­
eral occasions; all of which is congruent with the elderly Prince 
Chigi's exclamation: "Where (lTe ),ou from?" (No. 468). 
(272) His lave was .0 Btrong, .0 naive, tlutt he experienced till the 
innocent scruples tluJt dSBdil us when we love fOr the first time. * REF. Code of Passion. 
(273) As he begtJn to realize tlutt he would soon have to tfCt, to 
f'/.ot, to inquire where lA Zambine& lived, whether she 1uuI a 
mother, uncle, tfUlCher, fdmil)', to ponder, in short, on Wd)" to see 
her, .f'edlc to her, these great, mnbitious thoughts JTatUJ. his M4rt 
sweU .0 fNtinfull)' tlutt he fmt them off untilltJter, * Aer. "Will­
t~love": 13: alibi for the pause and prorogation of the respite. 
( 274) deriving as much satisfaction from his ph)'Bict1l suffering as 
he did from his intelkctuol pledsures. * SEM. Composite (we 
know Sanasine's paradoxical nature, in which opposites unite). 
(27S) "But," Mme de Rochefide interrupted me, '" still don't see 
dR)'fhing dbout either MtJridniRd or her little old mdn." 
"You (lTe seeing nothing but himr' , cried impatiently, liJce dR 
dUthor who is being forced to .poil d thedtricdl effect. * Code of 
Authors (through a metalinguistic act, the nanator indicates the 
code of nanators). ** HER. Enigma 4 (who is the old man?): 
request for an answer. *** The nanator's answer leads both to 
~rut:b_ (~mbinel1a is the oldmJIIjInaeriOi (we might think that 
Sarrasine was the old man): it is an equivocation (HER. Enigma 
4: equivocation). 
LV. LANGUAGE AS NATURE 
In practical tenns, Sarrasine's adventure concerns only two 
characters: Sanasine himself and La Zambinella. Thus, the old 
126 
man is one of the two ("You are seeing nothing but him"). 
Truth and error are reduced to a simple alternative: the reader 
is getting "warm," since he need only consider-for a split sec­
ond--each term of the alternative, and thus La Zambinella, for 
the soprano's identity to be revealed: to suspect a sex is to as­
sign it a definitional class, that of anomaly: where sexual c1assi­
ti~tion is coD~med, doubt insta~tly turns into "doubtful." 
How~y'c;.!, .this is not what is read; the ambiguity, one might 
~y, is certain only on the analytical level; at ordinary reading 
speed, the alternative's two elements (error/truth) are at­
tached to a kind of swivel which neutralizes its revelatory 
fOwer. This swivel,is t.h~.~~~~_ce._.E;.v~~~~.&..~~ut .!!a.the 
simplia'1~~ J~ structure,.~ts brevity,_~ts .. ~~~j which seems 
borrowed, by metonymy, from the narrator's impatience) 
l~_~e truth (dangerous to the story's interest) ~way from 
the reader. Elsewhere (a further example), it will be no more 
than-a syntactical inftexion, both expeditious and elegant, a 
resource present in the language itself-the reduction of a 
structural contradiction to a simple concessional morpheme: 
"despite the eloquence of eI few mutu4l gl4nces, he wetS dSton­
ished elt the reserve Let Zctmbinell4 maintelined towelrd him" 
(No. 351 )-which softens, lightens, dissipates the articulations 
of the narrative structure. To put it another way, there is a 
!Q!~ in the sentence (linguistic entity) that domesticates the 
artifice of the" narrative, a meaning that denies the meaning. 
We might call this diacritical element (since it overhangs the 
iifiCulation of "the narrative units) : sentencing. To put it still 
another way: the sentence is a nctture whose function-or scope 
..:]S to jus~ry. ~e culture of the narrative.~~~~ ~ t1'!.e 
narratiVi structure, forming it, guidine it regulatin& ituhyfuI!l~ 
~pOs1iifOnlrmoiP~emes of ~. purel}'~m~~~"cal lo~c! __ th~ 
sentence serves as evidence for the narrative. For language (in 
thiScil5e,Yienclir,-bytlie way it-IS learned (by children), by 
its historical weight, by the apparent universality of its con-
ventions. in short. by its ttnteriority. seems to have every right 
over a contingent anecdote. one which has begun only some 
twenty pages back-whereas language has lasted forever. 
Whereby we see that denotation is not the truth of discoune: . 
denotation is not outside-Strucfures~i-t has a structu~~ ~_~ljQi. 
on a ~r with the others: that of ;umfying structure:; it f1!r-_ 
nishes the codes··With-- a lcind of precioUs excipient. but. in !... 
circular fashion. it is also a particular •. specialized substance_~ 
used by the other codes to smooth their articulation. 
( 276 ) For severtll dttyB. I raumed after d ".,.. StIrraita8 Iuul ,.. 
df'lJe4red .0 fdithfull" in lUI box tmd lUI eya Iuul flXF-d lUCIa 
love * REF. Chronology (from lexia 265 we know that these sev­
eral days have been a week). ** ACT. 'Will-ta-love": H: re.um~ 
of the pause. 
LVI. THE TREE 
Sometimes. as the utterance proceeds. the rhetorical code is 
superimposed on the proairetic code: the sequence lists its ac­
tions (to choose/to draw/to rentd box/to fJtIu8e/to bre4k off 
the undertdlt.ing), but the discourse expands by branching out 
logically: a nominal genus (dmorous IuIllucindtion) is trans­
formed into particular behavior (evening! morning). which ta­
gether turn into result. alibi or resume. Starting from the 
implicit nomination of the sequence ("will-ta-Iove"), we thus 
arrive at a proairetic (often trellised) tree whose forb and 
new joints represent the incessant transformation of the sen­
tence line into textual volume: 
uS 
romantic 
drawing 
_cmic ~hanUCinatory '.wing dGlwing 
\. J -,\, 11 
Result 
~ 
9 10 
hearing sight 
7 
morning 8 
evening \( 
6 
nominal 
indication 
\ 
1 2 3 4 5 
To propose To dnaw To rent To pause To interrupt 
.. undcrtakd>g • .... ~ tbe uadertakiog 
"-----" ~ ~~/ ---) 
The rhetorical code, so powerful in the readerly text, produces 
offshoots at certain places in the sequence: the tenn becomes 
a knot; a noun caps off, to indicate or summarize, an enumera­
tion which will be or which has been detailed: the pause by 
moments, the drawing by types, the hallucination by the or­
gans affected. Through a structure which is strictly Aristote­
lian, ~~ISC_C?On~nuany osc!lla!~ between th~ _(~~~al) 
genus and its (proairetic) species: as a system of generic and 
speaaf names, the lexicon makes a basic contribution to struc­
turing, indeed appropriates it, for meaning is a force: to name 
is to subject, and the more generic the nomination, the stronger \ 
the subjection. When discourse itself speaks of halluciruttion 
(not to mention subsequently f'roducing it), it commits the 
same act of violence as the mathematician or logician who 
says: let us call P the object which ; let us aUl PJ the 
irnctge which etc. Readerly discourse is thus shot through 
with pre~emonstrative nominations which ensure the text's 
subjection-but which also, perhaps, provoke the nausea 
brought on by any appropriative violence. ~~_ ~.!l.!!C?!ves, l>y 
naming the sequence ("wiJl-to-Iove"), are only prolonging the 
war of meaning, reversing the appropriation effected by t:h£­
text itself. 
(2n) that his ptJssion for Ld ZmnbirwUti. voice would h4w been 
common Icnowkdge throughout PtJris, Md this ddventure h4p. 
pened there; * SYM. The castrato's voice (what might pass for a 
common synecdoche-Zambinella being designated by her voice­
should here be taken literally: it is with the castrato's V9j~.I~th_ 
castration itself, that Samsine is in. love) . ** REF. Ethnic psy­
chology: Paris. 
(278) however, in Ittdy, nuulmne, everyone goes to the thedter for 
hinuelf, with his own ptJssions, and with a heartfelt interest which 
precluda .pying through opera gl.aB8a. * REF. Ethnic psychol­
ogy: Italy. 
( 279 ) N everthelus, the BCUlptor', enthusidml did not esctJt-the 
attention of the ringers for long. * Enigma 6 (Who is La Zambi­
nella?) is a loaded enigma, it is based on a stratagem. Thus each 
time in Enigma 6 that the hick can be traced back to a machinat­
ing agent, we have a byte, a coherent sequence: Machination. How­
ever, La Zambinella's ruses will still be considered mtlTU, relating 
to Enigma 6 in general, and not to machination, in order to respect 
the (possible) ambiguity of La Zambinella's own feelings (HER. 
"Machination": 1: the machinating group). 
130 
(280) One evening. t'" Frenchman saw that they were lttughing 
., him in t'" wings. * REF. Chronology ("One evening" con­
tulUes "events took him by surprise," No. 263). ** HER. "Machi­
Dation": 2: to laugh (motive of the stratagem). Laughter, the 
basis for the machination, will in No. 513 be exposed as castrating 
( "LttughlLttughl You d4red pl4y with a man's feeling?") . 
(281) It is hdrd to know what extreme actions ,.. might not have 
taken • SEM. Violence, excess. 
(282) had LA LDnbinell4 not come onto the stdge. S,.. gtIW Sm­
rasine one of those eloquent glances * The "eloquent" glance of 
La Zambinella is a snare set by the agency of the IIlachinating 
group and intended for its victim (HER. Enigma 6: snare. by La 
Zambinella. for Sanasine) . 
LVII. THE UNES OF DESTINATION 
One might call idyUic the communication which unites two 
partners sheltered from any "noise" (in the cybernetic sense of 
the word), linked by a simple destination, a single thread.~~ 
rative communication is not idyllic; its lines of destination are 
~ple:SOthaianym~~j~~~_~!~~~~E!~~i~i~c::6n~({ only 
Infis-~~d-whCl!ce it comes an~ wJ:tgeit ~ going: As re­
gards-Enigma 6 (Who is La Zambinella7), SarrcJSine starts five 
lines of destination. The first goes from the machinating group 
(the singers, VitagIiani) to its victim (Sarrasine); the message 
is then traditionally constituted of lies, snares, stratagems, and, 
if it is equivocal, of jokes and hoaxes designed to amuse the 
gallery of accomplices. The second line of destination goes 
from La Zambinella to Sarrasine; here the message is a pre­
tense, an imposture, or, if there is some equivocation, a stifled 
remorse, a pang of authenticity. The third line goes from Sar­
(asine to himself: it transmits alibis, prejudices, and fallacious 
131 
evidence by which the sculptor misleads himself, because of 
his vital interest. The fourth line goes from the external world 
(Prince Chigi, the sculptor's friends) to Sarrasine; here what is 
transmitted is public knowledge, evidence, "reality" ("La 
Zambinella is a castrato disguised as a woman"). TIt~,~f~~ 
of ~es!i~~tio_~g~~~~ the discourse to the reader; sometimes 
~~ transmits snares (iE order ~ot to reveal the s~ret oftTle 
enigma too.~~n), sometimes amb~ties (to arouse the read­
'e?s curiosity). Wliif this multIplication- bas at stake is obvi-
~,!~.JSl~~, ~~!..s~~:-i~y1lic- co!D~~~~o.!. 
denies all theater, it refuses agy 'presence in front of which the 
destin~t:1on ~-;'-bC achie-;ed, it ~ppresses' everything otheT;­
every ~ubject. Narrative communication is the opposite: each 
destination 'is at one moment or another a spectacle for the 
other participants jq th.~ game: the messages that La Zambi­
nella sends to Sarrasine or that Sarrasine sends to himself are 
heard by the machinating group; the snare, in which Sarrasine 
persists after the truth has been revealed to him, is divined by 
the reader, with the complicity of the discourse. Thus, like a 
telephone network gone haywire, the lines are simultaneoUsiy' 
twisted and routed according to a whole new system of splic­
iogs, of which the reader is the ultimate beneficiary: over-all 
reception is never jammed, yet it is broken, re&acted, caught 
up in a system of interferences; the various listeners (here we 
ought to be able to say kouteur as we say voyeur) seem to be 
located at every comer of the utterance, each waiting for an 
origin he reverses with a second gesture into the flux of the 
reading. Thus, !n contrast to i4y~~~_ ~1!!~.!lJlication, to pure 
communication (which wou!~t ~. (Q!.exampiC-:thatortii~. 
formalized sciences), reader!y WJ:iti.~ s~~. ~.~flaj;;~*'~ 
it is the writing of noise, of impur{.wmlD.1l~~On; _ ~'!.~ this.. 
noise is not confused, massive, unnameable; it is a clear noise 
made up of connections, not superpositions: it is of a distinct 
"cacography." 
(283) which often revul much more tlutn women intend tMm to. * REF. PsycbologyofWomen. 
( 2Si) This gltmce Well d toftJl revelation. SmrdBine weIIlo'Vedl 
"If it', only d ctlflrice," he thought, dlreddy dCCUIing his mi.stTess 
of excessiw mdor, "she doem't bow wlutt she is subjecting herself 
to. I cma hof1ing her CtJf1ric. will lcut In)' whole lif.... * SEM. Ex­
cess, violence, etc. ** HER. Enigma 6: snare (by Samsine, for 
himself). The snare involves not La Zambinella's feeling but her 
sex, since common opinion (mdOXll) holds that only a woman can 
loolc at a man "eloquently." 
(28S) At tlutt moment, the cDti6t', dttention Wdl distrdCUd by 
three soft ~nod, on the door of his box. * ACT. "Door II": 1: to 
Icnoclc (the three soft lcnoclcs connote a mystery without danger: 
complicity) . 
(286) H. opened it. * ACT. "Door II": 2: to open. 
(287) An old WOmtUI entered with dn air of rrrptery. * ACT. 
"Door II": 3: to enter. If we want to make banality speale, we must 
compare this "Door" to the one we have already encountered (No. 
12S-27), when Marianina entrusted the old man to a servant 
There we had: to tII'J'iw/to ~noc~/to df'fJeIIr/(to ~). Here we 
have: to 1moc1c/to open/to enter. Now, it is precisely the o~issiou 
of the ~~t t~Jt_o ~) ~t d~n~ ~e mystenr; ,..,4Q9J whidl 
;·~~~EJ·_~!.h~u~ ~y~~e'~ ha~."arrived at i!: 
(288) "Young mtm," ,he Idid, "if you wdnt to be 1uJppy. be ",..,­
dent. Put on d CdfJe, wedr d Iutt drdWn down OWl' your eya; tMn, 
mound ten in the evening, be in the Vid tW CorIO in front of the 
HoUl di SpdgntJ." * ACT. "Rendezvous": I: to arrange a rendez­
vous. ** REF. Mysterious and romantic Italy. 
(289) "ru be there," ,.. replied, * ACT. "Rendezvous": 2: to 
give assent to the messenger. 
(290) /Jleing two loW in the dammtll wrinIcled hand. * ACT. 
"Rendezvous": 3: to thanlc, to tip. 
133 
(291) H.lefthisbox * ACf. '70 leave": l:a6rstlocality. 
(292) aft~ Mving giwn 4 BigruJl to Ld ZtnnbiMlld, who timidly 
lowered 1wr huvy .,.zidJ, We. 4 WOrndn f'lu-d to ". unMrrtood 
at l4Bt. * ACf. "Rendezvous": +: to give assent to the penon of­
fering the rendezvous. ** SEM. Femininity (heavy eyelids). *** 
Lilc. 4 WOrndn ..; here is a snare, since La Zambinella is not a 
woman; but by whom is the mare sefs-fQi wtio;:Ji-iS-it mtendedi by 
Sarrasine for himself (if the utterance is indirect in style, reproduc­
ing Sanasine's thought)? by the discowse for the reader (plausible, 
since the liJce gives a modality to La Zambine11a's putative mem­
bership in the female species)? In other words, who is responsible 
for La Zambinella's gesture? The origin of the statement is in­
discemable or, more precisely, indeterminable (HER. Enigma 6: 
snare). 
(293) Then II. r4n hOrM to draa him..zf tI6 .ductiwly tJB ,.. 
could. * ACT. "Dress'·: 1: to want to dress. 
(29+) As II. WdB leaving til. tMttter, * ACT. "To leave": 2: a 
second locality. (Leaving is an action broken down into various 
localities: the box, the building.) 
(295) 4 Itr~ num tooi his dmI. 
"IN on your gutud, Fmv:hfflllll,'· M whiBp.r.d in lUI Mr. "This 
is 4 m.atter of life d1Id dath. c.diMl CicogntJt4 is Mr prot«:tor 
d1Id doan·t trifk:· * ACf. "Waming": 1: to give a warning. ** 
ACT ... Murde ... ·: 1: designation of the future murderer ("this man 
is dangerous") . 
(296) At that rnornent, htJd 10".. dnaon Nt tM fJit of MIl ".­
twun SdnairuJ d1Id Ld ZdmbiMll4, M would htIN cra.d it with 
one '*'P. Ulc. the hcma of the godl dacriIMd by Ho".." the aculp­
tor'. lolle htJd tTd'VerNd lIdBt dUttmca in the twinHing of 4ft .,.. * SEM. Energy, CKCCSS. ** REF. Litemry hiJtory. 
(297) "If dath itaelf were Wditing for ".. ouuuu the hOUN, I 
would go even ftakr," M T."IMd. * ACf. 'Waming": 2: to ig­
nore it. ** ACT. 'Will-to-die··: 2: to Bout a warning. to tab a 
risk. 
LVIII. THE STORY'S INTEREST 
SalT3sine is free to .!t.~.gr_~~r9.~~_~~.J!!l.mQ.wn_m~Jb_.~..m­
irig~-This alternative freedom is structural: ~!mar~_~~!t_ te~ 
C?f!~eq~e!,ce anhnsufes- i:hes!~rY~~rog..ess iI.L:_·!~l?9.~nds." 
f'l_o ~~s struc~!lll!i:Jlowev-e·r:~~~!~e ~.l1ot free to reject the 
Italian's warning; if he were to heed it and to refrain flom pur-
suini~~s a.~veiitli!e,tliere-Woufcrbe!i~ ~~~ry. TI!--otlier weirds, 
Sdrrasine is forced by the discourse to keep his rendezvous with 
fa Zambinella: the character's freedom is dominated by the 
discoursers instinCtfor preservation. On one hand an alterna­
'tiVe-;-on -Uie-other and simultaneously a constraint. Now, this 
conflict is organized as follows: the constraint of the discourse 
("the story must go on") is modestly "forgotten"; the freedom 
of the alternative is nobly imputed to the free will of the c1i!lr­
a~t~!: who_a.'ppea~-t~)ave~mplete responsibility for choice 
rathe~ ~an dyJng a .fHJPeT 4~"J t~e m~t temole for a char­
acter in a novel), to which the discourse constrains him. This 
sfeight of hand permits the novelisticbigh tragedy to get off 
the ground. For on~e posited far from the fHlper, in a referen­
tial utopia, the character's choice appears to be subject to in­
ternaraeterminations: Sarrasine chooses the rendezvous: (1) 
because he is naturally obstinate, (2) because his passion is the 
stronger element, (3) because it is his destiny to die. Overde­
termi!!3JiC?~.t~.e!epy serves a dual function: it appears "to refer 
to a freedom of the charaCtei-andofThe-slory, sinCe the action 
falls wi~~~ .. a.psycholo&y·Of -the "Person;--and--aftne same time 
i£!P~!s._bl !!lpe~iti~n the implacable constraint of the dis­
~)QISC. This game is an economic one: it is to the story's inter­
est that SalT3sine ignore the stranger's dissuasion; he must at 
till costs keep the duenna's rendezvous. In other words, he 
keeps it to ensure the very survival of the anecdote, or,' if one 
prefers, to protect an article of merchandise (the narrative) 
which has not yet been put on the reading market: the story's 
135 
"interest" is the "interest" of its producer (or its consumer); 
as usual, however, the price of the narrative article is subli­
mated by an abundance of referential determinations (drawn 
from the world of the soul, off the paper), which form the 
noblest of images: the Destiny of the subject. 
(298) "Poverinol" the mdnget cried dB he ~d. * REF. 
Italianness (fJoverino and not fJoor wretchl). 
( 2W) SpetJlcing of dttnger to d lover is td1lttJmount to telling him 
ple4sures, is it not? * REF. Proverbial code. 
( 300 ) SturdSine', l'tUet htJd newT I8eR his mtJ6ter tdltc so much 
CdTe over his toiktte * ACT. "Dressing": 2: to dress (the so­
quell(:e "Dressing" has an over-all value as a signifier of love, of 
hope). ** We recognize this theme: Sanasine sequestered from 
sexuality, kept in a state of virginity by the mother's (Boucbar­
don's) vigilance. This state was destroyed when Sanasine saw and 
heard La ambinella. 00 that oa:asion, an exprasion signified the 
accession to sexuality, the end of virginity: for the (i.rrt ti"... This 
lim ti".. is what reappears in Sarrasine's dressing: the lCUlptor is 
drating for tM lim tj"..: we recall that Clotilde was unable to 
dissuade him from hU "untidy dress" (No. 194) (understood: was 
unable to dissuade him from his tIfJIuInUiB), which moreover was 
the reason she left him (SYM. End of sexual exile) . 
(301) His linut sword, d gift fro", BoucluJrdon, the IdJh ClotiltJ. 
htJd given him, his embroidered COdt, his Iilwr-brOCtJd. WtJiBtcotJt, 
his gold muffbox, his jeweled wtJfcha, weT. tJll tam from their 
cofferl, * Bouchardon and Cloblde were liokcd to constraint, con­
sbiction, tJ/JhtJniBis; they therefore preside ritually, through their 
gifts, over Sarrasine's initiation: those who sequestered now COIlSe­
aate what is released. The "deftowering" is accompanied by sym­
bolic objects (a sash, a sword) given by the guardians of virginity 
(SYM. Initiation). 
( 302) and he ddomed hirruelf liIee a girl about to dI>/JUI before 
her lim lov.. * REF. Psychology of lovers. .. The hero dresses 
himself in the manner of a young girl: this inversion connotes Sar­
mine's (already noted) Femininity (SEM. Femininity). 
(303) At the appointed hour, drunlc with love and seething with 
hope, * Here begins a long sequence articulated in three principal 
terms: to hope/to be decaved/to com~. (ACI'. "Hope": 1: 
to hope). 
( 3(4) Santl8ine, concedled in his C4fJe, sped to the rende%l'OUI the 
old woman Iuu:I given him. The duenna was waiting for him. 
"You too~ a long time," ,he BtIid. * ACf. "Rendezvous": 5: 
rendezvous kept (Y au too~ a long time is redundant in the light of 
Sarrasine's very careful dressing, No. 3(0). 
(305) "Come." 
She led the Frenchman along several boele streets * ACI'. 
"Route": 1: to set out .. ACI'. "Route": 2: to walk along .... 
REF. Mysterious and romantic Italy (back streets). 
( 306) and stofJPed before a rother handsome numsion. * ACI'. 
"Door III": I: to stop at. 
(307) She ~noc~ed. * ACI'. "Door III": 2: to knock. 
(308) The door operwd. * ACI'. "Door III": 3: to open. No 
more banal (expected) or seemingly more useless proairetism can 
be imagined; from the anecdotal viewpoint, the story would have 
been equaUy readerly had the discourse stated: She led the Fmteh­
rrtdn to a mansion and, hlIving entered it, led him to a room 
The operative structure of the story would have remained intact. 
So what does the Door add? semantics itself: 6rst, because ~ 
cl09r is an ·obj~ of-some-vague"SjinbOlisml Ii-whole-"cOmpleX-ot" 
.death. pleasure, limit, secret, is bound up in it); and next, because 
this door which opens (without a subject) connotes an abIles­
phere of mystery; last, because the open door and the end of the 
route stiII remain uncertain, the suspense is prolonged, in other 
words heightened. . 
137 
(309) SM led &maine along d Idbyrinth of IttIirwtql, gdllerW, 
dnd rooms which were lit onl)' by til. f-"" light of til. moon, dIIII 
soon CtlJne to d door * ACT. "Route": 3: to penetrate. ** REF. 
Adventure, the Novelistic (labyrinth, stairways, darkness, the 
moon). 
( 310) through who. crdCb prned bright light. dnd from ". 
hind which Cdrne til. joyful sounds of tlllVerdl voicer. * Aer. 
"Orgy": 1: precwsory signs. The diegetic statement (interior ~ 
the story) must not be confused with the rhetorical statement, 
wJ:aereby the discourse merely names in advance what it wiIIlatei 
on detail (here: diegetic statement). 
(311) When at d word from til. old WOmdn he WdI ddrnitt.d to 
this mysterious room, Sttrraine WdS IUdcknly ~d at finding 
himself in d StJlon dB brillUmtl)' lighted dB it WdB rumfJtuOUlfy fur­
nished, in the center of which rtood d tdble ldtI.n with wnerdble 
bottles dnd {ItJshing fl480ns .".lding with ruby f«¥b. * Aer. 
"Route": 4: to arrive. ** REF. Wine (sad/joyous/murderer/ 
bad/loyal/tender/etc.). This code is accompanied by an implicitly 
literary code (Rabelais, etc.) . 
(312) He recognized the singers from the theater, * HER. "Mach­
ination": 3: the machinating group. 
( 313) dlong with BO",. chmming women, dll rudy to begin em 
drtists' orgy tIS Boon tIS he WtlS cunong them. * ACT. "Orgy": 2: 
statement (Here the statement is more rhetorical than diegetic). 
( 314) &maine rufJPrUltld d feeling of di8d/>IJointnwnt * ACT. 
"Hope": 2: to be disappointed. 
(315) dnd fmt on d good face. * ACT. "Hope": 3: to compen­
sate (This term is close to the proverbial code: to face misfortune 
bravely). 
( 316) He hdd expected d dim room, his miItreBI 8fUlted by the fire, 
Bome jetJlous person netJrby, death dnd loYe, dn exchdnge of confi­
dencel in low voicu, hedrt to hedrt, ddngerous Itiaes dnd fdCa so 
close thdt Ltt ZtJmbinelld' B Iutir would hdve ctJrUltld his forelwdd 
138 
throbbing with desire, fewriBh with haMJinal. * Aer. "Hope": 
4: to hope (retrospective reprise). ** REF. Codes of Passion, 
Fiction, Irony. 
LIX. THJU:E CODES TOGETHEI\ 
The referential codes have a kind of emetic virtue, they bring 
On nausea by the borecJoD.l, _c:;onfQnnism, and di~t with repe­
tition that establishes them. The classic remedy, more or less 
~~!oy~_ a~~~_t~_ ~e_ ~.!1~~!;~.~-"!()-~~~-tb~IriniCaf,­
i.e., to superimpose on the vomited code a second code which 
~resses'lt at a distance (the limit of this procedure has been 
stated, XXlJ;I~-otlier ;ards, to engage a ~~n~s!!~~N': 
ess (the modem problem is not to halt this process, not to span 
the Clistance taken with respect to a language). In saying that 
Sarrasine "hdd expected d dim room, some jwous person, 
de4th dRd love," etc., the discourse mingles three disconnected 
codes (each absorbing the others) from three different sources. 
The Code of Passion establishes what Sarrasine is supposed to 
be feeling. The Novelistic Code transforms this "feeling" into 
literature: it is the code of an author in good faith, an author 
who has no doubt that the novelistic is a just (natural) expres­
sion of passion (who, contrary to Dante, does not know that 
passion comes from books). The Ironic Code absorbs t!te "na­
iyet~" of ~e 6rst two codes: as the novelist undertakes to spc;ak 
of the character (code 2), the ironist underta!es to speak ~f. 
the novelist (code 3): Sarrasine's "natural" (interior) lan­
guage is spoken twice; it would suffice to produce, on the 
model of this sentence 316, a pastiche of Balzac to back up 
still further this terracing of the codes. What is the bearing of 
this disconnection? Constantly exceeding the last span and 
aspiring to infinity, it constitutes writing in all its power as a 
game. Classic writing does not go so far: it is quickly winded. 
closes down. and signs its final code quite soon (for example. 
by displaying. as here. its irony). Flaubert. however (as has al-. 
ready been suggested), working with an irony Impregnated 
with uncertainty. achieves a salutary discomfort of writing: he 
does not stop the play of codes (or stops it only partially). so 
that (and this is indubitably the proof of writing) one never 
lenows if he is responsible for what M writes (if there is a sub­
ject behind his language); for the very being of writing (the 
meaning of the labor that constitutes it) is to keep !he ques­
tion Who is spuleing? from ever being answered. 
( 317) "Vive la folie" he cried. "Signori e belle donne. you will 
aUow me to ttJlce my revenge lttter and to show you my gratitude 
for the way you Mve welcomed a poor sculptor." * ACT. "Hope": 
5: to compensate (reprise). ** REF. Italianness. 
(318) Having been greeted wtJrTnly enough by most of those p,es­
ent. whom he knew by sight. * HER. "Machination": .. : pretense 
("Those present" are the agents of the machination against Sar­
rasine; their greeting is a part of this plot) . 
LX. THE CASUISTRY OF DISCOURSE 
Sarrasine is greeted warmly enough-a curious qualifier: by re­
ducing a possible extremely or very. it reduces the positive it­
self: these warm enough greetings are actually something less 
than warm, or, at least, warm with embarrassment and reti­
cence. This reticence of the discourse is the result of a com­
promise: on the one hand, the singers must give Sarrasine a 
warm welcome in order to mislead him and to further the 
machination they have undertaken (whence warm greetings); 
on the other hand. this welcome is a pretense for which the 
discourse would prefer not to take responsibility-without, 
however. being able to assume its own detachment, whicb 
would be tantamount to a premature exposure of the lies of 
the machinators, and the story would lose its suspense (bence, 
the warmly enough). This shows us that ~~ ~'!JX i$ trying 
~o lie tIS~ ~ ~: just what is required to ensure the 
interests- of reading, -that is, its own survival. Caught up in a 
civilization of enigma. truth, and decipherment. the discourse 
reinvents on its own level the moral terms elaborated by that 
civilization: there is a casuistry of discourse. 
(319) he aought to d/'INOdCh the anncMir on which Ld Zcrmbi­
nelUJ * ACT. "Conversation": 1: to approach. 
(320) WtI8 C4BIUIlly reclining. * SEM. Femininity. 
(321) Ahl how hiI hedrt be« when he.,n.d d tJ.lictD foot .hod 
in one of thOile .u",.,., which in tha. d4y1. mtrj I ray. rJ'I.tIdmr.., 
gave women'. feet au:h d coqu«tiIh tIIUI YolufJtuOlU looA: tIuJt I 
don't know how men W8Te tJbk to raiIt them. TM w.ll-fitting 
white Ifoclcings with green clocb, the .hort rIrirtJ. the iii",.,. with 
pointed toa. tJnd the high heelI of Low. XV. reign mtrj hIIN con­
tributed IOrMthing to tM demordliution of EurC>p. tJnd the 
clergy. 
"Something?" the MdTquUe replWd. "HtJYe ),OU Ndd nothm,r' * SEM. Femininity. ** La Zambinella's entire costume is a trick 
played on Samsine; this trick succeeds because Sanasine inevitably 
turns the imposture into proof (coquetry proves the Woman): 
here one might call it the proof by foot (HER. Enigma 6: snare, 
by Zambinella. for Sanasine). *** REF. The century of Louis 
XV. Furthermore, it cannot be a matter of indifference that the 
moment when the young woman resumes contact with the nana­
tive (by interrupting it) is that of an erotic allusion; a brief mari-
vaudage (in which the Marquise suddenly shows herself to be 
emancipated, "knowing," almost vulgar) reactivates the contIact 
which is in the process of being honored and which is of an amo­
rous nature (the nanator is not deceived and answers the Mar­
quise with a smile) . 
(322) "IA Zambinell4," I continued, mUling, "htuI imtmdent1y 
crossed her legs tmd Well gently rwinging the uf'PeT one with CI C8r­
tllin crttrcrctive indolence which BUited her C4f1ricious sort of beauty. * La Zambinella's coquetry, signified very precisely by "crossed 
legs," a conspicuous gesture condemned by the code of Good Man­
ners, is Wlderstood as a provocation: here, therefore, it has the 
value of a pretense (HER. Enigma 6: snare, by La Zambinella, for 
Sarrasine) . 
(323) She herd removed her costume dnd Well wearing d bodice 
tlult accentuttted her ruurow wcrist dnd set off the Btltin fxmniers of 
her dress, which Well embroidered with blu. flowers. * As long as 
La Zambinella was on stage, her woman's costume was somehow 
institutional; but in private life, the musician is deceptive in re­
taining the appearance of a woman: there is a deliberate pretense. 
Moreover, !t is hom clothing that Sarrasine will learn the truth 
(No. 466); for only the institution (clothin.&J f~ches Sanasine his 
reading of the $eXes :if he did not beli~eclotbin.&. ~~WO«­
still be alive (HER. Enigma 6: snare, by La Zambinella, for Sar­
rasine). 
(32-4) Her bosom, the treCIIUr .. of which were concedled, in ttn 
excess of coquetry, by d covering of Idee, WCII dtJulingly white. In 
order to analyze-and perhaps even to enjoy-the rather inb"icate 
ambiguity of this sentence, we must break it down into two paral­
lel snares, of which only the lines of destination are slightly diver­
gent. * La Zambinella conceals her bosom (the text's only allusion 
to an anatomical, and no longer cultural, femininity); along with 
her bosom, La Zambinella also conceals hom Samsine the very 
reason for the concealment: what must be concealed is the fact 
that there is nothing: the perversity of the deficiency lies in the fact 
that it is concealed not by padding out (the vulgar false­
hood of the artificial), but by the very thing which is WJually WJed 
1.p 
to conceal the full bosom (lace): deficiency bouows from fullness 
not its appearance but its deception (HER. Enigma 6: mare, by 
La Zambinella, for Sarrasine). ** The discourse itself lies more 
crudely: it alleges fullness (treoBura) as the only possible purpose 
for concealment, and because it provides a motive (coquetry) for 
this concealment, it makes its emtence undeniable (by drawing 
attention to the cause, it avoids having to ascertain the fact) 
(HER. Enigma 6: snare, by the disc:oune, for the reader). *** 
The deficiency is d4ulingl"j whit., it is designated on the castrato's 
body as a source of light, an area of purity (SYM. Whiteness of 
deficiency) . 
(325) Her htDT arranged Bonwthing lilee that of M".. du &ny, her 
ftJCe, though it Wdl (HIrti4Il"j1aitlMn untUJr a full bonfUlt, ~ed 
onl"j the more delicdte, dIId fJOWdtn suited her. * SEM. Feminin­
ity. ** REF. Historical code. 
( 326) To .. her thus WdB to ado,. her. * REF. Code of Love. 
LXI. NARCISSISTIC PROOF 
A commonplace truism (a completely literary en40X4 which 
"life" constantly disproves) maintains that there is an obliga­
tory link between beauty and love (to Bee her so lovely if to 
love her). This link derives its power from the fact that (novel­
istic) 12ve, which is itself a ~, IJ.lust be supported by .a ~,e 
_~~: .~uty provides this; not, A:S we have seen, because such 
a code _~~ J)C lla:sede>P ~,:ly ~f"~tial traitJ: ,peauty cannot be 
·d~bed (other than by lists and tautologies); It has no refer-_ 
en~ yet it does not lack references (Venus, the Sultan's daugh­
ter, Raphael's Madonnas, etc.), and it is this abundance of 
authorities, this heritage of writings, this anteriority of models, 
which make beauty a secure code; consequently, the love estab­
lished by this beauty is brought under the MtuTtIl rules of 
culture: the codes meet, one rests on the other, there is a circu-
1,.3 
larity: beauty obliges me to love, but also what I love is inevi­
tably beautiful. Bj'declaringLa ~mbine1la ad~~ble, Samsine 
establishes one of the three proofs (narcissistic, psychologicai,­
aesthetic) be wilt continoaHy use in ordetfo-cfeceive hiiiiSelr 
about the castrato's sex: ram jusfified-i~ roVin.l!.t~~·~USe 
she is-beautiful, and if I love her (I-·WhO cannot be mistaken), 
-~ it is because she is a woman. 
(327) She gave the scull'for II grtICeful mUle. * HER. Enigma 6: 
snare, by La Zambinella, for Sarrasine. 
( 328) VnJuJppy tit not being ttble to Bf'e4Ic to her without wit­
nesses present, SdTTdline * ACT. "Hope": 6: to be disappointed 
(reprise). 
(329) politely sat down nat to her ttnd tdlIced ttbout mwic, pr __ 
ing her extrdOrdinmy tttlent; * ACT. "Hope": 7: to compensate 
(reprise) ... ACT. "Conversation I": 2 and 3: to sit down and 
talk. 
( 330) but hi. voice trembled with love. with fur ttnd hope. * 
ACT. "Hope": 8: to hope (reprise). 
(331) "WMt tlTe you afrtIUI 0(7" ahd Vitdglitmi, the cornpttrry'. 
molt fllmous Binger. "Co tthedd; you nad ,Mr no rill,," MH ... 
HdYing ldid thill, the tenor mriled without dnother word. ThiI maW 
Wdl repeated on the lip. of ttll the guem. * HER. "Machination": 
5: index of machination (complicity of the machinating group) . .. HER. Enigma 6: equivocation. 
LXII. EQUIVOCATION I: DOUBLE UNDERSTANDING 
The tenor says "Yau Me no rivttl," because: (1) you are loved 
(Samsine's understanding); (2) you are wooing a castrato 
(understanding of the accomplices and perhaps, already. of the 
144 
reader). According to the first understanding, there is a snare; 
according to the second, a revelation. The braid of the two 
understandings creates an equivocation. And in fact the equiv­
ocation results from two voices, received on an equal basis: 
there is an interference of two lines of destination. Put another 
way, the double undersfdnding, the basis for a play on words, 
cannot be analyzed in simple terms of signification (two sig­
nifieds for one signifier); for that there must be the distinction 
of two recipients; and if, contrary to what occurs here, both 
recipients are not given in the story, if the play on words seems 
to be addressed to one person only (for example, the reader), 
this person must be imagined as being divided into two sub­
jects, two cultures, two languages, two zones of listening 
(whence the traditional affinity between puns and "folly" or 
madness: the Fool, dressed in motley, a divided costume, was 
once the purveyor of the double underrtcmding). In relation 
to an ideaJly pure message (as in mathematics), tiiediViSio~ 
~f reception constitutes a "no~~" it makes COP.l~unica.tion O~ 
scure, fallacious, hazardous: uncertain. Yet this noise, this un­
~inty are emitted by the diJcourse with a view toward a 
communication: they are given to the reader so that he may 
-feed on them: what the reader reads is a countercommunica­
tion; and if we grant that the double underrttmding far exceeds 
the limited case of the play on words or the equivocation and 
permeates, in various forms and densities, all classic writing 
(by very reason of its polysemic vocation), we see that litera­
~es are in fact arts of "noise"; what the reader consumes is 
this defect in communication, this deficient message; what the 
whole structuration erects for him and offers him as the most 
precious nourishment is a countercommuniccrtion; the reader 
is an accomplice, not of this or that character, but of the dis­
course itself insofar as it plays on the division of reception, the 
impurity of communication: the discourse, and not one or an-: 
other of its characters, is the only I'oBitive hero of the story. 
145 
(332) whOle dttntion coraftIiMd d hid4m rntJUt:. d lowr wouW ... 
not Jun. noticed. * On the one band, Sanuine is powerless to . 
uncieIstand the stratagem because he is blinded by love: structur­
ally, this is tantamount to his setting a snare for himself; on the . 
other hand, in noting his blindness, the discourse presents the 
reader with the beginning of a solution, it proposes the stratagem 
openly (HER. Enigma 6: equiwcation). ** REF. the lover 
(blindfolded) . 
(333) Such op.nnar WCllliJr.e d ~ thruIt in SdrnaiM'. Mdrt. 
Although endolWd with d CG'tdin Itrength of cMrdCt.r, tmd fIl­
though nothing could chtmge Jail low, * Sarrasine takes the ten­
or's smile as an index not of malignity but of indiscretion; he de­
ceives himself (HER. Enigma 6: srwe, by Sarrasine. for himself). ** SEM. Energy. 
( 334) it hdd fJ«'" not )'« occurred to him tIIIIl LtJ Zambi....u. 
WdI virlwIlly d cowfadn, * Samsine's forgetfulness (wbich ech­
oes the "ignortmcc of tM fllCb of life" in which Bouchardon bad 
kept him) is a snare: to make La Zambiuella a courtaan is to con­
firm her in her femininity; to doubt her sodalidcu~ty i! to.~ 
doubting her sexual identity (HER. Enigma 6: mare, by Sarrasine, 
for·himself) . 
(335) tmd thdt he could not Jun. both tM ".". ,..". tMt 
mtIIte d )IOung gitl'. IaH 10 deliciow tmd 1M ~ trtlrll­
fKJrtI by which the hctJrdow iJoaaDOR of em dCtraI rnuat be fJur­
cluaed. • REF. Paradigm of Women: youug girl! courtesan. 
(336) He refl«Ud tmd raigJwd hirruel{. * ACf. "Hope": 9: to 
compensate, to resign oneself (reprise). 
(337) S."",., WtII,.,-wd. * ACf. "0Igy": 3: IUpper. 
(338) 5drrai,.. cmd IA ZambirttlJd ItIt down informttlly .. by 
liM. • ACf. "Conversation II": 1: to sit side by side. 
( 3 39 ) For tM font IuIlf of the fMdl, the 4I'tiItJ ",...,-v.d IOft'I8 
cJ.corum, • ACf. "Orgy': of: initial calm. 
1~ 
(340) tmd the sculptor WdB dbk to clult with the linger. * ACI'. 
"'Conversation II": Z: to chat. 
(lil) He found her witty, acute, * SEM. Mental acuity. This 
teme, a kind of h4fxtx in the account of La Zambinella's character, 
aves to correct, according to a euphemistic and confonnist inten­
tion, what would be injurious in the image of a retdrded woman. 
(liZ) but monUhingly ignordnt, * La ZambineUa's ignQ"llce ~ 
~!~I~t to hC!~ P!I~~!~~~!~ri!y.{SEM.. ImmaturityL 
(li3) dnd alae mwled hAmelf to be wedJr tmd BUpentitiouB. * 
Weakness and superstition are equivalent to pusillanimity (SEM. 
P.l$iJlanimity) . 
(3+t) TM delic4cy of her orgtUII WdI reflM:Ud in her uruWrrt4nd­
ing. * If one understands by La ZambineUa's "organs" her vocal 
chords, nothing bas been revealed; but if these organs are her sex­
.. I characteristics, everything has been suggested: thus there is a 
double understanding (HER. Enigma 6: equivocation). ** Psy­
chophysiological code: physical deficiency and mental weakness. 
(3+5) WIJ.n Vittlglilmi uncorhd the ~ 00ttJ. of chmnpagne, * ACI'. "Orgy": 5: WiDc:s. 
( 316 ) SdrrdIiM mu1 in IUs cOJRlNlnion', eyes d rtJJTt of t.rror dt 
the tiny aploGon C4U1ed by the acd#'ing gao * HER. Enigma 6: 
mare, by Sanasine, for himself (timidity "rova femininity: Sar­
rasine uses this psychological proof to deceive himself). 
LXIU. PSYCHOLOGICAL PIWOF 
Champagne serves to prove La Zambinella's pusillanimity. La 
Zambinella's pusillanimity serves to prove her femininity. 
Thus, the Sarrasinean snare shifts from proof to proof. Some 
are inductive, based on that old rhetorical deity: the e;um-
plum: from a narrative episode (champagne, later the snake), 
one induces a character trait (or, rather, one consbucts the 
episode to signify the character). Others are deductive; these 
are enthymemes, imperfect syllogisms (defective, or incom­
plete, or simply probable): all women are timid; La Zambi­
nella is timid; therefore La Zambinella is a woman. The two 
logical systems intermingle: the exemplum permits positing 
the minor premise of the syllogism: La Zambinella is fright­
ened by a popping cork, thus La Zambine1la is timid. As for 
the major premise, it derives from the narcissistic zone (woman 
is adorable), the psychological zone (woman is timid), the 
aesthetic zone (woman is beautiful); what establisbes this 
major premise is, in conformity with the definition of the 
enthymeme, not a scientific buth but "common knowledge," 
an endoXd. Thus the snares Samsine sets for himself are based 
on the most social discourse: completely immersed in sociality, 
the subject takes from it his censures and his alibis, in short 
his blindness, or even: his own death-since he will die from 
having misled himself. ?~ychology-pu~ ~ .~_l:lrse­
thus appears as a murderous language which cond~ i'!l!d~ 
this word we would like to put the inductive exem"'~~~~ 
the deductive syllogism) the subject to the final castration .. 
. __ •... - " -...... _-
(347) The love-stricken tlTtilt interpreted the invoiunttJTy ,hudder 
of this feminine conmtution dI the rign of dR exceaive te1IIitivity. 
The Frenchmttn Wdl clumned by tm. wed1cness. * SEM. Pusil­
lanimity (timidity, femininity) ... Feminine corutitution is a 
snare if taken literally and a deciphennent if understood meta­
phorically (HER. Enigma 6: equivocation). 
(348) How much is protective in d mttn',lovel 
"My Btrength your ,hieldl" Is thiI not written tit the heart of dll 
declmdtions of love? * REF. Proverbial epde: Love. 
148 
(:H9) Too excited to .hower the buutiful ItdlUm with compli­
ments, SdtrtlSine, like fill lovers, WCIB by turns seriouI, LJughing, or 
refI«tM. * REF. Psychology of Loven. 
(350) Although II. BUJned to be listening to the other guests, he 
did not he4r d word they were arying, 80 dbso,bed WCIB he in tM 
~. of finding hirruelf baide her, touching her hdnd dB he 
served her. He btlthed in d Bl8CTet jay. * REF. Love: actions and 
feelings. 
(351) DafJite the eloqumce of d ffIW mutrud tJtmca, * Mutudl 
gltmces are signs of reciprocal love. However, sbucturally, Sarra­
sine's feeling has no pertinence, since it has long been established 
in the discourse and has nothing uncertain about it; the only thing 
that counts here is the sign of agreement emitted by La Zambi­
nella; this sign is a pretense (HER. Enigma 6~ snare, by La Zambi­
nella, for Sanasine) . 
(352) he WCIB tJBtonished at the ,uerve 1.A 'Lnnbinell4 mointained 
towdrd him. * Were Sarrasine to extend his "astonishment" a tri­
Oe, he might discover the buth; thus this "astonishment" is a 
decipherment Sarrasine performs incompletely in his own behalf 
(HER. Enigma 6: partial decipherment, by Sarrasine, for himself) . 
(353) I ndecd, she held begun by preaing his foot dnd taling him 
with the flirttItiOUBJ1e8l of d WOmdn in love dnd free to show it; * 
HER. Enigma 6: snare, by La Zambinella, for Sarrasine ... REF. 
Typology of Women. 
(3H) but ,he auddenly wrdf'Ped herself in the modaty of d ),oung 
girl, * REF. Typology of Women ... All of La Zambinella's re­
serve, whatever its motive (fear or sauple), is a s~ion of the 
stratagem and is tantamount to an initial deciphenn.ent; here, how­
evtr. w~ cannot tell whether the message comes from ~ Zamhiudla 
or from the disoowse, whether it p~QCCCds towar~ SamsineQr the 
~der: it is strictly unsituated: whereby we see once again thlt 
writing" has this power of producing a veritable silence of des­
tiQation: it is, literally, a countercommunication, a )'cacographi' 
(HER. Enigma 6: partial decipherment). .. ---,-, 
149 
( 355) after hetuing SdrrdBine dacribe d trdit which revetJled fir. 
exceaiw violence of his chartJCter. * SEM. Violence (excess). ** 
La Zambinella's pusillanimity (logical source of her femininity) iI 
signified in several examples (champagne, snake), but also in cer­
tain of Sarrasine's offensives; the seme then assumes an operati\'e 
value ( even though these offensives are not initially directed 
against La ZambineUa); it foons the conclusion of a long sequence 
("Danger") laid down by the threats of which La Zambinella wiD 
increasingly be the object, until the moment when, the machina­
tion having been discovered, the singer is nearly hlled by Sarra­
sine. These fears, following certain threats (however abstract), an: 
harbingers of the final crisis (Acr. "Danger": 1: act of violence, 
sign of a dangerous character) . 
(356) When the flU""., becmne tJn orgy, * ACT. "Orgy": 6: 
nomination of the orgy (here a rhetorical, denominative sta~ 
ment: the discourse gives an over-all name to what it will detail). 
(357) the guests brolee into song under the influence of the PertJltd 
dnd the Pedro-Xirnenes. There were ravishing duets, songs from 
CalabritJ, SpdniBh seguidilltu, Neapolitlm CdR%Onettas. * Acr. 
"Orgy" 7 t . : : 0 slOg. 
(358) IntoxictJtion was in every eye, in the music, in hearts tJnd 
voices alike. Suddenly dn mclumting vivtJCity weUed up, d gay 
tJbdndon, dn ItalitJn wttnnth of feeling * ACT. "Orgy": 8: to 
abandon oneself (denominative statement). 
( 3 59) inconceivtJble to those tJCqUtJinted only with Pdri.sitJn gtJther· 
ings, London routs, or Viennese circles. * REF. Worldly Europe. 
( 360 ) J olees dnd words of love flew like bullets in d bdttle through 
ltJughter, profdnities, dnd invocations to the Holy Virgin or il Bam­
bino. * ACT. "Orgy": 9: to abandon oneself (1) unbridled talk. ** REF. ltalianness (il &mbino). 
(361) SorneoRil ltJy down on d 'ofd dnd feU tI6leep. * Acr. 
"Orgy": 1 0: to let oneself go (2) : to sleep. 
,(162) .A girl WCIS listening to a declaration of love, urutware that 
•• WCIS sfJilling sherry on the tablecloth. * ACf. "Orgy": 11: to 
.mndon oneself (3): to spill wine (this gesture is not in confor­
.uty with the Code of the Young Girl and this incongruity rein­
'fortes the sign of disorder) . 
(363) In the midst of this disorder, * ACT. "Orgy": 12: to aban-
40n oneself (denominative reprise). Abandon, a fragment of the 
~, is rhetorically constructed: a statement, three tenns, a reprise. 
(36+) La Zetmbinella remllined thoughtful, CIS though terror-struck. 
She refused to drinJc, • ACf. "Danger": 2: the victim's fear. 
LXIV. THE VOICE OF THE READER 
AI though terror-struck: who is speaking here? It cannot be 
Sanasine, even indirectly, since he interprets La Zambinella's 
icar as timidity. Above all, it cannot be the narrator, because 
lie knows that La Zambine1la really is terrified. The modaliza­
~ (CIS thou8h) expresses th~ interests of only one character, 
who is neither Sarrasine nor the narrator, but the reader: it is 
tbe-ieaaer \vho-isconcerned thaftlie--truHl-be-si~'~1 ta~eously 
'!!!':!~.-~~~ .. ~idea. -~D: ambiguity~wh!~~-~lli~~..d~91.l~ IP~ely 
~tes by CIS though, which indicates the truth and yet re­
dyces, itdedaratively to a mere appearance. What we hear! 
tber~fore, is the displ4ced voice which the reader lends, by 
~xy, to the discourse: the discourse is speaking according to 
the reader's interests. Whereby we see that writing is not the 
cinnmunication of a message which starts from the author and 
proceeds to the reader; it is specifically the voice of reading it­
Idf: in the text, only the reader speaks. This inversion of our 
prejudices (which make reading a reception or, to put matters 
IDOre clearly, a simple psychological participation in the ad-
venture being related), this inversion can be illusbated by • 
linguistic image: in the Inde>-European verb (for example, 
Greek), two diatheses (specifically: two voices) were set in 
opposition: the middle voice, according to which the agent 
performed the action for his own sake (I BdCrifice for m)'Sel/). 
and the active voice, according to which he performed this 
same action for another's benefit (as in the case of the priest 
who sacrificed on his client's behalf). In this accounting, writ· 
ing is active, for it acts for the reader: it proceeds not from an 
author but from a public scribe, a notary institutionally ~ 
sponsible not for Battering his client's tastes but rather for 
registering at his dictation the summary of his interests, the 
operations by which, within an economy of disclosure, he man­
ages this merchandise: the narrative. 
( 365) perluJp, ,he ate d bit too much; howeY." it is Idid thtJt 
greediness in d WOmdR is d chtmning qwdity. * REF. Code of 
Women (they are greedy). ** Greediness",ova the Woman, as 
does her timidity: this is a psychological proof (HER. Enigma 6: 
snare: by Sarrasine, for himself? by the discourse, for the reader?). 
(366) Admiring his miBtrea', modaty, * Deceiving himself, Sar­
rasine transfonns fear into modesty (HER. Enigma 6: snare, by 
Sarrasine, for himself). 
( 367) &masine thought seriously dbout the tutu,.. 
"She ",obdbly wcmts to be mmried," he thought. He then turned 
his thoughu to the delightl of this 1nlIIT'iage. His whok lif.,."..d 
too ,hort to exIutu8t the ","rags of "."inea h. foUnd in the 
depths of his soul. * Sarrasine's self-deception. 6rst concerned 
with a denomination of fact (modaty instead of fright), extends 
metonymically to motive, which is in tum placed under the author­
ity of the Code governing bourgeois marriage (if a woman refuses 
to give herself, it is because she wants to be married) (HER. 
Enigma 6: snare, by Sarrasine, for himself). ** REF. The Lover's 
imagininp. 
( 368 ) V itdglitmi, who Wd8 Bitting next to him, refilled his glIlJI8 80 
often tMt, towtITd three in the morning, * ACT. "Machination": 
6: the victim is made drunk. 
( 369) without being totttlly drunk, StlrrdBi,.. could no longer con­
trol his delirium. * Here begins a limited "Rape" which we will 
distinguish from the final "Abduction" (ACT. "Rape": 1: condi­
tioning of the ravisher ) (this rape is constructed as a "delirium," a 
minor dCting out) . 
(370) Im/'ftuou.zy, he piclced up the worrum, * ACT. "Rape": 
2: to carry off the victim. 
(371) esc4ping into d lcind of boudoir next to the Bdlon, * ACT. 
"Rape": 3: to change locale. 
(372) tOWdrd the door of which he hdd glmaced monr tlum once. * ACT. "Rape": i: to have premeditated the abduction. 
(373) The IftIlidn WOmdR WdB d1'1JWd with d ddgger. 
"If you come dn}' clOBer," she Bdid, "I will be forced to "'unge 
this wetJfJon into your he4rt. * ACT. "Rape": 5: the victim's 
armed defense. ** La Zambinella is defending not her virtue but 
her lie; thereby she designates the truth and her action is tanta­
mount to an index. Sarrasine, however, attributes this action to a 
courtesan's wiles, he misleads hilllKlf: index and blindness create 
an equivocation (HER. Enigma 6: equivocation). *** The dis­
course is on La Zambinella's side [in French, "I will be forced," ;e 
term forck, the past participle is feminine]; obliged by no more 
than orthography (agreement of the past participle), it has no 
option but to become an accomplice in the imposture (HER. 
Enigma 6: mare, discourse for reader). **** La Zambinella 
threatens Sarrasine with mutilation-which will moreover be car­
ried out in the end: "You have dr~d me down to your ,,,_,,'' 
No. 525 (SYM. Castration, the knife). 
153 
(37-t) Let me got You would des". me. I have conceived too 
much respect for your c#UUtJCter to rurrender in this ftl8hion. I don't 
wcmt to betray the feeling you Mve for me." * HER. Enigma 6: 
equivocation (the reason La Zambinella gives can be either tactical 
or sincere). ** REF. Honor of Women, Esteem and not love. 
etc. 
( 375) "Oh not" cried Sammne. "You C4nnot rtifIe d passion by 
stimulating itt * REF. Psychology and strategy of the passions. 
( 376) Are you tIlready so corrupt that, old in heart, you would cJCt 
like cJ young courtesan who whets the emotions by which she fJlia 
her trader' * REF. Typology of Women (the courtesan). ** 
HER. Enigma 6: snare, by Sarrasine, for himself (Sarrasine mis­
leads himself as to La Zambinella's motive). 
" " LXV. THE SCENE 
La Zam binella and Samsine exchange lines of dialogue. Each 
line is a snare, a misuse, and each misuse is justified by a code: 
Honor of Women corresponds to Typology of Women: codes 
are hurled back and forth, and this volley of codes is the "scene." 
Thereby appears the nature of meaning: it is a force which 
attempts to subjugate other forces, other meanings, other lan­
guages. The force of meaning depends on its degree of system­
atization: the strongest meaning is the one whose systematiza­
tion includes a large number of elements, to the point where it 
appears to include everything noteworthy in the world: thus 
great ideological systems which battle each other with strokes 
of meaning. The model for this is always the "scene," the end­
less confrontation of two different codes communicating solely 
through their interlockings, the adjustment of their limits 
(dual replication, stychomythia). A society aware of the-in 
some sense-linguistic nature of the world, as was medieval 
154 
society with its Trivium of the arts of speech, believing that it 
is not the truth which brings an end to the confrontation of 
languages, but merely the force of one of them, can then, in a 
ludic spirit, attempt to encode this force, to endow it with a 
protocol of results: this is the disputCltio, the function of cer­
tain of whose terms was to close off, arbitrarily but necessarily, 
the infinite repetition of dialogue-"terminemes," in short, 
marks of abandonment that brought the interplay of lan­
guages to an end. 
on) "But todtzy is Frid4y," 8M replied, * SEM. Superstition 
(pusillanimity, timorousness). 
(378) frightened at tM FrenchrruJn's violence. * ACT. "Dan­
ger': 3: the victim's repeated fright. 
(379) SmrtlSine, who WdS not devout, brolee into krughter. * 
SEM. Impiety. Sarrasine's impiety paradigmatically corresponds to 
La Zambinella's superstition; this paradigm is (will be) actually 
tragic: the pusillanimous being will draw the virile being into its 
deficiency, the symbolic figure will contaminate the strong mind. 
(380) !AI Zdmbinelld jumped up lib d young deer * ACT. 
"Rape": 6: victim's Sight. 
(381) and ran towdTd tM Idlon. * ACT. "Rape": 7: change of 
locale (symmetrical to and the inverse of No. 371). 
(382) WMn Samuine dppedTed in her pursuit, * ACT. "Rape": 
8: pursuit. 
(383) M WCIB greeted by dn infernal burn of laughter. * HER. 
"Machination": 7: laughter, signaling success of the sbatagem 
(collective laughter is the motive for the machination: "I onl)' 
agreed to trick )'ou to pled8e m)' friends, who wt.'nted to laugh," No. 
512) . 
155 
( 3M) He ICfW Ut ZdmbiMlld lying in a BWoon upon a sofa. SIa. 
WdB f'dlIIand drained by the extrtlOrdinary effort ahe hdd ;un 1J1IJd.. * SYM. Weakness, pusillanimity, timorousness, femininity. 
( 385) Mthough 5drrtUine At,..,., little ItdlUm, * REF. Chronology 
(the notation refers to the Dumber of days Sanasine has been iD 
Rome: three weeks, by the evening of the orgy) . 
It " LXVI. THE READERLY I: EVERYTHING HOLDS TOGETHER 
I t is necessary (likely) for Sarrasine to undrntand Italian, 
since his mistress's remark must confound him and end his 
delirium; however, it is no less necessary (likely) that he not 
know it well, since he has been in Italy only twenty-four days 
(as we know from the chronological code); he cannot have 
been there longer, since he must be unaware of the Roman 
custom of putting castrati on the stage; he must be unaware of 
the custom. since he has to mistake La Zambinella's identity, 
etc. In other words, the discourse scrupulously keeps within a 
circle of solidtlrities, and this circle, in which "everything holds 
together," is that of the readerly. As we might expect, the read­
erIy is controlled by the principle of non<antradiction, but by 
multiplying solidarities, by stressing at every opportunity the 
compdtible nature of circumstances, by attaching narrated 
events together with a kind of logical "paste," the discourse 
carries this principle to the point of obsession; it assumes the 
careful and suspicious mien of an individual afraid of being 
caught in some 8agrant contradiction; it is always on the look­
out and always, just in case, preparing its defense against the 
enemy that may force it to acknowledge the scandal of some 
illogicality. some disturbance of "common sense." The soli­
darity of notatio~ thus appears to be a kind of defenSIve 
weapon, it says in its way that meaning is a force, that it is 
devised within an economy of forces. 
156 
(386) he hetlTd his mistress tutying in d low voice to Vitaglidni: 
"But he will lciU me'" * HER. "Machination": 8: indication of 
complicity between the instigator and the agent of the machina­
tion. ** ACT. "Danger": 4: victim's premonitory fear. 
(387) The BCUlfJtor WClS utterly confounded by this strdnge scene. 
He regdined his senses. At first he stood motionless; then he found 
his voice, 8tIt down next to his mistress, dnd ClSSUred her of his 
respect. He WCIS tJble to divert his passion by dddressing the most 
high-minded phrC1Se8 to this WOmdn; cmd in depicting his love, he 
u.ed all the resources * ACT. "Abduction": 9: failure of the rape, 
return to order. 
( 388 ) of that mcJgicdl eloquence, that inspired intermeditJry * 
REF. Code of passion. 
(389) which women rdrely refuse to believe. * REF. Psychology 
of Women. 
( 390) When the guests were surprised by the first gletnns of morn­
ing light, d WOmdn suggested they go to FrClSC4ti. * ACf. "Excur­
sion": 1: proposal. ** ACT. "Orgy": 13: end (dawn). 
LXVII. HOW AN ORGY IS CREATED 
Someone, not the reader but a chal3cter (Sarrasine, in this 
instance), gradually approaches the scene of an orgy; it is an­
nounced to him by the sound of voices, by bright lights 
glimpsed through cracks of a door: this is an announcement 
interior to the story, analogous to the physical indices that en­
able us to decipher in advance a tempest. an earthquake: we 
are in a natural history of the orgy. Then the orgy is announced 
interior to the discourse: it is named, which supposes that like 
a denominative resume (a chapter title, for example) we are 
going to analyze it, give its moments, the signifieds which com-
157 
pose it: we are in a rhetoric of the orgy. These parts of the 
orgy are stereotyped items of behavior, created by a repetition 
of experiences (supper, uncorking champagne, singing. liem. 
tiousness): we are in an empirical knowledge of the orgy. 
Further, a certain moment of this orgy, given under its generic 
name, Clbandonment, can no longer be analyzed like the orgy 
itself, but illustrated by certain typical items of behavior (sleep­
ing, spilling wine): we are in an inductive logic of the orgy 
(based on exempltJ). Finally, the orgy dies down, ends: we are 
in a physics of the orgy. What we have called the proairetic 
code is thus itself made up of other diverse codes based on 
different disciplines. The series of actions, natural, logical, 
linear as it may appear, is not controlled by a single rule of 
order; not only can it "divagate," accommodating endless ex­
pansions (as here, with the failed rape of La Zambinella), it 
refracts different disciplines, orders, codes: it is a perspective 
space: the materiality of the discourse is the point of view; the 
codes are the vanishing points; the referent (the orgy) is the 
framed image. 
(391) Everyone enthusi4sticdlly feU in with the idu of spending 
the cLty at the V ilia Ludovisi. * Aer. "Excursion": 2: general 
agreement. 
(392) Vitagliani went down to hire some carriages. * Aer. "Ex­
cursion": 3: hiring of carriages. 
(393) Sarrasine had the pleasure of leading La Zambinella to a 
phoeton. * Aer. "Amorous outing": 1: to get into the same 
carriage. 
( 39i) Once outside Rome, the gaiety which had been moment4r­
ily repressed by each person's battle with sleepiness suddenly re­
vived. Men and women ali1ce seemed used to this rtrdnge life, theN 
ceaseless pleasures, this artist's impuhiveness which tur1l8 life into d 
IS8 
perpetUt1l ptIrty at which one ltrughed unreservedly. * ACT. "Ex­
cursion": 4: collective gaiety. ** Artist's Life. 
(395) The sculptor', cOJTJ/Htnion WdS the only one who seemed 
downcast. 
"Are you iU7" SarrdSine dSlced her. "Would you rather go homer' 
"I'm not strong enough to stand aU these excesses," ,he replied. 
"I must be very careful; * ACT. "Danger": 5: persistent fear. ** Sarrasine continues to mislead himself: after having taken La 
Zambinella's resistance for modesty or ftirtatiousness, he attributes 
her depression to illness (HER. Enigma 6: snare, by Sarrasine, for 
himself). *** La Zambinella's response is a snare if the fatigue 
she alleges is due to the orgy; it is truthful if her illness results from 
fear, it is a snare if her pusillanimity is attributed to her femininity; 
it is truthful if it is due to "her" castration: there is a double under­
standing (HER. Enigma 6: equivocation). **** ACT. "Amo­
rous Outing": 2: t~te-a-t~te conversation. 
( 396) but with you 1 feel so well! Had it not been for you, 1 would 
never have stayed for supper; * Two likelihoods make their voices 
heard here, thereby producing a double understanding: (1) the 
operative likelihood will say that La Zambinella is offering Sarra­
sine a discourse which is, if not amorous, at least amical, in order 
to allay any suspicion of the stratagem in which he is caught; it 
will then be a snare; (2) the "psychological" likelihood which con­
siders logical the "contradictions of the human heart" will see in 
La Zambinella's confidence an impulse of sincerity, the fugitive 
suspension of the fraud (HER. Enigma 6: equivocation). ** The 
request for protection signifies: everything but sex; but thereby the 
very deficiency of sex is designated (SYM. Asexual protection: the 
theme will reappear) . 
( 397) a skepless night and 1 lose whatever bloom 1 httve." 
"You are so delicate," Sttrra.sine Sdid, loolcing at the chttrn'ling 
creature's pretty face. 
"Orgies ruin the voice." * SEM. Femininity. 
(398) "Now that we're alone," the ttTtist cried, "and you no 
longer need fedT the outbursts of my fJdSsion, uU me that you love 
me." * ACT. "Declaration of love": 1: request for an avowal. 
159 
LXVIII. THE BRAID 
At this point in the narrative (it could be at another) several 
actions are still underway at the same time: the "danger" run 
by La Zambinella, the hero's "will-to-die," his "declaration of 
love" to his mistress, their "amorous outing." the group's 
"machination" and "excursion" are still in process, suspended 
and interwoven. ~e text, w~i~, ~~Js be!~g_p~od~~_is li_~~ __ a 
piece of Valencienneilace creat~ bcfOIC.JlS-URc!~ t:l.!eJa~k­
er's fingers: each sequence undertaken hangs like the temporar­
ily inactive bobbin waiting while its neighbor works; t~~~-wh~ 
its tum comes, the hand takes up ~e_!hr~d ~n, ~ri~gs it 
back to the frame; and as the pattern is filled out, the progress 
of each thread is marked with a pin which holds it and is grad­
ually moved forward: thus the terms of the sequence: they are 
positions held and then left behind in the course of a gradual 
invasion of meaning. This process is valid for the entire text. 
The grouping of codes, as they enter into the work, into the 
movement of the reading. constitute a braid (text, fdbric, 
braid: the same thing) ;~cll thread, each code, is~ v9~~;_~~ 
braided-or braiding-voices form the writing: when it is alone._ 
the voice does no labor, transforms nothing: it expr~-~\1tu 
soon as the hand intervenes to gather and intertwine the inert 
threads, there is labor, there is transformation. We mov..-the­
symbolism of the braid: Freud, considering the origin of weav­
ing. saw it as the labor of a woman braiding her pubic hairs to 
form the absent per.is. TI.!e text, in short, is a fetish; an~_ ~Q re­
dqce it to the unity of meaning, by a deceptively univocal read­
ing. is to cut the braid, to sketch the castrating gesture. 
(399) "Why?" .he replied. "What would ". the we? • ACf. 
"Declaration": 2: to elude the requested avowal. ** Like every 
embarrdBICd attitude, La Zambinella's reply designates the truth by 
160 
eluding it (or at least says that there is an enigma) (HER. Enigma 
6: equivocation) . 
(100) I IUnWd pretty to )'ou. But )'ou tIT. FTench dnd )'OUT feel­
i",. will /NIBS. • HER. Enigma 6: snare, by La Zambinella, for 
Samsine (You will stop loving me because you are fickle; there­
fore I am truly a woman). •• "Declaration": 3: first basis for de-
clining an offer of love (love is fickle). ... REF. Amorous ty-
pology of nationalities: the fickle French ..... HER. Enigma 6: 
snare (by the discourse: I seemed pretty UolieJ to )'ou puts ;ol;' in 
the feminine, d. No. 373). 
( 40 1) All, )'ou would not love 1M as J long to be loved." 
"How ccm )'OU B4'/ thatr' 
"Not to satisfy dn)' vulgdT passion; pUTely. * ACT. "Declara­
tion": 4: second basis for declining an offer of love (impossibility 
of a suitable feeling) ... SYM. Asexual protection .... SYM. 
Alibi of castration: the Misunderstood Woman. Sincere or not (to 
decide that, one would have to go behind the PdfJeT), La Zambi­
nella sublimates the condition of castration (or of exclusion) be­
neath a noble and plaintive theme: that of the Misunderstood 
Woman. This theme will be taken up again by Mme de Rochefide 
when the narrator's story has drawn her into castration: "No one 
willluzve known 1M, I dm proud of thttt," No. 560 ..... "Not to 
satisfy tmy vul.gtIT fJtI8Bion; puTel)," is an equivocation; for either 
exile from sex is a physical deficiency (the truth) or it is a sublime 
release granted, by the ideal, to the 8esh (snare) (HER. Enigma 
6; equivocation) . 
(402) I ttbhOT 1Mn perhttp. even mOTe them I hate W01Mn. • 
SYM. The neuter (ne-uteT) of the castrato. 
(403) I need to Beek Tefuge in friendBhip .• SYM. Asexual pro­
tection. .. HER. Enigma 6: equivocation (a sincere feeling or 
an evasion determined by the toils of the machination) . 
(404) FaT 1M, the wOTld is a desert. I am an occuTsed creatuTe, 
condemned to underBttUld httppinea, to tu' it, to deWe it, dnd, 
like mttR)' other •• fOT~d to Bee it flu from 1M continuall), .• 
ACT. "Declaration": 5: third basis for declining an offer of love 
161 
(excluded from normal affections). ** SYM. Exclusion, curse (ill 
the untenable position of a ne-uter, the castrato is a creature ~ 
longing nowhere: he is excluded from difference, from antithesis: 
he transgresses, not the sexes, but classification). *** SYM. E. 
phemistic definition of the castrato: unfulfilled desire. **** REF .. 
Code of acquired wisdom (happiness Bees from man) . 
(405) Remember, BiT, thtrt I will not have deceived you. * The 
future perfect refers to the moment when the machination will be 
uncovered; a predictive and exorcising term (HER. "Machina­
tion": 9: prediction and exorcism of the outcome). ** HER. 
Enigma 6: equivocation. The equivocation arises because La lam­
binella's "frankness" takes the form of a statement general enough 
to include the truth, but too general, in fact, to designate it. 
LXIX. EQUIVOCATION II: METONYMIC FALSEHOOD 
Equivocation (often) consists in disclosing genus (I tim em 
excluded CTedtuTe) and silencing species (I (1m (I ClIStrdto) : one 
says the whole for the part, a synechdoche, but in the ambiva­
lence, metonymy is in a sense caught in the act, as statement 
and no longer as thing stated; for the discourse (or, by proxy, 
th~_~halacter) ()n the ~ne hand a~y~nceS~~1.Oses. and§nt1ie 
other holds back, conceals; it undertakes to impr~~~_ !h~_ 
void of what it silences by the plenitude of what-it says, to 
identify two different truths, the truth of speech and the truth 
of silence; of the two species of the genus Excluded (on one 
hand the Inaccessible Woman, on the other the undesirable 
castrato), the discourse implies one, the receiver the other; 
here again there is a divided reception. As we might expect, 
this metonymic falsehood (since by stating the whole for the 
part, it induces error or at least masks the truth, hides vacuum 
under plenitude) has a strategic function: as the difference 
between species and genus, it is La Zambinella's s~ty 
which is silenced: now this specificity is both opera tionally de-
.61 
cisive (it controls the disclosure of the enigma) and symboli­
cally vi tal (it is castra tion itself) . 
('f06) I forbid you to love me. * ACf. "Declaration": 6: to for­
bid to love. 
( 4(7) I Cdn be your elevoted friend, for I ddmire )'Our strength dnd 
your chtudCter. I need d brother, d protector. Be dll thdt for me, * ACf. "Declaration": 7: reduction of love to friendship. ** 
SYM. Asexual protection (the alibi conceals sexual deficiency). 
*** Can La Zambinella be a friend (un ami, masculine)? Since 
there is a feminine form (une cnnie), a choice exists, and the use of 
the masculine reveals the transvestite. Yet this disclosure has no 
real effect on the reading: the giveaway word is carried along in the 
oommonplace generality of the sentence, covered by its similarity 
to a stereotyped phrase (to be d elevoted friend) and thereby 
blurred (HER. Enigma 6: disclosure, by La Zambinella to Sar­
rasine) . 
(408) but no more." * Throughout the story, the excedent is 
obviously the sexual organ (SYM. Asexual protection) . 
(409) "Not love you'" ScmdSine cried. "But my dedrest dngel, you 
are my life, my IutppineSB'" * ACf. "Declaration": 8: protesta­
tion of love. ** REF. Rhetoric of love (dear dngel, my life). 
(410) "If I were to say one word, you would repulse me with hor­
ror." * If one word can alter a situation, it is because it has revela­
tory power, and thus there is dn enig1J1lJ (HER. Enigma 6: pro­
posal). ** SYM. Mark, curse, exclusion. *** SYM. Taboo on 
the word cdstrdto. 
LXX. BEINC-cASTRATED AND CASTRATION 
To make being-costrcJted, an anecdotal condition, coincide 
with costrcJtion, a symbolic structure, is the task successfully 
163 
carried out by the pedormer (Balzac), since the former doa 
not necessarily entail the latter: witness many anecdotal nana-. 
tives about Cd8trdti (Casanova, President De Bros5eS, Sade, 
Stendhal ). This success hinges on a structural artifice: identi­
fying the symbolic and the hermeneutic, making the search 
for truth (hermeneutic structure) into the search for castra­
tion (symbolic structure), making the truth be tmeCdot4lq 
(and no longer symbolically) the absent phallus. The coinci­
dence of the two paths is effected (structuIally) by keeping 
one or the other from ever being determined upon .HJlg~t~ 
minacy is a "proof' of writing): aphasia concerning the word 
CdStrctto has a double value, whose duplicity is insoluble: on 
the symbolic level, there is a taboo; on the operative level, the 
disclosure is delayed: ~e truth is suspended both by ceoso.J;.. 
ship and by machination. 'J1l~!e4!1erry.!~.s!YICQl the text i$ 
thereby raised to the level of an analytical investigation; how­
ever, we can also, and more justifiably, say that, by becoming 
anecdotal, the psychoanalytical progression of the subject 
(pedused throughout: through Sarrasine, the narrator, the 
author, and the reader) .bccQmcs u.nn~!y: the symbolic is 
in excess, useless (what we have here called rymbolic does not 
derive from psychoanalytic knowledge). Which accounts for 
this story's perhaps unique value: "illustrating" castration by 
being-castrated, like with like. it mocks the notion of illustra­
tion, it abolishes both sides of the equivalence (letter an4 
symbol) without advantage to either one; the latent here 9CCu­
pies the line of the manifest from the start. the sign is 8~tt~n~ 
out: there is no longer any "representation." 
("11) "Coquettel * HER. Enigma 6: mare, by Sanasine. for 
himself. Sanasine penists in revnng the partial clues La Zambi­
nella, either sincere or wary, offen him: he denies his partner's dis­
claimen. This second disclaimer is made in actual semantic terms: 
l~ 
of La Zambinella's messages, Sanasine retains only the connota­
tion associated with them by the cultural code of amorous pretense 
(here: coquetry). 
(i12) Nothing Cdn frighten me. * SEM. Stubbornness. ** The 
disclaimer of danger designates precisely the place where fate will 
strike (or rather: fate is the very thing being denied) (ACf. "Will­
to-die": 3: to acceptany risk) . 
(i 13) TeU me you will cost my future, tlutt 1 will die in two 
months, tlutt 1 will be dmnned merely for hcMng It.i8Bed you." * 
ACT. "Will-to-die": i: predictive term (1 will die) in the form of 
a provocation of fate. ** ACf. "Declaration": 9: gift of life (pur­
chase of the desired object) . 
(iIi) He Iriaed her, * ACf. "Amorous Outing": 3: to want to 
kiss. 
LXXI. THE TRANSPOSED ICISS 
A second reading, the reading which places behind the trans­
parency of suspense (placed on the text by the first avid and 
ignorant reader) the anticipated knowledge of what is to come 
in the story, this further reading-unjustly condemned by the 
commercial imperatives of our society, which compels us to 
squander the book, to discard it as though it were deflowered, 
in order to buy a new one-this retrospective reading bestows 
upon Sarrasine's kiss a precious enormity: Sarrasine passion­
ately kisses a castrato (or a boy in drag); the castration is trans­
posed onto Sarrasine's own body and we ourselves, second 
readers, receive the shock. Thus it would be wrong to say that 
if we undertake to reread the text we do so for some intellec­
tual advantage (to understand better, to analyze on good 
grounds) : it is actually and invariably for a ludic advantage; .t<> 
multiply the signifiers, not to reach some ultimate signified. 
165 
( i15 ) despite LeI ZambiMll4' s efforts to resist this fJdBIionate em­
brtlCe. * ACf. "Amorous Outing": i: to resist. 
(iI6) "Tell me you are a devil, that you want my money, fff1 
name, all my fame I Do you want me to give up being a sculptor? 
Tea me." * ACf. "Declaration": 10: gift of one's most precious 
possession (Art). 
(iI7) "And if 1 were not a womanr' * HER. Enigma 6: dis­
closure, La Zambinella to Sarrasine. ** The impossibilities of 
loving which La Zambinella has heretofore alleged (400, 401, 4(4) 
were all of a psychological order. What is now advanced is a physi­
cal limit. There is a shift from the banal contestation of feelings 
based on certain psychological attributes (You are ficlcle, 1 am de­
manding, excluded), each of which was nonetheless deemed a 
sufficient motive for refusal when it was presented, to the radical 
contestation of being (1 am not a woman): we will admit this is 
an unusual term in the banal "Declaration of love" sequence: a 
term whose content is anomalous, scandalous, but whose form 
(impossibility of loving) leaves the sequence all its readerliness 
(ACT. "Declaration": 11: physical impediment). 
(iI8) LeI ZambiMlla asked in a soft, Bilvery voice. * SEM. Femi­
ninity. ** (Connoted) femininity denies its own (denoted) dis­
claimer, the sign is more powerful than the message, associated 
meaning than literal meaning (this will of course be seized upon 
by Sarrasine, great devourer of connotations as he is, who under­
stands in a sentence not what it asserts but what it suggests) 
(HER. Enigma 6: snare, by La Zambinella, for Sarrasine). 
(i19) "Wlutt a ;okel" ScurasiM cried. "Do you think you can de­
ceive an artist's eye? * ACT. "Declaration": 12: disclaimer of the 
disclaimer. ** REF. Anatomical knowledge of the realistic artist. *** HER. Enigma 6: snare, by Sarrasine, for himself: aesthetic 
proof: artists are infallible. 
LXXII. AESTHETIC PROOF 
To ensnare himself (a task up:m which he lavishes a vigilant 
energy), Sarrasine employs' three enthymernes: narcissistic 
proof (1 love her, therefore she is d womtln), psychological 
proof (women dre weak, lA Zmnbinelld is weak, etc.), and 
aesthetic proof (beauty is solely the province of womtln, there­
TOre ). These false syUogisms can unite and reinforce 
their errors, can form a kind of sorites (or abridged syllogism) : 
beauty is feminine; only dn dTtist Cdn know beduty; I dm em 
artist; therefore I know beduty cmd therefore I know woman, 
etc. A "realistic" reader might ask Sarrasine why, even if it is 
to triumph over it in the end, he shows no surprise, no shock 
at his partner's incredible remark ("if I were not d woman?"); 
why he immediately accepts an (ill-founded) rationalization 
against this appeal, however timid, however interrogative, to 
"reality" (we have aheady noted that to suspect a sex is defini­
tively to deny it). The answer is: because the "realistic" artist 
~ places "reality" at the origin of his discourse, but only 
and always, as far back as can be traced, an already written real, 
ap~Ospective code, along which we discern, as far as the eye 
cali'see, only a succession of copies. In this case, the code is 
that of plastic art: it is the code which sustains beauty and 
love, as reSected in the Pygmalion myth, under whose author­
ity Sarrasine is placed (No. 229). By immediately advancing 
an artist's reason in refutation of La Zambinella's avowal, the 
sculptor is merely citing the supreme code, the basis for all 
reality, which is art, whence Sow truths and facts alike: t!t.f:: 
artist is infallible not by the sureness of his performance (he is 
Dot merely a good copyist of "reality") but by the authority of 
-his competence; it is he who knows the code, the origin, the 
basis, and thus he becomes the guarantor, the witness, the 
author (duc(or) 9.Lrcality: he has the right to determine 
the difference between the sexes, against the very protestation 
167 
of the interested parties, who, confronted by the original and 
ultimate authority of Art, live in the contingency of phe. 
nomena. 
(420) Haven't I I/Jenf ten dayr devouring, scrutinizing, tldmiring 
your perfectionl * REF. Chronology (this datum is just about 
exact: one evening at the theater, eight days on the sofa, then right 
afterwards the duenna's rendezvous, the orgy, the outing). ** 
Sarrasine defines the nature-or the origin-of his admiration for 
La Zambinella in relation to a seme which has already been applied 
to him (162), his taste for whittling, for kneading, for what, in 
order to grasp the form of this action, we would have to call driU· 
ing, the urge to pierce, a kind of endoscopic energy which, remov· 
ing veils, garments, will probe the object for its internal essence. 
To IICrUtiniu means, literally, to acaYat., to probe, to visit, to 
explore: in scrutinizing La Zambinella (for ten days), Sarrasine has 
exercised a triple function: neurotic, since he repeats a childhood 
act (No. 162); aesthetic (i.e., for him, the basis of existence), since 
the artist, and specifically the sculptor, authenticates the copy of 
appearance by his knowledge of its interior, its undernuth; and 
last, symbolic-or inevitable, or even: absurd-since this excavation 
whose triumphant product (La ZambineUa's femininity) Sarna· 
sine reveals woul~ if carried further, definitively bring to light the 
nothing which constitutes the castrato, so that once this nothing 
was discovered, the artist's very knowledge would be voided and 
the statue destroyed (SEM. Whittling). 
(421) Only a woman could Iutve thiI round, wft arm, thae ele· 
gant curves. * Aesthetic proof rests on an enthymeme with a false 
premise (only women are bedUtful), since at least castrati can be 
as beautiful (HER. Enigma 6: snare, by Sarrasine, for himself). 
(422) Oh, you want complinwnt8." * HER. Enigma 6: snare, by 
Sarrasine, for himself (psychological proof: coquetry). 
(423) She mailed at him ltIdly, and ramng her 'Ifi huvenward, w mumwred: "FdtlIl buutyr' * Derived from a compler: pieta-
168 
rial code, La Zambinella here achieves her final incarnation, or re­
veals her ultimate origin: t1.. MCidonruJ with RtriBed Eyes. This is a 
powerful stereotype, a major element in the Code of Pathos (Ra­
phael, EI Greco, Racine's Junie and Esther, etc.). The image is 
sadistic (we understand it as giving rise to Samsine's dumb rGge 
in No. 430): it describes the pure, pious, sublime, passive victim 
(Sade's Justine) whose eyes raised heavenward are saying quite 
clearly: see what I will not see, do as you like with my body, I am 
disinterested, pursue your interest (REF. Code of Pathos) . 
(424) At tlurt moment her gdU hod an indacribable expression of 
horror, so powerful. and vivid tlurt Sammne shuddered. * SYM. 
The curse, exclusion ("horror"). ** La Zambinella clearly reveals 
to Sarrasine the essence of her condition, which is horror (the 
curse, the mark) -through the kind of alethic hierarchy of signs in 
which sounds (a cry, an exclamation) are more trustworthy than 
words, aspect more than sounds, and expression (the nee plus ultra 
of sincerity) than aspect. Sarrasine receives the message: he shud­
ders (led to the verge of truth); but he is distracted from the sig­
nified (from its formulation, hom its accession to language, which 
is the only thing that wou1d count) by a sadistic impulse: the sig­
nifier (eyes raised heavenward) leads him not to the castrato's 
truth but to his own, which is to destroy La Zambinella, whatever 
her sex (HER. Enigma 6: disclosure, La Zambinella to Sarrasine). 
(425) "FrenchJTldn," she went on, "forget this moment of J'J'JIJd­
ness forever. * ACf. "Declaration": 13: command to forget. 
(426) I respect you, * Three meanings are mingled here: refusal 
of sex (in the Code of Love, respect is the euphemism which per­
mits rejecting the partner's desire without in8icting too deep a 
narcissistic wound) ; sincerity (led on for the sake of fun into a trick 
at your expense, I have come to know you and respect you); pru­
dence (when you learn the truth, without having lost everything, 
you will forgo your violence and thus we will end this adventure at 
the least cost to me). These meanings are possible, i.e., indiscern­
ible (HER. Enigma 6: equivocation). 
(427) but til for lewe, do not tIIIc it of me; tlurt feeling is maothered 
in my heart. I have no heartr' Uae cried, weeping. "The It4ge where 
lfi9 
you SCIW me, that aPfJl4we, that music, that fame' cam condemnMJ 
to, BUCh is my life,' httve no other. * La Zambinella reverts again 
to the definition of being-castrated. By a euphemism alreadyem­
ployed, the "heart" designates the very thing removed from the 
castrato. A deficient creature, he is condemned to an exterior CI:­
istence, mutilated at his core, in his plenitude, in that unclemedth 
which, for Sarrasine, defines in one impulse art, truth, and life. 
This definition draws its support (by citing it) from a cultural 
code: the actor is condemned to exteriority (the tragedy of the 
clown, etc.) (SYM. Castrato's condition). 
( 428) 'n ca few hours )'Ou will not see me in the BdfM wei)', tit. 
WOmdn ),ou love will be detul." * HER. "Machination": 10: an­
ticipation of the end. ** The woman will be dead: (1) because I 
will die; (2) because you will no longer love me; (3) because the 
false envelope of femininity will fall away, etc. This ambivalence is 
based on what we have called the metonymic falsehood: Woman 
sometimes designates the total person, sometimes the sex, so~ 
times the imaginary object created by a sentiment of love; the pre­
tense consists in playing on relations of identity between the whole 
and the parts (HER. Enigma 6: equivocation) . 
(429) The sculptor rFItUk rw reply. * The speeches of the Decla­
ration here involve a significant blank, since it is in this silent "an­
swer" that Sarrasine's sadism is located (ACf. "Declaration": H: 
to remain silent) . 
(430) He WdS overcome with ca dumb r. which oppreued hi. 
hecart. He could only gaze with enflmned, burning eyes CIt this ex­
trdOrdinary WOmdn. Lt Zcambinella's wed voice, her rJ14nner, her 
movements cand gestures mcarked with sorrow, meuJncholy, dJ1d dis­
courcagement, awakened all the wedlth of fJdSSion in his soul. EClCh 
word WdS a good. * This sadistic configuration has two purposes 
here: on the one hand, for a short while, it allows the subject to 
ignore the truth his partner is offering him and dispenses him from 
responding to the rejection he has been given; on the other, it ful­
fills in the situation the seme of violence, aggressiveness, assigned 
to Sarrasine at the outset; meaning shifts to action (SEM. Vio­
lence, excess) . 
(431) At that moment they retlChed FrdSCati. * ACT. "Amorous 
outing": 5: to come to an end. ** "Excursion": 5: to arrive at the 
destination. 
(432) As the ttrtUt offered his mistress his arm to asrirt her in 
alighting, • ACT. "Amorous outing": 6: to assist in alighting 
from the carriage (corresponds to No. 393: to get into the same 
carriage) . 
( 433) he felt her shiver. 
"What is wrong? You would kill me," he cried, seeing her gTow 
pale, "if , were even an innocent cause of your Ilightut unlulpf1i-
ness." 
"A S1IdIte," she StJid, pointing to d gTdBI S1IdIte which WdS gliding 
along d ditch. '" am afraid of those horrid cretJtureB." SdrrdSine 
crushed the S1IdIte', hedd with his heel. * The episode of the snake 
is the element of a proof (a fJrobdtio) whose enthymeme (albeit 
defective) we know: Women are timid; La Zambinella is timid; 
La Zambinella is a woman. The snake episode serves as a minor 
exemplum (SEM. Pusillanimity, timidity). 
LXXIII. THE SIGNIFIED AS CONCLUSION 
The snake episode is both an exemplum (inductive weapon of 
the old rhetoric) and a signifier (referring to a character seme 
attached in this case to the castrato). In the classic system, 
semantic proof is indistinguishable from a logical process: one 
must simultaneously work up from signifier to signified and 
work down from the example to the generality that can be 
induced from it. Between the signifier (to be frightened of a 
make) and the signified (to be impressionable as a woman) 
there is the same distance as between an endoxal premise 
(timid people are afraid of snakes) and its abridged conclu­
sion (La Zambinella is timid). Semic space is g!ued to her­
~~~tic. s.Fce: the point is always -to"lociteinthe"perspective 
171 
of the classic text a profound or final truth (the profound is 
what is discovered at the end) . - _. --.-----. .--
(Hi) "How Cdn )'ou be so brave?" La 'Ltrnbinelld continued, 
looking with visible horror at the dedd ref:1tile. * SEM. ''Timid­
ity." Timidity permits a recurrence of "protection," an alibi of love 
"minus sex." 
(435) "Ala," the artist replied, mUling, "now do )'ou dttre den)' ),OU 
are d WOmdW' * The form of the sentence "Do )IOu dtue deny" 
attests the arrogant triumph of a fact. But this fact is merely the 
oonclusion of a defective enthymeme (You are timid, therefore you 
are a woman) (HER. Enigma 6: snare, by Sarrasine, for himself: 
psychological proof of femininity) . 
(436) They rejoined their companio,., dM BtroUed through the 
woods of the V il1d Ludovisi, which in those days belonged to Cdr­
dirud CicogncJrd. * ACT. "Excursion": 6: to stroll in the woods. 
Strictly speaking, the allusion to Cardinal Cicognara is insignificant 
(has no functional importance); however, in addition to introduc­
ing an effect of reality, it enables the name of La Zambinella's pro­
tector and Sarrasine's murderer to be reintroduced: this is !~ 
"glue" of the readerly . . -~---------?-
(437) TIuJt morning fled too quicld)' fOr the eRdmored sculptor, • 
REF. Love and Time Passing. 
( 438) but it WdB filled with d host of incidents which revealed to 
him the coquetry, the wettknea, tmd the "'ictlC)' of tlail wit dM 
enervated being .• SEM. Pusillanimity, Femininity. 
(439) This WdB WOmdn herself, with her sudden f8tlT8, her irrd­
tiorud whims, her instinctive worries, her impetuous boldness, her 
(uBBings, dnd her delicious sensibility .• SEM. Femininity. The 
source of the sentence cannot be discerned. Who is speaking? Is it 
Sarrasine? the narrator? the author? Balzac-the-author? Balzac-the-
man? romanticism? bourgeoisie? universal wisdom? The intersect­
ing of all these origins creates the writing. 
(+to) It ~d that as they were wcmdering in the open coun­
tryside, the little group of merry singer. BCIW in the distdnce some 
heavily tJTTned men whow rRdnneT of dr888 WclS ftIT from red8BUring. 
Someone said, "They must be highwaymen," ttnd everyone quicle­
ened his fJdce towtITd the refuge of the Czrdindl'. grounds. At this 
critictll moment, &marine BCIW from LA ZtITnbinellti. ptJIlor tIutt 
she no longer IuuJ the rtrength to walle; he toole her up in his tJrmI 
and ctlTried her for d while, running. When he CdJne to d nurby 
tlTbor, he put her down. * The episode of the highwaymen is an 
exemplum (SEM. PusilJanimity, Timidity, Femininity). 
LXXIV. TIlE MASTERY OF MEANINC 
A cla~~~~~ti.ve always ~ves t~_~_ i~'p.~~~on.:.. ~_~.!!tho~ 
first conceives the signified (or the generality) and then finds 
~i~ according to the" chance of his imagination, "good" sig­
nifiers, probative examples; the classic author is like an artisan 
bent over the workbench of meaning and selecting the best 
apresl1ions for the concept he has already formed. For in­
stance, timidity: one selects the sound of a champagne cork, a 
story of a snake, a story of highwaymen. However, the signify­
ing imagination is even more profitable if it fills a double func­
tion; it then endeavors to produce doubly articulated signs, 
committed to that solidarity of notations which defines the 
readerly; for instance, impiety: one could be content to repre­
sent the subject playing games in church, but it is a greater art 
to link impiety to the child's vocation (by showing Sarrasine 
whittling licentious pieces during Mass) or to contrast it with 
La Zambinella's superstition (which makes Sanasine laugh); 
for sculpture and pusillanimity belong to different nanative 
networks, and the closer and better calculated the anastomosis 
173 
of the signifiers, the more the text is regarded as "well writ­
ten." In the old rhetoric, the choice of exempld and demon­
strative premises constituted a vast department: inventio: 
beginning with the very end of the demonstration (what one 
wished to prove), one endeavored to marshal arguments and 
direct them appropriately; certain rules helped in doing so 
(notably the topic). Similarly, the classic author becomes a 
perfonner at the moment he evidences his power of conducing 
meaning (a marvelously ambiguous, semantic, and directional 
verb). Indeed, i_t is the dir~ct#on of ~eaning which detennines 
the two major management functions" of the cla'ssK:-text:-tbc­
duthor is always supposed to go from signified to signifier, 
from content to fonn, from idea to text, from passion to ex­
pression; and, in contrast, the critic goes in the other direction, 
works back from signifiers to signified. The mtlBtery of medn­
ing, a veritable semiurgism, is a divine attribute, once this 
meaning is defined as the discharge, the emanation, the spir­
itual efBuvium overflowing from the signified toward the sig­
nifier:_!h~duth'!.r is a god (his place of o~_n.~""!!te_~_~fiedJ; 
as for the critic, he is~e-pri~t whQ~J~~k~tQJ:lCcipher.th~_ 
Writing of the god. 
(441) "Explain to mil," he Iltlid, "how this extremll weakness, 
which I would find hideous in dny other wornctn, which would dis­
pledse mil and whose slighten indicdtion would be almost enough 
to choice my love, pleases dnd channs me in you? * From the sym­
bolic point of view, it is now the subject's tum to advance 
in avowal; he attempts to define that thing he loves in La Zal!lbi:._ 
nella, and that thing is deficiency, n~!I:1Je:iri&,Cas~.tion~~~~e-_ 
less, however far Sarrasine goes in this kind of self-analysis, he 
persists in misleading himself by continuing to employ a language 
of double understanding: for if the extremity of weakness is the 
superlative tenn of a hierarchy, pusillanimity connotes a superla­
tive woman, a reinforced essence, a Super-Woman; if, on the other 
band, extremity is defined as the lowest depth, it designates, in the 
ambinellian body, its center, which is absence. These are, in a 
sense, the two extremities that are superimposed, or that set up an 
interference, in Sarrasine's statement: social language, saturated 
with prejudices, endoXlli, syllogisms, cultural references (this lan­
guage infallibly decides in favor of La Zambinella's femininity), 
and symbolic language, which persists in stating the agreement be­
tween Sarrasine and castration (SYM. Desire for Castration) . 
(442) Ah, how IloWl you," he went on. "All your faults, your ter­
rors, your resentments, tJdd tin inclefiruJble tltJCe to your soul. * 
Deficiency (faults, terrors, resentments, all the characteristic prod­
ucts of castration lis a supplement by which La Zambinella differs: 
(I) hom other women (snare of Sarrasine based on an origiTUllity 
in La Zambinella), (2) hom women (truth of Sarrasine who loves 
the castrato in La Zambinella) (SYM. Supplement of deficiency). 
(443) 1 tmnJc 1 would detest tI strong womtln, tI StJppho, tI cou­
rq,eous cretlture fuU of energy tlnd fXUJlrion. * Sarrasine could hardly 
idenJ!!r. m~re clearly the woman he fears: tJie-Castiatirtg woman, 
~ned~y the "Inveited-pTacesDtnx:cupies-onlJi-e-:-sexua)'axi$"'C tI 
rij)pho). We recall that the texflw'aIrea:dy presented several 
images of this active woman: Mme de Lanty, the young woman 
the narrator loves, and substitutively Bouchardon, a possessive 
mother who has kept her child sequestered from scx. Now, if 
destiny is indeed that precise and "designated" action which causes 
two extICtly opposite events suddenly to overlap and become identi­
fied, Sarrasine here states his destiny (or what is fdttJl in his adven­
ture): for in order to See Sappho, the castrating woman, he seeks 
refuge with the castrated being whose very deficiency reassures him; 
however, this being.willlay hands on him more certainly than the 
redoubtable Sappho, and will drag him into its own emptiness: 
it is for having Sed castration that Sarrasine will be castrated: thus 
!be6gure faIriiliaihom dream and story'is fulfilled: to seek refu&e 
in the arms of the murderer who is seeking you (SYM. Fear of 
castration) . 
(+H) Oh, soft, frctil cretJture, how could you be otherwise? * La 
Zambinella's difference (that deficiency which is an absolutely pre­
cious supplement, since it is the very essence of the adorable) is 
175 
necessary: everything is justified, both the castrato and desire far 
the castrato (SYM. Inevitability of castration). 
(+4S) Tlutt tmgclic voice, thdt delic4U voice would be em tIRO""'. 
coming from tDrf body but )'oun." * The diJference, an essential" 
adorable diHerence, is here given a specific site: the body. If Su­
rasine were reading what he says, he could no longer pretend his 
pleasure in the castrato was a mistake or a sublimation; he himself 
formulates the truth, the truth of the enigma, of La Zambinella, of 
himself. The symbolic terms are here restated in their proper order: 
to public opinion, to mythic language, to the cultural code uncia 
which the castrato is a count.,-feit of woman and the pleasure be 
can create an anomtlly, Samsine replies that the union of the ador­
able voice and the castrated body is right: the body produces the 
voice and the voice justifies the body; ~() love La ~~~_i!l~~ 
voice, as it is, is to love the body from which it proceeds, as it is 
(SYM. Love of the castrato).- .--~-
(+16) "I Cdnnot give)'ou tin)' hope," .he 1tIid. * ACf. "Declam­
tion": IS: command to give up. 
( ..... 7) "Stop ~ng to me in tlail wCI)', * "Declaration": 16: 
command to be silent. 
( ..... 8) becauIe they will mIlIee d fool of )'OU. * HER. "Machina­
tion": 11: equivocation. La Zambinella's warning is equivocal: on 
the one band she refers to the true purpose of the plot, laughter, 
and on the other she speaks of a risk, whereas the damage has al­
ready been done. 
( +f9 ) 1 ClJnnot Itop )'ou from coming to the thettter; but if )'ou low 
me or if )'ou are wile, )'ou will come tM' no mor.. * ACf ~ "Dec­
laration": 17: final dismissal. 
LXXV. THE DECLARATION OF LOVE 
The declaration of love (a banal, tIlrettdy written sequence, if 
ever there was one) merely alternates an assertion (1Io'Ve you) 
176 
and a disclaimer (do not love me); fonnally, therefore, it is 
both subject to variation (in the musical sense) and infinite. 
Variation results from the poverty of terms (there are only 
two), which requires finding for each of them a whole list of 
different signifiers; here these signifiers are redSORS (to love or 
to reject); however, in other cases (in lyric poetry, for exam­
pie) they can be metaphorical substitutes. Only a historical 
inventory of the forms of the language of love could exploit 
these variations and reveal to us the meaning of "Parlez-moi 
d'amour," whether this meaning has evolved, etc. Infinitude, 
on the other hand, results from repetition: repetition is, very 
precisely, the fact that there is no reason to stop. By these two 
characteristics (variation and infinitude) we already see that 
the declaration of love (accepted or rejected) is a contestant 
discourse, like the "scene" (LXIV): two languages with dif­
f~t_ va~hi_ng points (metaphorical perspectives l are placed 
!J!a~~Jo pack; all they have in common is their participation in 
the same paradigm, that of ya/no, which is ultimately the 
pure form of any paradigm, so that the contestation (or the 
declaration) appears as a kind of obsessive game of meaning, 
a litany, comparable to the child's game of alternatives in 
Freud, or to the game of the Hindu god who eternally alter­
nates the creation and destruction of the world, thereby mak­
ing that world, our world, a mere plaything, and the repeated 
difference the game itself, meaning as a superior game. 
(450) Listen, monsieur," she said in a low voice. * HER. 
Enigma 6: disclosure, imminent and delayed. 
(451) "Oh, be rtiU," the irn.ptJmoned fITtiat Bdid. * The naming 
of the castrato has been interrupted (for that is what La Zambi­
nella was 6nally prepared to do, in a low 'Voice) (SYM. Taboo on 
the word castrato). ** HER. Enigma 6: snare, by Sarrasine, for 
177 
himself. The subject's vital interest is not ~o hear the truth, just. 
the vital interest of the discourse is to contiDue"'to"siupend-HiC 
answer to the enigma. --
LXXVI. CHARACTER AND DISCOURSE 
Sarrasine interrupts La Zambinella and thereby arrests the a~ 
pearance of the truth. If we have a realistic view Qf cMrcJCter, 
if we believe that Sarrasine has a life off the page, we WlUlook 
for motives for this interruption (enthusiasm, unconscious 
denial of the truth, etc.). If we have a realistic v!,~ ~~_~ 
course, if we consider the story being told as a mechanism 
WlUcli-must function until the end, we will say that since the 
law of narrative decrees that it continue, it was necessary that 
the word C4Strclto not be spoken. Now these two views, a!­
though derived from different likelihoods and in principle in­
dependent (even opposed), support each other: a commo~ 
sentence is produced which unexpectedly contains elementso! 
various languages: Sarrasine is impassioned because .the dis­
course must not end; the discourse can continue because Sar· 
rasine, impassioned, talks without listening. ~th circuits 3:re 
necessarily undecidable. ,~ narrative writing is of t!I~ v~ 
~ndecidability. From a critical point of view, therefore, it is as 
wrong to suppress the character as it is to take him off the 
page in order to tum him into a psychological character (en­
dowed with possible motives): the cMrcJCter and the discourse 
are each other's accomplices: the discourse-creates inth~~h~r­
acter its own accomplice: a form of theurgical detachment by 
which, mythically, God has given himself a subject, man a 
helpmate, etc., whose relative independence, once they have 
been created, allows for pUtying. Such is discourse: if it creates 
characters, it is not to make them play among themselves 
178 
before us but to play with them, to obtain from them a com­
plicity which assures the uninterrupted exchange of the codes: 
the characters are types of discourse and, conversely, the dis­
course is a character like the others. 
(.52) "Obsttlcla f114Ite my love more ardent." * REF. Dynamics 
of passion. 
(.53) L4 Zambinelld' B graceful and modest attitutJ. did not 
cIumge, but she f.zl silent fIB though a terribr. thought Iuu1 reYe4led 
lOme misfortune to her. * ACf. "Danger": 6: premonition of 
misfortune. 
(is.) When it came time to return to Rome, she got into the 
four-seated COtlCh, ordering the BCUlptor with imperious cruelty to 
rft1lrn to Rome alone in the cdrTi4ge. * ACf. "Excursion": 7: 
return. ** ACf. "Amorous Outing": 7: separate return. 
(i55) During the journey, Sarrosine resolved to ltidnap L4 Zambi­
Mild. He spent the entire day f114Iting pldns, eoch more outrageous 
tlum the other. * REF. Chronology: the excursion and the kid­
napping are separated by one day (however, a mere period sepa­
rates the "Excursion" from the "Kidnapping"). ** ACf. "Kid­
napping": I: decision and plans. 
(.56) At nightfall, fIB he "'dB going out to inquire where his mis­
tress', fMl4zzo "'fIB located, * ACf. "Kidnapping": 2: preliminary 
information. 
(i57) he met one of his friends on the threshold. 
"My dear felluw," he Bttid, "our ambCIBsddor hCIB asJced me to 
invite you to his house tonight. He is giving a nutgnificent concert, * ACf. "Concert": I: invitation. 
I I' 
(.58) and when I tell you tlutt Zambinella will be there " * 
I~Wan normally calls for the article before a proper name. This 
rule, elsewhere insignificant, here has consequences of a hermeneu-
179 
tic order, owing to the enigma of Zambinella's sex: for a Freoc:k~ 
and English reader, the article (u.) emphasizes the feminine af~ 
the name it precedes (it is a common way of establishing the faai.~ 
ninity of transvestites), and the discoune, with an eye to ~] 
porting the sexual pretense of which Sarruine is the victim, _'~ 
heretofore (with one or two exceptions) stated: La ZambineDL : 
Any loss of the article therefore has a hermeneutic deroding fuuo. . 
tion, shifting the soprano from feminine to masculine ~ 
Btll4). Whence a considerable play on this article, present or : 
absent according to the speaker's situation in relation to the c-. ' 
trato's secret. Here Sarrasine's friend, aware of Roman customs an4 
speaking French to a French person, defeminizes the singer (HEll 
Enigma 6: decipherment, common knowledge to Sarrasine). 
("59) "Zdmbinelld," cried StaT ... , int~ by tM 1IdIIII, 
"rm rI'UId about ,.,.'" 
"You',. like everyone ""'," hiI frimd replied. * When Sam­
sine repeats Zambinella's name without the article, he does so with 
an entirely di&erent inftection; 6rst: from the viewpoint of veris~ 
itude (that is, a certain psychological congruence of data), Sarra­
sine, with a poor knowledge of Italian (as the chronological code 
has informed us) grants no pertinence to the article's presence or 
absence; in addition, from the stylistic viewpoint, the ex!!~lJ!.Ijim 
point puts the name at "degree zno," for it appears '&re in ib 
essence, anterior to any morphological treatment "(this was ear1ic:f 
the case with the shout by which acclaim, in No. 205, informed 
Sarrasine of La Zambinella's existence). His friend's word info~ 
Sarrasine of the artist's masculinity no more than the masculine- he 
himself employs signi6es the least awamle5S on hiS part of Zam: 
binella's secret (HER. Enigma 6: snare, by Sarrasine, for himself). ** The two lines of dialogue ( .. 58 and "59) establish a further 
ambivalence in the discoune: the friend is aesthetically mad about 
Zambinella; Sarrasine is erotically mad about La Zambinella 
(HER. Enigma 6: equivocation). 
(-460) "If you me my friends, you, Vim, lAumbour& dnd AlJ.­
grain. will you help me do .omething afkr the partyr' Sm1(";'" 
tIIud. 
"It', not lOme CtlTdinol to ". JOD.d? .. not ... r' 
180 
"No, no," &marine Itlid, ''fm not dSlting you to do anything an 
Iwnat person couldn't 00." * ACT. "Kidnapping": 3: recruitiog 
ICCOmplices. ** By copying later on, as Adoois, the statue of La 
Zambinella, Vien, introduced here, will ensure the continuity of 
the chain of duplication (SYM. Replication of bodies). 
(461) In a ahort time, tit. BCulptor Iuu1 4mmged ewrything for 
the BUCCe8S of his uruJ.rtalting. * ACT. "Kidnapping": 4: anange· 
mentsmade. 
( 462) He WCII one of til. la6t to tJr1'iw at tit. ambaIIador'I, * 
ACT. "Concert": 2: to arrive late. In a banal sequence (to go to a 
coocert) this equally banal term (to arrive ~t~) call have i~ense 
~rative force: . is it not because he arrives late at the Princess de 
CUennaotcs's concert thiat Proust's narrator is vouchsafed the remi-
nisCences 00 which the work is based? . 
LXXVlI. THE READERLY II: DETERMINED/DETERMINANT 
We have discussed the law of solidarity which governs the 
laderly: everything holds together, everything must hold to­
gether as well as possible (LXVI). Vien is both Sarrasine's 
accomplice and his heir (he will transmit La Zambine1la's 
image to posterity); these two functions are separated in the 
sequence of the discourse, so that on the one hand Vim seems 
to appear in the story for the first time by pure contingency, 
without our knowing at the time whether he will "re-serve" 
some purpose (Vien's syntagmatic companions, Lauterbourg 
and Allegrain, no sooner brought into the discourse, disappear 
from it forever), and on the other hand, reappearing later on 
(No. 516) to copy the statue of La Zambinella, Vien is then 
recogniud, a recognition which must afford logical satisfac­
tion: is it not fitting that Vien copy the statue Samsine has 
created. since he was his friend? The moral law, the law of 
value of the readerly, is to fill in the chains of causality; for 
thus each determinant must be, insofar as possible, deter-
181 
mined, so that every notation is intermediary, doubly orient~ 
caught up in an ultimate progression: the old man's deafness 
determines the nanator to let it be known that he knows his 
identity (No. 70), but the deafness itself is determined by his 
great age. So here: Sarrasine arrives late at the amb~~daO 
concert: this is explained (preparation for the kidI\app~nLhas 
been time-consuming) and it expldins: Zambinella is already 
singing, she will falter in public, Cicognara will notice it a~ 
issue the order to have her watched and then to have Sanasi~ 
murdered. Sarrasine's lateness therefore is a crossroad ~~rm: 
determined and determinant, it allows for a nttturtd anasto:­
mosis between the Kidnapping and the Murder. This is the 
narrative fabric: seemingly subject to the discontinuity of mes­
sages, each of which, when it comes into play, is received as a 
useless supplement (whose very gratuitousness serves to au­
thenticate the fiction by what we have called the retllity ef­
fect), but is in fact saturated with pseudo-logical links, relays. 
doubly oriented terms: in short, it is ccdcul4tion which effects 
the plenitude of this literature: here dissemination is not the 
random scattering of meanings toward the infinity of the lan­
guage but a simple-temporary-suspension of aHinitive, al­
ready magnetized elements, before they are summoned to­
gether to take their place, economically, in the same fJdClcage. 
(463) but he had come in a traveling carrittge clrtlWn by POwerful 
horses and driven by one of the most entnprising vetturini of 
Rome. * ACT. "Kidnapping": 5: rapid means of escape ... 
REF. I talianness (vetturini). 
(464) The ambdssddor's polQ%ZD was crowded; * ACT. "Con­
cert": 3: large audience ... SEM. Star (the crowd is an index of 
LI ZambinelJa's popularity; this popularity is functional, since it 
will justify the soprano's and consequently the Lantys' immense 
fortune. 
(165) not without some difficulty, the sculptor, who WdB d rtrdnger 
to everyone present, lTIdde his wei)' to the Idlon where Zcambindl4 
Wd8 singing cat thcat very moment. * ACf. "Concert": i: to reach 
the music room. It takes Sanasine some time to reach the salon, 
not only beC4USe there is a crowd; it is so thcat, retroactively, it can 
be stated that Zambinella is famous. ** REF. Chronology. Sarra­
sine is a stranger to those present becaUse he has not been in Rome 
very long (basis for his ignorance): "everything holds together." *** In its tum, after Sanasine's friend, the discourse adopts the 
masculine, even though the truth has hot yet been revealed either 
to Sarrasine or to the reader; in fact, the (realistic) discourse ad­
heres mythically to an expressive function: it pretends to believe in 
theprior existence of a referent (a reality) that it must register, 
copy; communicate; now, at this point in the story, the referent, 
te~:·the soprano, is already bodily before the eyes of the discourse: 
the discourse is in the salon, it already sees La Zambinel1a dressed as 
alDan: it would be carrying the lie a moment too far to continue 
to-refer to a character in the feminine (HER. Enigma 6: decipher­
ment, discourse to the reader) . 
(i66) "Is it out of consideration for the C4rdiruds, bishops, dnd 
cabbes present," SmrcaBine dBked, "that she is dressed liJce d lTI4n, 
thcat she is wedTing d snood, kinky hlIir, and d sword?" * The 
enigma of La Zambinella is situated wholly between two modes of 
dress: as a woman (No. 323) and as man (here). Clothing appears 
(or would appear) to be the peremptory proof of sex: yet Sarrasine, 
determined to preserve his snare at any cost, hopes to destroy fact 
by disputing motivation (HER. Enigma 6: snare, by Sanasine, for 
himself). ** From now on, La Zambinel1a's femininity is "cited" 
(she): it would seem that no one can assume it any longer. How­
ever, the origin of this citation is enigmatic: is the discourse itali­
cizing it? Is Sarrasine emphasizing it in speaking the pronoun? 
(HER. Enigma 6: decipherment). *** "l(jnky hair"; this is a 
"realistic" detail. not because it is precise, but because it evokes 
the image of a Neapolitan rcJt,dUO and because this image, in con­
formity with the historical code of c:astrati, helps to unmask the 
boy, decipher the enigma, more surely than the sword or mode of 
dress (HER. Enigma 6: decipherment, and REF. Historical code 
of castrati) . 
(167) "She? Whdt sher' tlB1ced the old noblnum to whom s.­
,dline IuJd been Bf'e4lcing. "IA 'Ltmbinelld." "IA 'Ltmbinelldr' ,. 
Roman prince repu.d. "Ar, ),ou jolting? * HER. Enigma 6: dis­
closure, by the collectivity, to Sarrasine. The disclosure occurs '" 
means of a kind of excbmatory and interrogatory agitation of the 
snare; however, since the snare concerns sex, every contestation is 
alternative and immediately discloses the other term. 
(i68) Where are ),OU from? * Every chronological reference 
tended to persuade us, "objectively," that Sarrasine's Italian experi­
ence was of short dwation; this chronological line culminates here 
in a diegetic function: Sarrasme's innocence explains the snare in 
which he has lived and from which the elderly Prince Chigi is 
awakening him (HER. Enigma 6: disclosure: indirect expbnatioD 
of the snare) . 
(469) HdB there ever been d woman on the Roman rtdge? And 
don't )'OU 1cnow dbout the creatura who sing fmude ,ala in tM 
PcJfNIl StIIta? * HER. Enigma 6: disclosure (although euphemis­
tic, stated in generalities, and without the word being spoken, the 
truth could not be better put: ZambincUa is a castrato). ** REF. 
History of music in the Papal States. 
LXXVID. TO DIE OF IGNORANCE 
Resumes of common knowledge, the cultural codes provide 
the syllogisms iia the narrative (there are many, as we have 
seen) with their major premise, based always on public 0P~I!­
ion ("probable." as the old logic said), on an endoxal buth, in 
~hort, on the discourse ~f othen. SamiSine;-whohas persisted 
in proving to himself La Zambinella's false femininity by these 
enthymemes, will die because of an inaccurate and inconclu­
sive reasoning: it is from the discourse of others! ~om its s~~~ 
Buity of reasons that he dies. !Jut it (~_~ -mY~!KJy a~4 
complementarily, a defect in this discou.r~ whidl.kill£.him: all 
the cultural codes, taken up from citation to ~i~t:i~n-,-_!C?gether 
184 
form an oddly joined miniature version of encyclopedic knowl­
~, a fairago:·'tl1iS- farrago forms tbe everyday "reality" in 
relation to which the subject adapts himself, lives. gne defect 
in this encyclopedia, one hole in this cultural fabric, and death 
~~:result. Ignorant orthe code of Paparcus~C?~s. -·Sam~ige 
~~ ~!.'?~ a gap in knowledge ("Don't you know .,").lNm 
~_~lank in the discourse of others. ,It is significant that this 
discourse finally succeeds (too late, but it would always have 
been too late) in reaching Sarrasine through the voice of an 
old, "realistic" (didn't he try to realize a good investment with 
his ragauo's voice?) courtier, a spokesman for that vital knowl­
edge on which "reality" is based. What is ha~hly contrasted 
to the complex constructions of the symbol (which have taken 
up-the entire story), what is rightfully called upon to triumph 
over them, is social truth, the code of institutions-the prin­
ciple of reality. 
(+70) I crm the one, monsieur, who gave Zmnbinell4 his YOke. I 
fJtIid for everything thttt BCd"." ever hdd, even hiB singing te«her. 
WeU, he Iuu so litt~ grdtiwde for the service I rendered him thtlt 
he lUll never consented to set foot in my howe .• Evoking the 
boy instead of the woman or the castrato, thtlt flCdmp reestablishes 
(if only fteetingly) a normal-if one can use the word-axis of the 
sexes (garbled throughout the story by the castrato's uncertain situ­
ation, sometimes the essence of femininity, sometimes the dis­
claimer of all sexuality) (SYM. Axis of the sexes) ... SYM. Be­
fore castration. 
LXXIX. BEFORE CASTRATION 
Beyond denoting the truth, Chigi's little speech is fatal in two 
other ways, according to the images it releases. First, it denomi­
nates the boy in Zambinella, forces Sarrasine to retreat from 
the superlative Woman to the scamp (the Neapolitan boy 
185 
with kinky hair): he produces in the subject what we might 
call a paradigmatic fall: two diametrically opposed tenns (DB 
the one hand the Super-Woman, end and foundation of Art. 
and on the other a dirty, tattered Neapolitan streP.t: boy) am 
suddenly brought together in one person: the imfJOSSible co. 
junction (to use Machiavelli's phrase) occurs; meaning, statu­
torily based on difference, is abolished: there is no more mean­
ing, and this subversion is fatal. Further, by evoking the time 
prior to Zambinella's castration (this is not speculation on our 
part but merely a development of the connotation), Chigi ~ 
leases a scene, a whole little anterior novel: the rctgeJUO taken 
in and kept by the old man who takes charge of both his oper­
ation (I paid for everything) and his education, the ingratitude 
of the protege on his way to stardom, cynically taking a richer, 
more powerful, and visibly more amorous protector (the Car­
dinal). The image clearly has a sadistic function: it forces Sar­
mine to read his beloved as a boy (the only touch of pederasty 
in the entire story); it vulgarizes castration, situated as a per­
fectly real surgical operation (dated, endowed with a before 
and an after); last, it exposes Chigi as the literal castrator (the 
one who paid for the operation); now it is this same Chigi who 
leads Sarrasine to castration and death through the insignifi­
cant froth of his prattle: a colorless mediator, lacking symbolic 
scale, engulfed in contingency, a self-assured upholder of the 
endoxal Law, but one who, precisely because situated outside 
meaning, is the very figure of "fate." Th~ ~ !h~~ive 
function of chatter (Proust and James would say: gossip), the 
eSsence of the discourse of others, and thereby the ·deadliest 
language imaginable.-
(HI) And yet, if he makes a fortune, he wiD owe it all to ",." * 
In a hypothetical fonn, ZambineIla's enonnous success is pre­
dicted. We must here recall that in the eightccoth century a ca. 
186 
bato could occupy the position and amass the fortune of a great 
international star. Caffarelli bought a duchy (San Donato), be­
came a dulce, and built himself a magnificent palace. Farinelli ("II 
"¥fIUo") left England (where he had triumphed over Handel) 
covered with gold; proceeding to Spain, he cured the mystic leth­
argy of Philip V by singing to him daily (moreover, always the 
same song); and for ten years received from the King an annual 
pension of 14 million old francs; discharged by Charles III, he 
built himself a superb palace in Bologna. These facts show the 
fortune possible for a successful castrato like La Zambinella: the 
operation paid for by old Chigi could be profitable, and in allud­
ing to this kind of quite financial interest (aside from the fact that 
money is never symbolically neuter), the discourse connects the 
Lanty fortune (the initial theme in a chain of enigmas and the 
"subject" of this "scene from Parisian Life") to a sordid origin: a 
castration operation, paid for by a Roman prince (for profit or 
debauch), perfonned on a young Neapolitan boy who later "threw 
him over" (SEM. Star). 
("72) Prince Chigi mtty well Iutve gone on tdlking for some time; 
StmdSine Wdl not listening to him. A horrid truth htJd crept into his 
aoul. It Wdl tIS though he 1uu1 been rtruck by lightning. He stood 
motionless, his eyes fixed * HER. Enigma 6: disclosure confinned. 
The complete disclosure is accomplished in three stages: (1) agi­
tation of the snare, (2) explanation, (3) its effect. 
LXXX. DENOUEMENT AND DISCLOSURE 
In what Brecht calls dramatic theater, there is a passionate in­
terest in the denouement; in epic theater, in the development. 
Sarrasine is a drama tic story (what will happen to the hero? how 
Will he "end up"?), but the denouement is compromised in 
a disclosure: what happens, what constitutes the denouement, 
is the truth. This truth can have different names, according to 
likelihoods (critical pertinences): for the anecdote, the truth 
is a referent (a real object) : Zt2mbinelUt is d CdStrdto. For psy-
18, 
chology, it is a misfortune: I have lcwed d CdStrato. For tile 
symbol, it is an enlightenment: in ZmnbinelUt, it is the _ 
tredo whom I lutve loved. For the narrative, it is a predictioa:! 
lutving been touched by CdStration, I must die. In any ev~: 
truth is the predicate at last discovered, the subject at last pmoj 
vided with its complement; since the character, if we grasped it: 
merely on the level of the story's development, i.e., from _ 
epic viewpoint, would always appear incomplete, unsaturated. 
a subject wandering in search of its final predicate: nothing is 
shown during this wandering but snares, mistakes: the enigma 
is this predicative lack; disclosing, the discourse completes the 
logical formula and it is this recovered plenitude which affords 
the denouement of the drama: the subject must ultimatdJ 
be supplied with (own) an attribute, and the mother cell 01 
the entire Occident (subject and predicate) must be saturated. 
This temporary wandering of the predicate can be describal 
in terms of a game. The draIOatic narrative is a &.1Ull~.w!th ~ 
players: the snare and the truth. At first a tremendous indeter­
mination rules their encounters, the wandering is wide of the 
mark; gradually, however, the two networks move closer to­
gether, co-penetrate, determination is completed and with it 
the subject; disclosure is then the final stroke by which the 
initial "probable" shifts to the "necessary": the game is ended, 
the drama has its denouement, the subject correctly "predi­
cated" (fixed): the discourse can do nothing more than faR 
silent. Contrary to what occurs in the epic work (as Brecht 
conceived it), nothing Iuu; been shown (offered an immediate 
critique by the reader) : what is shown is shown in on~ stroke, 
and at the end: it is the end which is shown. 
(473) on the fol8e linger. * Enigmatic fonnulation (hi prhendu 
cMnteur); we would expect instead the feminine (ld pretendua 
188 
chanteuse), for in Ut Zambinella, it is not the singing which is 
false but the sex, and since the sex here is masculine (the only 
gender the language possesses for castrato (Ie CdStrat), it cannot 
be "false"; but perhaps it is Zambinella's entire person which is 
affected by pretension, falseness, imposture, whatever his appear­
ance; in order for this appearance not to be "false," Ut Zambinella 
would have to be dressed as a castrato, a costume that Papal society 
had not provided for (HER. Enigma 6: disclosure). 
(174) His fiery gcue exerted d sort of m4grwtic influence on Zcun­
binelld, * ACf. "Incident" (at a concert, a perfonnance): 1: 
gaining the attention of the artist on stage. 
(475) for the musico (intllly tumed to look at SttrrCJBine, * ACT. 
"Incident": 2: attention gained. ** REF. ltalianness (hence­
forth the discourse no longer refers to Zambinella in the feminine) . 
("76) CJnd at that moment his hedVenly voice fCJlUTed. He trem­
bledl * ACf. "Incident": 3: artist's difficulty. ** ACf. "Dan­
ger" (for Ut Zambinella) : 7: reaction of fright. 
("77) An involuntary mumwr esctlf'in& from the dUdience he had 
kept han&in& on his lips completed his discomfiture; * ACT. "In­
cident": .. : collective discomfiture. 
("78) he B4t down dnd cut short his cnieJ. * ACT. "Incident": 5: 
interruption of the song, of the performance. 
("79) Cmdintll CicognmQ., who held glanced out the COrMr of his 
eye to see what held attracted his prot~ge', attention, then saw the 
FrenchmCJn: * ACT. "Murder": 2: indication of the victim. The 
"~.J!~.r" sequence develops on the basis of the Concert Incident, 
~j~~ ~ thereby justified functionally: without the incident (whicn 
i~lf is due to Sarrasine's delay), ~~ would be no greeting for 
Zambinella, no murder for Sarrasine. 
( "SO) he le4ned over to one of his ecclesi4sticCJl tJide,-de~mp CJnd 
dppetued to be dBkin& the sculptor" Mme. * ACT. "Murder": 5: 
request for infonnation. 
( '181) Having obtllined the cmswer he sought, * ACf. "Munier": 
4: infonnation received. 
( 482) he regarded the artist with grut dttention * ACf. "Mur­
der": 5: evaluation and interior decision. 
(483) dnd gave dn order to dn dbW, who quiclcly ~ed .• 
ACf. "Murder": 6: secret order. This portion of the sequence has 
a semie as well as an operative function: it establishes a "shadowy" 
atmosphere (oa:ult power of the Church, forbidden loves, secret 
orders, etc.), the very one which, ironically, Sarrasine had bcea 
disappointed not to find when confronted with a carousing theater 
party instead of a lover's tryst (No. 316). 
(484) During this time, ZdmbinslUJ, having recovered himself. * 
ACf. "Incident": 6: to recover oneself. 
(485) once more begdn the piece * ACf. "Incident": 7: recom­
mence singing. 
(486) he IuJd so cdpriciously interrupted; * SEM. Star. 
LXXXI. VOICE OF THE PERSON 
The end approaches, the end of our transcription as well. We 
must therefore reexamine one by one each of the Voices (each 
of the codes) whose grid has formed the text. Here is one of 
the very last semes. What is it then that we have learned from 
the inventory of these semes? The seme (or the signi6ed of 
connotation, strictly speaking) is a connotator of persons, 
places. objects, of which the signi6ed is a CMrdcter. Character 
is an adjective, an attribute, a predicate (for example: unnttfu: 
raI, slutdowy, star, composite, excessive, impious, etc.). Even 
though the connotation may be clear, the nomination of its 
signi6ed is uncertain, approximative, unstable: to fasten a name 
190 
to this signified depends in large part on the critical pertinence 
to which we adhere: the seme is only a departure, an avenue of 
meaning. These avenues can be arranged to fonn various land­
scapes: these are thematics (we have done no such arranging 
here, we have only given a list of these characters, without put­
ting them in any particular order). If we set aside the semes 
of objects or atmospheres, actually rather rare (here, at least), 
what is constant is that the seme is linked to an ideology of the 
person (to inventory the semes in a classic text is therefore 
merely fO observe this ideology): the person is no more than a. 
collection of semes (inversely, however, semes can migrate 
110m one figure in the text to another, if we descend to a cer­
tain symbolic depth, where there is no longer any respect of 
persons: Sarrasine and the narrator have semes in common). 
Thus, from a classic viewpoint (more psychological than sym­
bolic), S~rrasine is the sum, the point of convergence, of: tur­
bulence, artistic gift, independence, excess, femininity, ugli­
ness, composite nature, impiety, love of whittling, will, etc.). 
\vba! gives the illusion that the sum is supplemented by a pre­
cious remainder (something like individtuJlity, in that, quali­
tative and ineffable, it may escape the vulgar booklceepin..g Qf 
~~positional characters) is the Proper Name, the difference 
completed by what is proper to it. The proper name enables 
the person to exist outside the semes, whose sum nonetheless 
constitutes it entirely. As soon as a Name exists (even a pro­
noun) to Row toward and fasten onto, the semes become pred­
~.~es, inductors of truth. and the Name becomes a subjec.t: we 
can say that what is proper to narrative is not action but the 
c.haracter as Proper Name: the senUc raw material (correspond­
ing to a certain moment of our history of the narrative) com­
pletes what is proper to being, fills the name with adjectives. 
The inventory and structuration of semes, the reception of 
this Voice of the person, can be of great service to psychologi­
cal criticism, of minor service to thematic criticism, of minor 
service to psychoanalytical criticism: everything depends OD 
the level where we halt the nomination of the serne. 
(+87) but he Btlng it btully, * The remaining disturbance no 
longer refers to the concert incident but to Zambinella's awareness 
of the danger threatening him (Acr. "Danger": 8: feeling of 
threat). 
( +88) and despite all the requem rruuIc to him, he ,..,..,.d to ling 
anything else. * Acr. "Incident": 8: refusal to prolong the con­
cert, the performance. 
(489) This WdB the {im ti",. he diJpltJyed thtJt ~ tyrararq 
for which he would 14t~ be til ca.mdted dB for hiB tdlent * SEM. 
Star. Here we see clearly the nature of the connotative seme: the 
"capricious" character of stars is not accounted for in any diction­
ary unless it be a dictionary of Accepted Ideas-which would be a 
dictionary of customary connotations. ** Articulated around the 
"Danger" run by Zambinella, a new sequence will shortly develop 
around the very precise threat the sculptor will bring to bear on the 
castrato during his kidnapping; the outcome of this sequence is 
already suggested here: the future (LIter) assures us that Zambi­
nella will survive Sarrasine's aggression (Acr. ''Threat'': 1: pre­
diction of outwme) . 
( 190 ) and his vast fortune, due, til they Sdid, no lea to hiB von 
than to hiB beauty. * The chain of enigmas is almost reconsti­
tuted. As soon as we mow that the aged Zambinel1a is Mme de 
Lanty's uncle, already aware from this 1exia of the casbato's for­
tune, we shall know the source of the Lanty fortune (HER. Enigma 
2: the Lanty fortune: theme recalled). That ZambineIla's beauty 
wonts for something in his vast fortune can only refer to the amo­
rous "protection" alforded him by the Cardinal: therefore, the ori­
gin of the Lanty fortune is "impure" (deriving from a "prostitu­
tion") . 
(491) "It;' a woman," Sdrrtlli,.. IKIid, belining hi".." lIlo".. 
"There ;, .0",. hidden intrigue here. Cdrdi1UJl Cicognma ;, cI«eiY-
ing the Pope dRd the whole city of Romer' * HER. Enigma 6: 
snare, by Sanasine, for himself. The re8exive snare (Sanasine for 
~rrasine) survives the disclosure: we mow that the sculptor pre­
fers the evidence of codes to the evidence of facts. ** REF. Ma­
cbiaveUian code (a fictional network of secret intrigues, shadowy 
impostures, subtle and preposterous deceptions: realm of paranoia 
and the code of Florentine and Papal Italy). 
(492) The sculptor thereupon left the sedon, * ACT. "Concert": 
S: to leave the music room. 
(493) gdthered hil friends together, * ACT. "Kidnapping": 6: 
gathering of the accomplices. 
(i94) dRd ported them out of light in the courtyard of the pa­
Lruo .• ACT. "Kidnapping": 7: ambush. 
(49S) When Ztlrnbinelld wcu confident tlutt StlrrdBine IuuI de­
INDfed, he tlppeared to regtzin his composure. * ACT. "Danger": 
9: to become calm again. 
(496) Around midnight, htJving wtlndered through the rooms liIce 
tI mtIn seelring Bome enemy, * REF. Chronology (around mid­
night, i.e., the evening of the ooncert). ** ACT. "Danger": 10: 
oontinued uneasiness. The ':Da~e(' ~lIen~ will hen~fo~h 
yield to the "Threat" sequencel whi£l1. ~l.~~e. p1a~ m ~he s~diC? 
!ili.e!'c -Sanasine holds ~mbinella prisoner: Although these two 
proaireticisms are very close, they are not of the same order. DaneCf 
"here consists of a series of premonitions or of reactions to repeated 
incidents; Threat is a seque~ce constructed according to the design 
of a crisis; Danger may be an open, infinite ~es; Threat is a 
ClOSed strucfure,requiring an end. Nevertheless, the two are struc­
turally related: the dispersal of the terms of Danger serves to mari 
the object of the threat; long since designated as the victim, Zam­
binella can then enter the crisis of the Threat. 
(497) the musico delJtlmd .• ACT. "Kidnapping": 8: the vic­
tim's innocent departwe. 
(498) AI lOOn dB he croaed the threthold of the fHIl4uc, he WdB 
tldroitly .aud by men who gtJ&ged him with tI lumdlcerclUef lind 
193 
drew him into the cctrriage StmctSine htul hired. * ACf. "Kidnap­
ping": 9: the act itself. This Kidnapping is structurally perfect: the 
accomplices were recruited in No. 460, gathered together in No. 
+93, stationed in ambush in No. 194, the (fast) carnage was 
brought in No. 463. 
(499) Frozen with horror, Zo.mbinelld remtJined in ct comer, not 
dctring to move. He SdW before him the terrible ftlCe of the ctrtist, 
who WClS silent CIS death. * ACf. "TIueat": 2: terrorized victim. 
(500) The journey WClS brief. * ACf. "Kidnapping": 10: journey. 
In other narratives, this term is open to an infinite catalysis that 
lasts for an entire novel, an entire 6lm. 
( 501) Ccuried in SctrrctSine', ttnnB, Zo.mbinelld soon found himMf 
in ct dtuk, empty Btudio. * ACf. "Kidnapping": 11: arrival at the 
hide-out. 
(502) Hctlf dectd, the singer remtJined in d cMir, * ACf. '''Threat'': 
3: immobilized victim. 
(503) without dctring to excmaine the st4tue of CI WOrnCIR in which 
he recognized his own fecttures. Another, more logical version 
of the text has: "in which he IuJd recogniud hil own fetttures." * 
ACf. "Statue": 1: thematization of the object which will central· 
ize a certain number of actions. ** SYM. Replication of bodies: 
the statue is one link in that long chain which duplicates the bod· 
ies of the Essential Woman, from La Zambinella to Girodet's 
Endymion. 
(504) He mctde no ctttempt to ,peale, but his teeth cluJttered. * 
ACf. "Threat": 4: mute victim. 
(505) SdrrctSine fJtICed up ctnd down the room. Suddenly he 
stopped in front of Zo.mbinelld. "TeU me the truth," he pluded * HER. Enigma 6: disclosure: equivocation. The disclosure has 
been made, but the subject is still uncertain. Tell me the truth im· 
plies: (1) that Sarrasine continues to doubt and hope; (2) that he 
already regards Zambinella as a "scamp" with whom he can 
194 
employ the familiar form of address (Sarrasine has heretofore ad­
dressed Zambinella as "tu" only twice, 444 and 445, but then as a 
sublime being, deserving of the high lyric apostrophe) . 
(506) in a low, altered voice. * The low sound (coming from the 
_l!lufBed dept~s of the body) is (in the West 1 supposed t~ con­
note the interiority-and thus the ~th~f an emotion: Sarrasine 
k'nows Zamhinella is Dot a woman (HER. Enigma 6: decipher­
ment, Sarrasine for himself). 
(507) "You are a WOJTldnl * HER. Enigma 6: equivocation (the 
snare implied by the statement is corrected by its interrogative 
form). 
(508) Cmdinal Cicognara ." * HER. Enigma 6: snare, by 
Sarrasine, for himself (Sarrasine returns to the notion of some 
Roman intrigue [No. 491], an explanation that preserves Zambi­
nella's femininity). ** REF. Machiavenian code. 
(509) ZdmbiJ1liUa fell to his ~J1Iies, and in reply lowered his hedd. * HER. Enigma 6: disclosure, Zambinella to Sarrasine. 
(510) "Ah, you me a WOJTldn." the artist cried in a delirium, "for 
even d ." He bro~e off. "No," he continued, "he would not be 
so cowmdly." * HER. Enigma 6: snare, by Sarrasine, for himself. 
Psychological proof furnishes Sarrasine his last snare, and pr<>­
vides delirium its last refuge. This proof bases femininity on the 
weakness of woman. Faced with this proof, which he has often 
employed, Sarrasine is nonetheless encumbered with a new term, 
the castrato, which he must situate in the moral hierarchy of bio­
logical creatures; since he needs to locate absolute, ultimate weak­
ness in Woman, he gives the castrato an intennediate position 
("even a castrato would not be so cowardly");_the enthymeme, on 
which an proof is based, is organized as follows: woman occupi~_ 
the last stage of pusillanimity; Zambinella. by his submissive pos­
ture, the cowardliness of his behavior, attains this last stage; th~s 
Zambinella is really a woman. ** SYM. Taboo on the word cas­
trato. *** SYM. Graphological mark of the neuter: the under­
lined, cited he, whose masculinity is suspect. 
19~ 
(511) "Ala, do not au me," cried ZdmbinMl4, bursting into t8t1n. * ACf. "Threat": 5: 6nt plea for mercy. Pleas for mercy do not 
necessarily follow on an explicit threat, but a difuse threat, con­
noted by the situation and by Sarrasine's delirium. 
( 512) "I only tJgTeed to triclc you to ",... my frWnda, who wnted 
to l4ugh." * HER. "Machination": 12: disclosure of the motive 
for the machination (we know that Laughter is a substitute cas­
trator). 
(513) "lAughr' the aculfJfor r.pud in em inf.mtd tOM. "lAugh' 
lAughl You dmed pltq with d mem' B f_lings, your' The castrating 
role of Laughter is confirmed here by the virile protest, linked to 
the threat of castration, which Sarrasine offen in opposition to it. 
We know that Adler had 6nt suggested the phrase rrttU Fotal 
for the rejection of all passive attitudes toward other men, and that 
it has subsequently been suggested that this protest be more Q­
plicitly de6ned as a refJudiation of femininity. Sarrasine is in fact 
repudiating a femininity of which he himself bean traces"; the 
"paradox-"emphasizecrby" Samsine "himselris'that his ViriIity­
should have been contested, under the castrating tool of l£ughter, 
by a creature whose very definition was that be bad been stripped 
of his virility (SYM. Virile protest). 
(5H) "Oh, have mercyl" Zdmmnelld replied. * ACf. "Threat": 
6: second plea for mercy. 
( 515) "I ought to 1rill you." Stmdli,.. cried, drawing lUI ,.word 
with d violent guture. * ACf. "ThQ:at": 7: first threat of death 
(the conditional already indicates the suspension of the threat) . 
(516) "However," he wmt on, in cold diJdlJin, * ACf. "Threat": 
8: threat withdrawn. 
(517) were I to SCOUT yOUT body with thU bldde, would I find 
tMre one feeling to Iti/Ie, 0,.. ~ to BtIti8fy? You 41W noth­
ing. If you were d rRdn or d WOmtln, I would JcjJJ you, * SYM. The 
nothing,.." of the castrato. The reasoning is as follows: "You 
wanted to lure me into castration. In order to avenge myself and 
196 
punish you, I should castrate you too [to scour your body with this 
bltule], but I cannot, since you are already castrated." The loss of 
desire puts the castrato beyond life or death, outside all cldssi­
peation: how to kill what is not classified? How to reach what 
transgresses-; riOl'lli-elntemil order of the sexUal paradigm (a trans­
vestite would have inverted this order but not destroyed it: If ),ou 
were d J1UIn, I would Icill )'ou), but the very existence of difference 
which generates life and meaning; the ultimate honor is not death 
but that the classification of death and Hfe-slloUldbe broken of. 
(518) but . 
&mdGine J1UIde d gesture of disgust • SYM. Taboo on the word 
castrato ... SYM. Honor, curse, exclusion. 
(519) which forced him to tum dWd)', whereufJon he saw the 
stdtue. • ACf. "Statue": 2: to see the object previously thema­
tized. 
LXXXII. GLISSANDO 
tWQ codes set side by side in the same sentence: this opera­
~on, a common device of the readerIy, is not indifferent: 
poured into the same linguistic unit, the two codes here form 
_an apparently nttturtd link; this rutture (which is simply that of 
age~ld syntax) is ful611ed each time the discourse can produce 
ll~ elegant relation (in the mathematical sense: an elegant so­
lution) between two codes. 'Dtis elegance is associated with a 
kind of causal glissttndo which allows the symbolic fact to join 
the proairetic facts, for example, in the continuity of a single 
sentence. Thus, we articQl~t~ disgust fQJ the castIato (sym­
bolic term) and destruction of the statue (proairetic term) by 
a whole chain of tiny causalities strung close together, like 
beads sliding on an apparently smooth thread: (1) Sarrasine is 
disgusted at the sight of the castrato; (2) disgust makes him 
197 
avert his eyes from this sight; (3) averting his eyes makes him 
tum his head; ( .. ) as he turns, his eyes fall upon the statue, 
etc.: a whole marquetry of articulations that enable us to pass, 
as if from lock to lock, from the symbolic to the operative 
across the great naturalness of the sentence ("Scurasine J1UIde 
a gesture of disgust which forced him to tum dWCI)', where­
upon he saw the statue.") Bro~ht to the surface of the dis­
course, the codal citation there loses its identity,ifieeeiveilike 
a new garment theo'syntacticaroform dei'iving'"fromOOtbeO"etero-
!lal" sefltence, that fC?11J! justifies it and enthrones itio°the vast 
nature of ordiruzry language.-
(520) "And it's an illusion," he cried. * ACf. "Statue": 3: to be 
deceived (by the falsehood, the void, of the thematized object). ** HER, Enigma 6: disclosure, Sarrasine to himself. 
(521) Then., turning to Zambinell4: "A wOmdn's heart was a 
refuge for me, a home. Herve )'ou an)' sisters who resemble )'ou? * SYM. Replication of bodies. ** Zambinella's sisters permit a 
Seeting image of a female castrato, a corrected, cured castrato 
(SYM. The rectified castrato) . 
LXXXIII. PANDEMIA 
~tion iscontagjousr ito to~c,hes~ve!Yl.hing)t ..!!>~ma(:hes 
(it will touch Sarrasine, the narrator, the young woman, ili..e 
narrative, the money): this is one of the "demonstrations" ~f 
Sanasine. So with the statue: if it is an "illusion," this is not 
because by artificial means it copies a real object whose materi­
ality it cannot possess (banal proposition) but because this 
object (La ZambineUa) is empty. The "realist" work must be 
lC)8 
guaranteed by the integral truth of the model which the copy­
ing artist must know to its innermost depths (we know the 
function of undressing with regard to the sculptor Sanasine); 
in the case of La Zambinella, the internal holl~~ess of any 
statue (which doubtless attracts many lovers of statuary and 
provides iconoclasm with its entire symbolic context) rq:>fO­
duces the central deficiency of the castrato: the statue is-ironi­
cally true, dramatically unworthy: the emptiness of the model 
has invad~ the copy. communiCating to it its sense ofhorror: 
the statue has been touched by the metonymic force of castra­
tion. It is understandable that the subject should oppose this 
contagion with the dream of an inverse, favorable, saving me­
tonymy: that of the essence of Femininity. The hoped-for sis­
ters permit imagining a rectified, re-sexualized. cured castrato 
who would slough off his mutilation like some hideous en­
velope. retaining only his correct femininity. In the mores of 
certain peC?ples. society prescribes marrying not a person but a 
kind of family essence (sorority. sororal polygyny, levirate); 
~iIrtilarly, Sanasine is pwsuing, far beyond the slough of cas­
tration the castrato leaves in his hands. a Zambinellan essence 
-which later on, moreover. will Bourish anew in Mariaoina 
and Filippo. 
(522) Then diet • ACT. "Threat": 9: second threat of death. 
(523) But no. you ,ludl live. Im't luving you dliv. condemning 
you to something worse tMn death? * ACT. "Threat": 10: with­
drawal of the threat. .. SYM. The castrato outside any system. 
Death itself is touched, corrupted. is disnamed (disfigured. as the 
expression goes) by castration. There is a real death. an active 
death, a cLurified death which is part of the system of life:. being 
outside the system. the castrato no longer even has access to this 
death. 
199 
(52") It is neither m)' blood nor my ai6tenc. thttt I Tegr.t, but 
tM future tJnd my hetlrt's fOTtuM. Your feeble htJnd htJs datroyed 
m)' hdfJpinas. * Samsine comments on his death, which he has 
therefore accepted (ACT. "Will-to-die": 5: to comment on one', 
death in advance) ... SYM. Contagion of castration. 
(525) WhtJt hope Cdn I strip from )'ou fOT tJll those ),OU hav. 
blighted? You Iutve dTtJ&&ed me down to ),OUT Iev.l. To love, to be 
loved I are Mnceforth muningless WOTds for me, tJS they are fOT 
)'OU. * SYM. Contagion of casbation: Samsinc casbated. 
LXXXIV. LITERATURE REPLETE 
The Zambinellan disease has overtaken Sarrasine ( "You lutve 
drtJgged me down to your level"). I:!~~ _t!t_c; _£9ntaginus force.... 
of castration explodes. Its me~~~~~~~!~~,j.s }rreve~!~'~ 
touched by its void, not only is sex eradicated, but art too is 
J?roken (the statue is destroyed) , language dies ! ;~§J~ve, to ~-: 
lovedl cue henceforth me41Iingless wort!s lc!'~ 1M"}: J>y which 
we can see that according to Sarrasinean metaphysics, mean­
ing. art, and sex form a single sustitutive chain: that of the 
replete. As the product of an art (that of narration), the mo­
bilization of a polysemic system (that of the classical text) and 
a thematics of sex, the story itself is an emblem of plenitude 
(though what it represents, as we shall soon state more clearly, 
is the catastrophic confusion of this plenitude): the text: is re­
plete with multiple, discontinuous, accwnulated meanings. 
and yet burnished. smoothed by the "natural" movement of its 
sentences: it is an egg-text. A Renaissance author (Pierre Fabri) 
once wrote a treatise entitled Le grand et vrai art de pleine rhe­
torique. In like manner, we can say that any classic (readerly) 
text is implicitly an art of Replete Literature: literature that is 
replete: like a cupboard where meanings are shelved, stacked, 
safeguarded (in this text nothing is ever lost: meaning recu­
perates everything); like a pregnant female, replete with signi­
fieds which criticism will not fail to deliver; like the sea, replete 
with depths and movements which give it its appearance of 
infinity, its vast meditative sudace; like the sun, replete with 
the glory it sheds over those who write it, or finally, acknowl­
edged as an established and recognized art: institutional. This 
Replete Litemture, readerly literature, can no longer be writ­
ten: symbolic plenitude (culminating in romantic art) is the 
last avatar of our culture. 
( 526) 'shtJIl forever think of this imtJgiruJr)' WOmdn when , see a 
rem wOmdn." He indicdted the statue with a gesture of desfJdir. * 
The statue, the imaginary (superlative) woman, and the real 
woman are links in the duplicative chain of bodies, catastrophically 
broken by the castrato's de6ciency (SYM. Replication of bodies). ** ACf. "Statue": +: despair aroused by the thematized object. 
(527) '" sludl always have the memory of a celutial hllrpy who 
thTUSt8 its talons into aU my mdnly feelings, and who will stamp 
all other women with a se4l of imperfection! * SYM. Contagion 
of castration. The image of the Harpies connotes both castration 
(the creature with talons) and guilt (the theme of the Furies). 
The code of female bodies, a written code if ever there was one, 
since it is the code of art, of culture, will henceforth be stamped 
by deficiency. 
(528) Monster! * Here the apostrophe has its literal plenitude: 
the monster is outside nature, outside any classi6cation, any mean­
ing (this seme has already been attached to the old man) (SEM. 
Outside nature). 
(529) You who can give life to nothing. * SYM. Replication of 
bodies. 
201 
LXXXV. INTERRUPTED REPUCATION 
As an "imaginary" woman-imaginary, that is, in the modem 
sense, i.e., evoked in Sarrasine by the misreading of his uncon­
scious-La Zambinella served as a relay between contingent, 
fragmented speech (real women: so many fetishes) and the 
code establishing all beauty, the masterpiece, both goal and 
point of departure. Once this relay is defective (it is empty), 
the entire system of transmission collapses: we have the Sar­
rasinean de-ception, dis-connection of the entire circuit of bod­
ies. The banal definition of being-castrated ( "You who Cdn 
give life to nothing') thus has a structural bearing, it concerns 
not merely the aesthetic duplication of bodies (the "copy" of 
realist art) but also the metonymic force in its generality:~.£.. 
fundamental crime or disaster ("Monster''') is in fact to 
~nterrupt the circulation of (aesthetic or biological) copies, to. .. 
disturb the controlled penneability· ofmeaniogs, their con­
cateMtion, which is classification and repetition, as' with lan­
guage. Itself metonymic (and with what powerl), casbati~.!l_ 
jams all metonymy: the chains of art and life are broken, as in 
a moment will be the;: statue, c;:plpJem of th~ !l~~()us ~nsmis­
sion of bodies (but it will be saved, and something will be 
transmitted to the Adonis, to the Endymion, to the Lantys, to 
the narrator, to the reader). 
(530) For me, you httve wiped women from the earth." * SYM. 
Pandemic castration. ** The hero's physical death is preceded by 
three partial deaths: to women, to pleasures, to art (ACT. "Will­
t<HIie": 6: to die to women). 
(531) SamlSine Sdt down before the terrified singer. Two huge 
fetUS weUed trom his dry eyes, roUed down his manly eheeb, and 
teU to the ground: two tears ot r6&e, two bitter and burning tetJTS. * REF. Code of Tears. The code of the hero allows a man to cry 
zoz 
within the very strict limits of a certain ritual, itself strongly histori­
cal: Michelet complimented and envied St. Louis for having had 
the "gift of tears," audiences cried abundantly at Racine's tragedies, 
etc., whereas in Japan, in the Bushido, a code inherited from the 
Samurai, any physical sign of emotion is forbidden. Samsine has 
the right to cry for four reasons (or on four conditions): because 
his dream as an artist, a lover, has been destroyed; because he is 
about to die (it would not be fitting for him to survive his tears); 
because he is alone (the castrato being nothing); because the very 
contrast between virility and tears inspires pathos. Further. his 
tears are few (two) and burning (they do not participate in the un­
worthy humidity associated with femininity. but in fire. dryness. 
virility) . 
(532) "No more lovel I am dud to on pledBure. to every hUmdn 
emotion." * SYM. Contagion of castration. ** ACf. "Will-to­
die": 7: to die to pleasure. to feeling. 
(53 3) So Btl)'ing, he reiud d httmJ71llr d1Id hurled it dt the ~ 
with ruch extrdordintlT)' force * ACf. "Will-to-die": 8: to die to 
Art. ** "Statue": 5: destructive act. 
(53-4) thdt he missed it. He thought he httd datroyed this monu­
ment to his folly, * ACf. "Statue": 6: statue spared. ** SYM. I Replication of bodies: the chain, in e:drenUs, is saved. 
(535) ttnd then toolc up IUs Nord dnd brdndished it to 1rill the 
Binger. * ACf. "Threat": 11: third threat of death. 
(536) Zambinell4 uttered piercing BCr8drrLS. * ACf. '''Threat'': 
12: to caU for help. The victim's call for help will allow the two 
sequences "Threat" and "Murder" to combine: the victim will be 
saved because his attacker will be killed: the rescuers of the former 
will be the murderers of the latter. 
LXXXVI. THE EMPIRIC VOICE 
Soon all the proairetic sequences will be closed. The narrative 
will die. What do we know about them? That they are born 
of a certain power of the reading, which tries to give a suffi­
ciently transcendent name to a series of actions, themselves 
deriving from a patrimonial hoard of human experiences; th~t 
the typology of these proaireticisms seems uncertain or that at 
least they can be assigned no logic other than that of the prob­
able, ~f empirics, of the "aIr~dy-d~~" QI "ahcady-~t~eD~" 
for the nwnber and the order of their terms vary, some deriv­
ing from a practical reservoir of trivial everyday acts (to knock 
at d door, to dTTdnge d rende%Vow) and others from a written 
corpus of novelistic models (the Abduction, the Deckudtion 
of Love, the Murder); that such sequences are generally open 
to catalysis, to branching, and can form "trees"; that when 
subjected to a logico-temporal order, they constitute the strong-._ 
est armature of the readerly; that by their typically sequential 
nature, simultaneously syntagmatic and organized, they can 
form the favored raw material for a certain structural analysis 
of narrative. 
( 537) At that moment, three men entered * ACT. "Threat": 13: 
arrival of the rescuers ... ACT. "Murder: 7: entrance of the mur­
derers. 
( 538) and at once the sculptor fell, rtdbbed by three ltiktto thrusts. * ACT. "Threat": Ii: elimination of the aggressor ... ACT. 
"Murder"; 8: murder of the hero. The weapons are coOed: the 
sword is the phallic weapon of honor, of thwarted passion, of virile 
protest (with which Samsine tried first to charm La Zambinella, 
301, and then to kill the castrato, 535); t"~e stiletto (li~ E!t.~1l~ 
is the contemptible weapon of hired killen, the weapon fit for the 
henceforth castrated hero. -. 
(539) "On beMlf of Cordin4l CicogndTtI," 0,.. of them atDd. * 
ACT. "Murder": 9: signature of the murder. 
204 
(510) "It is a good dud worthy of a ChristUrn," replied the French­
man as he died. * ~j~ tile ironic allusion to the murderer's 
religion, the victim's bless~ turns the murder into a suicide: the 
subject·iWumes-lii$d~th~ !!ll!~rd ~th the pact he had made 
with himself' (No-:l40) and with the symbolic fate to which con­
tact with ·ostr.ltfc)n"Tias-~oll)mj~ted him (ACT. "Will-to-die": 9: 
to assume one's death) . 
(HI) These Binister musenger. * REF. Novelistic mystery (d. 
below, the closed carri.age) . 
LXXXVII. mE VOICE OF SCIENCE 
The cultural codes, from which the Samsinean text has drawn 
so many references, will also be extinguished (or at least will 
emigrate to other texts; there is no lack of hosts): one might 
say that it is the major voice of minor science that is departing 
in this fashion. In fact, these citations are extracted from a 
body of knowledge, from an anonymous Book whose best 
model is doubtless the School Manual. For, on the one hand, 
this anterior Book is both a book of science (of empirical ob­
servation) and a book of wisdom, and on the other hand, the 
didactic material mobilized in the text (often, as we have 
noted, as a basis for reasoning or to lend its written authority 
to emotions) generally corresponds to the set of seven or eight 
handbooks accessible to a diligent student in the classical bour­
geois educational system: a History of Literature (Byron, The 
Thousand dJ1d One Nights, Ann Radcliffe, Homer), a History 
of Art (Michelangelo, Raphael, the Greek miracle), a History 
of Europe (the age of Louis XV), an Outline of Practical 
Medicine (disease, convalescence, old age, etc.), a Treatise on 
Psychology (erotic, ethnic, etc.), an Ethics (Christian or Stoic: 
themes from Latin translations), a Logic (for syllogisms), a 
205 
Rhetoric, and an anthology of maxims and proverbs about life, 
death, suffering. love, women, ages of man, etc. ~tho¥h CD­
tire!y .~~riv~ .!!o~. ~~~ th_esc= codes, ~y a swiv~! cba~~_ 
is tic of bourgeois ideology, which turns culture into nature, 
~'~ppea~ to estalllish reality, "Life," '~Life" then, in the-cIaSslC" 
't~t. ~omes a nauseating mixture of common opinions~'--a 
!smothering layer of received ideas: in fact, it is in these cultural 
codes that what is outmoded in Balzac, the essence of what, in 
Balzac, cannot be (re) written, is concentrated. What is au!: 
moded, of course, is not a defect in performance, a~~~~al_ 
inability of the author to afford opportunities in his work for 
what will l>e Ill~el)l, but rather a fatal condition of R~plete 
Literature, Illortally stalked by the army of stereotypes it c()Il,,:. 
tains. Thus, a critique of the references (the cultural codes) 
ttas never been tenable except through trickery, on the very 
limits of Replete Literature, where it is possible (buf at the 
cost of what acrobatics and with what uncertainty) to criti­
cize the stereotype (to vomit it up) without recourse to a n~y.r 
stereotype: that of irony. Perhaps this is what Flaubert did (we 
shall say it once again), particularly in BouYdTd et Pkuchet, 
where the two copyists of scholastic codes are themselves "rep­
resented" in an uncertain status, the author using no metalan­
guage (or a suspended metalanguage) in their regard. In fact, 
the cultural code occupies the same position as stupidity: how 
can stupidity be pinned down without declaring onself in­
telligent? How can one code be superior .to another without 
abusively closing off the plurality of codes? Qulx .wri!Lng, .by 
assuming tI:t~ lif..&.ru-RQjsible plu~U!!. * .. Q~ ~~~_~ll~~ 
~thout~p~.tQft:)~e the iIn:perialism of each la~: 
(542) informed ZtJmbin.lld of the concern of hil protector, who 
WtJI wtJiting tJt the door in tJ clcwd CtJTritIge, to ttJlc. him tlWq tJI 
106 
soon d8 heluul been rescued. * ACf. "Threat": 15: to return with 
the rescuers. ** ACf. "Murder": 10: 6nal explanation. 
(543) "But," Mme de Rochefide d8lced me, "whdt connection iB 
there between this story and the little old J'7UJn we B4W at til. 
Lantys'?" * HER. Enigma .. (Who is the old man?): formula­
tion. 
(544) "MacltJme, CardiMl Cicognma toolc possession of Zambi­
nell4's statue and had it executed in J'lUJrble; todtty it is in tM Al­
bani Museum. * ACT. "Statue": 7: the statue (aimed at and 
missed) rediscovered. ** Yet another link in the duplicative chain 
of bodies: the statue was copied in marble. Desire is once again the 
agent of this duplicative energy: Cicognara, -who has no scruples 
about appropriating his victim's work and con~emplatin, his favor­
ite's effigy thro~l(hiui'lltsJ!y~~.asin a pme of "button­
button," his desire and the castration which is in this case attached 
to it, on to post~tr:, th~'dgire_~iJl ~~~~~!~ ~p~~ate Vien's 
Adonis (desired 'by Mme de RocJte6de) and Girodet's Endymion 
visited b,y the moon (SYM. Replication of bodies) . 
(545) There, in 1791, the Ldnt)' family found it * REF. Chro­
nology. In fact, the item is a dead end, it cannot be connected 
with any other infonnation (nor is it incompatible with any other: 
the life of Vien, for example, who died in 1809); it is a pure effect 
of "reality": nothing is more "real," we think, than a date. ** 
HER. Enigma 3 (Who are the Lantys?): beginning of an answer 
(there is a connection between the Lantys and the statue) . 
(546) and asked Vien to copy it. * SYM. Replication of bodies. 
LXXXVIII. FROM SCULPTURE TO PAINTING 
Sarrasine dead, La Zambinella emigrates from statue to can­
vas: something cldngerous has been contained, exorcised, paci­
fied. In passing from volume to plane sudace, the copy loses 
or at least attenuates the buming problema tics the story has 
continually evoked. Free-standing, penemble. in short pro­
found. the statue invites visitation. exploration. penetration: 
it implies ideally the plenitude and truth of the inside (which 
is why it is a tragedy that this inside is empty. castrated); ac­
cording to Sarrasine. the perfect statue would have been an 
envelope containing a real woman (supposing she herself were 
a 17UISterpiece). whose essence as reality would have verified. 
guaranteed the marble skin applied to her (this relation. in 
the opposite direction. gives us the Pygmalion myth: a real 
woman is born from the statue). The painting, by contrast. 
may have a baclc, but it has no inside: it cannot provoke the 
indiscreet act by which one might try to find out what there is 
behind the canvas (except. as we have seen, in Frenhofer's 
dream; he wanted us to be able to move within the picture. as 
though in three-dimensional space, to walk around the 8esh of 
painted bodies, so as to test their authenticity). The Sarrasin­
ean aesthetic of the statue is tragic, it risks the fBi.f of~esir~ 
plenitude into castrated emptiness, of meaning in outside----...--'" 
meaning; the aesthetic of the canvas-less emblematic, more 
indifferent-is mo(e easily satisfied: a statue breaks; ~_.~iivas. _ 
more simply, blws (as happens, in its self-destruc~on, tc? ~e . 
"unknown masterpiece"). Passed down along the duplicative 
chain in the paintings of Vien and Girodet, the sinister story 
of La Zambinella grows distant. no longer exists save as a 
vague, moon -struck enigma, mysterious without being offen­
sive (although the mere sight of the painted Adonis will re­
activate the castrating metonymy: it is because she is seduced 
by it that the young woman provokes the narrator to the nar­
rative that will castrate both of them). As for the final avata..r. 
the passage of the canvas to written "representation," it recu­
perates all the preceding copies, but writing extenuates stilt 
further the hallucination of the inside, for it has no other sub­
stance than the interstice. 
(547) The portrait in which)'ou BcIW Zambinell4 at twenty. d ,"­
ond aft., IulVing Been him tit one hundred. later served for Giro­
def', Endymion; you will htnIe recognized its type in the Adonia." * REF. Chronology (Zambinella is twenty in 1758; if he is actu· 
ally one hundred at the time of the Lanty party, then this must 
occur in 1838. eight years after Balzac wrote it, d. No. 55). ** 
HER. Enigma 4 (Who is the old man?): partial disclosure (the 
disclosure concerns the old man's public identity: he is La Zam­
bioella; it remains to disclose his family identity. his relationship 
to the Lantys). *** SYM. Replication of bodies. **** HER. 
Enigma 5 (Who is the Adonis?): disclosure (La Zambinella at 
twenty). 
(548) "But tlUB ZambineUa-he or she?" 
"He, mtld4me. ill none other than MdTidnirui, great-uncle. * 
HER. Enigma 4: complete discloswe (the old man's family iden­
tity). ** HER. Enigma 3: disclosure (Who are the Lantys?­
relatives of La Zambinella). *** What grammatical gender to 
apply to the castrato? The neuter, probably. but French has none; 
thus this alternative he/she, the oscillation of which, as in physics, 
produces a kind of average sex, equidistant from masculine and 
feminine (SYM. Neuter). 
(549) Now 'You can reddily see what interest Mme de Lmty IuJB in 
hiding the IOUTCe of d fortunll which COmel from-" * HER. 
Enigma 2 (source of the Lanty fortune) : disclosure. 
LXXXIX. VOICE OF TRUTH 
All the enigmas are now disclosed, the vast henneneutic sen­
tence is closed (all that will continue a little longer is what we 
might call the metonymic vibration of castration, whose last 
waves will disturb the young woman and the narrator). We 
now know the morphemes (or the "hermeneutemes") of this 
hermeneutic sentence, this period of truth (in the rhetorical 
sense). They are: (I) themtlti%tJtion, or an emphasizing of the 
209 
subject which will be the object of the enigma; (2) fn'0/J0BtIl. 
a metalinguistic index which. by signaling in a thousand dif­
ferent ways that an enigma exists, designates the hermeneutic 
(or enigmatic)' genus; (3) formulation of the enigma; (4) 
promise of an answer (or request for an cmswer); (5) BnlUe. a 
pretense which must be defined, if possible, by its circuit of 
destination (by one character for another. for himself, by the 
discourse for the reader); (6) equivocation, or double under­
standing, the mixture in a single statement of a snare and a 
truth; (7) ;amming, acknowledgment of the insolubility of the 
enigma; (8) suspended cmswer (after having been begun); (9) 
pmtilll answer, which consists in stating only one of the fea­
tures whose total will form the complete identification of the 
truth; (10) disclosure, decipherment, which is. in the pure 
enigma (whose model is always the Sphinx's question to Oedi­
pus), a final nomination, the discovery and uttering of the 
irreversible word. 
(550) "Enough'" she &did, gesturing to me imperiously. We BtIt for 
d moment plunged in the dee,,", silence. * SYM. Taboo on cas­
bation. ** SYM. HOlTor of casbatiOD. The disgust attached to 
the Lanty fortune (the theme of this "scene from Parisian life") 
has several sources: it is a fortune tainted by prostitution (the 
rdgdUO kept by old Chigi and later by Cardinal Cicognara), by 
blood (Sarrasine's murder), but especially imbued with the hOlTor 
consubstantial with castration. 
(551) "Well?" lllllid to her. 
"M," she exclaimed, Btdnding up dnd fJtlCing up dnd down the 
room. She looled at me dnd .pob in em dltered voice. * Castra­
tion reaches the young woman: she shows symptoms of illness (agi­
tation. confusion) (SYM. Contagion of castration) . 
(552 ) "You hdve gillen me d dilgUBt for life dnd for /JdISiOnl that 
will r.a.t d long time. * SYM. Contagion of castration. ** Cas-
210 
tration has arrived by the bearer of the narrative (ACT. "To nar­
rate": 13: castrating effect of the narration) . 
XC. THE BALZAClAN TEXT 
A long time? Hardly. Bbtrix, Countess Arthur de Roche6de, 
born in 1808, married in 1828, and very quic1cly weary of her 
husband, taken to the Lantys' ball by the nanator around 
1830-and stricken then, she says, by a mortal castration-will 
nevertheless three years later run oft to Italy with the tenor 
Conti, will have a celebrated affair with Calyste du Cuenic to 
spite her friend and rival Felicite des Touches, will later be­
come the mistress of La Palferine, etc.: castration is obviously 
not a mortal disease, one can be cureclof it. However, to be 
~iired we musfTeave'-smTdsine and' emigrate'to other ~,. 
(Beatrix, Modeste Mignon, One FIDe d'Eve, Autre Etude de 
Femme, Lea Secrm de 14 Princesse de Cadigrum, etc.). These 
texts form the Balzacian text. There is no reason not to include 
the Sanasinean teXt Within the' Balzacian text (we could have 
done so had we wanted to continue, to develop this game of 
the plural) : by degrees, a text can come into contact with any 
other system: the inter-text is subject to no law but the infini­
tude of its reprises. The Author himself-that somewhat de­
crepit deity of the old criticism-can or could some day become 
a text like any other: he has only to avoid making his person 
the subject, the impulse, the origin, the authority, the Father, 
whence his work would proceed, by a channel of expression; he 
has only to see himself as a being on paper and his life as a 
bi~gr""h)' (in the etymological sense of the word), a writing 
without referent, substance of a connection and not of a tili4-
tion: the critical undertaking (if we can still speak of criticism) 
will then consist in returning the documentary figure of the 
author into a novelistic, irretrievable, irresponsible figure, 
2.11 
caught up in the plural of its owo text: a task whose adven­
ture has already been recounted, not by critics, but by authon 
themselves, a Proust, a Jean Genet. 
( 553) Excepting for monsters, don't dll human feelings com. 
down to the Sdme thing, to horrible dUdppointmenu? Motherl, our 
children Irill us either by their bdd behavior or by their LJCIc of 
affection. W iveB, we lITe deceived. Mweaes, we tire foradltm, 
tJbandoned. Does frientUhip even aUt? * Engaged, under the nar­
rative action in a labor of aut{H2Stration, the young woman im­
mediately elaborates the sublime venion of her disease; she dresses 
up this retreat from sex, dignifies it by putting it under the com­
forting and ennobling authority of a high moral code (SYM. Alibi 
of castration). ** This code is the oode of universal pessimism, 
of the vanity of the world and of the ungrateful, stoic, and ad­
mirable role of noble victims, mothen, wives, mistresses, and 
friends (REF. V Gnit4r Ydnitdtum) . 
( 55'f) I would become d nun tomorrow did I not A:now thdt I ccm 
rerrutin unmoved Q8 d rocA: mnicl the 6tomu of life. * SYM. Alibi 
of castration: Virtue (cultural code). 
(555) If the ChrVtidn', future iB dlBo dn illUBion, dt lust it iB not 
destroyed until after delzth. * REF. Christian code. 
(556) Leave me." 
"All," I Sdid, "you A:now how to /1UnMh." * Touched by castra­
tion, the young woman breaks the contract with the narnator, with­
draws from the bargain and dismisses her partner (ACT. "To nar­
rate": 14: breaking of contract). ** SYM. The narnator drawn 
into castration (he is punished for having "told"). 
XCI. MODIFICATION 
A man in love, taking advantage of the curiosity evidenced by 
his mistress about an enigmatic old man and a mysterious por­
trait, offen her a contract: the truth in exchange for a night of 
312 
love, a namtiv~,in ~£h!l.I!~Jor<_~._~,! After having at­
tempted-to bargain her way out of it, the young woman 
agrees: the namtive begins; but it turns out to be the story of 
a terrible disease animated by an irresistible contagious 
strength; carried by the namtive itself, this disease ends by 
contaminating the lovely listener and, withdrawing her from 
love, keeps her from honoring the contract. Caught in his own 
trap, the lover is rebuffed: a story about castration is 110t tol<1 
'~ill:t!!np~nity. -This fable teaches us that namtion (object) 
modifies namtion (action): the message is paramebically 
linked with its performance; there is no question of an utter­
ance on the one hand and on the other its uttering. Tdling is 
a responsible and commercial act (are these not the same 
thing? in both cases, a matter of weighing?) whose outcome 
(the virtuality of transformation) is "indexed" on the price of 
the merchandise, on the object of the namtive. This ob~t, 
therefore, is not final, it is not the goal, the term, the end of 
the namtion (SarrdSine is not a "story about a castrato"): as 
meaning, the subject of the anecdote harbors a recurrent 
force which reacts on language and demystifies, ravages the in­
nocence of its utterance: what is told is the "telling." mti­
~ately, the namtive has no ob;e(:t: the namtive concerns only 
itself: the Rdrrdtive tells itlelf. 
( 557) "Am I wrong?" 
"Yes," I replied, with d kind of courttge. "In teUing this Rory, 
which is fairly well known in IttJly, llutve been able to give you d 
fine exmnple of the progrea made by civilization todtly. They no 
longer create these unfortururte creatures." * In a 6nal effort­
obviously doomed to failure, which is why he needs "a kind of 
courage" -the narrator attempts to set up against the terror of an 
all-powerful castration, which blints everything and of which he is 
llJe 6nal victim, the dam of historical motive and positive fact: let 
us dismiss the symbol, he is saying, let us return to earth, to "re­
ality," to history: there are no more castrati: the disMIe lads been 
wiped out, it has disappeared from Europe like the plague, libi 
leprosy; petty proposition, insecure dam, absurd argument againll:: 
the torrential force of the symbolic which has just swept away the: 
entire personnel of Sarrasine (SYM. Denial of the contagion of, 
castration). ** SYM. Rationality, asymbolism (this seme had ~ .. 
ready been attached to the narrator). *** REF. History of cas-I 
trati. The historical code to which the narrator refers informs .. ~ 
that the last two famous castrati were Crescentini, who was given t 
the Order of the Iron Crown after Napoleon heard him in Vienna ;~ 
in 1805 and brought him to Paris, and who died in 1846, and Vel- ~ 
luti, who sang his final performance in London in 1826 and died 1 
in 1861. ~ 
1 
~ 
(558) "Paris is a very hospitable pl«e," she Sdid. "It tlCCepts every-l 
thing, shameful fortunes and bloodstained fortunes. Crime and ~ 
infamy can find asylum here; * REF. Paris, Gold, immorality of ' 
the new society, etc. 1 .; 
( 559) only virtue luis no altars here. Yes, pure souls have their 
home in heavenl * SYM. Sublime alibi for castration (heaven 
will justify the castrati we have become). ** REF. Moral code 
(virtue is not of this world) . 
(560) No one will have known me. I am proud of thatl" • Like 
La Zambinella, whose condition she has symbolically come to 
share, the Marquise twns exclusion into "misunderstanding." The 
Misunderstood Woman, a replete figure, an ennobled role, an im­
age fraught with imaginary meanings, an object of language ('" 
am proud of that" ), profitably substitutes for the horrid emptiness 
of the castrato, who is the one about whom there is nothing to ,. 
say (who can say nothing about himself: who cannot irrwgine him­
self) (SYM. Alibi of castration: the Misunderstood Woman). 
XCII. THE THREE POINTS OF ENTRY 
The symbolic field is occupied by a sing}!! o~ect from which 
it derives its unity (and from which we have derived a certain 
right to name it, some pleasure in describing it, and what may 
pass for a privilege granted the symbolic system, the symbolic 
aClventure of the hero, sculptor or narrator). This object is the 
hu-man body. Str"asine recounts the topological transgressions 
of this body. The antithesis of inner and outer: abolished. The 
untkrnuth: empty. The chain of copies: interrupted. The 
contract of desire: falsified. Now we can enter this symbolic 
@~-br..!hree routes, no one of which is privileged: provided 
with equal points of entry, the textual network, on its symbolic 
level, is reversible. The rhetorical route discovers the transgres­
sion of the Antithesis, the passage through the wall of op­
posites, the abolition of difference. The route of castration, 
strictly speaking, discovers the pandemic void of desire, the 
collapse of the creative chain (bodies and works). The eco­
n~!oute discovers the disappearance of all fake currency, 
empty Gold, without origin or odor, no longer an index but a 
sign, a narrative corroded by the story it bears. These three 
routes are all conducive to stating the same disturbance in 
c:!~~~~.fication: it is fatal, the text says, to remove the dividing 
line, the paradigmatic slash mark which permits meaning to 
function (the wall of the Antithesis), life to reproduce (the 
opposition of the sexes), property to be protected (rule of 
Contract). In short, the story represents (we are in a readerly 
-art) a generalized collapse of economies: the economy of lan­
gu-age:-usually protected by the separation of opposites, the 
economy of genders (the neuter must not lay claim to the 
human), the economy of the body (its parts cannot be inter­
changed, the sexes cannot be equivalent), the economy of 
money (Parisian Gold produced by the new social class, specu­
lative and no longer land-based-such gold is without origin, it 
has repudiated every circulatory code, every rule of exchange, 
every line of propriety-in French, a justly ambiguous word 
proprihe, since it indicates both the correction of meaning and 
the separation of possessions). This catastrophic collapse al-
ways takes the same fonn: that of an unrestrained metonymy. 
By abolishing the paradigmatic barriers, this metonymy a~ 
ishes the power of legdl submtution on which meaning is 
based: it is then no longer possible regularly to contrast-'>~ 
Posites, sexes, possessions; it is no longer possible to sa.:feguanl 
an meier of just equivalence; in a word, it is no longer ~ 
sible to represent, to make things rel>resentative, individuated, 
separate, assigned; Sarrasine represents the very confusion ~ 
representation, the unbridled (pandemic) circulation of signs. 
of sexes, of fortunes. . 
(561) And the Marquise remained penme. * Pensive, the Mar­
quise can think of many of the things that have happened or that 
will happen, but about which we shall never mow anything:,. ~ 
in6nite openness of the pensive (and this is precisely its structural 
function) removes this 6nallexia from any classification. -.-_ .. 
XCIII. TIlE PENSIVE TEXT 
Like the Marquise, the classic text is pensive: ~lete wit~L 
meaning (as we have seen). it still seems to be keeping in Ie­
~e some ultimate meaning, one it does not C?'press but­
whose place it keeps free and signifying: this ~ degree of 
meaning (which is not its annulment, but on the conbary its 
recognition), this supplementary, un~ JDea~.which 
is the theatrical sign of the implicit, is Pensiven~: the pensive 
(in faces, in texts) is the signifier of the inexpte:Ssi.ble,· not of 
the unexpressed. For if the classic text has nothing more to 
say than what it says, at least it attempts to '1et it be under­
stood" that it does not say everything; this allusion is coded by 
:n6 
pensiveness, which is a sign of nothing but itself: as though, 
having filled the text but obsessively fearing that it is not in­
conteBt4bly 6lled, the discourse insisted on supplementing it 
~th an et cetera of plenitudes. Just as the pensiveness of a 
face signals that this head is heavy with unspoken language, 
sO-The (classic) text inscribes within its system of signs the 
signature of its plenitude: like the face, the text becomes ex­
IN_we (let us say that it signifies its expressivity), endowed 
With an interiority whose supposed depth compensates for the 
parsimony of its plural. ~t its discreet urging, we want to ask 
the classic text: What are you thiniing about? but the text, 
;mer-than all those who try to escape by answering: about 
iiOtmng, does not reply, giving meaning its last closure: sus­
~ion. 
217 
Appendices 
I 
Honore de Balzac 
lSARRASINE 
21 was dap in one of those daydredms Iwhich o~e even the 
Bh4Ilowest of men, in the midst of the most tumultuous parties. 
4Midnight hdd just sounded from the clode of the ElyHe-Bourbon. 
"Seat.d in tJ window rec8118 'tJnd hidden behind the sinuous foldB 
of tJ BiUc curttlin, T I could contempl4U at my leisure the gtITden of 
the mttnsion where I was spending the evening. 'The trees, pttrti4Jly 
covered with snow, stood out dimly ttgtJinst the grtJ)'ish boclcground 
of tJ cloudy sky, btJrely whitened by the moon. Seen tJmid these ftJn­
ttJstic surroundings, they vttguely resembled ghosts httlf out of their 
.hrouds, tJ gigtJntic representtJtion of the ftJmous Dttnce of the 
Dettd. 'Then, turning in the other diTection, 1°1 could tJdmire the 
DtJnce of the LivingllltJ splendid StJlon decortJted in silver tJnd gold, 
with glittering chttndeliers, spttrIWng with ctJndles. There, miUing 
ttbout, whirling tJround, flitting here tJRd there, were the most betJu­
tiful women of PtJris, the richest, the noblest, dtJuling, rtateiy, re­
splendent with didmonds, flowers in their httir, on their bosoms, on 
their hedds, strewn over dresses or in gtJrlttnds at their feet. Light, 
rustling movement8, voluptuous steps, mtJde the ltJces, the sille bra­
ctJdes, the pus, flottt mound their delicate forms. Here tJnd there, 
some overly tJnimtJted g14nces dtJTted forth, eclipsing the lights, the 
221 
fire of the diamonds, dnd stimulated dReW ,ome tOCHll'dent hemta. 
One might dlso cdtch movements of the hedd medning/ul to lovers. 
dnd negdtiYe gestures for husbands. The BUdden outburm of ta 
gamblers' voices dt etJCh unexpected turn of the dice, the clinic of 
gold, mingled with the music and the murmur of conversdtion, cmd 
to complete the giddiness of this mtISS of fJeople intoxicated ", 
everything seductive the world Cd1l hold, d haze of fJerfume cmd 
genered inebritttion pl4yed upon the fevered mind. 12ThUB, on "'1 
right, the d4rk dnd silent irooge of death; on my J.ft, the seemly 
bacclulJudias of life: here, cold rutture, dull, in mourning; there, hu~­
mdn beings enjoying themselves. 1.IOn the borderline between 
these two so different scenes, which, d thoUS4nd times repeated in 
vmious guises, make Pcuis the world's moat cmwsing cmd mOlt phil. 
osophicdl city, I WdB 11I4king for myself tI mored J'J1lIddoine, httlf 
pledSdnt, httlf funereed. With myieft foot I bedt time, dnd I felt dB 
though the other were in the grttve. My leg WdB in ftICt chilled by 
one of those insidious drafts which freeze httlf our bodia whik tM 
other httlf feels the humid hedt of rooms, tin occurrence rtlther fre· 
quent crt bttl18. 
u"Monsieur de Lttnty hdSn't owned this house for very long, hdS 
he?" 
"Oh yes. Mtlrechttl Cmiglidno sold it to him netlTly ten )'ftI11 
ttgo." 
"Aht" 
"These people must httve d huge fortune." 
"They must httve." 
"Whdt d pttrtyllt's shockingly elegtlnt." 
"Do you think they're dB rich dB M. de Nucingen or M. de Con· 
dreville?" 
II"You medn you don't know?" 
I stuck my hedd out dnd recognized the two spettiers dB members 
of thdt strtlnge rdee which, in Pttris, dettls exclusively with "why," 
tlnd "hows," with "Where did they come frow' ·'WhtIt', httppen. 
ing?" "WhtIt hdS she done?" They lowered their voices tlnd wttUced 
off to tdlk in grettter comfort on some isol4ted softl. Never httd tI 
richer vein been offered to seekers ttfter mystery. IINobody knew 
whtlt country the Lttnty ftlmily CtIJ'ne from, lTor from whttt businus, 
wMt plunder, wMt piraticol tJCtivity, or wMt inheritance derived a 
fortune eBtinutted at severol millions. 18All the members of the 
family spoke ltolian, French, Spanish, English, and German per­
fectly enough to create the belief tMt they muBt have spent a long 
time among these various peoples. Were they gyPsies? Were they 
freebooters? 
l'''Even if it's the devil," some young politicians said, "they give 
a rnmvelous party." 
"Even if the Count de lAnty had robbed a bank, I'd marry his 
daughter any time!" cried a philosopher. 
2OWho wouldn't have married Marianina, a girl of sixteen whose 
beauty embodied the fabled imaginings of the Eastern poets! Like 
the sultan's ddughter, in the Btory of the Magic Lamp, she should 
have been kept 'Veiled. Her singing put into the shade the partiol 
tolents of Molibran, Sontag, and Fodor, in whom one dominant 
quality has olways excluded over-aU perfection; whereas Marianina 
was able to bring to the Sdme level purity of sound, sensibility, 
rightness of movement and pitch, soul and science, correctness and 
feeling. This girl was the embodiment of that secret poetry, the 
common bond among aU the arts, which olways eludes those who 
search for it. Sweet and modeBt, educated and witty, no one could 
eclipBe Mttri4nina, save her mother. 
21Have you ever encountered one of those women whose BtriJcing 
beauty defies the inroads of age and who seem at thirty-six more 
desirable than they could have been fifteen years earlier? Their 
visage is a vibrant soul, it glows; each feature sparkks with inteUi­
gence; each pore has a speciol brilliance, especiolly in artificiollight. 
Their seductive eyes refuse, attract, speak or renunn silent; their 
wolk is innocently knowledgeable; their voiced employ the melodi­
ous weolth of the molt coquettishly soft and tender notes. Based 
on comparisons, their praises flatter the self-love of the molt sen­
tient. A movement of their eyebrows, the leaBt glance, their pursed 
lips, fill with a kind of terror those whose life and happiness depend 
upon them. Inexperienced in love and influenced by words, a 
young girl can be seduced; fo.r this kind of woman, however, a man 
muBt know, liJce M. de Jaucourt, not to cry out when he is hiding 
in a closet and the nutid brew two of his fingers as she shuts the 
door on them. In loving these powerful sirens, one gambles with 
one's life. And this, perhaps, is why we love them 10 pttssioJUttely. 
Such Wtts the Countess de IAnt}'. 
22Filippo, Marianinct's brother, shttred with his Bister in the 
Countess's metrvelous bettuty. To be brief, this young metn Wttl d 
living irnttge of Antinous, even more slender. Yet how well theBe 
thin, delicttte proportions dre suited to young people when an 
olive complexion, strongly defined eyebrows, and the fire of velvet 
eyes give promise of future rnttle {JdBsion, of brave thoughts I If 
Filippo resided in every gul's hettrt tts an idedl, he also resicUd in 
the memory of every mother tIB the best ClItch in FrdnCe. 
23The bettuty, the fortune, the wit, the cluDms of theBe two chil­
dren, came solely from their mother. ··The Count de Ltmty was 
BJ'nttll, ugly, and pock-mttrked; dtuk tts a Spaniard, dull as a btmJc.,. 
However, he was taken to be d deep politicidn, (Jerh4ps becttUlle he 
rdrely lttughed, emd was always quoting Metternich or WeUington. 
2aThis myrterious fmnily had aU the tJfJI'eal of one of Lord By­
ron's poems, whose difficulties each person in the fttshionttble world 
interpreted in a different way: an obscure and mblime lOng in every 
strophe. HThe reBerl'e rnttintained by M. and Mme de Ltmty dbout 
their origin, their post life, and their reldtionship with the four 
corners of the tJobe had not ldsted long tIB a subject of ttltoniBh­
ment in Pttris. Nowhere perh4ps is Vupd8i4n's caiom better under­
Ifood. There, even bloodstained or filthy money betrays nothing 
and ItttndI for everything. So long tts high society knows the amount 
of your fortune, you CITe clttIsed among those htMng an equal 
cnnount, dnd no one tIBia to '" your ftUnily tree, because everyone 
howl how much it colt. In d city where toeitJl problenu tIr. BOlved 
liJce CIlgebraic equ.ations, ddventurm have every opportunity in 
their favor. Even suppoAng this family were of 8)'''''' origin, it WCI8 
10 wealthy, 10 attractive, thttt society had no trouble in forgiving its 
little teCTeU. 21UnfortuJUttely, however, the mylfery of the LtmtyB 
prumted " continuing wurce of curiOllity, rttther like tlutt can­
toined in the nov'" of Ann RmIcliffe. 
"Obfenoer., people who 17Ittl:e it d point to know in whttt .hop 
you buy your c"ndleIticb, or who cJd the cnnount of your rent 
when they find your cJfJtIrlnumt attrdCtive, had nomd, now and 
then, in the midst of the Countess'. partiu, concerts, bdlls, tmd 
routs, the tJPfJe4rtmee of tJ strtJRge persontJ{!,e. nIt WdB tJ mtJn. BOThe 
first titfUI he htJd tJfJPetJred in the mcmsion WdB during tJ concert, 
when he seetfUld to have been drtJWn to the BtJlon b, MtJritJnind s 
enchtJnting voice. 
Il"AU of tJ sudden, I'm cold," tJ l4cl, htJd said who WcIS sttJnding 
with tJ friend by the door. 
The strtJ",er, who WdS sttJnding next to the women, went dWtJY. 
"ThtJt's oddl I'm wcmn now." she said, after the strtJnger htJd 
gone. "And ,0u'U StJY I'm mtJd, but I ctJn't help thinking thtJt m, 
neighbor, the mtJn dressed in bltJclr. who just left, WdB the ceruse of m, chill." 
uBefore long, the exaggertJtion ntJtive to those in high society 
gtIlIe birth to tJnd dCCUmu14ted the most tJmusing idetJs, the most 
outrtJgeous expressions, the most ridiculous tIlWcdotes tJbout this 
mysterious persontJ{!,e. II Although not tJ vtJmpire, tJ ghoul, or tJn 
tJrtificitJl mtJn, tJ Ir.ind of FtJust or Robin GoodfeUow, people fond of 
ftJnttJSy said he htJd something of tJU these tJnthropomorphic Rd­
tures tJbout him. "Here tmd there, one CtJ11Je tJCrOSS SOtfUI GermtJns 
who accepted dB foct these clever witticisms of PmisitJn sctmdtJl­
mongering. liThe strtmger WdS tfUlrel, tJn old mtJn. aeMtJny of the 
young tfUln who were in the htJbit of settling the future of Europe 
ellery morning in tJ few eiegtJnt phrtJSe8 would htJ\le lilted to see in 
this strtJnger SOtfUI gretJt crimiRtJi, the possessor of vtJst wetJlth. 
SOtfUI storytellen recounted the life of this old mtJn tmd prOllided 
retJUy curious dettJils tJbout the tJtrocities he htJd committed while 
in the service of the MtJhtJrtJjtJ of Mysore. SOtfUI btJnkers, more posi­
tive by ntJture, invented tJ fable tJbout money. "BtJh," they StJid, 
shrugging their .houlders in pity, "this poor old mtJn is tJ ~e 
genoisel" 
1'''Sir, without being indiscreet, could ,OU pletJSe teU tfUI whtJt 
you tfUltJn by tJ tete genoise?" 
"A mtJn, sir, with tJn enormous lifmtfUI Cd/JittJl tJnd whose fttm­
il,'s incotfUI doubtless depends on his good hetJlth." 
III retJUlmber lutving hetJrd tJt MtfUI d'Espord'. tJ h,pnotist prov­
ing on highly suspect historictJl dattJ thtJt this old mtJn, pruerved 
under tJ.tm, WcIS the ftJmous BtJlstJmo, Ir.nown dB CtJgliostro. Accord-
ing to this contemporary dlchemirt, tM Sicilidn adventurer hdd 
ucdfJed duth and fJds8ed his time fdbricating gold for his grtmd­
children. lAst, the bailiff of F erette nuJintdined tIutt he hdd recog­
nized this odd personage dB the Count of Sdint-Germttin. ItThae 
stupidities, spoleen in witty accents, with the mocking dir chdrtJCter­
istic of atheistic society in our d4y, leept tIliv. vcrgue SUSpicioDS 
dbout the LAnty fanul:),. f.°Findlly, through a mange combiMtion 
of circumstances, the members of this family ;umped everyone', 
conjectures by belutving somewhat mysteriously toward this old 
mdn, whose life WdB somehow hidden from till investigdtion. 
f.1 Whenever this person crossed the thr-.hold of the room he 
WdB supposed to inMbit in the LAnty mdMOn, his tJPfJedrdnce tIl­
wd)'s created a great sensation crmong the family. One might Ium 
Cdlled it an event of great importance. Filippo, MaridnintJ, Mme de 
lAnty, and an old servant were the only persons privileged to dBIist 
the old mdn in wdllcing, tJriBing, sitting down. &ch of them wdtched 
over his slightest movement. f.2lt seemed that he WdB an enchanted 
being upon whom depended the IuJpfJiJJe8l, the life, or the fortune 
of them till. taW dB it affection or fem? TIuw in society were uRdbk 
to discover d1I')' clue to help them wive this ",oblem. M Hidd4m for 
whole months in the depths of a aecret BmICtuttT)', this family .". 
would tlUddenly come forth, unexpecudly, and would tJ/'I'e4r in the 
midst of the salons lilce those fdiries of bygone dttys who dacended 
from flying dragons to interrupt the rites to which they Iuul not 
been invited. f.l()nly the m06t avid onloolcerr were then ttble to 
perceive the uneasiJJe81 of the hedds of the house, who could con­
ce4l their feelings with unUSUtll sJall. tlSometimes, holWlVer, while 
dtJncing a quadrille, Mdridnina. ndive dB she WdB, would CtI8t a terri­
fUld glance at the old man when she spi6d him crmong the crowd. 
Or elBe Filippo would slip quiclcly through the throng to his side 
and would std)' near him, tender and attentive, dB though contact 
with others or the slightest breath would destroy this mange cred­
ture. The Countess would mtIlre a point of drawing near, without 
seeming to have any intention of joining them; then, dBtIUming a 
manner and expression of servitude mixed with tenderness, submis­
non, and power, she would "y a few words, to which the old J11dR 
nearly tIlwayr deferred, and he would disappem, led off, or, more 
:n6 
precisely, ccmied off, by her. nlf Mme de Lanty were not present, 
the Count used d thoUS4nd streatttgems to reach his side; however, 
he seemed to luJve difficulty m.cJking himself heord, dnd treeated him 
like d spoiled child whose mother gives in to his whims in order to 
avoid d scene. nSome bolder persons having thoughtlessly ventured 
to question the Count de lAnty, this cold, reserved mdn Iuul dP­
pemed never to understcmd them. And so, after mdny biss, dll futile 
becduse of the circumspection of the entire fdmily, everyone stopped 
trying to leatham such d weU-kept secret. WedT)' of trying, the com­
fJdniorulble spies, the idly curious, dnd the politic dll gcwe up both­
ering dbout this mystery. 
uHowever, even now perhdps in these glittering salons there 
were some philosophers who, while ettting dn ice or d sherbet, or 
pldcing their empty punch gltIS8 on d side tdble, were SlJYing to each 
other: "It wouldn't surprise me to lecarn theat those peofJle tile 
crooks. The old mdn who hide, dnd only m.cJkes his dppetJrdnce on 
the first ddy of spring or winter, or dt the solstices, looks to me like 
d IcilkT " 
"Or d confidence mdn 
"It's dlmost the Sdme thing. Killing d mdn's fortune is sometimes 
worse tlum lciUing the mem." 
-1O"Sir, llutve bet twenty loWs, I should get bod forty." 
"But, sir, there tile only thirty on the tdble." 
"Ah weU, you see how mixed the crowd is, here. It's impossible 
to play." 
"True But it's now netllly six months since we've seen the 
Spirit. Do you think he', redl.ly oliver' 
"Hoht tit best " 
These lost words were spoken netI1 me by peofJle I did not know, 
CIS they were moving off, 610nd CIS I WClS resuming, in dJI afterthought, 
my mixed thoughts of white ond block, life dnd deeath. My vivid 
imdginotion CIS weU CIS my eyes looked bod mad forth from the 
party, which hod reached the height of its splendor, ~nd the somber 
Beene in the gordens. 121 do not know how long I mediteated on 
these two faces of the hUmdn coin; II but dll eat once I WdS owak­
ened by the sti~d lough of d young WOmdn. IH I WdS stunned by the 
tJfJpetlldnce of the iJ'J1d&e which orose before me. HBy one of those 
tricks of ndture, the Judf-mournful thought turning in my mind 
hdd emerged, ttnd it tlf'l'etIT.d living befen me, it htuI ",",ng lih 
Minerva from the head of Jow, ftIlJ and nrong. it Well tit once d 
hundred )'"11 old ttnd twenty-two )'etIrI old; it Well dim and Udd. 
"Escaped from his room liJc. d lunatic from 'hil cell, the little" old 
man hdd obviouBly slipped behind a hedge of p.oplc who were 
listening to Mttrianind', voice, ~niBhing the cavtltind from Tancredi. 
IT He seemed to hdve come out from underground, impelled by 
some piece of If4ge rrldChinery. "Motionless ttnd somber, he rtood 
for a moment gazing tit the fJ4rf)', the noises of which htuI perhdpl 
reached his etITs. His tIlmort somndmbultltory I'reoccupation WdB'SO 
concentrtlted on things tlult he Well in the world without _ng it. 
UHe had unceremoniously ",",ng up next to one of the mort rav­
ishing women in Paris, IOd young and elegant ddncer, delictltely 
formed, with one of those ftlCes dB fresh dB that of a child, pinlc and 
white, so frcDl and transparent that d man's tJ4nce seems to pene­
trtlte it lilce d ray of sunlight going through ice. lIThe)' were both 
there before me, together, united, ttnd so clOBe that the Btrdnser 
brushed against her, her gaury drea, her gtITlttnds of flow"', her 
softly curled hair, her floating BdBh. 
121 had brought this young woman to Mme de Lanty', btIll. Since 
this was her ~rtd visit to the house, I forgave her her rtifled 14ugh, 
but I quidly gave her a signtll which com/'letely silenced her ttnd 
~d her with awe for her neighbor. "She sat down next to me. 
"The old man did not wdnt to leave this lovely cretlture, to whom 
he had att«hed himself with that Iilent ttnd aeemingly base_ 
stubbornness to which the extremely old tlTe /'rone, ttnd which malees 
them tJI'fJedr childish. -In orckr to sit netI1' her, he htuI to t41ce (J 
folding chair. His slightetd movements were full of that cold huvi­
nea, the stupid indecision, CMrdCterirtic of the gestures of a /'tITd­
lytic. He sat slowly down on his seat, with circumspection, "mut­
tering Bome uninteUigible words. His worn-out voice WdB liJc, the 
sound made by d rtone faIling down a well. "The young woman 
held my hand tightly, dB if .. Icing /'rotection on some precifJice, 
and she shivered when this man tit whom she waloolcing tatum.d 
ul'0n her two eyes without wttrmth, glaucow eyes which could only 
be compared to dull mother-of~. 
2:18 
.... I'm afraid," she said, letming toward m)' ear. 
TO"You Cdn ttdlt," I answered. "He is very IuJrd of hearing." 
"Do you know him?" 
71 Thereupon, she gctthered up enough courdge to look for a 
moment ctt this CTettture for which the hUmdn language IuJd no 
name, a form -without substance, a being without life, or a life with­
out action. 12She was under the speU of that timorous curiosity 
which leads women to seek out dangerous emotions, to go see 
chained tigers, to look ctt boa constrictors, frightening themselves 
because they are separctted from them onl), by wuk fences. TI Al­
though the little old mdn's back was stooped lilee a laborer's, one 
could etI8ily tell that he must luzve IuJd ctt one time a normal .luJpe. 
His excessive thinness, the delicacy of his limbs, proved that he IuJd 
always been slender. 'of He WCII dTessed in block riUt. trousers which 
feU about his boR)' thighs in folds, liJce an empty 1Itlil. 111 An anctto­
mist would have promptl), recognized the symptoms of gdlloping 
consumption by loolting ctt the skinn), legs supporting this strange 
bod)'. fly OU would luzve said they were two bones CTOBsed on a 
tombstone. 
11 A feeling of profound horror for mdMind gripped the heart 
when one saw the m41b thctt decrepitude IuJd left on this fragile 
mochine. TIThe stranger was wearing an old-fashioned gold~m­
broidered white waistcoat, and his linen was daulingl)' white. A 
friU of BOl1IeWhat ),ellowed lace, rich enough for a queen's envy, 
feU into ruflla on his breast. On him, hOWflWlr, this 14ce ,.."..d 
more lilee a rag tluJn lilee an ornament. Centered on it was a fabu­
lous clidmond which glittered liJce the sun. '''This outmoded luxury, 
this particu14r and fllBteless jewel, made the strange CTectture's fdee 
even more striking. IOThe setting was worth), of the portrait. This 
dark face WCII angular and aU SUM in. The chin was SUMen, the 
templel were suMen; the eyes were lost in )'eUowiBh sockets. The 
jawbones stood out because of his indescribable thinness, cruting 
C4lVities in the center of eoch cheek. I1The .. deformations, more or 
less iUuminated by the candles, produced sluJdow. and strange 
refkctions which BUCCeeded in erasing an)' hUmdn characteriBtia 
from his face. U And the )'etJTIluJd glued til. thin, )'eUow .kin of his 
face so closely to his slrull that it WClS covered cill over with d multi­
tude of circul.ttr wrinkles, Wee the ripple. on d pond into which d 
child IuI8 thrown d pebble, or Btar-Bhttped, like d crdCked window­
ptlne, but everywhere deep dnd close-set CIS the edges of pttges in d 
closed book. ·Sorne old people have presented more hideous por­
traits; what contributed the moat, however, in lending the tJPfJear­
dRCe of dn ttrtificUU creature to the specter which httd risen up 
before us WClS the red tJRd white with which he glistened. The eye­
brow. of his mllSk took from the light d luster which revfUJled that 
they were ptlinted on. FortuntJtely for the eye depressed by the 
sight of such ruin, his CtJeUtverous skuU WClS covered by d blond wig 
whose innumerttble curls were evtdence of dn extrdordiRllry preten­
sion. "For the rest, the feminine coquetry of this phttnflumtJgoriettl 
persoruJge was rtJther strongly emphasized by the gold omttments 
httnging from his fUlTS, by the ring. whose fine stones glittered on 
his bony fingers, dnd by d wtJtch chttin which shimmered like the 
brilliltnts of d choker tUound d womtJn's neck. BlFincilly, this sort 
of Jdptlnese idol "httd on his bluish lips d fixed dnd frcnen smile, 
implttcttble dnd mocking. like d .Jrull. "'Silent ttnd motionless CIS d 
Bttttw, it exuded the musty odor of old clothes which the heirs of 
sorne duchess tttlce out for inventory. II Although the old mtJn 
tumed his eyes towtUd the crowd, it seemed that the movernenu 
of those orbs, inCtJptlble of sight, were dCCOmplished only by rnetJRS 
of sorne imperceptible artifice; dnd when the eyes CtJrne to rest on 
something, dnyone looking tJt them would httve concluded that 
they httd not moved tJt cillo "To see, next to this humtJR wreckage, 
d young womtJn IOwhose neck, bosom, dnd tJTmS were bdre tJRd 
white, whose figure was in the full bloom of its bemJty, whose httir 
rose from her cdcJbdSter forehead dnd inspired love, whose eyes did 
not receive but gave off light, who WClS soft, fresh, dnd whose float­
ing curls dnd sweet bretJth seemed too huvy, too htUd, too power­
ful for this shttdow, for this mtJn of dust: 11tJhl here were detJth dnd 
life indeed, I thought, in d fdntdBtic mCJbesque, httlf hideous chi­
merd, divinely feminine from the wtJist up. 
"Yet there me rn.cJTTi4ges like that often enough in the world," I 
stJid to myBlllf. 
n"He smells like d grdVeymd," cried the terrified young womtJn, 
"preBBing ttgtJinst me for prot.mon, t1nd whose uned8)' movements 
told me she Wt18 frightened ..... Wht1t t1 horrible light," she went on. 
"I ct1n't st4y here t1ny longer. If Iloole t1f him ttgt1in, I ,Ml.l believe 
that death itself ht18 come looleing for me. Is he oliwr' 
"She retlChed out to the phenomenon "with that boldness 
women Cdn summon up out of the rtrength of their desires; "but 
,he brolee into t1 cold swettt, for no sooner ht1d she touched the old 
mt1n tht1n she heard t1 cry lilr.e t1 rt1ftle. This sharp 'Voice, if voice it 
Wt18, issued from t1 nearly dried up throat. "Then the sound Well 
quicldy foUowed by t1 little, convulsive, childish cough of t1 fJeCulim 
sonorousness. "At this sound, Mari.t1nint1, Filippo, t1nd Mme de 
LAnty ldell in our direction, mad their gl4nces were li.It.e bolts of 
lightning. The young womt1n wished she were t1f the bottom of the 
Seine. lflOShe toole my cmn t1nd led me into t1 side room. Men, 
women, everyone mt1de wcry for us. At the end of the public rooms, 
we Cdme into t1 smt1U, semicircultu cht1mber. lOlMy comfJt1nion 
threw herself onto t1 divt1n, trembling with fright, oblivious to her 
runoundings. 
l02"Mt1dtmae, you me mt1d," l.aid to her. 
10l"But," she replied, t1fter t1 moment's silence, during which I 
&dUd at her in tldrniration, lOt"is it my ft1Ult? Why does Mme de 
Lanty t1llow ghOBts to Wt1nder i1bout in her howe?" 
lOO"Come," I repl.Ued, "you me being ridiculous, tding t1 litt" 
old mt1n for t1 ghost." 
loe"Be still," she Btlid, with tht1t forceful t1nd moclcing t1ir t1U 
women so et1Sily t18BUme when they Wt1nt to be in the right. 
lOT'Wht1t t1 pretty rooml" she cried, loolcing mound. "Blue S4tin 
t1lwcrys mdes such wonderful wall ht1ngings. How refreshing it isl 
108()hl wht1t t1 bet1utiful pttintingl" she went on, getting up mad 
going to stt1nd before t1 painting in t1 mttgnificent frt1me. 
We stood for t1 moment in contemplation of this mt1TVel, 
l"which seemed to ht1ve been pttinted by some sufJem4turttl brush. 
nOThe picture Wt18 of Adonis lying on t1 lion', slein. 111 The li1mp 
ht1nging from the ceiUng of the room in t1n t1ltJbt1ster tJobe illumi­
nated this ct1nvt18 with t1 soft I!J.ow which eruJbled us to mde out 
t1U the beduties of the painting. 
112"Does such t1 perfect crei1fure exist?" ,he t1Sleed me, llIafter 
2)1 
Mving. with II soft tmlile of contmtment, examined the exquisite 
grtJCe of the contours, the pose, the color, the hdir; in ahort, the 
entire picture. 
IW'He is too buutiful for II mem," .he added, after an exdmina­
tion BUCh tIS .he might have made of some rival. 
'lll()hI how jedlous I then felt: IOmething 111 in which d poet IuJd 
. vdirdy tried to rnal:e me beliew, the jedlOUBY of engravings, of pic­
tures, wherein artists eMg&erdte human beauty dCCOrding to the 
4e>¢iJUl which ,"ds them to idetJlize everything. 
m"lt's a portrdit," 1 replied, "t~ I"oduct of the talent of Vien. 
118But tlutt gredt pttinter never scrw the original dnd n1lI)'be~Yoil d 
admire it less if you l:new tlutt this daub Well copied from the BttItw 
of a womem." 
llI"But who is it?" 
1 hesitdted. 
"I Wllnt to l:now," she added, impetuously. 
120"1 belielle," I replied, "thot this Adonis is a II reldtive of 
i Mme de Ldnty." 
1211 IuJd the pain of seeing her rapt in the contempldtion of this 
figure. She Bdt in silence; I lilt down nat to her dnd tool: her Iumd 
without her being dWdre of itI Forgotten for d paintingI I_At this 
moment, the light footsteps of d womem in d rwtUng drea b,ol:e 
the silence. lily oung MdridnirJIJ ClII1Je in. cmd her innocent Gl"eB­
sion made her even more alluring tlum did her grace tmd her lavely 
dress; she WtlS wall:ing slowly and escorting with maternal Cdre, 
with filial solicitude, the cortumed If»cter who 1uuI made us fla 
from the music room mdnd whom .he Wtll leading. watching with 
wlutt seemed to be concern til he alowly advdJ1Ced on his fubl. feft. 
'2IIThey went together with lOme difIiculty to d door hid4m be­
hind a tapestry. 12eThere, MaridnirJIJ l:nocl:ed .oftly. UTAt once, til 
if by JntJgic, a taU, stern man. a Idnd of fdmily genie, appedred. 
'28Before entrusting the old man to the Cdre of hil m)'lterioul 
grurrdian, I2Ithe child respectfully baed the Wdll:ing corpse, lind 
her cluute Cdre .. WdB not devoid of tlutt graceful Clljolery of which 
lOme privileged women poaea the teeret. 
uO"Addio, adelio," she Bdid, with the prettiut infLu:tion in her 
youthful voice. 
IIISM tldded to tM ~nal '1lUJble d 11ItI1'Wlously weU-GeCUud 
trill, but in d .oft voice, dB if to give I>oetic expreaion to til. emo­
tiORB in her hemt. II2Suddenly mucic by .ome memory, tIN old 
man stood on tM thre.hold of this secret hideawd)'. Then, through 
the silence, we hemd the hury sigh thdt Cdme from his chest: 
IUhe toolc the most bedutiful of the ri~ which ddorned his .Itele­
tdl ~nger., dnd pldced it in MdruJRiRd'. bo.om. IUThe young girl 
brolce into ldughter, toolc the ring, dnd slipped it onto her ~nger 
over her glove; IUthen she wdllced quiclcly towmd the Bdlon, from 
which there could be hemd the opening medBUrU of d quddrille. 
II'She scrw us: 
"Ala, you were here," .he Bdid, blushing. 
After having seemed dB if @Out to question UB, liT .he rdn to her 
pmtner with the CClreless petulmace of youth. 
1 .... Whdt did thdt mednl" my young comfJdnion dBlced me. "Is 
he her husbdnd? 1181 must be druming. Where dm I?" 
"You," I replisd, "you, rf'ItUl4me, superior dB you Me, )IOu who 
understand .0 well the most hidden feelings, who bow how to 
inspire in d man'. hedrl the most delicdte of feeli~ without blight­
ing it, without bredlting it dt the outset, you who pity MtIT'tlIChe 
dnd who combine the wit of d PdTisisnne with d /Jd88iondte soul 
worthy of Itdly or Spain-" 
She perceived the bitter irony in my .peech; then, without seem­
ing to have hedTd, .he interrupted me: "Oh, you fdBhion me to your 
own Ulste. Whdt tyrdnnyt You don't WdRt me for myselfr' 
"Ala, I wdnt nothing," I cried, tden dbdclc by her severity. IW'b 
it true, dt leost, thdt you enjoy hedring stones of those vivid fJdI­
sioJU thdt ravishing Southern women inspire in our hedTtlr' 
IU"Yu, .or' 
"So, I'U Cdll tomorrow Mound nine dRd revedi this mystery to 
you." 
lt2"No," .he replisd, "I wdnt to Icnow now." 
"You haven't yet given me the right to obey you when you Bd)': 
I wdnt to." 
It'''M this moment," ,he replisd with mtlddening coquetry, "I 
have the molt burning deme to Icnow the secret. TomorroW,-"Y 
might not even liBten to you " 
lUShe smiled and we pcated; she just dB proud, jun dB forbidding, 
and I just dB ridiculous dB ever. She IuuJ the auddcity to walt% with 
a young Clide-de<amp; and I MIS left in tum angry, pouting, admir­
ing, loving, jedlous. 
l""TiU tomorrow," she scrid, cuound two in the morning, dB she 
left the bdll. 
"'''1 won't go," I thought to rrryseif. "I'U give you up. You cue 
more capricious, fJerluJps a thoUSdnd times more fanciful tluna 
my imtlgiruttion." 
l"The next evening, we were both sectted before a good fire 
14'in a smtdl, ele.nt Sdlon, she on a low sold, I on cushions almost 
at her feet, and my eyes below hera. The street WdB quiet. The lmnp 
shed a soft light. It WdB one of those evenings ple4sing to the soul, 
one of those never-to-be-forgotten moments, one of thOle houn 
spent in peClCe and desire whOle clutnn, later on, is a matter for con­
stant regret, even when we may be h4ppi6r. Who can erdle the 
vivid imprint of the prst feelings of love? 
l41"WeU," she ldid, "I'm listening." 
110"1 don't dcue begin. The story has some dangerous ptJ8Btlges 
for its teUer.lf I become too mewed, you murt rtop me." 
lIll"T ell." 
112"1 will obey." 
lliErnest-/ean SttrrClBine WdB the only son of d lawyer in the 
Frdnche-Comte, I went on, after d fJdUSe. His father held dmtl88ed 
six or eight thoUBdnd livra of income honertly enough, d profes­
sional's fortune which at thtlt time in the provinces, WdB considered 
to be coloatJl. The elder ScurClBine, having but one child and dnDoUS 
to overloole nothing where his education WdB concerned, hoped to 
mellee d mtlgistrdte of him, dnd to live long enough to see, in his old 
tJge, the grdndson of Mtltthieu ScurClBine, farmer of Sttint-Die, 
seated beneath the lilies dnd ndpping throiJ&h some tri4l for the 
gredter f)ory of the law; however, huven did not hold this ~re 
in store for the lawyer. 
ll4The younger SarrClBine, entrusted to the lesuits at an eculy tJge, 
lilevidenced an unUSlUll turbulence. litHe IuuJ the childhood of a 
meln of tdlent. liTHe would study only whtlt pleQlCd him, fre-
qwntly rebelled, and sometimes spent hours on end plunged in 
confused thought, occupied tit times in watching his comrtJda at 
pltty, tit times dreaming of Homeric heroes. II1Then, if he JTJdde up 
his mind to amuse himself, he threw himself into games with an 
extraordiTIIJry ttrdor. When a fight brolee out between him and a 
friend, tM battle rttrely eruJ.d without bloodshed. If he WClS the 
wea1cer of the two, he would bite. II1Both active and fJCIS8iw by 
turns, without aptitude and not overly inteUigent, his bi%drre chttr­
tlCter IIOrruuk his teachers CIS wary of him dB were his clamnata. 
l11Instead of lettrning the elements of Greele, he drew the Rewrend 
F tither CIS he explilined a fJtIsS4ge in Thucydides to them, sleetched 
the mttthematics tfUlCher, the tutors, the Ftlther in chttrge of disci­
pline, and he scribbled ShapeleS8 designs on the walls. IlJlnstead of 
singing the Lord's praisa in church, he distracted himself during 
services by whittling on a pew; Il10r when he had Btolen a piece of 
wood, he C41Ved some holy figure. If he had no wood, paper, or 
pencil, he reproduced his idus with bread crumbs. 1MWhether 
copying the chttrdCters in the pictura that decortlted the choir, or 
improvising, he always left behind him some groa sleetcha whose 
licen.tioumea shocleed the youngeBt F tithers; .viZ tongua main­
tained that the older lauiis were amused by them. IIiFinaUy, if we 
are to beUne school gOllllip, he WClS expelled Il1(or lutving, while 
awaiting #aU tum at the confessional on Good Fr1d4y, shaped a big 
stid of wood into the form of Christ. The impiety with which thu 
~ WClS endowed was too bltttant not to Iutve nwrited punish­
ment of the artist. Had he not had the audacity to place this some­
what cynical figure on top of the ttJberJ1IJcle, 
II1Sttrrasine sought in Paris a refuge from the effects INof a 
father's curse. I"Having one of those strong wills that broole no 
obsttICle, he obeyed the comJTJdnds of his genius and entered Bou­
chttrdon's studio. 17°He worleed all day, and in the evening went 
out to beg for his living. I'll Astonished at the young artist's progress 
and intelligence, Bouchttrdon 1 T2soon became aware of his pupil's 
poverty; he helped him, grew fond of him, and treated him li1ce his 
own son. !TIThen, when Sttrrasine's genius WClS revealed In in one 
of those worb in which future talent strug&les with the efferves­
cence of youth, lTlthe warmhearted Bouchttrdon endeavored to 
restore him to the old lttwyer's good grtJCes. Before the ttuthority of 
the famous sculptor, the pmentdl anger BUbBided . .All B~on re­
joiced at htJving given birth to a grut man of the future. In the 
first throes of the ecstasy produced by his fldttered vanity, the mi­
serly lawyer gave his son the means to cut a good figure in ,ociety. 
n'For a long time, the lengthy and laborious studies demanded by 
sculpture 1TTtttnWd Samuine', impetuous nature and wild genius. 
Bouchardon, foreseeing the violeJ'IU with which the passions would 
erupt in this young soul, 1 ''which was perhaps as predisposed to 
them as Michelangelo's had been, lTIchanneled his energy into con­
stant labor. He succeeded in keeping Sarrasiruls extraordif'IIITY im­
petuosity within limits by forbidding him to work; by suggesting 
distractions when he saw him being carried away by the fury of some 
idea, or by entrusting him with impoTtlJnt work when he seemed 
on the point of abandoning himself to dissipation. 1lOHowever, 
gentleness was always the most powerful of weapons where this 
passionate soul was concerned, and the master had no greater con­
trol over his student than when he inspired his gratitude through 
paternalltindness. 
181 At twenty-two, Sarrasine was necessarily removed from the 
BlIlutary influence Bouchardon had exercised over his morals and 
his habits. 182He reaped the fruits of his &miuB by winning the 
sculpture 1'"%11 1Uestablished by the Marquis de Marign)" the 
brother of Mme de Pompadour, who did so much for the arts. 
186 Diderot hailed the statue by Bouchardon's pupil as a master­
piece. 181lThe King's sculptor, not without great sorrow, saw off to 
ltdlya young man l"whom he had Jcept, as a 1I1IItter of principk, 
in total ignorance of the facts of life. 
11'For six ),eaT', Sarrasine had boarded with Bouchardon. 1NAs 
fanatic in his art as Canova was later to be, he arose at dawn, went 
to the studio, did not emerge until nightfall, 118and lived only with 
his Muse. 1101f he went to the Comedie-FraFlfttise, he was talen by 
his master. He felt so out of pl4ce at Mme Geoffrin', and in high 
society, into which Bouclutrdon tried to introduc. him, that he pre­
ferred to be alone, and ,hunned the pkalures of that licentious era. 
111 He had no other mistress but sculpture 112and Clotilde, one of 
the luminaries of the Dpha. 1NAnd even thil affair did not z.t. 
:136 
IIHS4rrasine was rather ugly, IIlways bttdly dreaed, mad so free in his 
nature, so irregular in his private life, Il1fhat the celebrated nymph, 
feming some C4ttl8trophe, soon relinquished the sculptor to his love 
of the Am. l"Sophie Arnauld mtItU one of her witticimu on this 
BUbject. She confessed her BUrpri.se, 1 believe, thdt her frUnd htu.:f 
JTUlnttged to triumph over stattuDy. 
IITScmasine left for ltllly in 1758. 118During the journey, his vivid 
imtJgination caught fire benedth ca brillidnt slty mad at tM Bight of 
the wonderful monuments which are to be found in the birthpltlce 
of the Arts. He cadmired the statues, the frescoes, the paintings, cand 
thus inspired, l"he ccnne to Rome, JOOfilled with desire to carve his 
ncame between Micheltmgelo'. cand M. Bouchardon' •. Accordingly, 
at the beginning, he divided his time betwun studio tcasb cand 
examining the worb of art in which Rome cabounds. 101He htu.:f Ill· 
reddy spent two weeb in the ecBttJtic st4te which overwMl"., 
young minds at the sight of the queen of ruins, IOSwhen he went 
one evening to the Teatro Argmtinca, IOIbefCml which ca huge crowd 
WClS tJSSembled. IMHe inquired as to the CdUSeB of this gathering 
200cand everyone canswered with two ncames: ~i~lUJr 10meUir 
20IHe entered aoTcand took ca selIt in tlw orchestrca, ... quuud be· 
tween two notcably fat abbati; "however, he was luclty enough to 
be fdiTly close to the st •• 21°The curf4in roat. IllFor the fim time 
in his life, he heard that music 2Uwhose delights M. 1f1Cln·TClCqtIfi 
Roussecau htu.:f so eloquently prad to him at one of Baron d'Hol· 
bach'. evenings. IIIThe young sculptor's senBe8 were, 10 to 1IfJed1c, 
lubricdted by the ClCcents of 'omelli's BUblime IuJrmony. TIw lcan· 
guorous novelties of these skillfully mingled ltdlican voices plunged 
him into ca delicious ecstasy. I1tHe rerncained speechka, motionlea, 
not even feeling crowded by the two priests. IltHis soul ptvJ8ed into 
his ear. cand eye •. He seemed to hear through every pore. II'Sud· 
denly ca burst of applcause which .hook the house greeted the priJTUI 
donnca's entrance. IlTShe came coquettishly to the front of the stage 
and greeted the audience with infinite grace. The lights, the gen. 
erlll enthusicasm, the theatriclll illusion, the glcamour of ca style of 
drus which in those days was quite attroctive, IIlI conspired in favor 
2110f this WOmCln. 211S4rrasine cried out with plecaBure. 
tao At that instant he mmveled at tlw idecal beauty he had hith· 
.no sought in life, _king in 0,.. often unworthy model tM round­
ness of a fIerfect Ie&; in another, the curw of a breaBt; in another, 
white .hould.r.; finlllly ttlking .ome girl'. ned, some woman'. 
hmads, and 10,. chWI. lfRooth inees, 1I1without ever lutving en­
countered under the cold Parisilm .iy the rich, sweet creations of 
d11Cient Greece. I2lLa Zambi,..Ua dUfJlttyed to him, united, living, 
and delicate, thoee exquUite femtllc farms he 10 tlrdently duired, of 
which a sculptor is at one. tM severest and the most ~ 
judge. lI2aHer mouth WdB expruriY., her eyes loving, her complexion 
d4ulingly white. II~And along with these dettIils, which would 
Iutve eruaptured a ptlinter, lllwere aU the wonders of those irn.ages 
of Venw revered and rendered by the chilelB of the Greeu. IIIThe 
artist never wearied of admiring the inimitable grdee with which 
the arms were dtt4ched to the torso, the J1IdnIelow round,.." of 
the ned, the harmoniOUI Ii"., drawn by the eyebrows, the nose, 
and the perfect oval of the ftlCe, the purity of its vivid contours and 
the effect of the thici, curved ldshes which lined her he4vy and 
'Voluptuow eyelids. DTThis was more than a woman, this was a 
masterpiece/lllIn this unhoped-for creation could be found a love 
to erutJf1ture any man, and buutia worthy of Btttisfying a critic. 
lI2IW ith his eyes, Sarrasine dnoured Pygmalion'. st4tue, co,. 
down from its pedestal. JIOWIwn La ZmnbineUa rang, U1tM eff.ct 
was delirium. IUThe artist felt cold; Daflwn he felt a hut which 
suddenly began to pricltle in the inrwrmort apth of his being, in 
what we call the heart, for ltIClc of any otJwr wordl ~He did not 
appl4ud, he said nothing, IUhe experinced an imf1ulse of madness, 
2Na land of frenz:y which overcoma UI only when lH tire at the age 
when desire has something frightening and infernal about it. UTSar_ 
rasine wanted to leap onto the IttIgfI and tdlce fJ08BUBion of this 
woman: his strength, increased a hundredfold by a moral Upreaion 
impo.sible to explain, since these phenomena occur in em tired hid­
den from human obBer'Vation, seemed to manifest itself with pain­
ful violence. HlLoolang at him, one would have thought him a cold 
and "nselea man. "'Fame, Icnowledge, tutu", existence, laurels, 
everything coll4peed. 
2tO"To be loved by her, or dUJr' Such was the acru Sarrasine 
fJd8sed upon hinvelf. 841He was .0 utterly intoxicat.d that he no 
338 
longer saw the theater, the specttttOrB, the tlCtor., or hurd the 
music. If2Moreover, the distdnce between himself dnd Ltt Zdmbi­
nelltt htuJ cetllfld to exist, he p088e8Sed her, his eyu were riwted 
upon her, he took her for his own. An ttlmort ditlbolicttl power en­
abled him to feel the bretSth of this voice, to rmeU the scented 
powder covering her httir, to see the plarue, of her face, to count the 
blw wins sluldowing her StJtin skin. 2UlAst, this ttgile voice, fresh 
dRd silvery in timbre, supple dB d threttd slulped by the slightest 
bredth of tJiT, rolling dnd unroUing, cCIBCdding dnd sctJttering, this 
voice dttttcked his soul so vividly 14ftlust severttl times he gdYe vent 
to involuntmy erie, tom from him by convulsive feelings of pled­
sure 21~hich tlTe ttU too rdrely vouclwtfed by hurrutn pttsBions. 
2·'He WdB presently obliged to leave the theater. 2fTHis trembling 
legs ttlmost refused to support him. He WdB limp, W8dk dB d sensi­
tive rrutn who htJB given wtty to overwhelming dnger. He httd experi­
enced such p/.edSUre, or perhttps he IuId suffered so keenly, tlust his 
life httd drttirued dWtty like wdter from d broken VtJBe. He felt empty 
inside, d prostrdtion similtJT to the debilittJtion thttt overcomes those 
convttlescing from serious iUness. 
21SOvercome by dR inexplicttble Sddness, I4the StJt down on the 
step, of d church. There, lettning bock ttgttinsf d pill4r, he feU into 
d confused medittJtion, dB in d dretml. He httd been maitten by ""'­
sion. HOUpon returning to his lodging" 20Ihe feU into orue of those 
frenzjes of tJCtivity which disclose to us the presence of new ele­
ments in our lives. A prey to this fim fever of love derived equttlly 
from both pleClBUre dRd pttin, he tried to ~ his imptttience 
dnd his delirium by drttwing LrJ Zttmbinella from memory. It WdB d 
kind of embodied medittJtion. 1120n orue pttge, Ltt ZtnnbirueUd tJf; 
fJetI1ed in tlust dppttrently cttlm dnd cool pose fdYored by &p1uJe1, 
Ciorgiorue, dnd every gretSt pttinter. III()n dnother, ,he WdB tkli­
edtely tuming her heOO ttfter httving finished d triU, ttnd ttpfJetI1ed to 
be listening to herself. 2HStlTTttsirue ,ketched his mistress in evtIrf 
pose: he drew her unveiled, setJted, stttnding, lying down, cluJste or 
dmorous, embodying through the delirium of his pencils every Cd­
Pricious notion thttt Cdn enter our hettds when we thinJr intently 
ttbout d mistress. 2OIHowever, his fevered thought. went beyond 
drttwing. 211He SdW Ltt ZttmbirueUtt, spoke to her, beseeched her, he 
239 
fJtIBs8d a thoU8dnd yeflTB of life tmd Iutf1pinea with her by fJldcing 
her in every ifTl4gincJble position; IITin short, by Sdmpling the future 
with her. 2II()n the foUowing day, he sent his valet to rent a box 
next to the st4ge for the entire sedlon. IIIThen, lilee dll young pe~ 
pie with lusty .ouls, HOhe euggerdted to hirrJ88lf the difficulties of 
his undertdlcing and first fed his pcusion with the pletJsure of being 
dble to ddmire his mistress without obstruction. 2tlThis golden. 
of love, during which we tdlce pledSUre in our own feeling and in 
which we dre hdppy dlmost by ourselves, IUWdB not destined to ldBt 
long in SdrrdSine's Cdse. 2UNevertheless, events took him by surprise 
H4while he WdB still under the speU of this verndl halluciRdtion, dB 
naive dB it WdB voluptuous. Hlln a week he lived a lifetime, spend­
ing the mornings knedding the cl4y by which he would copy LA 
ZambineUa, 2t8desf:rite the veils, slrirts, corset., and ribbons which 
corlCedled her from him. ItT1n the evenings, instdUed in his box 
edrly, dlone, lying on a sofa lilee a Turk under the influence of 
opium, he cruted for hirrJ88lf a pletJsure dB rich tmd vnd dB he 
wished it to be. "'First, he gradlUllly fmnilimized hirrJ88lf with the 
overly vivid emotions his mistress'. singing dfforded him; -he then 
trdined his eyes to see her, and findlly he could contempltfte her 
HOWithout fettring dR outburBt of the wild frenry which hdd seized 
him on the first day. As his fJdssion beCdme cdlmer, it grew deeper. 
HIFor the rest, the unsocilJble sculptor did not dUow his frinuIB to 
intrude upon his solitude, which WdB peopled with irncJga, ddorned 
with fdRtdsies of hope, dRd filled with Iutf1pinea. ITIH" love WdB 
.0 strong, so Rd'ive, tlult he experWnced dU the innocent scruples 
thdt dSSdil us when we love for the first time. ITIAs he begdR to re­
dlize thdt he would soon hdve to oct, to plot, to inquire where LA 
ZdmbineUd lived, whether she hdd a mother, uncle, fetlcher, fam­
ily, to ponder, in short, on Wd)'S to see her, .pedlc to her, these grut, 
ambitious thoughts made his hemt sweU 80 painfully thdt he put 
them off unfillater, 2T4deriving dB much satisfaction from his ph)'si­
cdl suffering dB he did from his intel1ectlUll pleasura. 
2711"But," Mme de Rochefide interrupted me, "I still don't Bee 
anything about either MarianiRd or her little old mdR." 
"You tlTe seeing nothing but himf' I cried imptlt'Wntly, Wre dn 
dUthor who ir being forced to ,poil d thedtricdl effect. 
nlFor severol dayB,I raumed afUr d fHtu#, StlTraiM IuuJ r~ 
peored BO fdithfull)' in hir box dnd hir eyes IuuJ exf'rUSlld auch love 
2T7tlutt his pasion for LA 'LunbinelU(,voice would Iutve _n com­
mon 1cnowledge throughout Pdria, IuuJ thiB ddwnture ,..".,..d 
there; 2T'however, in ItIIl)', 71ItItlmne, everyone goa to the theater 
for himself, with hiB own /JdBBiOnB, dnd with d hetlrtfelt interut 
which precludeB spying through operd gLlsBu. n'NeverthelaJ, the 
sculptor'. enthU6i4ma did not UCdfJe the CIttention of the iii,..,. 
for long. 2IO()ne evening. the FrenchrndflldW tlutt they wr. Laugh­
ing dt him in the wings. 1I1It ir hmd to Jrnow what extreme dCtiORB 
he might not httve Wen IIIhdd LA 'Lunbinelld not come onto the 
BftJge. She gave Sturdtline one of tho. eloquent tJ.tmca tuwhkh 
often reveol much more thtJn women intend them to. -Thir 
gl4nce WCII d totdl revel4tion. StITr_ne wdllovedl 
"If it'. only d CdfJrice," he thought, tIlrudy ClCCUtling hiB mistral 
of excessive tlTdor, "she doesn't Jrnow whdt she ir subjecting heraelf 
to. I am hoping her C4fIrice willlMt my whole lif .... 
211 At tMt moment, the tITtiIt'. dttmtWn WCII diBtrlUUd by flu. 
soft 1cnocb on the door of hiB box. IMHe open.d it. In An old 
WOmdR entered with em tIir of mystery. 
2 .... Young ffIIIII," ,he Idid, "if you wcmt to be htJpfry, be prudent. 
Put on d cdfJe, wetIT d htJt drawn down Oller your eyes; then, tlTound 
ten in the evening, be in the Vid del Corso in front of the Hotel eli 
Spttgnd." 
2W'l'U be there," he replied, "pleing two louU in the dwnn4', 
wrin1cled htJnd. 
211 He 16ft hir box 282ttfter IuMng fivm d rignal to LA 'LunbinelltJ, 
who timidly lowered her heavy eyelidI, lih d WOmdR pktaed to be 
underrtood dt 1Mt. 2tlThen he rdn home to dr ... hinuelf CII Be­
ductillely dB he could. INAs he WCllluving the theater, nod mcmge 
mdR too1c hiB tIml. 
"Be on your gwud, FrenchmtJn," he whilpered in his elIr. "This 
ir d J1JII:tUr of life dnd dedth. Ctlrdinol CicogntlTd ir her protector 
dlld doan't tri{k." 
241 
... At that moment, IuJd some demon set the /'it of heU between 
Smrtlli,.. dnd Ld ZAmbiJWll4, he would h4ve croaed it with OM 
kd/J. We the horses of the gods described by Homer, the sculptor's 
love 1uJd tr~d 'VdBt diBtttnt:a in the twinJrling of dI1 eye. 
·'''If death it8elf were wditing for me outside the house, I would 
go even fd8ter," he replied. 
lIII"Poverino'" the Btrdnger cried III he ~ed. 
2W5pedling of ddnger to d lowr is tcmtamount to telling him 
pluBures, is it not? "'SmrdBine's 'VdIet htJd never seen his mdBter 
tdlce so much Cdre owr his toilette. IOIHis finat BWor~ d gift from 
Bouchdrdon, the BdBh Clotilde hdd given him, his embroidered 
cOdt, his ril"., -brOCdde wcristcOdt, his gold muffbox, his ;ew.z.d 
wdtches, were dll tdlcen from their coffers, I02dnd he ddo"..d him­
self Wee d girl dbout to df1I*Ir before her font love. IOIAt til. .. 
pointed hour, drunJc with love tmd seething with hope, ICHSmrtlline, 
conculed in his CdfIe, .ped to the rmde%voUi til. old womcm htuI 
gi'Ven him. The duenrlll Will Wditing for him. 
"You took d long time," she BtIitl ...... Come." 
She kd the Frenchmdn dlong .wrdl bdck meets aoetmd rtof'Ped 
before d rather htJndsome mdMon. "She knocked. IWfhe door 
opened. --She kd Smrdli,.. dlong d ldbyrinth of rtairwcJya, gtIlm­
ia, dnd rooms which were lit only by the f-ble light of the moon, 
2nd soon Cdrne to d door 'IOfhrough whoa. crClCU tJurrwd bright 
light8 dnd from behind which Cdme the joyful soundl of armdl 
'Voices. I11Whm at d word from the old WOmdn he Will ddmitted 
to thil myrteriOUB room, Smraine WdB sudtknly ddzzlAId tit finding 
hi"*'f in d Idlon dB brillidntly lighted III it WdB rumptuouJly fur­
nilhed, in the center of which stood d tdble ldden with venerdble 
bottla dnd fltuhing fld&ons BfJdrl:ling with ruby ftll¥t8. IllHe recog­
nized the Bingen from the theater, 'lIdlong with some chdrming 
wornen, dll re4dy to begin dn artistB' orgy III lOOn III he Wdl crrnong 
them. Il'SmrdBine ruf'l1rused d feeling of diItJppointment 11Itmd 
put on d good fdee. IllHe hdd expected d dim room, his mist:raB 
seated by the fire, some jetdOUB person nedrby, d.ath tmd love, dI1 
exchtJnge of confidmca in low 'Voices, hurt to hurt, ddngerous 
kiaa tmd fdeeS so close that Ld Ztnnbinelld. hair would h4ve 
cdrused his forehedd throbbing with delir., feverish with hdppi­
nell. 
In"Vive la folie'" he cried. "Signori e belle donne, you will 
dllow me to t41ce my revenge kzter and to show you my gratitude 
for the wei)' you have welcomed d poor sculptor." 
IlIHaving been greeted wtJrmly enough by most of those present, 
whom he knew by sight, 111he sought to dfJProach the armchdir on 
which IA Zambirwlld DOwdS CtIItUIlly reclining. u1M, how his 
hedrt be« when he spied d delicate foot shod in one of thOle slip­
pers which in those dd)'s, md)' I say, mddclme, gave women's feet such 
d coquettish dnd 'Voluptuous look tluJt I don't know how men were 
dble to resist them. The well-(itting white stoclrings with green 
clocks, the short skirts, the slippers with pointed toes, dnd the 
high heels of Louis XV s reign md)' have contributed something to 
the demortJlWltion of Europe tmd the clergy. 
"Something?" the Mdrquise replied. "Have )'ou read nothing?" 
aulA Zambinell4, I continued, smiling, hdd imfJUdently 
croaed her legs dnd WdS gentl), swinging the upper one with d cer­
tdin attrdCtiw indolence which suited her Cdpricious sort of beaut)'. 
"She IuuJ removed her costume tmd WdS wedring d bodice tluJt 
tlCCmfutJted her nmrow wdist dnd Jet off the satin panniers of her 
drea, which WCII embroidered with blue flowers. BUHer bosom, the 
treMUr" of which were concedled, in dn excea of coquetry, by d 
covering of Idee, WCII ddulingl)' white. "Her hdir drrtJnged BOme­
thing like thot of Mme du BtDT)', her fdee, though it WdB ~ly 
hidden under d full bonnet, dPfJedred onl), the more delic4te, dnd 
powder suited her. 12'To su her thus WdS to ddore her. 121She gave 
the sculptor d groceful rmile. UIUnluIppy df not being dble to sfJedlc 
to her without witnesses present, Smrdsine I2Ipolitely Bttt down next 
to her dnd tdlked dbout music, prdising her exfrdOrdiRdr)' tdlent; 
llObut hil 'Voice trembled with low, with feM dnd hope. 
1I1"WIuJt dre you ttfraid of?" diked Vitdglidni, the company's 
most fdmow singer. "Co dhedd; )'ou nud feM no ri'Vtds here." Hav­
ing said thil, the tenor smiled without another word. This smile 
Wdl repedted on the lip. of dll the guests, IUwhose dftention con­
tdined d hidden mdlice d laver would not have noticed. "'Such 
openness Wdl like d dcIger thrust in Smrdsine', hedrt. Although 
endowed with d certdin strength of chmdCter, and dlthough nothing 
could cJum&e his love, l14it Md ".,,,. not ,..t occuned to him 
thdt 1...d ZdmbiJWlld WdB virtudlly d COUTtadJl, IIIcmd thdt he could 
not lutve both 1M pure pluBura thdt rrudt. d young girf. low .0 
delicious cmd the tempatuous trtllllports by which the hdurdoua 
poaarion of em actr... mUBt be purc1uued. ·'He r-flected cmd 
raipd hinlllelf. UTSUl'fJBr WCII ter'Wd. IIIScmdline tmd 1...d Zambi­
rudltJ sat down infomutlly.au by .uk. "'For the fint htIlf of the 
rnedl, the drl:i8tI preserYed lOme decorum, "°cmd the lCUlptor Wdl 
dble to clult with 1M Binger ... lH. found Mr witty, dCUte, Mlbut 
dBtoniBhingly ignordRt, I"dnd ".. ~d ""'f to be we4Ii dnd 
ruperrtitious. "'The delic4cy of Mr orgtml Wdl r~d in Mr 
understcmding. "IWhen Vif4&litmi uncorhd the fint bow. of 
clt.tma/Jdgne, "'Smrdlirae rHCI in lUI compmuon'. eyes d II4rt of 
terror at the tilT)' exploBion C4JWed by 1M ~ng gdl. "TThe low­
striclcen drtiIt interpreted the irrvolunf4ly .hudMr of thiJ feminine 
constitution dI the lign of dn aceaiw .. ruitivity. The FmlChmtm 
WdI ch4rmed by thia lN4l:nea. "IHow much ia protM:tiw in d 
man', low' 
"My Btrmgth )'Our shield," I. thiJ not written at the hed1t of dll 
declaratioRl of love? "'Too excited to Mower the be4utijullftlli4n 
with complimentB, Scmdline, lih IIll lovera, Wdl by tunu .mou., 
l4ughing, or r~. --Although he teemed to be u.t.nin& to the 
otMr guem, he did not hear d word tIuIy w.re aqing, 10 dbeorbed 
Wdl he in the plumre of finding hirruelf bailU Mr, touching Mr 
hdnd dI he served Mr. He bathed in d NCret ;oy. 1110.,. the 
eloquence of d few mutUdl gl4nca, IUhe WCII dltoniahed tit the 
raerye 1...d Llmbinelld mtlinfllined towdrd him. Ullnd.d, ".. Md 
begun by pr .... ng his foot emd tedIing him with the fIirtatioumas 
of d WOmdR in love mad free to .how it; INbut Bhe IIUlMnly wr""".d 
hertelf in the modeBty of d young girl, IIIII/tn hedring Scmdlirae 
deacribe d trtlit which revedled the excasive vioZenc. of hia chdr­
deter. "'When the au""., bec4me dR orgy, UTthe guatI broO into 
lOng under 1M influence of the Perdltd dnd the Pedro-Xirnenft. 
There were ravishing dum, .oraga from CCIUIbri4, SfNmUh .. guidil-
141, Nedpolitan CdRZOnettdl. IUlntoxication WCII in every.-ye, in the 
music, in hurts dnd 'Voicer alike. SudUnly em mchdnting vivcJCity 
weUed up, d gay dbdndon, dn ItdlidR wdTmth of feeling Ulincon-
ceivtJble to those ocqUtlint.d only with PdTisUtn gatherings, London 
routs, or Viennese circles. le%lces dnd words of love flew lilt.. bul­
lets in d battle through ldUghter, profdnities, dnd invocations to the 
Holy Virgin or il Bambino. lelSorneone ltty down on d sofd dnd feU 
tUkep. M2 A. girl WdS listening to d decLuation of love UndWdre tlult 
she WdB spiUing sherry on the ttIblecloth. IIIln the midst of this 
disorder, ~LA ZmnhinelltJ remoined thoughtful, dB though terror­
struclc. She refused to drink, auperhdps she ate d bit too much; 
however, it is tltIid tlult greediness in d WOmdn is d channing qutJlity. 
l"Admiring his mistress's modesty, aeTScarrcJSine thought .nou.ly 
dbout the future. 
"She probtJbly wdntB to be rntmied," he thought. H. then turned 
his thoughts to the delights of this rnorridge. His whole life seemed 
too short to exJurust the springs of 1uJ{1fJineB8 he found in the depths 
of his soul. IIIV ittJglitmi, who WdB rifting next to him, refilled his 
gltIIIIlO often that, towdrd three in the morning. H8without being 
tot4lly drunk, ScarrcJSine could no longer control his delirium. ITolm­
petuously, he piclced up the womtln, IUaarping into d lrind of bou­
doir next to the Bdlon, IT2towdrd the door of which he Iuul gltmced 
more tluln once. ITIThe ltdlidn womtln WdS drrned with d d4gger. 
"If you corne ttny cIOltlr," she said, "I will be forc.d to ",urage 
this WB4fJOn into your hettrt. ITtLet 1M gol You would dap;. 1M. 
I lulve conceived too much respect for your chtJrtJCter to surrender 
in this fdShion. 1 don't wdnt to betray the feeling )'Ou IuJw for 1M." 
IU"Oh no I" cried &maine. "You cdnnot stifle d fJd88ion by stim­
ulating itl IT'Are you dlrettdy 10 corrupt that, old in hettrt, you 
would tJCt liIre d young courtesan who whets the emotions by which 
she ",ie. her trdde?" 
In "But today is Friday," she replied, ITBfrightened at the French­
mtln's violence. 
ITISttrraine, who WdB not devout, broke into ldUghter. I80Lca 
ZdmbinelUt jumped up liIre d young deer u1dnd rdn towdrd the 
salon. I12When SttrrcJSine appedred in her pursuit, lllhe WdS greeted 
by an infemdl burst of ldUghter. 
litHe BdW LA Zambinelltt lying in d swoon upon d sofa. She WdB 
fJtIk and drained by the extrdordinary effort she Iuul just made. 
116 Although Sarrasine knew little Itdlidn, '"he hurd his mistress 
sutying in d low voice to VittJglidni: "But he willlrill me'" 
"'The sculptor WdB utterly confounded by this strdnge scene. He 
regained his sensa. At pm he stood motionless; then he found his 
voice, Selt down next to his mistress, dnd dSSUred her of his respect. 
He WdB able to di"Vert his pcusion by dddressing (he most high­
minded phrases to this woman; dnd in depicting his 1000e, he used 
dll the resources 1880f tlust magicdl eloqwence, tlust inspired inter­
medidry IUwhich women rdrely refuse to beline. III°When the 
guuts were surprised by the prst gledms of morning light, d woman 
suggested they go to FrdSCttti. 1II1El'eT)'one enthusicuticdlly feU in 
with the ided of spending the day CIt the VilUJ LudO'Visi. InVitagli­
ani went down to hire some cCl1T'idges. ItISarrasine 1uu1 the ple4sure 
of leading LA ZambineUa to d plureton. INOnce outside Rome, the 
gaiety which had been moment4rily repressed by edCh person's 
bcJttle with slupiness suddenly rmwd. Men and women dliJce 
seemed used to this strdnge life, these Ce4selea plecuures, this 
cntist' B impulsil'eness which tums life into d perpet1Ull {Jdrt)' at 
which one i4ughed unreserwdly. ·"The sculptor's cOmfJdnion WdB 
the only one who seemed doWJ1CQBf. 
"Are you ill?" Sarrasine dSked her. "Would you rather go homer' 
"I'm not strong enough to stdnd tJ1l these excuses," she replied. 
"I must be very careful; IIHIbut with you I feel so weU, Hdd it not 
been for you, I would never have stttyed for supper; .. Td sleeplea 
night dnd I lose wlusteller bloom llunte." 
"You lITe so delicate," SarrdSine said, looking at the clumning 
creature's pretty fdee. 
"Orgies ruin the voice." 
• .... Now that we're dlone," the drtist cried, "dnd you no longer 
need fellT the outbursts of my pcusion, teU me tlust you love me." 
1 .... Why?" she replied. "WIust would be the use? '001 seemed 
pretty to you. But you dre French and your feelings will pus. HIM, 
you would not low me dB liang to be lOlled." 
"How Cdn you Bel)' tlustr' 
"Not to Sdti.sfy dny 'VUlgdr fJdSBion; purely. '"I Clbhor men per­
haps ellen more thdn I luste women . .0., need to seek refuge in 
friendship. "'For me, the world is d desert. I dm dn tlCCUrsed cred-
ture, condemned to understand happiness, to feel it, to desire it, 
dnd, lilte many others, forced to Bee it flu from me continuaUy. 
tOlRemember, sir, that I will not have deceived you. tOIl forbid you 
to love me. tOTI can be your devoted friend, for I admire your 
strength and your character. I need a brother, a protector. Be all 
that for me, tGabut no more." 
tOl"Not love you I" StJmJSine cried. "But my dedrest angel, you 
are my life, my hdppinessl" 
nO"lf I were to sll)' one word, you would repulse me with horror." 
4ll"Coquette! U2Nothing can frighten me. tllTell me you will 
cost my future, thdt 1 will die in two months, thdt I will be ddmned 
merely for having kissed you." 
mHe Icissed her, tlIIdespite LtJ Zambinella's efforts to resist this 
po.ssionate embrdCe. 
n'''TeU me you are d devil, that you wdnt my money, my Mme, 
all my famel Do you want me to give up being d sculptor? TeU 
me." 
m"And if I were not a woman?" nlLtJ ZdmbineUd asked in a 
soft silvery voice. 
m"What d ;olcel" StJrrasine cried. "Do you thinlc you Cdn deceive 
an artist's eye? uOHdVen't I spent ten dtl)'s devouring, scrutini%ing, 
admiring your perfection? t210nl)' a woman could hdVe this round, 
soft arm, thae elegant curves. t220h, )'ou want compliments." 
UlShe smiled at him StUll)" and raising her eyes heavenward, she 
murmured: "Fatal beautyl" 
t24 At that moment her ga'U had an indescribdble expression of 
horror, so POwerful dnd vivid that Sarrasine shuddered. 
u'''Frenchman,'' she went on, "forget this moment of madness 
forever. UII respect )'ou, tHbut as for love, do not ask it of me; that 
feeling is smothered in m)' heart. I hdVe no hedrtl" she cried, weep­
ing. "The stage where you BdW me, that applause, that music, that 
fdme 1 am condemned to, wch is my life, I hdVe no other. n·'n a 
few hours you will not see me in the SlIme Wll)', the woman you love 
will be dead." 
U8The sculptor made no repl),. tlOHe was overcome with a dumb 
rage which oppressed his heart. He could onl), gtJ'U with enfl4med, 
burning eyes at this extraordintJry woman. LtJ ZambineUa's wealc 
voice, her m4nner, her movements dnd gestures m4rJr.ed with ,or­
row, meltJncholy, dnd discourdgement, dWtJlr.ened tdl the wettlth of 
ptusion in his soul. EdCh word WClS d good. UlAt thdt moment they 
retJChed FrdSCdti. tl2& the tlTtist offered his mistress his tITm to 
assist her in ttlighting, alhe felt her shiver. 
"WhtJt is wrong? You would Jr.iU me," he cried, seeing her grow 
fJt1le, "if , were even dn innocent CtJUSe of your slightert unhttfJpi-
ness." 
"A sndke," she said, pointing to d grdSS mttJr.e which WClS sliding 
tJlong d ditch. '" dm tJ(TtJid of thOle horrid cretJtures!' Stmczsine 
crushed the snttke's hedd with his heel. 
t34"How can you be so brave?" Ltt ZttmbineUd continued, looJr.­
ing with visible horror tJt the dettd reptile. 
tU"M," the mtist replied, mUling, "now do you elme deny ),OU 
dre a WOm4nl" 
"'They rejoined their companions dnd stroUed through the 
woods of the VilUJ Ludovisi, which in those dtty, belonged to Qu­
dinttl CicogntJrd. U7Thdt morning fled too quicJr.l)' for the entml­
ored sculptor, tllbut it WClS filled with d hart of incidents which 
revettled to him the coquetry, the wetJlr.nea, dnd the delicdcy of this 
soft dnd enervtJted being. '''This WdS womtJn herself, with her rud­
den fetJrs, her irrationttl whims, her inrtinct:ive worria, her impetu­
ous boldneBB, her /wIingt, tJnd her deliciou.s aeruibility. "·'t http­
pened thdt CIS they were Wdndering in the open countrylide, the 
little group of merry singers 8dW in the dirtdnce 801M huvil)' tlTfAed 
men whOle m4nner of dr." WdS ftIT from reczssuring. So1Mone said, 
"They must be highwaymen," dnd eHl')'0JVI quicJr.eJUld his poee 
towtITd the refuge of the CtJrdinttl', grourub. At this critictJl mo­
ment, Sttrrczsine laW from lA Ztnnbinelut'. pttIlor thdt .he no longer 
had the rtrength to wttlk; he tooJr. her up in his tITmB tJnd c41'ried 
her for d while, running. When he CtJme to d netJrby drbor, he put 
her down. 
Ul"Exp!4in to me," he SlIid, "how this extreme wetJlr.neas, which 
, would find hideous in dRY other WOmtJR, which would displetJSe 
me and whose slightert indication would be ttlmart enough to 
choke my love, plettse. dnd chttrms me in 'You? "IIAh, how llewe 
248 
you," II. went on. "All your faults, your terrors, your resentments, 
add an indefintlble grtlCe to your soul. uSI think I would detert a 
strong womdR, a Sttppho, a courdgflow creature, full of energy and 
ptlS6ion. '"Dh, soft, frdil creature, how could you be otherwiae? 
HITIutt angelic voice, tlutt delicate voice would be an anol11llly 
coming from any body but your •. " 
44'''1 cannot give you any hope," she said. UT"Stop speding to me 
in this wd)I, .. 8bectJUBe they will JRIIlce a fool of you. "'I cannot 
stop you from coming to the theater; but if you love me or if you 
tlTe wise, you will come there no more. u°Usten, monsieur," ,he 
said in a low voice. 
m"Oh, be Btill," the irnparioned artist sdid .• u"Obstdcles nurle 
my lav. more tlTdent." 
.uLA Ztl1nbinell4's graceful and modest attitude did not clutnge, 
but she feU silent dB though a terrible thought h4d reveoled .ome 
mirfortune to her .• MWhen it Ctn'ne time to return to Rome, she 
got into til. four«lllted cOdCh, ordering the sculptor with imperious 
cruelty to return to Rome alone in the ctJJTiiJ.ge •• IIDuring the 
journey, StlrrdBine resolwd to ltidnap LA Ztnnbinella. H •• /Jent the 
entire day 1J1dking plaru, flQCh more outrageow tlutn the other . 
• HAt nightftlll, dB he WdB going out to inquire where his miBtre,,', 
/NIkuz.o WdB 100000ed, .IT II. met one of his friends on til. threshold. 
"My detIT f.Uow," he _d, "our dJ1Ibrr""dor h4s dBlced me to 
invite you to his house tonight. He is giving a JRIIgnificent concert, 
tlland when I teU you tlutt Ztnnbinelld will be there " 
"'''Ztnnbinelld,'' cried Stlrrllline, intoxicdted by the Rdme, ''I'm 
mad about her," 
~ "You're liJce everyone el8e," his frWnd r.plied. 
• .... ,f you tlTe my friends, you, Vien, Lttuterbourg, and AJkgrdin, 
will you MIl' me do I9mething after the fJdrf'Ir' Stlrrllline tIIlced. 
"It'. not .ome CtlTdiMl to be Itillecll not r' 
"No, no," Stlrrdline sdid, "I'm not aMing you to do anything an 
honest fJerIOn couldn't do." 
•• 11 n a .hart time, the a:ul"tor h4d tUTanged everything for the 
BUCCeBI of his uradert4Jrjng .• uHe WdB one of the LIlt to tmive tit the 
ttrnbdaddor'., .ubut he h4d come in a trttveling CtI1'J'itI&e drtlWn by 
powerful horses and driven by one of the most enterprising vet­
turini of Rome ... t4The ambassador's fJdlCJ%Z.o was crowded; "Ilnot 
without some difficulty, the sculptor, who was a stranger to every­
one present, made his wei)' to the salon where Zambirudlll was ring­
ing at that very moment. 
4 .... ,s it out of consideration for the cardiJUlls, bishops, and abbes 
present," SarrCJSine asked, "that she is dressed like a man, that she 
is wearing a snood, kinky hair, and a sword?" 
4fJ7"She? What she?" asked the old nobleman to whom SarrCJSine 
had been speaking. "LA ZambineUa." "LA ZambinelltJ!" the Roman 
prince replied. "Are you ;oking? 4"Where are you from? 4"Has 
there ever been a woman on the Roman stage? And don't you know 
about the creatures who sing feJ1lllle roles in the Papal States? 
nOl am the one, monsieur, who gave Zambinell4 his voice. I paid 
for everything that scamp ever had, even his singing tedCher. Well, 
he has so little gratitude for the service I rendered him that he has 
never consented to set foot in my howe. tTlAnd yet, if he JJ14lces a 
fortune, he will owe it all to me." 
mPrince Chigi f7UI)' weU hlIve gone on talking for some time; 
SarrCJSine was not listening to him. A horrid truth had crept into 
his soul. It was as though he had been struck by Ughtning. He stood 
motionless, his eyes fixed n·on the false ringer. mHis fiery gaze 
exerted a sort of f1148netic influence on Zambinell4, "7'for the 
musico fiJUJUy turned to look at SarraBine, nland at thllt moment 
his heavenly voice faltered. He trembledl t77 An involuntary mur­
mur escaping from the audience he hlId kept hlInging on his lips 
completed his discomfiture; mhe sat down and cut short his dTilI. 
mCdTdirud CicogMra, who hlId gltJnced out the corner of his eye 
to see what had attracted his proteges ttttention, then S4W the 
Frenchman: .. 80he leaned over to one of his eccksiastical aides-de­
camp and appeared to be asking the sculptor's Mme. tIlHdYing ob­
tained the answer he sought, 482he regarded the artist with great 
attention 41l3and gave an order to an abbe, who quicldy disappetued. 
414During this time, ZambineUa, hd'Ving recovered himself, 
Ulonce more began the piece ""he hlId so Cdpriciously interrupted; 
487but he sang it badly, 488and despite all the requests made to him, 
he refused to sing anything else. 489This was the first time he dis­
pltryed that cczpricious tyranny for which he would later be as cele­
brated as for his t4lent f90and his vast fortune, due, as they said, no 
less to his voice than to his beauty. 
f91"lt is a wonutn," Sarrasine said, believing himself alone. "There 
is some hidden intrigue here. CardiTldl Cicognara is deceiving the 
Pope and the whole city of Romel" 
492The S(;wptor thereupon left the salon, ,telgathered his friends 
together, 4Hand posted them out of sight in the courtyard of the 
palazzo. 49&When Zambinelld was confident that Sarrasine had 
departed, he appeared to regain his composure. 4" Around mid­
night, having wandered through the rooms like a nutn seeking some 
enemy, UTthe musico departed. 498As soon as he crossed the thresh­
old of the paUuzo, he was adroitly seized by men who gagged him 
with a handkerchief and drew him into the carriage Sarrasine had 
hired. 41H1Frozen with horror, Zambinelkl remained in a corner, not 
daring to move. He saw before him the terrible face of the artist, 
who was silent as death. 
IOOThe journey was brief. &GlCanied in Sarrasine's arms, Zambi­
nelld soon found himself in a dark, empty studio. &02Half dead, the 
singer remained in a chair, &Oawithout daring to examine the statue 
of a wonutn in which he recognized his own features. IIIHHe nutde 
no attempt to speak, but his teeth chattered. IIOIISanasine paced up 
and down the room. Suddenly he stopped in front of ZambineUa. 
"TeU me the truth," he pleaded GOtjn a low, altered voice. IIOT"You 
are a wonutn? II08CardiTldl Cicognara " 
II09Zambinelkl feU to his knees, and in reply lowered his head. 
1I10"Ah, you are a wonutn," the artist cried in a delirium, "for 
even a ." He broke off. "No," he continued, "he would not be 
so cowardly." 
m"Ah, do not kill me," cried Zambinelkl, bursting into tears. 
m"l only agreed to trick you to please my friends, who wanted to 
klugh." 
IIla"Laugh!" the sculptor replied in an inferTldl tone. "Laugh! 
Laughl You dared play with a nutn's feelings, you?" 
IIW'Oh, have mercyl" ZambineUa replied. 
11111"1 ought to kill you," SandSiJW cried, drdWing IliI BWOrd with 
(I violent geBture. IIl'''However,'' he went on, in cold disdoin, 
m"were I to scour your body with tllil bldde, would I find there 
OJW feeling to stifle, OJW venguRCe to 1IItisfy? You tJTe nothins .. 'f,,' 
you were (I man or (I woman, I would kill you, 118but " 
SantUiJW made (I geBture of dUgurt 11'which forced him to turn 
dW"Y, whereupon he BdW the stCltue. 
IIIO"And it's (In illusion," he cried. IIIThen, tuming to 'Ltmbi­
JWlld: "A woman's he(lrt WdS (I refuge for me, (I home. Have you 
dRy sisters who resemble you? I122Then cu.112IBut no, you sIuIllliw. 
lm't leaving you eIlive condemning you to something worse tlum 
deClth? I12·It is neither my blood nor my existence tlutt I regret, but 
the future (lnd my heart's fortuJW. Your feeble hdnd lids destroyed 
my hdPPiness. II2IWIurt hope c(ln I strip from you for till those ),OU 
Iutve blighted? You Iutve drCJgged me clown to your level_ To }Qve. 
to be loved I dre henceforth mettninglels words for me, tIS they are 
for you. 11211 shdU forever think of tllil imttginttry woman when I 
see (I rettl woman." He ind.iclJfed the stdtue with (I gerture of u­
spetir. 1121"1 sheIll eIlw"Ys Iutve the memory of (I celestUd horfJY who 
thrusts its teIlORS into eIll my manl), feelings, (lnd who will stdmp 
till other women with (I Beell of imperfection I I12IMonsterl Illy ~ 
who c(ln give life to nothing. IIIOFor me, you Iutve wiped women 
from the earth." 
IIIlSarrtUiJW sat down before the terrified singer. Two huge tun 
weUed from his dry eyes, rolled down his mdnly cheeb, (lnd feU to 
the ground: two tedrS of r"8e, two bitter (lnd burning turs. 
1112"No more lovel I (1m dedd to till pledSUre, to every human 
emotion." 
1111150 saying, he seized (I hdmmer (lnd hurled it CIt the statue with 
such extr(lordinary force u.tlutt he misled it. He thought he hdd 
destroyed this monument to his folly, lIII(1nd then tool: up his sword 
(lnd br(lndished it to kill the singer. IIIIZdmbinelltJ uttered piercing 
serums. II.T At thdt moment, three men entered lIII(1nd CIt once the 
sculptor fell, stdbbed by three stiletto thrusts. 
1I·· .. On behellf of CtJTdindl Cicogruu(l," OJW of them Idid. 
MO"lt is (I good deed worthy of (I Christitm," repJi.d the French-
rndn CIS he died. I141These sinister messengers l142infoJ"f11Sd Zambi­
nelltJ of the concern of his protector, who WClS waiting at the door 
in ca closed ctJrTillge, to tde him tlWtry CIS soon CIS he head been 
rescued. 
IMS"But," Mme de Rochefide ClSked me, "wheat connection is 
there between this story and the little old man we BtIW cat tlie 
IAntys'?" 
IU" Mcadcame, Cardincal Cicogncarca took possession of Zmnbi­
nelltJ's stcatue cand IuuJ it executed in mcarble; today it is in the AJ­
bCIRi Museum. IHDThere, in 1791, the IAnty fcamily found it 641cand 
ClSked Vien to copy it. lIuThe portrait in which you SdW Zcambinellca 
at twenty, ca second after lurving seen him at one hundred, later 
served for Girodet's Endymion; you wililutve recognized its type 
in the Adonis." 
I14S"But this Zcambinellca-he or she?" 
"He, mcadcame, is none other thean Mcaridninca's great-uncle. 
IMINow you Cdn recadily see wheat interest Mme de IAnty htJs in 
hiding the SOUTce of ca fortune which comes from-" 
lIIO"Enoughl" she Sdid, gesturing to me imperiously. We scat for ca 
moment plunged in the deepest silence. 
11I1"Well?" I Sdid to her. 
"M," she exclaimed, sftJnding up and pacing up cand down the 
room. She looked at me cand spoke in can caitered voice. I1II2"You lutve 
given me ca disgust for life cand for pcrssions thcat will least ca long 
time. I113Excepting for monsters, don't call hUrndn feelings come 
down to the Sdme thing, to horribls discappointments? Mothers, our 
children kill us either by their bdd belurvior or by their lcack of 
affection. Wives, we are deceived. Mistresses, we are for.en, 
cabcandoned. Does friendship even exist? 111141 would become ca nun 
tomorrow did I not know theat I Cdn Temcain unmoved CIS ca rock 
camid the norms of life. naIf the Chri.stican's future is calso an illu­
sion, at led8t it is not destroyed until after death. lIH.Leave me." 
"Ah," I Sdid, "you know how to punish." 
lilT" Am I wrong?" 
"Yes," I replied, with d kind of courcage. "In telling this nory, 
353 
which is fttirly weU known in Itdly, I h4ve been dble to give ),OU a 
fine example of the progress mdtU by civilitdtion tod4y. They no 
longer crute these unfortu1l4te creatures." 
II8"Pcuis is a very hospitable p14ce," she said. "It ClCcePU every­
thing, shameful fortunes and bloodstained fortunes. Crime and 
infam)' can find asylum here; lIIonl)' virtue has no dltars here. Yes, 
pure souls h4ve their home in heaven/ MONo one will lutve known 
me. I am proud of that/" 
aelAnd the Marquise remtrined pensive. 
Paris, November 1830 
II 
Sequence of ActIons (Act.) 
Since actions (or proairetisms) form the main armature of the 
readerly text, we here recall the sequences as they were indicated 
in the text, without attempting to structure them further. Each 
term is followed by its 1exia number. The sequences are presented 
according to the order of appearance of their 6rst term. 
TO BE DEEP IN 1: to be absorbed (2). 2: to come back again (14). 
HmlNG PLACE 1: to be hidden (6). 2: to come out of hiding (15). 
TO MEDITATE 1: to be in the process of meditation (52). 2: to 
stop meditating (53). 
TO LAUGH 1: to burst out laughing (53). 2: to stop (62). 
TO JOIN 1: to sit down (63).2: to sit nextto (65). 
TO NAIlllATEl: to know the story (70). 2: to know the story 
( 120). 3: to offer to tell (140). 4: to suggest a rendezvous for 
telling a story (141). 5: to discuss the time of the rendezvous 
(142).6: to agree to the rendezvous (145). 7: to reject the ren­
dezvous (146).8: to have accepted the rendezvous (147).9: 
to command to tell (149). 10: to hesitate to tell (150). 11: to 
repeat the command to tell (151). 12: command accepted 
(152). 13: castrating effect of the narration (552). 
QUESTION I 1: to ask oneself a question' (94 ). 2: to verify (95). 
TO TOUCH 1: touching (95). 2: reaction (97). 3: generalized reac­
tion (99).4: to 8ee (100). 5: to hide (101). 
TABLEAU I : to look around (107). 2: to perceive (108). 
TO ENTEll 1: to announce oneself by a sound (122). 2: the en­
trance itself (123). 
OOOll I 1: to reach a door (125). 2: to knock (126). 3: to appear 
at a door (to open it) (127). 
FAllEWELL I: to entrust (before leaving) (128). 2: to embrace 
( 129). 3: to say farewell (130). 
CIFT 1: incite (or be incited) to the gift (132). 2: to give the gift 
(133). 3: to accept the gift (134). 
TO LEAVE 1: to want to leave (135).2: to delay (136). 3: to leave 
again (137). 
BOAllDlNC SCHOOL I: to go away to boarding school (154). 2: to 
be expelled (165). 
CAllEEll I: to go to Paris (167). 2: to study with a great master 
(169).3: to leave the master (181).4: to win a prize (182). 
5: to be praised by a great critic (184).6: to leave for Italy 
(185) . 
LIAISON I: to have a liaison (192). 2: indication of the end of the 
liaison (193).3: end ofthe liaison (195). 
JOUllNEY I: to depart (197).2: to travel (198). 3: to arrive (199). 
4: to stay (2oo). 
THEATEll I: to enter (the building) (202).2: to enter the hall 
(206). 3: to be seated (207).4: curtain up (210). 5: to hear 
the overture (Zll). 6: entrance of the star (216). 7: greeting 
of the star (Z17). 8: the star's aria (230).9: to leave (246). 
10: to return home (Z 50) . 
QUESTION II I: a fact to be explained (203). 2: to inquire (204). 
3: to receive an answer (205). 
D1SCOMFOllT 1: to be squeezed, made uncomfortable (208). 2: to 
feel nothing (214). 
PLEASUIlE 1: proximity to the desired object (209). 2: madness 
(235). 3: tension (237).4: apparent immobility (238). 5: iso· 
lation (241). 6: embrace (242).7: to be penetrated (243).8: 
ejaculation (Z44). 9: emptiness (Z47). 10: sadness (2..s). 11: 
to recuperate (Z49). 12: conditions for repetition (258). 
SEDUCTION 1: ecstasy (Z13). 2: extraversion (ZI5). 3: intense plea­
sure (ZI9). 4: delirium (231). 5: delirium 1: cold (23Z). 6: 
delirium Z: heat (Z33). 7: delirium 3: silence (234). 
TO DECIDE 1: mental condition of the choice (239). Z: to propose 
an alternative (240). 
WIU.-TO-LOVB (impulsive enterprise) 1: proposal of the enterprise 
(240).2: to draw, interim activity (251). 3: to rent a theater 
box (contemplative activity) (258).4: to pause (260). 5: in­
terruption of the undertaking (263). 6: indication of terms 
composing the interlude (264). 7: morning, to sculpt (265). 
8: evening, the sofa (267). 9: to accustom the ear (268). 10: 
to train the eye (269). 11: result (270). 12: protection of the 
induced hallucination (271). 13: alibi and prorogation (273). 
14: resume (276)_ 
WIU.-TO-DIE 1: proposal of the project (240). 2: to 80ut a warn­
ing (297).3: accept any risk (412).4: predictive, in the form 
of a provocation of fate (413).5: to comment on one's death 
in advance (524).6: to die to women (530). 7: to die to feel­
ing (532). 8: to die to art (533).9: to assume one's death 
(540). 
DOOaD 1: to knock (285).2: to open (286). 3: to enter (287). 
RENDEZVOUS 1: to arrange a rendezvous (288). 2: to give assent to 
the messenger (289). 3: to thank, to tip (290). 4: to give as­
sent to the person offering the rendezvous (292). 5: rendez­
vous kept (304). 
TO LEAVE 1: a 6rst locality (291). 2: a second locality (29-.). 
DUSSINC 1 : to want to dress (293). 2: to dress (300). 
w UNINC 1: to give a warning (295). 2: to ignore it (297). 
MUKDEJl 1: designation of the future murderer (295). 2: indicat-
ing the victim (479). 3: request for informa tion (4SO). 4: in­
formation received (481). 5: evaluation and interior decision 
(482). 6: secret order (483). 7: entrance of the murderers 
(537).8: murder of the hero (538).9: signature of the mur­
der (539).10: 6nal explanation (542). 
HOPE 1: to hope (303). 2: to be disappointed (314). 3: to com­
pensate (315) . .oJ: to hope (316). 5: to compensate (317).6: 
to be disappointed (328).7: to compensate (329).8: to hope 
( 330) . 9: to compensate (to resign oneself) (336). 
ROUTE 1: to set out (305).2: to walk along (305). 3: to penetrate 
(309).4: to arrive (311). 
DOOa III 1: to stop at (306). 2: to lcnock (307). 3: to open (308). 
OIIGY 1: precursory signs (310). 2: rhetorical statemen t (313). 3: 
supper (337).4: initial calm (339).5: wines (345).6: nomi­
nation ofthe orgy (356). 7: to sing (357). 8: to a bandon one­
self (denominative statement) (358).9: to abandon oneself 
~57 
( 1) unbridled talk (360). 10: to let oneself go (2) to sleep 
(361).11: to abandon oneself (3) to spill wine (362). 12: to 
abandon oneself ( denominative reprise) ( 363) . 13: end 
(dawn) (390). 
CONVERSATION I 1: to approach (319). 2: to sit down (329). 3: to 
talk (329). 
CONVERSATION II 1: to sit side by side (338). 2: to chat (340). 
DANGER 1: act of violence, sign of a dangerous character (355).2: 
victim's fear (364). 3: victim's repeated fright (378).4: vic­
tim's premonitory fear (386). 5: persistent fear (395). 6: 
premonition of misfortune (453). 7: reaction of fright (476). 
8: feeling of threat (487).9: to become calm (495). 10: con­
tinued uneasiness (496). 
RAPE 1: conditioning of the ravisher (369). 2: to carry off the 
victim (370).3: to change locale (371).4: to have premedi­
tated the abduction (372). 5: victim's armed defense 
(373). 6: victim's Bight (380). 7: change of locale (381). 8: 
pursuit (382).9: failure of the rape, return to order (387). 
EXCURSION 1: proposal (390). 2: agreement (391). 3: hiring of 
carriages (392).4: collective gaiety (394). 5: to arrive at the 
destination (431). 6: to stroll in the woods (436).7: return 
(454) . 
AMOROUS OUTING 1: to get into the same carriage (393). 2: t~e­
a-tete conversation (395). 3: to want to kiss (414).4: to ~ 
sist (415). 5: to come to an end (431).6: to assist in alight­
ing from the carriage (432).7: separate return (454). 
DECLAllATION OF LOVE 1: request for an avowal (398).2: to elude 
the requested avowal (399). 3: first basis for declining (fickle­
ness) (400 ). 4: second basis for declining (exigency) ( 40 1 ) . 
5: third basis, exclusion (404). 6: forbid to love (406). 7: 
friendship, not love (407). 8: protestation of love (409). 9: 
gift of life (413). 10: gift of art (416). 11: fourth basis for 
declining (physical impediment) (417). 12: disclaimer of the 
disclaimer (419).13: command to forget (425). 14: to remain 
silent (429). 15: command to give up (446). 16: command to 
be silent (447). 17: final dismissal (449). 
ICIDNAPPING 1: decision and plans (455). 2: preliminary informa­
tion (456). 3: recruiting accomplices (460). 4: amngernents 
made (461). S: rapid means of escape (463). 6: gathering of 
the accomplices (493). 7: ambush (494). 8: the victim's inno-
%58 
cent departure (497). 9: the act itself (498). 10: journey 
(500). 11: arrival at the hide-out (501). 
CONCEIlT 1: invitation (457).2: to arrive late (462). 3: large audi­
ence (464). 4: to reach the music room (465). 5: to leave the 
music room (492). 
INCIDENT 1: gaining the attention of the artist on stage (474). 2: 
attention gained (475). 3: artist's difficulty (476).4: collec­
tive discomfiture (477). 5: intenuption of the performance 
(478). 6: to recover oneself (484). 7: recommence singing 
( 485) . 8: refusal to prolong the performance (488). 
THREAT 1: prediction of outcome (489). 2: terrorized victim 
( 499). 3: immobilized victim (502). 4: mute victim (504). 5: 
first plea for mercy (511). 6: second plea for mercy (514). 7: 
first threat of death (515).8: threat withdrawn (516).9: sec­
ond threat of death (522). 10: withdrawal of the threat (523). 
11: third threat of death (535).12: to call for help (536). 13: 
arrival of the rescuers (537). 14: elimination of the aggressor 
(538). 15: to return with the rescuers (542). 
STATUE 1: thematization of the object (503).2: to see the object 
( 519). 3: to be deceived (520). 4: despair (526). 5: destruc­
tive act (533).6: statue spared (534).7: the statue rediscov­
ered (544). 
III 
Summary of Contents 
I. THE IlEADEIlLY 
1. Typology I: Evaluation 
a. No aiticism without a typology of texts (I). 
b. Basis of typology: the practice of writing the writerly text. 
Why the writerly is the prime value: the reader as producer 
ofthe text (I). 
c. The reactive value of the writerly: the readerly, the classic 
(I). 
2. Typology II: InterfJret4tion 
a. How differentiate readerly texts: appreciation of the plurality 
of the text (II). 
b. The appropriate tool for this appreciation: connotation; 
without being misled by it, we must continue to distinguish it 
from denotation (III, IV) . 
c. The classic text as plural, but parsimoniously so. 
l Method I: W cJ)'s of exmnining the plural 
a. Accept as "proof" of reading its power of systemization (V). 
Second and first reading (IX), reversion of the readings upon 
the text (LXXI). 
h. Acknowledge that forgetting meaning constitutes reading 
(there is no "total" of the text) (V). 
zoo 
c. Analyze a single text (VI); this analysis has a theoretical 
value (VI); it serves to dispel the illusion that the text con­
tains insignificant things and that structure is merely a "pat­
tern" (VI, XXII). 
d. Move gradually through the tutor text, starring digressions 
which signal the inter-textual plural (VI). 
e. Forgo establishing a deep and ultimate structure for the text 
(VI) and in reconstituting the paradigm of each code aim 
at multiple structures (XI, XII); prefer structuring to struc­
ture (VIII, XII); seek out the play of the codes, not the plan 
of the work (XXXIX). 
4. Method II: Operations 
a. Dividing the textual continuum into brief, contiguous frag­
ments (lexias) is arbitrary, but useful (VII). 
b. What we seek to identify: the meanings, signifieds in each 
1exia, or their connotations. Various approaches to connota­
tion: definitional. topica1, analytical. topological, dynamic, 
historical, functional. structwal, ideological (IV). 
c. Analysis provides material for various criticisms (VIII, 
LXXXI). This does not imply liberality, conceding some 
truth to each form of criticism, but observance of the plural­
ity of meanings as being, not as deduction or tolerance (II). 
d. The text chosen: Balzac's Sarrasine (X and Appendix I). 
II. THE CODES 
1. TM code in generdl (XII). 
a. The perspective vanishing point of the codes (VI, XII, 
LXVII). Continue the buttressing of the codes: critical prob­
lems: infinite thematids (XL); the Balzacian text (XC); the 
author as text (XC), not as god (LXXIV). 
b. The "already-written" (XII, XXXVI). 
c. The code as an anonymous voice (XII, LXIV). Irony as a 
voice (XXI). 
2. Code of Actions, Voice of EmpiricB (LXXXVI) 
a. Setting up a sequence of actions is to name it (XI, XXXVI). 
261 
b. The Empiric code is based on various branches of knowledge 
(LXVII). No other proairetic logic but the already-written, 
already-seen, already-read, aIready-done (XI), trivial or novel­
istic (XI), organic or cultural (XXVI, LXXXVI) . 
c. Expansion of the sequence: the tree (LVI), the interweaving 
(LXVIII). 
d. Functions: repleteness (XLVI), depreciation (XLV). The 
code of actions principally determines the readability of the 
text (LXXXVI). 
3. Hermeneutic Code, Voice of Truth (LXXXIX) 
a. Hermeneutic morphemes (XI, XXXII, LXXXIX). Proposi­
tion of truth articulated like a sentence (XXXVII); acciden­
tals, disorder, confusion, formlessness of terms (XXXVII, 
XLVIII). 
b. Structural paths of falsehood (1): equivocation, double un­
derstanding (LXII); metonymic falsehood (LXIX). 
c. Structural paths of falsehood (2): false proofs, tricks: nilrcis­
sistic proof ( LXI ), psychological proof ( LXI II ), aesthetic 
proof (LXXII). 
d. Structural paths of falsehood (3): casuistry of the discourse 
(LX). 
e. To delay truth is to constitute it (XXVI, XXXII). 
... Culturtu or Referentitll Code, Voice of Science (LXXXVU) 
a. The proverb and its stylistic transformation (XLIII). 
b. Codes of Knowledge, school texts, farrago (LXXXVII). 
c. Cultural Codes as ideological specters (XLII). 
d. Oppressive function of reference through repetition (vomit­
ing of stereotypes, LIX, LXXXVII), or neglect (LXXVIII). 
5. Senws or connotative signifieds, Voice of the Person (LXXXI) 
a. Naming of semes, thematics (XL). 
b. Textual distribution of semes (XIII). The portrait (XXV). 
c. Collection of semes: person, character (XXVIII, LXXXI). 
d. Semes, inductors of truth (XXVI). 
6. The Symbolic Fu..ld 
a. The body, site of meaning, sex, and money: whence the criti­
cal privileges apparently granted the symbolic field (XCII). 
z6z 
b. Reversibility: the subject perfused in the text (LXX); the 
symbolic field reached by three entrances, without order of 
precedence (XCII). 
c. Rhetorical entrance (meaning): Antithesis (XIV) and its 
transgressions: supplement (XIV), paradigmatic con8agra­
tion (XXVII, XLVII, LXXIX). 
d. Poetic entrance (creation, sex) 
1] The lubricated body (XLIX), the reassembled body (L, 
LI). 
2] Duplicative chain of bodies (XXIX). Beauty (XVI, U, 
LXI). Posterity (XVIII). 
3] Tenn and problems of the duplicative code: the master­
piece (LII); the beyond and short (XXX); the chain 
(XXXI, LXXXV); deficiency and underneath (theory of 
realistic art) (XXIII, L, LIV, LXXXIII, LXXXVIII). 
e. Economic entrance (trade, Gold). Passage from index to 
sign (XIX). Narrative as subject of a contract (XCI); up­
setting the economy (XCII). 
f. Generalized problem: castration as a camp (XVII), as me­
tonymy (XXIX), as pandemic (LXXXVIII, XCII). The 
castrating figure: the "gossip" (LXXXIX). Metonymic col­
lapse (XCII). 
7. The Text 
The text as a braid, woven of voices, codes (LXVIII): stere­
ophony (VIII, XV) and polytonality (XV). 
ID. THE PLUIlAL 
1. The plura/. uxt as tl whole 
The triumphant plural (II, V). The modest plural (VI) and its 
diagram: the score (XV). 
2. Reductive detennintltions 
a. Solidarities: holding (LXVI), overdetennination (LXXVI), 
coherent dispersion (XIII). 
b. Plenitude: to complete, to close, to predicate, to conclude 
(XXII, XXVI, XXXII, XLVI, UV, I.Jp{III); to fill mean­
ing, art (LXXXIV); to redound (XXXIV); to think 
263 
(XCIII). Character as illusion of plenitude: the Proper 
Name (XXVIII, XLI, LXXXI); character as effect of re­
ality (XLIV); character determined by motive (LVIII). 
Completude, nausea, outmoded (XLII, LXXXVII). 
c. Closings: classic writing prematurely cuts off the codes 
(LIX); the insufficient role of irony (XXI). Hermeneutic 
and proairetic codes, agents reducing the plural (XV). 
3. Multivalent dnd reversible detennin4tions 
a. Reversibilities and multivalences: symbolic area (XI, XV, 
XCII). 
b. The figure. Character as discourse (LXXVI), as accomplice 
of discourse (LXII). Figure, reversible order (LXXVIII). 
c. The dissolve of voices (XII, XX). 
d. Uncertain meanings (XXXIII, LXXVI). Transcriptability 
(Euphemism) (LIII). 
e. Ambiguities of representation. What is presented is not oper­
able (XXXV). "Flattened representation": narrative treating 
itself (XXXVIII, LXX, XCI). 
f. Countercommunication. Play of destinations (LVII), the 
division of listening (LXII, LXIX), literature as "noise," 
cacography (LVII, LXII). 
.... Performance 
Some successes of classic narrator: wide syntagrnatic difference 
between affirmative semes (XIII), uncertainty of meanings, 
confusion of operative and symbolic (XXXIII, LXX), explain­
ing the explainer (LXXIV), the ludic metaphor (XXIV). 
5. The redder'), text and writing 
a. The ideological role of the sentence: lubricating the semantic 
articulations, linking connotations in the "phrased," remov­
ing denotation from play, it yields meaning, with the security 
of an "innocent" nature: language, syntax (IV, VII, IX, 
XIII, XXV, LV, LXXXII). 
b. Appropriation of meaning in the readerly text: classification, 
nomination (V, XXXVI, XL, LVI); obsessional defense 
against the logical "defect" (LXVI); confrontation of codes: 
the "scene" (LXV), the declaration of love (LXXV), ob-
26.t 
jectivity and subjectivity (forces without affinity with the 
ten) (V). 
c. False unleashing of the infinity of codes: irony, parody (XXI, 
XLII, LXXXVII). Beyond irony, the ineparable force of 
meaning: F'laubert (XXI, Ux, LXXXVII) . 
d. Writing: with regard to the reader (I, LXIV), its "proof' 
(LIX), its power: dissolve all metalanguage, any submission 
of one language to another (XLII, LIX, LXXXVII) . 
"To a grettter or ksser degree every man is suspended upon nana­
tives, on novels, which revet1/. to him the multiplicity of life. Only 
these JUlTrtttives, often retld in a trance, Bifu4te him before his fttte. 
So we ought to seek pasBiorulfely to find whttt nanatives might be. 
"How to orient the effort through which the novel renews, or, 
better, perpetU4tes itself. 
"The concern for various techniques which cope with the Stltiety 
of famUim forms does occuP'Y the mind. But , am putting it btuily 
-if we want to know what a novel can be-thttt a basis should fim 
be perceived and weU mtlTked. The JUlTrative thttt revems the pos­
Bibilities of life does not necessarily appeol, but it revettls d moment 
of rage, without which its author would be blind to its excessive 
possibilities. , believe it: only suffocating, impossibk trial provida 
the author with the means of attaining the distant vision the redder 
is see1cing, tired of the tight limittttions conventions impose. 
"How can we linger over books to which obviously the author 
was not oonstrained? 
'" wanted to formulttte this principle.' wiU not argue it. 
'" .ht1l1 confine myself to giving some titla thttt respond to my 
sttttement (.ome titles , could give others, but disorder is the 
measure of my intent): Wuthering Heights, The Trial, Remem­
brance of Things Past, The Red and the Black. Eugenie de Franval, 
l'Arr~t de Mort, Sanazine [sic], The Idiot "I 
GEOaczs BATAILLE 
Foreword to Le Bleu du del 
J.-J. Pauvert, 1957, p. 7 
1 Euginie tU FrtUIVdl. by the Marquis de Sade (in Crima tU fAmour); fAr­
r~ tU Mort. by Maurice Blanchot; SdlTfWM [sic]. a story by Balzac that is 
relatively little known but is one of the high points of his wod. c .•. 
IV 
Key 
Evaluation 3 
D Interpretation .. 
m Connotation: Against 6 
IV Connotation: For, even 50 7 
v Reading, Forgetting 10 
VI Step by Step 11 
VD The Starred Text 13 
vm The Broken Text 14 
IX How Many Readings? 15 
x Sarrasine 16 
XI The Five Codes 18 
XII The Weaving of Voices 20 
XID Citar 22 
XIV Antithesis I: the supplement 26 
xv The Full Score 28 
XVI Beauty 33 
XVII The Castration Camp 35 
XVDl The Castrato's Posterity 37 
XIX Index, Sign, Money 39 
xx The Dissolve of Voices 41 
XXI Irony, Parody 44 
XXII Very Natural A.ctions 51 
2~ 
XXIR Painting as a Model 54 
XXIV Transfonnation as Game 58 
xxv The Portrait 60 
XXVI Signified and Truth 61 
XXVD Antithesis II: the marriage 65 
xxvm Character and Figure 6-J 
XXIX The Alabaster Lamp 69 
xxx Beyond and Short 71 
XXXI The Disturbed Replication 73 
XXXII Delay 75 
XXXIII And/or 76 
XXXIV The Pra ttle of Meaning 78 
xxxv The Real, the Operable 80 
XXXVI Folding, Unfolding 81 
XXXVD The Hermeneutic Sentence 14 
XXXVDI Contract-narratives 88 
XXXIX This Is Not an "Explication de Texte" 90 
XL The Birth of Thematics 91 
xu The Proper Name 94 
XLD Codes of Class 97 
XLDI Stylistic Transfonnation 100 
XLIV The Historical Character 101 
XLV Depreciation 104 
XLVI Completeness lOS 
XLVD S/Z 106 
XLVID The Unformulated Enigma 107 
XLIX The Voice 109 
L The Reassembled Body 111 
LI The Blazon 113 
LD The Masterpiece 114 
UD Euphemism 119 
LIV Behind, Beyond ill 
LV Language as Nature b6 
LVI The Tree u8 
LVII The Unes of Destination 131 
LVDI The Story's Interest 135 
2,70 
ux Three Codes Together 139 
LX The Casuistry of Discourse 140 
LXI Narcissistic Proof 143 
LXII Equivocation I: double understanding 1 .... 
LXm Psychological Proof 147 
LXIV The Voice of the Reader 151 
LXV The "Scene" 154 
LXVI The Readerly I: "Everything holds together" 156 
LXVD How an Orgy Is Created 157 
LXVUI The Braid 160 
LXIX Equivocation II: metonymic falsehood 16:2. 
LXX Being-Castrated and Castration 163 
LXXI The Transposed Kiss 165 
LXXII Aesthetic Proof 167 
LXXIn The Signified as Conclusion 171 
LXXIV The Mastery of Meaning 173 
LXXV The Declaration of Love 176 
LXXVI Character and Discourse 178 
LXXVU The Readerly II: determined/determinant 181 
LXXVIII To Die of Ignorance Is,. 
LXXIX Before Castration 185 
LXXX Denouement and Disclosure 187 
LXXXI Voice of the Person 190 
LXXXII Glissando 197 
LXXXm Pandemia 198 
LXXXIV Literature Replete :100 
LXXXV Interrupted Replication :10:2. 
LXXXVI The Empiric Voice :103 
LXXXVII The Voice of Science :2.05 
LXXXVIII From Sculpture to Painting :2.07 
LXXXIX Voice of Truth :109 
xc The Balzacian Text nl 
XCI Modification :2.U 
xcn The Three Points of Entry n4 
Xcnl The Pensive Text n6 
