Writings through
John Cage’sMusic, Poetry, and Art
Writings through

To Gordon Mumma
CONTENTS
Acknowledgments ix
Introduction David W. Bernstein 1
One “In Order to Thicken the Plot”: Toward a 
Critical Reception of Cage’s Music
David W. Bernstein 7
Two John Cage’s Queer Silence; or, 
How to Avoid Making Matters Worse
Jonathan D. Katz 41
Three The Intent of the Musical Moment: 
Cage and the Transpersonal
Austin Clarkson 62
Four Cage as PerformerGordon Mumma 113
Five As Time PassesDeborah Campana 120
Six David Tudor and the Solo for Piano
John Holzaepfel 137
Seven Here Comes EverythingPaul van Emmerik 157
Eight Cage’s Inﬂuence: A Panel Discussion
Gordon Mumma, Allan Kaprow, 
James Tenney, Christian Wolff, Alvin Curran, and Maryanne Amacher 167
Nine Cage and the Computer: A Panel Discussion
James Pritchett, James Tenney, Andrew Culver, 
and Frances White 190
Ten Cage’s Writings up to the Late 1980s
Jackson Mac Low 210
Eleven Cage and the Structure of ChanceConstance Lewallen 234
Twelve Diary: Cage’s Mountain Lake Workshop,
April 8–15, 1990
Ray Kass 244
Thirteen The Making of Cage’s One11
Henning Lohner 260
List of Contributors 299
Index 305
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This book resulted from a collaborative pro-
cess that began almost a year after JohnCage’s death on August 12, 1992. It was during one of many inspiring conversationswith Gordon Mumma—a wonderful crea-tive artist, ubiquitous scholar, intellectual,and the person to whom this book is dedi-cated—that the idea of a conference and fes-tival focusing on Cage’s work ﬁrst emerged.Its location at Mills College, an institutionwith a rich tradition in experimental musicand close ties to Cage, was a splendid choice.The combination of Cage and Mills proved a powerful catalyst, drawing scholars andcreative artists to the event from all over theworld.
“Here Comes Everybody: The Music, Po-
etry, and Art of John Cage” took place onNovember 15–19, 1995. It was supported byfunding from the National Endowment forthe Humanities, the National Endowmentfor the Arts, the Mills College Music Depart-ment, and the Mills College Art Museum. I would like to thank Laura Kuhn and JoanRetallack for introducing me to the dedi-cated community of scholars studying Cage’swork. I am also grateful to Charles Hamm
ix
and Marjorie Perloff for their enthusiastic support of our project. It was
especially a pleasure to meet and work with Andrew Culver. I wouldlike to thank my colleagues from the Mills College Music Departmentand Center for Contemporary Music—David Abel, John Bischoff, ChrisBrown, Belle Bulwinkle, Alvin Curran, Elisabeth Eshleman, MichelleFillion, Fred Frith, Dave Madole, Pauline Oliveros, Maggi Payne, JulieSteinberg, Les Stuck, and William Winant—for their artistic and intel-lectual inspiration. This debt I also owe to my students at Mills.
From the start, Kathleen Hansell, music editor for the University of
Chicago Press, expressed interest in our plan to produce a book from theconference proceedings. Her continued support gave us the opportunityto realize our goal. Moira Roth and George Lewis reminded us that acritical perspective is crucial for Cage research; their ideas inﬂuencedthis book’s ﬁnal form. It was a pleasure to work with the contributors tothis volume; they selﬂessly committed hours of their time. It is a rare op-portunity to work with a group of such talented artists and scholars.
I have had the privilege of collaborating with Christopher Hatch on
several projects. As coeditor of this book, he brought his uncanny abil-ity to shape and clarify an author’s argument without the intrusion of hisown editorial ego. This, as well as his keen intellect, curiosity, and open-ness, reminds me of John Cage. Finally, I would like to acknowledge thepatience and support of my wife, Jamie, and son, Jeremy, who madework on this book possible.
David W. BernsteinACKNOWLEDGMENTS
x
INTRODUCTION
David W. Bernstein
I notice both in writing and in
speaking [that] many peopleare gloomy about the presentcircumstances and it isn’t mynature to be gloomy. . . . I havebeen so long in reading andthinking of Finnegans Wake,“Here comes everybody,” andI think our experiences moreand more are populated notonly with more people, butwith more things that strikeour perceptions. . . . We live in a time I think, not of main-stream, but of many streamsor even, if you insist upon a river of time, that we havecome to [a] delta, maybe even beyond [the] delta to an ocean which is going backto the skies.
—John Cage, Radio interview
with Charles Amirkhanian,KPFA, Berkeley, January 14,1992The epigraph at left expresses the inspiration
behind a conference entitled “Here ComesEverybody: The Music, Poetry, and Art ofJohn Cage, ” which took place at Mills Col-
lege in Oakland, California from Novem-ber 15 to 19, 1995. It also conveys in largepart the motivation that led to this book. Theconference constituted a major landmark inCage scholarship; it was the ﬁrst interna-tional assemblage of scholars and creativeartists to examine Cage’ s work after his death
on August 12, 1992. As such, it marked anew era in Cage research, as scholars beganto consider and evaluate his life, inﬂuence,and creative output more critically.
Cage, who admired the writings of James
Joyce, particularly Finnegans Wake, was fond
of the phrase “Here comes everybody” because it epitomized his own pluralistic vision of politics, society, and art. For Cage, “Here comes everybody” represented
a political and social philosophy celebrat-ing the uniqueness of individuals and themultiplicity of cultural differences aroundthe world. In music, this vision informedCage’ s assumption that any combination of
sounds, whether they are “musical” sounds
1
INTRODUCTION
2
1. David Revill, The Roaring Silence: John Cage, a Life (New York: Arcade, 1992). Biographies
by Charles Shere, Mark Swed, and Franz van Rossum are currently underway.
2. Deborah Ann Campana, “Form and Structure in the Music of John Cage” (Ph.D. diss.,
Northwestern University, 1985); James William Pritchett, “The Development of Chance Tech-
niques in the Music of John Cage, 1950 –1956” (Ph.D. diss., New York University, 1988); Laura
Kuhn, “John Cage’ sE u r o p e r a s1&2 : The Musical Means of Revolution ”(Ph.D. diss., University of
California, Los Angeles, 1992); Martin Erdmann, “Untersuchungen zum Gesamtwerk von JohnCage” (Ph.D. diss., Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität, Bonn, 1993); David W. Patter-son,“Appraising the Catchwords, c. 1942 –1959: Cage’ s Asian-Derived Rhetoric and the Histori-
cal Reference of Black Mountain College” (Ph.D. diss., Columbia University, 1996); Paul vanEmmerik, “Thema’ s en Variaties: Systematische tendensen in de compositietechnieken van John
Cage” (Ph.D. diss., Universiteit van Amsterdam, 1996).
3. Marjorie Perloff and Charles Junkerman, eds., John Cage: Composed in America (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1994).
4. James Pritchett, The Music of John Cage (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1993); Ste-
fan Schädler and Walter Zimmerman, eds., John Cage: Anarchic Harmony (Mainz: Schott, 1992);
William Fetterman, John Cage’s Theater Pieces: Notations and Performances (Amsterdam: Harwood
Academic Publishers, 1996); Christopher Shultis, Silencing the Sounded Self: John Cage and theAmerican Experimentalist Tradition (Boston: Northeastern University Press, 1998); George Leon-
ard, Into the Light of Things: The Art of the Commonplace from Wordsworth to Cage (Chicago: Univer-
sity of Chicago Press, 1995); and Daniel Herwitz, Making Theory, Constructing Art (Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, 1993).or noises, can be aesthetically pleasing; the materials available for a mu-
sical work are thus virtually unlimited, and Cage rejoiced in the exis-tence of these inﬁnite possibilities.
Cage extended this idea into an encompassing pluralism that crossed
artistic boundaries. His creative energies were not limited to music, forhe was at the same time an accomplished writer and an artist. The au-thor of more than seven major volumes of essays and poetry, he was alsoextremely productive in the visual arts, especially printmaking and wa-tercolors. This richness of artistic output and an almost unprecedentedlevel of productivity continued until his death.
Throughout his career, Cage was known as a tireless provocateur and
propagandist for a small community of avant-garde musicians, artists,and writers, but today his work is recognized around the world. Wehave, in fact, arrived at a pivotal moment in the history of Cage studies.As scholars begin to address his extraordinary legacy, they will need tounderstand the breadth and importance of his achievements. This pro-cess has already begun. The ﬁrst Cage biography came out in 1992, andothers will appear soon.
1There exist a growing number of excellent dis-
sertations focusing on Cage’ s work.2A major Cage conference that took
place at Stanford University in 1992 resulted in an important volume of essays.
3In 1993, the ﬁrst book to examine Cage’ s entire musical out-
put appeared, several new books explore aspects of Cage’ s work and
aesthetics, while others contain substantial sections on Cage.4In addi-
tion, a collection of interviews published shortly before he died providesfresh insight into the compositional methods and aesthetics of his late
INTRODUCTION
3
5.Musicage: Cage Muses on Words, Art, and Music, ed. Joan Retallack (Hanover, N.H.: Wesleyan
University Press, University Press of New England, 1995).
6.“45/H11032 for a Speaker, ” in Silence: Lectures and Writings (Middletown, Conn.: Wesleyan Uni-
versity Press, 1961), 158.music.5An extensive archive containing thousands of Cage’ s manu-
scripts and other documents was recently established at the New York
Public Library. “Here comes everybody” captures the present situationvery well; today’ s Cage scholars have inherited a wealth of materials
that should occupy them for many years to come.
The Mills conference involved participants from a wide variety of 
disciplines; although the major focus was Cage ’s music, there were con-
tributions by writers, literary critics, and art historians. This book in-cludes papers presented at the conference, transcriptions of two impor-tant panel sessions, as well as several new essays addressing issues that emerged during the conference. The collection begins with my en-deavor to place Cage within a broad historical context and examine hisrelationships to developments in twentieth-century culture and musicalstyle. I explore Cage’ s ties to twentieth-century modernism, claiming
that this retrospective view may facilitate a critical appraisal of his mu-sic and thought.
In chapter 2, Jonathan Katz turns to aspects of Cage’ s life seldom 
discussed in Cage scholarship. Katz suggests that Cage came to termswith his homosexuality through Zen Buddhism at the same time that he developed an artistic philosophy based upon the negation of self-expression. Cage’ s “silence” in this sense signiﬁes his reluctance to men-
tion his sexuality. But rather than interpreting this as a strategy foravoiding post –World War II homophobia, Katz maintains that Cage’ s 
“silence” was rooted in his ideological convictions. His “silence” was amoral stance. As Katz explains, it was a way to resist the errors of oppo-sitional politics, which according to Cage, only “make matters worse. ”
Cage’ s “silent piece, ” 4/H1103233/H11033, supplies Austin Clarkson with a way to 
expose the reader to issues associated with listening to and performingCage’ s music. Cage believed that the purpose of music was to “sober the
mind and make it susceptible to divine in ﬂuences. ”
6As Clarkson points
out in chapter 3, 4/H1103233/H11033 “exempliﬁes quintessentially Cage’ s tendency to
link music and spirituality. ” Drawing from writings by William James,
Carl Jung, Meister Eckhart, and Daisetz Suzuki, Clarkson clariﬁes ourunderstanding of Cage’ s views concerning spirituality. He discusses how
performing and listening to a composition by Cage has a “transpersonal
effect” and, by engaging the creativity of those who experience it, canlead to a heightened state of being. Clarkson shows us that spirituality,for Cage, results from a psychological transformation rather than a reli-
INTRODUCTION
4 gious one. He identiﬁes a need to develop analytical techniques that ad-
dress this mode of musical experience and suggests some preliminarymethods that can help us perform and listen to Cage’ s music.
Performance is the focus of the next three essays. In chapter 4, Gor-
don Mumma, a composer and performer who collaborated with Cage at a time when both worked with the Merce Cunningham Dance Com-pany, documents aspects of Cage’ s activities as a performer. He covers
Cage’ s work as pianist and percussionist both in concert and as dance 
accompanist, his performances with David Tudor and others using elec-tronic media, and his virtuosic readings of his own poetry. Mumma dis-pels the myths (that Cage often helped promulgate) about Cage ’s mu-
sical abilities, demonstrating that he was in fact a skilled and sensitiveperformer. The two essays that appear here as chapters 5 and 6 also con-tribute to our knowledge about the performance practices associatedwith Cage’ s music. Deborah Campana explores how his concept of mu-
sical time evolved from the early compositions for percussion and pre-pared piano to the “number” pieces written toward the end of his life.She shows that Cage’ s concern for temporal organization remained con-
stant despite changes in his musical style and notational resources. JohnHolzaepfel deals more intensively with performance practice in his dis-cussion of piano virtuoso and composer David Tudor ’s realization of the
Solo for Piano from Cage’ s Concert for Piano and Orchestra (1957 –58).
Holzaepfel draws attention to Tudor’ s disciplined and extremely precise
interpretation of Cage’ s notation, tracing parallels with Cage’ s own meth-
ods and providing valuable insights into the performance practices asso-ciated with Cage’ s indeterminate scores.
In chapter 7, Paul van Emmerik looks toward the future of Cage 
research. Van Emmerik played an important role in cataloging the col-lection of more than twenty-ﬁve thousand folios of Cage’ s music 
manuscripts now located at the New York Public Library. “Here comeseverybody” becomes “Here comes everything” for van Emmerik, as the
availability of these materials ushers in a new era in Cage research. Acareful examination of the Cage Nachlass may take many years, but it
will certainly lead to signiﬁcant discoveries. Van Emmerik points outthat studying Cage’ s source materials is crucial when analyzing his 
music from the 1950s and later, since his compositional decisions tookplace before a score was realized through chance operations. He demon-strates the usefulness of this methodology through an analysis of Three,one of Cage’ s number pieces, for which thirty-nine folios of source ma-
terials exist.
Two symposiums are included as chapters 8 and 9 of this book. The
ﬁrst, entitled “Cage’ s Inﬂuence, ” provides an opportunity for ﬁve of
INTRODUCTION
5 Cage’ s former colleagues to discuss his impact on their own work as well
as that of others. Allan Kaprow begins with a valuable account of Cage ’s
classes in experimental music at the New School for Social Research in
the late 1950s. James Tenney assesses Cage’ s historical role, claiming
that by eliminating personal expression from music Cage brought to anend a period in music history that started with the beginnings of operain the early seventeenth century. Uncomfortable with the idea of “inﬂu-
ence, ” Christian Wolff stresses that Cage’ s groundbreaking discoveries
helped others pursue their individual and independent creative paths.Comparing the present with the late 1930s, when Cage wrote his fa-mous essay “The Future of Music: Credo, ” Maryanne Amacher explains
that today we face a similar revolutionary moment in music history,propelled by recent innovations in computer science, electronic media,pyschoacoustics, biotechnology, and neuroscience. The technologicaladvances that Cage predicted more than sixty years ago are now a real-ity. Amacher asks us to remain open to changes of the same magnitudein the not too distant future. The last participant, Alvin Curran, discusseshis own work with the improvisatory performing group Musica Elettron-ica Viva, telling us that although Cage disliked improvisation, he was animportant source of inspiration for this group.
In the second symposium, “Cage and the Computer, ” James Tenney
recounts how Cage’ s aesthetics affected his own pioneering work on
computer sound synthesis at Bell Labs during the early 1960s. Tenneycredits his interest in noise and algorithmic composition using ran-dom number generation to Cage’ s inﬂuence. In describing stochastic
processes as constrained random processes, he suggests an important
point of contact with Cage’ s working methods, since Cage invariably
built constraints into his own compositional systems before using chanceoperations. Controlled randomness comes up again in Andrew Culver’ s
remarks as he describes the intricacies of the computer programs he created for Cage. Culver, who worked as Cage’ s assistant from the early
1980s until the composer’ s death, contributes a fascinating overview 
of the computer programs that Cage used in composing music and writ-ing poetry. In this way, he provides insight into Cage’ s working meth-
ods, which are also the focus of comments from the third panelist, Fran-ces White.
Cage’ s involvement in media other than music supplies the inspira-
tion for the last group of essays. In chapter 10, Jackson Mac Low pre-sents a wide-ranging survey of Cage’ s writings through the 1980s. He
discusses Cage’ s methods and important inﬂuences on his writings.
Constance Lewallen (chap. 11) is interested in how the asking of ques-tions served Cage as an artist. She concentrates on the structured arena
INTRODUCTION
6 within which Cage applied his chance operations while engaged in
printmaking at Crown Point Press and painting at the Mountain LakeWorkshop in West Virginia. In chapter 12, Ray Kass, founder of thisworkshop, gives an account of Cage’ s activities at Mountain Lake and
includes valuable information on Cage’ s methods as a painter. Hen-
ning Lohner, in the ﬁnal essay of this collection, offers a study of one of
Cage’ s last major works, the ﬁlm One
11.Lohner describes Cage’ s work-
ing methods during their collaboration over several years. He revealsmuch about the creative personality of an artist at the end of an incred-ibly rich and varied career.
This book can by no means claim inclusiveness. The scope and in ﬂu-
ence of Cage’ s activities are far too extensive to address in a single vol-
ume. It is our hope, however, that it will give readers a sense of the importance of Cage’ s creative activities in a variety of ﬁelds and an un-
derstanding of how much research has yet to be done. Finally, our goalhere is to contribute to the rapidly expanding knowledge about Cageand his creative output. An end to this task is not in sight and may, infact, not be desirable. For, as Cage often explained, it is far more inter-esting to search for new questions than for right answers. This book willinspire many such questions and open up new areas of inquiry. We areconﬁdent that this would have pleased John Cage.
I
In an essay entitled “History of Experimental
Music in the United States, ” John Cage para-
phrases a question put to Sri Ramakrishna:“Why if everything is possible, do we concernourselves with history (in other words witha sense of what is necessary to be done at aparticular time)? ” And Cage answers, “In 
order to thicken the plot. ”
1The essay, writ-
ten at the request of Wolfgang Steinecke, director of the Internationale Ferienkursefür Neue Musik at Darmstadt, was publishedin the 1959 issue of the Darmstädter Beiträge.
Cage’ s concern was to provide an interna-
tional audience with a historical context forhis work. He traces the radical developmentsin his style during the 1950s to the ﬁrst half
of the twentieth century and the AmericanExperimentalist tradition. The essay outlinesthe attributes of experimental music, em-phasizing the use of chance, indeterminacy,collage, and noise. It describes a new ap-proach to musical form in which compos-ers no longer felt the need to “stick sounds
71.“History of Experimental Music in the United
States, ” in Silence: Lectures and Writings (Middletown, Conn.:
Wesleyan University Press, 1961), 68.ONE
David W. Bernstein
“In Order to Thicken the Plot ”: 
Toward a Critical Reception of 
Cage’ s Music
together to make a continuity, ” thus letting “sounds be themselves. ”
Cage also points to the historical inevitability of the changes in his mu-
sical style:
All those interpenetrations which seem at ﬁrst glance to be hellish —his-
tory, for instance, if we are speaking of experimental music —are to be
espoused. One does not make just any experiment but does what must
be done. By this I mean one does not seek by his actions to arrive atmoney but does what must be done; by this I mean one does not seek byhis actions to arrive at fame (success) but does what must be done; onedoes not seek by his actions to provide pleasure to the senses (beauty)but does what must be done; one does not seek by his actions to arriveat the establishing of a school (truth) but does what must be done.
2
The urgency and determinism conveyed by this passage seem out of
place; it makes a modernist claim of historical progression —similar pro-
nouncements by Cage’ s teacher Arnold Schoenberg come immediately
to mind —within an essay promoting what today we would deﬁne as
postmodernist aesthetic elements. Cage ’s linking of these ideas leads us
to questions concerning his position within the history of twentieth-century art and ideas, and particularly his role in the development ofmodernist and postmodernist aesthetics.
While attempting to disentangle the many meanings of the term
“postmodernism” and to clarify its relationship to modernism, criticCharles Jencks has explained that “Post-Modernism means the continu-
ation of Modernism and its transcendence, a double activity that ac-
knowledges our complex relationship to the preceding paradigm andworld view. ” Jencks objects to the polarizing polemics pitting modern-
ism against postmodernism, often expressed in lists of mutually exclu-sive elements of each worldview, such as “purpose vs. play, ” “design vs.
chance, ” or “hierarchy vs. anarchy. ”
3Rejecting such reductionism, he
argues that the emergence of postmodernism in the second half of thetwentieth century does not entail a reversal, an abandonment of mod-ernism. Postmodernism is “a hybridization, a complexiﬁcation of mod-ern elements with other ones”— which Jencks terms “double-coding. ”
4
Jencks ’s “double-coding” seems especially useful for understanding
Cage’ s position within a broad historical context. There seems to be aDAVID W. BERNSTEIN
8
2. Ibid.
3. See “The Post-Modern Agenda, ” in The Post-Modern Reader, ed. Charles Jencks (New York:
St. Martin ’s Press, 1992), 11, 12. The juxtaposition of these terms originally appeared in Ihab
Hassan, Paracriticisms: Seven Speculations of the Times (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1975),
123–24.
4.“The Post-Modern Agenda, ” 12.
consensus among literary critics that Cage played a vital role in “post-
modernizing” music.5Similarly, in a recent article, musicologist Charles
Hamm maintains that Cage’ s work from the 1950s on was postmodern.6
These discussions have contributed to our understanding of Cage ’s aes-
thetics and musical style. However, if we draw a dichotomy betweenmodernism and postmodernism with respect to Cage, we may overlookhis ties with a modernist project devoted to political and social changethrough art. Moreover, if we underestimate his dependence on tech-niques associated with twentieth-century musical modernism, we maymiss a valuable opportunity to clarify some of the problematic featuresof his musical style. The historical, stylistic, and cultural context forCage’ s work makes up an extremely “thick” plot consisting of a subtle
interplay between modernism and postmodernism. Indeed, as this es-say will demonstrate, it is useful to consider aspects of both worldviewsin order to ﬁnd a path through the complex maze of interpenetrationsthat constitute the historical context for Cage’ s aesthetics and creative
output.
II
Cage’ s relation to what J ürgen Habermas refers to as the “project of 
modernity”
7lies in his connection with the history of the most radi-
cal manifestation of modernism, the twentieth-century avant-garde. Inplacing Cage within this historical context, we must recognize that,while scholars have examined avant-garde aesthetics from a variety ofdisciplinary perspectives, historians of twentieth-century music havenot addressed the topic adequately. Moreover, for the most part, musi-cal historiography lacks a precise deﬁnition of the “avant-garde, ” even
though the term is often applied to musical repertories from several dif-ferent historical periods.
In its well-known military usage, an avant-garde constitutes the lead-
ing edge of an invading force. Similarly, in aesthetics and cultural historythe avant-garde functions as a vanguard, paving the way for develop-ments in artistic language. But the meaning of the term is far more com-plex, for it embodies sociopolitical as well as artistic issues. The notion of“IN ORDER TO THICKEN THE PLOT”
9
5. See, for example, Gregory L. Ulmer, “The Object of Post-Criticism, ” in The Anti-Aesthetic:
Essays on Postmodern Culture, ed. Hal Foster (Seattle: Bay Press, 1983), 101ff.; Frederic Jameson,
Postmodernism, or, The Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism (Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press,
1991), 1; Marjorie Perloff, The Poetics of Indeterminacy (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1981). Perloff places Cage within a postmodernist literary tradition that included Rimbaud,
Stein, Williams, Pound, Beckett, Ashbery, and Antin.
6.“Privileging the Moment: Cage, Jung, Synchronicity, Postmodernism, ” Journal of Musicol-
ogy15, no. 2 (1977): 278 –89.
7.“Modernity —an Incomplete Project, ” in Foster, The Anti-Aesthetic, 3–15.
DAVID W. BERNSTEIN
10
8. Quoted in Donald D. Egbert, Social Radicalism in the Arts (New York: Knopf, 1970), 121 –22.
9. Gabriel Desiré Laverdant, for example, in his book entitled De la mission de l’art et du rôle
des artists (1845) deﬁned avant-garde art as that which has the potential to initiate social change,
and in 1878, Mikhail Bakunin prepared a periodical entitled L’Avant-garde, which served as a fo-
rum for the anarchist movement. See Renato Poggioli, The Theory of the Avant-Garde (Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 1968), 9.
10. See, for example, Glenn Watkins, Soundings: Music in the Twentieth Century (New York:
Schirmer Books, 1988), 506ff., and the article on the “avant-garde” by Paul Grif ﬁths in The New
Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians, 1:742 –43.
11. For a history of dadaism, see Hans Richter, Art and Anti-Art (New York: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 1965). RoseLee Goldberg, Performance Art: From Futurism to the Present (New York:
Abrams, 1988) contains an excellent introductory survey of both movements.
12. Filippo Tommaso Marinetti, Selected Writings, trans. R. W. Flint and Arthur Coppotelli
(New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1971), 42.an avant-garde was ﬁrst applied to the arts in the early nineteenth cen-
tury by the father of utopian socialism, Henri Comte de Saint-Simon.He envisioned a society led by artists and scientists —an avant-garde
that would spearhead a radical transformation of society: “What a mostbeautiful destiny for the arts, that of exercising over a society a positivepower, a truly priestly function, and of marching forcefully in the vanof all intellectual faculties, in the epoch of their greatest development!This is the duty of the artists, this is their mission. ”
8
The association of the avant-garde with sociopolitical radicalism con-
tinued in Europe throughout the nineteenth century.9However, despite
its long-standing historical association with political radicalism, in mu-sical scholarship today, avant-gardism is often equated with artistic ac-tivities that have little or nothing in common with social change. Radi-cal innovation and experimentation have in many cases become the solecriteria for the avant-garde. For example, the Ars Nova, the New Ger-man school, and the post –World War II generation of composers in-
cluding Boulez and Stockhausen have all been characterized as avant-garde movements.
10
The history of the twentieth-century avant-garde began with the
iconoclastic radical art movements known as futurism and dadaism.11
Both futurism and dadaism emerged from the economic, political,moral, and social upheaval surrounding the First World War. But whiledadaism was a loose international af ﬁliation of artists, writers, and po-
ets revolted by the butchery of World War I, futurism represented amore insular movement, whose proponents were fervently national-istic, misogynist, and pro-war. These sentiments were proclaimed by Filippo Tommaso Marinetti, who established futurism with a mani-festo published in Italy in 1909: “We will glorify war —the world’ s only
hygiene —militarism, patriotism, the destructive gesture of freedom-
bringers, beautiful ideas worth dying for, and scorn for women. ”
12
In spite of the political and national differences between the two
movements, the aesthetic assumptions underlying dadaism and futur-
“IN ORDER TO THICKEN THE PLOT”
11
13. Ibid.
14.“Lecture on Dada, 1922, ” in Dada Painters and Poets: An Anthology, 2d ed., ed. Robert
Motherwell (Boston: G. K. Hall, 1981), 250.
15. Richter, Art and Anti-Art, 48.
16. For more on this and other genres of early twentieth-century experimental poetry, see
László Moholy-Nagy, “Literature, ” in The Avant-Grade Tradition in Literature, ed. Richard Kostela-
netz (Buffalo: Prometheus, 1982), 78 –141.ism were remarkably similar. Both endorsed a total reformulation of
contemporary aesthetic values accompanied by radical political and so-cial change. The futurists adamantly rejected the past, particularly its artistic institutions. In his 1909 manifesto, for example, Marinetti evenexhorted his followers to “destroy the museums, libraries, and acade-mies of every kind. ”
13Although they were usually not as belligerent,
dadaist writings often echo this disdain for the past and for institution-alized art. Thus, Tristan Tzara, a Rumanian artist and writer who playeda major role in the Zurich dada movement, wrote: “The beginnings of dada were not the beginnings of an art, but of disgust. Disgust withthe magniﬁcence of philosophers who for three thousand years haveexplained everything to us (what for?), disgust with the pretensions of these artists-God’ s-representatives on earth, [and] disgust with the
lieutenants of a mercantile art made to order according to a few in-fantile laws. ”
14In its most radical form, the early-twentieth-century
avant-garde’ s rejection of institutionalized art was only part of an all-
encompassing nihilism that looked forward to the downfall of social aswell as artistic institutions. Walter Serner, an Austrian anarchist whowas a member of the dadaist circle in Zurich, called for the complete de-struction of present-day society. In a work entitled Letze Lockerung (1918),
he explained that active dissolution of the status quo was itself a form of serious art.
15Art, or “anti-art” as it is often termed, was a means by
which to destroy a corrupt and hopeless society.
The anti-art polemics produced by these movements also arose from
a common understanding that art and life praxis are inseparable —a
fundamental tenet of avant-garde aesthetics. This view was expressed ina variety of ways. The futurists celebrated the urban environment, withits chaos, noise, machines, and speed. Futurist painters attempted tocapture what they termed the dynamism and simultaneity of modernlife. Futurist musicians such as Antonio and Luigi Russolo inventednoise-making machines (called intonarumori) so that they could usecitylike sounds in their music. Dadaist artists pioneered collage and pho-tomontage, techniques that sought to represent the real world during atime of chaos and revolution. Their poetry often employed almost ran-dom combinations of words and, in some cases, used only abstract soundsdevoid of meaning in a new poetic style called “Verse without Words” or“Sound Poetry. ”
16This new form of verse was practiced by Hugo Ball,
DAVID W. BERNSTEIN
12
17. Marinetti, Selected Writings, 120–21.
18. Tristan Tzara, “Seven Dada Manifestoes, ” in Motherwell, Dada Painters and Poets, 92.who with his wife, Emmy Hennings, opened the Cabaret Voltaire —a
nightclub, founded in 1916, that served as a center for dadaist activities
in Zurich.
Their fascination with chaos, irrationality, and simultaneity led both
futurists and dadaists to the development of multimedia performanceart. In a manifesto dated 1913, Marinetti described the “Variety The-ater”—an early example of performance art in which jugglers, balleri-
nas, gymnasts, poets, and musicians all participated simultaneously. Thepurpose of such a wild spectacle was to engage and even infuriate the au-dience, as Marinetti’ s ideas for possible scenarios for his “Variety The-
ater” make clear:
One must completely destroy all logic in Variety Theater perfor-
mances. . . . Systematically prostitute all of classic art on the stage, per-forming for example all the Greek, French, and Italian tragedies, con-densed and comically mixed up, in a single evening —put life into the
works of Beethoven, Wagner, Bach, Bellini, Chopin by inserting Neapoli-tan songs . . . play a Beethoven symphony backward . . . boil all of Shake-speare down to a single act . . . have actors recite Hernani tied in sacks up
to their necks —soap the ﬂoorboards to cause amusing tumbles at the
most tragic moments.
17
Marinetti’ s collaborative performances, which he called “Futurist Eve-
nings, ” were staged all around Italy. Similar events were in vogue within
dadaist circles.
Chaos and irrationality inspired dadaist experiments with chance.
Hans Richter explains that the Alsatian painter and dadaist Jean Arp
once, when dissatisﬁed with one of his paintings, tore it in pieces andthrew it on the ﬂoor. To his amazement Arp noticed that the new con-ﬁguration of scraps was more successful than the original. Chance hadsucceeded where the artist’ s original intent had not. Tristan Tzara also
used chance methods in his poetry. He cut up newspapers into littlepieces containing no more than a few words, then either selected piecesrandomly from a hat or threw them onto a table. The new combina-tion of words was then pasted together.
18These experiments anticipate
Cage’ s ﬁrst compositions using chance methods by more than thirty
years. Again, the motivation behind this sort of activity was to bring artcloser to the randomness that was seen to characterize real life.
Political and social activism, the rejection of tradition and institution-
alized art, chaos, chance and irrationality, simultaneity, and the merg-
“IN ORDER TO THICKEN THE PLOT”
13
19. This term is used by Peter Bürger in his The Theory of the Avant-Garde (Minneapolis: Uni-
versity of Minnesota Press, 1984).
20. For a ﬁne survey of the arts in twentieth-century Russia before World War II, see David
Elliot, New Worlds: Russian Art and Society, 1890 –1937 (New York: Rizzoli, 1986); The Great Utopia:
The Russian and Soviet Avant-Garde, 1915 –1932 (New York: Guggenheim Museum, 1992) is an-
other useful secondary source. For more on the constructivist art movement, see Christina Lod-
der, Russian Constructivism (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1983).
21. For a discussion of the ﬁnal stages of the dadaist movement, see Richter, Art and Anti-
Art,196, and Georges Ribemont-Dessaignes, “History of Dada, ” in Motherwell, Dada Painters and
Poets, 116ff.
22. Ilya Ehrenburg, Post-War Years, 1945 –54(London, MacGibben and Kee, 1966), 287.
These words are cited in the following excellent study of surrealism’ s political context: Helena
Lewis, The Politics of Surrealism (New York: Paragon, 1988), 122.ing of art and life were the aesthetic principles endorsed by avant-garde
movements in the early twentieth century. Dadaism, futurism, and theartistic movements that grew out of them —collectively known as the
“historical avant-garde”
19—did not survive beyond the fourth decade of
the twentieth century. The onslaught of World War I helped bring onthe dissolution of futurism, although aspects of its ideology took root in Russia. The futurists ’ interest in the industrial world, for instance,
was echoed by the Russian constructivists, who believed in a utilitarianart committed to the establishment of a classless society. Thus, initially,avant-garde art ﬂourished in postrevolutionary Russia, but the rela-tively tolerant artistic climate that reached its apogee during the 1920swould decline under an increasingly totalitarian political regime.
20Dur-
ing the years after World War I, dadaism spread from Zurich to Berlin,Hanover, Cologne, New York, and Paris. It was in Paris that the move-ment began to break apart as a result of internecine rivalries and, aboveall, the impossibility of unifying a movement that embraced chaos anddisorder. Although many of the artists and writers who helped createdadaism still remained productive, by 1924, after a series of confronta-tions, polemics, and public disputes, dadaism was ﬁnished.
21Surrealism
emerged out of the ashes of dada, but by the beginning of the SecondWorld War, this movement had also run out of steam, owing to its in-ability to align itself with the Communist party and the fact that fewpeople could concern themselves with “discussions of sex, character,and potential behavior of a scrap of velvet at a time when fascists wereburning books and killing people. ”
22
The collapse of the historical avant-garde did not prevent the dissem-
ination of its aesthetic principles and artistic techniques. Cage played acrucial role in this development. Although his early percussion worksgave noise a musical vitality that went far beyond the dadaist and futur-ist experiments, this new direction in his musical style was inﬂuenced,in part, by the historical avant-garde. Even more important was his in-
DAVID W. BERNSTEIN
14
23. Of course, Asian philosophy, Zen Buddhism in particular, was also an important source
for this aspect of Cage’ s aesthetics. Cage attended a lecture entitled “Zen Buddhism and Dada”
at the Cornish School in Seattle. He noted that there exist possible connections between dada-
ism and Zen. See the foreword to Silence, xi.
24. Caroline A. Jones, “Finishing School: John Cage and the Abstract Expressionist Ego, ”
Critical Inquiry 19 (summer 1993): 628 –65.terest in breaking down the barriers between art and life, a position with
unmistakable parallels to the historical avant-garde.23This aesthetic con-
viction drew Cage to many of the techniques used by the dadaist move-ment, such as simultaneity and chance methods. It resulted in the nowfamous “happening” at Black Mountain College in 1952 and the com-
position of 4/H1103233/H11033 during the same year. The latter work, a piece for piano
without sound, challenged the distinction between art and life. In so doing, 4/H1103233/H11033 was perhaps Cage’ s most important contribution to the
midcentury revival of avant-garde aesthetics. Cage’ s fascination with the
sort of layered simultaneities employed in his Black Mountain piece extended throughout his career, from his early experiments with elec-tronic media such as Williams Mix, to the enormous superimposition of
electronic and other musical media in HPSCHD, to later works such as
Roaratorio and the Europeras, which, although not intended in the same
antagonistic spirit, resemble Marinetti ’s plans for his “Variety Theater. ”
Cage enjoyed a longtime personal association with Marcel Duchamp,
and it is not surprising that many of his ideas stem from dadaist aestheticideology. From the 1940s on, he increasingly took on the role of anagent provocateur, in much the same spirit as Tristan Tzara and otherradicals active in the early part of the century. In 1948, Cage causedquite a stir with his polemics against Beethoven at Black Mountain Col-lege. His “Lecture on Nothing, ” presented at the New York City Artists’
Club circa 1949 –50, was perhaps an inﬂammatory jab at the aesthetics
of abstract expressionism.
24The uproar resulting from these activities
was surpassed by the ﬁrst performance of 4/H1103233/H11033 in Woodstock, New York,
on August 29, 1952. The audience, although well prepared for an eve-ning of contemporary music, was shocked by what Cage would later callhis most important work.
After World War II, there was a resurgence of avant-gardism. Many
of the radical groups associated with the postwar resuscitation of theavant-garde —such as the Nouveaux réalistes, the Cobra movement, the
International Situationists, and Fluxus —had political and artistic agen-
das remarkably similar to those of the historical avant-garde and arethus often referred to as the “neo-avant-garde” or “neo-dada. ” Cage was
an important ﬁgure in this revival of avant-garde aesthetics. During thelate 1950s, he taught a course in experimental music at the New Schoolfor Social Research. His students, among whom were George Brecht,
“IN ORDER TO THICKEN THE PLOT”
15
25. These classes are described by Allan Kaprow in the panel discussion entitled “Cage’ s In-
ﬂuence, ” chapter 8 below.
26. For a discussion of Cage’ s activities during this period, see David W. Bernstein, “John
Cage and the Aesthetic of Indifference, ” in The New York Schools of Music and the Visual Arts, ed.
Steven Johnson (New York: Garland Publishing, forthcoming).
27. Natalie Crohn Schmitt, “John Cage in a New Key, ” Perspectives of New Music 20 (fall/
winter 1981): 99 –103.
28. John Cage and Morton Feldman, Radio Happenings I –V, 1966 –1967 (Cologne: Musik-
Texte, 1993), 153.Dick Higgins, Toshi Ichiyanagi, Allan Kaprow, Jackson Mac Low, and
Richard Maxﬁeld, went on to become leaders within such avant-gardeartistic circles as the Fluxus movement.
25
Despite these ties to the historical avant-garde, Cage’ s work immedi-
ately following the war seems apolitical, and thus appears to lack a nec-essary component of the avant-garde aesthetic program.
26Much of the
high modernist art of the 1950s did not overtly address political con-cerns. On the surface, Cage’ s Music of Changes (1951) and Concert for Pi-
ano and Orchestra (1957 –58) appear as examples of the apolitical 1950s.
These works drew upon the premise that art equals life by “imitating na-ture in her manner of operation, ” an approach certainly congruent with
the avant-garde’ s aesthetic claims. But the passivity and apparent ab-
sence of political engagement characteristic of Cage ’s music from this
period differ markedly from works by the historical avant-garde.
Toward the end of the 1960s, Cage paid increasing attention to the re-
lation between art and political and social structures.
27Yet, although he
must have supported many of the goals of the 1960s protest movement,he did not endorse its methods. In a conversation with Morton Feldmanabout the Vietnam War he explained:
You know, my tendency is to think of these activities —of protest, and 
of parades, and objections, and all these things —as being like critical 
actions rather than like composing actions. I know, in my case and 
certainly in your case, that nothing that the critic said stopped me fromcomposing. Now it seems to me that the war is not going to be stoppedby critical action, or, if it is stopped, that it will be succeeded by an-other war, et cetera. I think something like a composing action needs tobe made rather than like a critical action, in order to bring about a worldwhere these things to which we clearly and rightfully object will not takeplace.
28
For Cage, a work of art might offer a model of how an ideal world would
be constructed. This idea is stated explicitly in Cage ’s essay “The Future
of Music” (1974): “Less anarchic kinds of music give examples of lessanarchic states of society. The masterpieces of Western music exemplify
DAVID W. BERNSTEIN
16
29.“The Future of Music, ” in Cage, Empty Words (Middletown, Conn.: Wesleyan University
Press, 1979), 183.
30. See Williams’ s “Base and Superstructure in Marxist Cultural Theory, ” Contemporary Lit-
erary Criticism, ed. Robert Davis and Ronald Schleifer (New York: Longman, 1989), 384. The tac-
tics of alternative culture were taken up by Cage’ s successors, including Christian Wolff, who 
experimented with compositional techniques that yield works resembling ideal social commu-
nities. Another noteworthy example is Pauline Oliveros ’s practice of “deep listening. ”
31. See, for example, Hans Magnus Enzenberger, “Die Aporien der Avant-Garde, ” Einzel-
heiten Poesie und Politik (Frankfurt am Main, 1962); Leslie Fiedler, The Collected Essays (New York:
Stein and Day, 1971), 2: 454 –61; Bürger, Theory of the Avant-Garde; Andreas Huyssen, After the
Great Divide: Modernism, Mass Culture, Postmodernism (Bloomington: Indiana University Press,
1986), and Marjorie Perloff, Radical Artiﬁce (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991).monarchies and dictatorships. Composer and conductor: king and prime
minister. By making musical situations which are analogies to desirablesocial circumstances which we do no yet have, we make music sugges-tive and relevant to the serious questions which face Mankind. ”
29The
political intent of art conceived in this way lies in its offering us alter-native epistemologies in the hope that these might lead to a radical re-shaping of our political and social structures. This approach exempli ﬁes
what Marxist literary critic Raymond Williams has termed alternativeculture, as opposed to oppositional culture, which also envisages socialchange but relies on a much more overt and confrontational politicalmessage.
30
Seen in this light, even Cage’ s most abstract high-modernist com-
positions from the early 1950s were steps toward his formulation of musical works as idealized social structures, for by “letting sounds be
themselves” in works such as the Music of Changes, he created a musical
anarchy that would later provide us with models of alternative forms of social and political organization. Cage ’s early interest in the future of
music increasingly became a concern for the state of the world, a pre-occupation that was to persist throughout his artistic career.
Cage’ s renewal of avant-garde aesthetics came at a time when the
phrase “the avant-garde is dead” had started to appear in writings by
both intellectual historians and literary critics.
31Noting the failed polit-
ical, social, and artistic programs endorsed by avant-garde movementsin the twentieth century, many scholars had concluded that the avant-garde was no longer viable. But through his own works, and by pro-moting ideas drawn from Marshall McLuhan, R. Buckminster Fuller,and anarchist politics, Cage transformed the sociopolitical program ofthe twentieth-century avant-garde, redirecting its concerns to problemsfacing us at the turn of the twenty-ﬁrst century. His reformulation ofavant-garde aesthetics is a contemporary manifestation of the modern-ist project initiated by Enlightenment philosophers more than two hun-dred years ago.
“IN ORDER TO THICKEN THE PLOT”
17
32. Musicage: Cage Muses on Words, Art, Music, ed. Joan Retallack (Hanover, N.H.: Wesleyan
University Press, University Press of New England, 1995), 88. Cage ’s interest in Schoenberg’ s
music led him to attend the latter’ s classes at both USC and UCLA. For a historical account of
this period in Cage’ s career, see Michael Hicks, “John Cage’ s Studies with Arnold Schoenberg, ”
American Music 8 (summer 1990): 125 –40. I examine the relationships between the two com-
posers’ musical aesthetics in “John Cage, Arnold Schoenberg, and the Musical Idea, ” in John
Cage: Music, Philosophy, and Intention, 1933 –50,ed. David W. Patterson (New York: Garland Pub-
lishing, forthcoming).
33. This is not the case for the second movement of Cage’ s Solo for Clarinet (1933).III
Thus far we have examined Cage ’s modernist ties in a broad context.
Narrowing the focus by considering his relationship to twentieth-century musical modernism sheds light on the development of his mu-sical style. Cage’ s early musical training included an exposure to several
facets of early-twentieth-century modernist music. Upon his return toLos Angeles in 1931, he saw the musical landscape in terms of two camps,populated by followers of Schoenberg on the one hand and followers ofStravinsky on the other: “I came to think that it was fairly clear from a
survey of contemporary music that the important ﬁgures then wereSchoenberg and Stravinsky, and that you could go in one direction orthe other. I myself preferred Schoenberg. ”
32Cage’ s early works employ
various idiosyncratic interpretations of Schoenberg’ s twelve-tone sys-
tem. By the mid-1940s, he had established his career as a composer withconnections to the Schoenberg “school. ”
The historical context for Cage’ s early music also included work by
composers from the American ultra-modernist school, such as HenryCowell, Ruth Crawford, Charles Seeger, Carl Ruggles, and JohannaBeyer. These composers sought to break their ties to European musicaltraditions; their dissonant harmonies and experiments with serialism,however, still point to Schoenberg’ s atonal and twelve-tone music.
Henry Cowell, a prominent ﬁgure in this group, was an active Schoen-berg advocate. In short, the musical milieu that Cage joined after re-turning from Europe owed much to Schoenberg’ s inﬂuence.
During the 1930s, Cage developed his own idiosyncratic approach 
to the twelve-tone system. Perhaps the most striking departure fromSchoenberg’ s method was his decision to avoid the thematic articulation
of his twelve-tone rows. Cage refrained from any successive presenta-tion of the twelve members of the row. The series was an element of hisprecompositional process, never appearing in the ﬁnished work.
33He
constructed melodic motives based upon the row’ s intervallic structure.
These motives remain constant, not subject to alteration. Cage formedconnections between the motives by referring to the ﬁnal note of eachmotive and its position within the row. Each subsequent melodic motive
DAVID W. BERNSTEIN
18
34. For a discussion of this and other early works by Cage, see David Nicholls, American Ex-
perimental Music, 1890 –1940 (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1990), 175ff. Paul van Em-
merik also discusses this work in “Thema’ s en Variaties: Systematische tendensen in de com-
positietechnieken van John Cage ” (Ph.D. diss., Universiteit van Amsterdam, 1996), 34.
35. Nicholls and van Emmerik each present different orderings of the row. The version used
here appears in Cage’ s analytical sketches for his 1974 revision of this work. These sketches are
written in a stenographer’ s pad now part of the John Cage Manuscript Collection at the New
York Public Library, JPB 94 –24, folder 22. The differences between Cage’ s, Nicholls ’s, and van
Emmerik’ s interpretation are not signiﬁcant, since each preserves the row’ s intervallic structure.begins on the following or preceding note of the row. The ﬁrst movement
of his Two Pieces for Piano (1935) illustrates Cage’ s technique (ex. 1.1).34
The twelve-tone row for this work reads as follows:35
B–B/flat–G–D–E/flat–D/flat–A/flat–G/flat–C–E–A–F
The melodic motive in the right hand, bar two, consists of interval
classes 1 and 5, a succession that appears between the ﬁfth, fourth, andthird notes in the row. The last note of the motive, A /flat, proceeds to G /flat,
which begins the next motive (bar three) and also follows A /flatin the row.
Similarly, the melodic motive in the left hand (bar one) consists of twointervallic successions stemming from the row: a three-note fragmentconsisting of interval classes 5 and 4 and a two-note fragment consist-ing of interval class 5. The ﬁnal note of the motive, G, proceeds to D,which begins the next motive. D follows G in Cage ’s row.
Cage’ s sketches for the 1974 revision of his Two Pieces provide further
insight into his working methods. The sketches suggest that he beganwith a series of rhythmic as well as melodic motives (noted in terms ofintervals up or down between pairs of pitches). Each melodic motive wasassigned its own rhythm, as illustrated in example 1.2, which juxtaposesa page from Cage ’s sketches and its transcription. The entire ﬁrst move-
ment consists of repetitions of these motives at different levels of trans-position. For instance, the ﬁrst motive in example 1.2 appears in mea-sures two and twenty-four in the right hand and measures eight, nine,sixteen, and thirty-four in the left hand. Motive six occurs in measuresnine and twenty-ﬁve in the right hand and measures one, six, twelve,and thirteen in the left hand. It is apparent that the score was assembledin a somewhat mechanical way. Much of the composing of the worktook place before this process as Cage composed the work’ s row, derived
his melodic and rhythmic materials, and decided upon the proceduresgoverning just how these materials would be put together in the workitself.
The late 1930s marked a breakthrough in the development of Cage ’s
compositional style. It was during this period that he began a lifelongexploration of the musical potential of noise. But at the same time thatCage was mapping out a new, unexplored musical terrain, he was alsobuilding upon innovations by his contemporaries and predecessors. His
“IN ORDER TO THICKEN THE PLOT”
19
 EXAMPLE 1.1
Two Pieces for Piano, I, Edition Peters. © 1974 by Henmar Press, Inc. Used by permission.
interest in noise was inspired by the work of ﬁlmmaker Oskar von Fisch-
inger,36the music of Edgard Varèse, and dadaist and futurist experi-
ments with bruitism. Perhaps less obvious was Schoenberg’ s continuing
inﬂuence. Cage’ s ﬁrst work for percussion, the Quartet, was written in
1935, the same year in which he moved back to Los Angeles to study
with Schoenberg. In a lecture presented circa 1938 –40, Cage explains
36. For the Birds: John Cage in Conversation with Daniel Charles (Boston: Marion Boyars, 
1981), 73ff.
20 EXAMPLE 1.2
Sketch for the 1974 revision of Two Pieces for Piano, from stenographer’s pad, New Y ork Public
Library, John Cage Manuscript Collection, JPB 94-24, folder 22. Shown with its transcription.

21 EXAMPLE 1.2 continued
10-15-29+7 -4
3-7-48+7 +17+76
3-7-7
-4-4+1+26+75
3-7-46-14+3 63-6 -1 -12+7-1+71-1 +5
or:*
*
5
*The triplets transcribed here conform to the way they appear in the ﬁnal score.
DAVID W. BERNSTEIN
22 that just as Schoenberg has rejected the distinction between consonance
and dissonance, today there exists a needless differentiation betweennoise and so-called musical sounds:
Whereas, in the past, the point of disagreement has been between disso-
nance and consonance, it will be, in the immediate future, between noiseand so-called musical sounds. The present methods of writing music,principally those which employ harmony and its reference to particularsteps in the ﬁeld of sound, will be inadequate for the composer, who willbe faced with the entire ﬁeld of sound. New methods will be discovered,bearing a deﬁnite relation to Schoenberg’ s twelve-tone system and pres-
ent methods of writing percussion music and any other methods whichare free from the concept of a fundamental tone.
37
The parallels with Schoenberg were a matter not only of aesthetics, but
also of similar compositional technique. Cage predicted that new meth-ods for writing percussion music would draw upon Schoenberg’ s twelve-
tone system. This seems to have been true of Cage ’s First Construction (in
Metal) (1939). In composing the First Construction, as in his twelve-tone
works written during the period from 1935 to 1938, Cage began with acollection of motivic groups, or cells. He ﬁrst composed a series of six-teen rhythmic cells, as illustrated by the sketch and its transcription inexample 1.3.
In a letter to Pierre Boulez, Cage described the method used in com-
posing this work:
Now something about the Construction in Metal. The rhythmic structure is
4, 3, 2, 3, 4 (16 /H11003 16). You can see that the ﬁrst number (4) equals the
number of ﬁgures that follow it. This ﬁrst number is divided 1, 1, 1, 1 and
ﬁrst I present the ideas that are developed in the 3, then those in the 2,
etc. Regarding the method: there are 16 rhythmic motives divided 4, 4,4, 4 conceived as circular series. When you are on 1, you can go 1 2341
or retrograde. You can repeat (e.g., 112233443322 etc.). But you cannotgo 2–4 or 1 –3. When you are on 2, you cannot only use the same idea
but can go back to 1 using the “doorways” 1 or 4. (Very simple games.)
38
These remarks point to the work’ s rhythmic structure, which according
to Cage’ s “square root” system consists of sixteen sixteen-bar phrases
grouped into larger sections based on the proportion 4:3:2:3:4. Like-
wise, each sixteen-bar section divides into phrases of 4, 3, 2, 3, and 4measures long. The work begins with a section made up of four sixteen-bar units (1, 1, 1, 1), which Cages calls an “exposition. ” This is followed
37.“The Future of Music: Credo, ” in Silence, 4–5.
38. Jean-Jacques Nattiez, The Boulez-Cage Correspondence, trans. and ed. Robert Samuels (Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993), 49.
“IN ORDER TO THICKEN THE PLOT”
23
by a“development” with sections of 16 /H110033, 16 /H110032, 16 /H110033, and 16 /H110034
measures, and a “coda. ”
Cage deployed the rhythmic cells according to the “circular series”
described above. As indicated in his sketch, the order of the cells is dif-
ferent. For example, the ﬁrst group of four cells is numbered 1, 4, 2, 3rather than 1, 2, 3, 4. This change is taken into account in ﬁgure 1.1,which is a revision of the diagram from Cage’ s letter to Boulez.
Cage’ s “serial” method is illustrated in example 1.4, which consists of
the opening sixteen measures of the second, third, and sixth percussionparts. (The reader should note that in this passage and elsewhere in thework, Cage’ s rhythmic cells are often accompanied by sustained sounds,
such as the thundersheet rumblings in the opening of the movement orthe brakedrum half notes in bars eight and nine. These accompanimentsdo not appear to correspond to Cage’ s cells. There are some cases, how-
ever, in which their total duration matches that of the cells. For exam-ple, the brakedrum half notes correspond to the duration of cell 3. ThatCage may have been thinking in these terms is suggested by his sketch,in which the durational value of each cell appears in the right-hand col-umn.) In measures ten through sixteen, the sixth percussionist movesaround the ﬁrst circle, playing cells 3, 3, 1, 3, 3, 1, 3, 2, 2, and 4. Pre-cisely as the composer’ s precompositional rules allow, there are moves
in both directions to contiguous cells along the circle and repeated cells,but no moves across the circle. The third percussionist plays cells 4, 1, 4,2, 3, 3, and 4. This succession adheres to Cage ’s rules except for the ﬁnal
cell 4, which is preceded by cell 3 from across the ﬁrst circle. It seemsclear that Cage was willing to deviate from his plan for musical rea-sons;
39the third and sixth percussionists play cell 4 in unison, thus ar-
ticulating the end of the ﬁrst sixteen-bar section.15
3 1 47 2 8
26
91 3
11 312 15 416
10 14
FIGURE 1.1
Circular series for First Construction (in Metal), in The Boulez-Cage Correspondence, ed. Jean-
Jacques Nattiez (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993), 49.
39. This was also the case in Cage’ s later work. See, for example, the discussion below of his
Music of Changes.
EXAMPLE 1.3
Sketch for First Construction (in Metal), New Y ork Public Library, John Cage Manuscript Collection, JPB 95-24,
folder 37. Shown with its transcription.

25 EXAMPLE 1.3 continued
1514163 3 3131110123976853241
5 97 34 5
DAVID W. BERNSTEIN
26 Another noteworthy departure from the rules occurs in the ﬁrst two
measures, where the second percussionist plays cells 1, 7, 9, and 5. If
cell 1 is segmented into groups of 4 and 3 eighth notes, the durationalvalues in eighths of these cells are 4, 3, 2, 3, 4 (as indicated by the brack-ets in example 1.4).
40Cage’ s opening “theme” thus foreshadows the
rhythmic proportions governing the entire piece. It is almost as if thecomposer chose to present, in Schoenbergian terms, the composition ’s
“basic shape, ” or Grundgestalt, as the work’ s initial gesture.
41This fore-
shadowing and the quasi-serial structure in the First Construction are evi-
dence of Schoenberg’ s continuing inﬂuence. It is important to point out,
however, that the cellular permutations in the First Construction differ
markedly from Schoenbergian motivic techniques, particularly develop-ing variation. The essential difference lies in the fact that Cage ’s motivic
cells are static; they recur unchanged and are never developed. His tech-nique is “constructive, ” as his title suggests, rather than “developmen-
tal,” a process involving transformation rather than literal repetition.
During the four sixteen-bar sections in his exposition, which com-
prises the ﬁrst large unit of the rhythmic structure, Cage proceedsthrough each of his four circles. For example, in the second section(which begins at rehearsal letter A), the fourth percussionist alternatescells 5 and 7, the ﬁfth percussionist plays cells 5, 8, 6, 7, 6, 8, and 5 (ex. 1.5). In this passage and elsewhere, a cell is abbreviated (see theﬁrst cell 8 in ex. 1.5). In addition, there is an overlap; the passage con-tains cells 3 and 2 (in the second and sixth percussion parts) from theprevious section. But here and throughout the First Construction, Cage
for the most part adheres to the rigors of his system. In the development,he deploys the cells at a slower rate. Following the remaining units ofhis rhythmic “macrostructure, ” he moves through the ﬁrst circle during
three sixteen-bar units (rehearsal letters D, E, and F), the second circleduring three sixteen-bar units (rehearsal letters G and F), the thirdcircle during three sixteen-bar units (rehearsal letters I, J, and K), andthe fourth circle during four sixteen-bar units (rehearsal letters L, M, N,and O). As in the exposition there are overlaps, and some of the longercells are condensed. The work ends with a nine-bar coda in which theﬁrst percussionist plays cell 16, the last cell from the fourth circle.
The foregoing analyses of two of Cage’ s early pieces reveal much about
the formation of his compositional style. They can, moreover, provide
40. I am grateful to percussion virtuoso and Cage expert William Winant for pointing this
out. Note that cell 1 might be construed as cells 5 and 9, thus yielding the same segmentation
into groups of 4 and 3 eighth notes.
41. It is very likely that Cage was exposed to this concept during his classes with Schoen-
berg. See Bernstein, “John Cage, Arnold Schoneberg, and the Musical Idea. ”
27 EXAMPLE 1.4
First Construction (in Metal), measures 1–16, second, third, and sixth percussion parts.
3 2 2 42 3 34131 1 1 13 3 1 3 3 14 1 491 795 44 451 1 16321143
72
93
54
4 1
DAVID W. BERNSTEIN
28 EXAMPLE 1.5
First Construction (in Metal), measures 17–23.
2 2 2 2 355774 3 33432 2 2 2655 8
46768
545 75 75 75 731
2
us with a valuable perspective for examining his later works. Although
Cage began his compositional career exploring aspects of Schoenberg ’s
twelve-tone system, his limited exposure to these methods (Schoenbergpreferred not to teach his students serial techniques) and natural incli-nation to experiment and push boundaries led him to develop his ownapproach to the twelve-tone system. Perhaps most striking is the extentto which Cage focused on setting up intricate precompositional strate-gies. A signiﬁcant portion of the actual “composing” of Two Pieces and
“IN ORDER TO THICKEN THE PLOT”
29
42. For an informative account of Cage’ s “appropriations” of South and East Asian philoso-
phy, see David W. Patterson, “ Appraising the Catchwords, c. 1942 –1959: Cage’ s Asian-Derived
Rhetoric and the Historical Reference for Black Mountain College” (Ph.D. diss., Columbia Uni-
versity, 1996). For a discussion of the changes of this period within the context of the develop-ment of the New York school, see Bernstein, “Cage and the Aesthetic of Indifference. ”
43. John Cage, “45/H11032 for a Speaker, ” in Silence: Lectures and Writings (Middletown, Conn.: Wes-
leyan University Press, 1961), 158.
44. Quoted in Cage, “History of Experimental Music, ” 68.First Construction took place before Cage turned to the ﬁnal score. In the
case of Two Pieces, Cage ﬁrst composed his row and then his melodic/
rhythmic motives. He next arranged the motives, according to the rules
of his twelve-tone system, into the mosaic that constituted the ﬁnal score.
Similarly, in the First Construction, Cage selected the instrumentation, de-
termined the rhythmic structure, composed his motivic materials, anddecided upon the method for their systematic deployment before real-izing the score. In both cases, a mechanistic process seems to lessen therole that choice plays in the creative process. But Cage’ s emphasis upon
the earliest stages of composition helped him cultivate an acute sense ofthe potential of his musical materials and methods that would remain acrucial aspect of his compositional technique.
IV
Cage’ s works from the early 1950s mark critical changes in his musical
style and aesthetic philosophy, which seem to indicate a departure fromhis earlier modernist af ﬁliations. During the previous decade Cage had
become interested in South and East Asian philosophy, appropriating el-ements of Indian, Taoist, and Zen philosophy into his own aesthetics.
42
The focus of his music shifted from the composer to the listener; mu-sic now had an ethical and spiritual function —“to sober the mind and
make it susceptible to divine inﬂuences. ”
43After 1950, Cage looked to-
ward a more complete withdrawal of his own subjectivity from the cre-ative process through the use of chance and indeterminacy. The resultwas a seemingly depersonalized musical style, emphasizing the objecti-ﬁcation of musical sound. As Christian Wolff explained in an article onelectronic music: “One ﬁnds a concern for a kind of objectivity, almost
anonymity —sound comes into its own. The ‘music’ is a result existing
simply in the sounds we hear, given no impulse by expressions of self or personality. It is indifferent in motive, originating in no psychologynor in dramatic intentions, nor in literary or pictorial purposes. ”
44This
development may be seen, as James Tenney argues in chapter 8, as theend of the “operatic era”— a 350-year period in the history of Western
music during which the primary function of music was to express hu-man emotion. But to identify Cage’ s shift as a complete break from the
past does not take the full historical situation into account. The radi-
DAVID W. BERNSTEIN
30 cal changes in his compositional style notwithstanding, Cage continued
to play a role within the evolution of post –World War II modernism.
Moreover, the importance of understanding Cage’ s ties to the past be-
comes especially apparent when we begin to look toward developinganalytical methods for the music he wrote after 1950.
Cage enjoyed a lively correspondence with Pierre Boulez from 1949
to 1954.
45The two men exchanged detailed notes regarding the compo-
sitional techniques they were employing at that time. It is fascinating toobserve how much they had in common, despite the fact that Boulezwas moving toward integral serialism while Cage was exploring chanceand indeterminacy. Each composer promoted the other’ s work. Cage
was an advocate of Boulez’ s music in the United States. He especially 
admired the latter’ s Second Piano Sonata, despite the fact that its extro-
verted, often aggressive style was far from his own. Boulez organized aperformance of Sonatas and Interludes for a soirée at Suzanne Tézenna’ s
salon in June 1949. He was especially interested in Cage ’s exploration of
complex frequency patterns in his percussion music and compositionsfor the prepared piano. In Boulez’ s view, Cage “proved the possibility 
of creating non-tempered sound spaces, even with existing instru-ments. Thus his prepared piano is not merely an unexpected sidelight on
the percussion-piano, whose soundboard is invaded by strange metallicvegetation. It rather calls into question the whole notion of acoustics asit has gradually stabilized in the evolution of western music, becomingan instrument capable, by means of an artisan tablature, of yielding com-plex frequency patterns. ” He also praised Cage for “conceiving rhythmic
structure as dependent on real time, expressed through numerical rela-tionships in which the personal element plays no part. ” Boulez noted
the similarities between Cage’ s innovations and his own work. He saw
Cage’ s focus on the “individuality of sound” as an approach that took
into account all the attributes of sound: pitch, volume, timbre, and du-ration. Boulez recognized parallels between his own development of in-tegral serialism and Cage’ s systematic procedures in such pieces as the
Music of Changes. Describing how Cage used a system of tables to set up
“structural relations between different components of sound, ” organiz-
ing “each component into parallel but autonomous distributions, ” Bou-
lez remarked, “The tendency of these experiments by John Cage is tooclose to my own for me to fail to mention them. ”
46
45. Nattiez, The Boulez-Cage Correspondence. This correspondence is also examined in Deborah
Campana, “A Chance Encounter: The Correspondence between John Cage and Pierre Boulez,
1949 –1954, ” in John Cage at Seventy-Five, ed. Richard Fleming and William Duckworth (Lewis-
burg, Pa.: Bucknell University Press, 1989), 209 –48.
46. Pierre Boulez, “Possibly ..., ” in Stocktakings of an Apprenticeship, trans. Stephen Walsh
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1991), 134, 135.
“IN ORDER TO THICKEN THE PLOT”
31
47. The charts and working materials for the Music of Changes are located in the David Tudor
Archive now housed at the Getty Center for the History of the Arts and Humanities in Los An-
geles. Most of the materials are contained in a hardbound notebook. Several of Cage ’s sound
charts appear as separate sheets.
48. Dominique Jameaux, Pierre Boulez, trans. Susan Bradshaw (Cambridge: Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 1991), 48.
49. See ibid., 269ff., for a useful discussion of the serial techniques in Structures Ia.
50. Ibid., 52.
51. Ibid., 51, 269.In the Music of Changes, Cage used eight charts containing sounds (and
silences), eight charts with durations, and eight charts with dynamics.
In addition, single charts were used to determine tempi and superposi-tions (the number of contrapuntal layers in each phrase). Several ofthese charts are reproduced in example 1.6.)
47Selections from the charts
were made through coin tosses according to the procedures in the I Ching.
In cases where Cage used eight charts, four were mobile and four im-mobile (or static) at any given point during the compositional process.When elements were selected from mobile charts, they were thereafterreplaced. Elements from immobile charts could be used again.
Boulez completed the ﬁrst (Ia)of his Structures for Two Pianos in 1951,
the same year in which Cage ﬁnished his Music of Changes.
48The two
composers’ letters during this period include an interesting exchangeconcerning the compositional methods employed in the two works.Boulez’ s letter to Cage dated August 1951 contains some of the working
materials used for Structures (ex. 1.7). Boulez’ s charts are strikingly sim-
ilar to those used by Cage. The matrices marked A and B can apply tointensity, attack, duration, and pitch. Thus, the permutations of orderpositions for his pitch series determine the reorderings of his series forintensity, attack, and duration.
49The ﬁrst movement, Structures Ia, is an
extremely deterministic work. Boulez was exploring the limits of totalserialism; as he explained, his concern was “to see how far one couldpursue the automaticism of musical relationships without allowing in-dividual choice to intervene other than on really basic levels of organi-zation. ”
50He was experimenting with an “expressive nadir, ” a pure and
objective musical style devoid of the composer’ s personality and intent.
To this end, Structures uses the series composed by Olivier Messiaen for
his Modes de valeurs et d’intensités (1950). In addition to reconciling the of-
ten ambivalent relationship with his former teacher, this strategy dimin-ished the element of choice from the very beginning of Boulez ’s compo-
sitional process.
51
Thus, in the early 1950s, Cage had strong ties with the ultramodernist
Darmstadt school. Like Boulez and Stockhausen, he was intently explor-ing composition based upon all aspects of musical sound. Ironically, al-though the ironclad determinism of total serialism seems diametrically
EXAMPLE 1.6
Music of Changes, sound chart 3, amplitude charts 3 and 4, and tempo chart, the David Tudor Papers,
1884–1998 (bulk 1940–1996), Getty Research Institute, Research Library, accession no. 980039.

“IN ORDER TO THICKEN THE PLOT”
33 EXAMPLE 1.6 continued
opposed to music based on chance, the mechanical “automaticism” 
of the former procedure appeared to all but eliminate the composer ’s
role just as did the latter. Despite the seemingly paradoxical congruence,Boulez had reservations concerning Cage’ s use of chance operations,
which culminated in 1957 with his well-known article entitled “Alea, ”
in which he denounced the overuse of chance in composition. Boulez at-tributed the overuse of chance to a weakness in compositional technique.He claimed that a composer working with chance “feels no responsibil-ity for his work, but out of unconfessed weakness and confusion and the
DAVID W. BERNSTEIN
34 EXAMPLE 1.6 continued
desire for temporary relief, simply throws himself into puerile mumbo-
jumbo. In other words, everything just happens as it will, without con-trol (an intentional but not meritorious omission, since there is no alter-native), 
BUTwithin a ﬁxed network of probabilities, since even chance
must have some sort of outcome. ”52Boulez was unwilling to allow for
what he referred to as “accidental chance. ” He believed that the whole-
sale adoption of such methods amounted to an abandonment of the cre-ative process. This characterization, however, does not apply to Cage’ s
music. Indeed, it is a persistent misunderstanding that his use of chanceoperations entails a lack of compositional control.
Cage composed the Music of Changes according to the phrase and sec-
52. Boulez, “Alea, ” in Stocktakings, 26. See also his letter to Cage dated December 1951. Nat-
tiez, The Boulez-Cage Correspondence, 112–13.
35 EXAMPLE 1.7
Working materials for Pierre Boulez, Structures Ia, Boulez to John Cage, August 1951, in The
Boulez-Cage Correspondence, ed. Jean-Jacques Nattiez (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1993), 100, 101. Reprinted with the permission of Cambridge University Press.

DAVID W. BERNSTEIN
36 tion lengths of a precompositionally determined rhythmic structure.53
Just as in the First Construction, the Music of Changes uses Cage’ s “square
root” system; there are 295⁄8sections, each 295⁄8measures long and di-
vided into phrases of 3, 5, 63⁄4, 63⁄4, 5, and 31⁄8measures. For each phrase
the tempo and the number of layers were determined by a single hexa-
gram.54If the phrase appeared at the beginning of a section of 295⁄8mea-
sures, the same hexagram would determine whether the odd-numberedor even-numbered duration, pitch, and dynamics charts were mobile orimmobile. He selected elements from these charts, composing one layerat a time until the phrase was ﬁlled. When the same pitch occurred si-multaneously in two different layers, a situation Cage called “interfer-ence, ” one of the pitches was omitted.
55That he was willing to make ad-
justments to the musical score after his coin tosses is an important point.There are many examples of his compositional intervention in the Mu-
sic of Changes. Its composition was not an entirely mechanical process;
when necessary, Cage shortened, lengthened, and segmented the dura-tion of his sounds according to his own musical judgment. He likewisemanipulated the dynamics and used pedaling to alter the results of hischance operations in order to yield what he thought were more musicalresults.
56
Cage’ s control was certainly operative before the score’ s realization;
the ﬁnal results were a function of the compositional system employed
in the Music of Changes.57This system ensured a varied contrapuntal tex-
ture, from single lines to dense polyphonic events. The nature of thematerials used in making the Music of Changes had an obvious effect
upon the end product. The duration charts consisted of rhythms builtincrementally from as small as a thirty-second of a beat to a whole noteand included sixteenths, eighths, and quarters as well as units based onthirds, ﬁfths, and sevenths (ex. 1.8). These guaranteed a level of rhyth-
mic complexity similar to that found in contemporaneous works byBoulez and others. Cage described the contents of his sound charts interms of single sounds and silences, intervals, aggregates (simultaneities
53. In his pathbreaking dissertation on the development of Cage ’s chance techniques in the
1950s, James Pritchett has reconstructed the step-by-step procedure through which Cage com-
posed the Music of Changes. See Pritchett, “The Development of Chance Techniques in the Music
of John Cage, 1950 –1956” (Ph.D. diss., New York University, 1988), 129ff. See also Pritchett, The
Music of John Cage (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1993), 78 –88.
54. Pritchett, “Development of Chance Techniques, ” 130.
55. Cage, “Composition: To Describe the Process of Composition Used in Music of Changes
and Imaginary Landscape No. 4, ” in Silence, 58.
56. Pritchett, “Development of Chance Techniques, ” 6ff., 151. See also Prichett, “Under-
standing John Cage’ s Chance Music: An Analytical Approach, ” in Fleming and Duckworth, John
Cage at Seventy-Five, 249–61.
57. Pritchett, “The Development of Chance Techniques, ” 6ff.; see also “Understanding John
Cage’ s Chance Music. ”
“IN ORDER TO THICKEN THE PLOT”
37
consisting of three or more notes), and constellations (more complex
rhythmic combinations).58The charts contain a wide variety of innova-
tive piano sounds such as clusters, harmonics, and “string-piano” tech-niques used by Cage and his mentor Henry Cowell. There are also sev-eral instances of sounds produced by slamming the keyboard lid andstriking the wood under the keyboard. These sounds as well as theEXAMPLE 1.8
Music of Changes, duration chart 6, the David Tudor Papers, 1884–1998 (bulk 1940–1996), Getty
Research Institute, Research Library, accession no. 980039.
58.“Composition: To Describe the Process of Composition Used in Music of Changes and
Imaginary Landscape No. 4, ” in Silence, 58.
work’ s many silences (each sound chart contains as many silences as
sounds) yield a distinctly Cagean style. The more traditional “pitched”
aggregates and constellations are largely dissonant combinations, whichgive the work a distinctive chromatic sound markedly different frommany of the often diatonic combinations in the gamuts for such worksas Cage’ s String Quartet in Four Parts (1949 –50). The high degree of chro-
maticism in the Music of Changes was also guaranteed by Cage’ s precom-
positional decision that the vertical and horizontal axes of his soundcharts must include all twelve tones of the chromatic scale.
59Note, for
instance, in the sound chart given in example 1.6 that the trichord inthe upper-left corner (C, A /flat, E, or pitch-class set 3 –12) is immediately
followed by its complement (C/sharp, F/sharp, G, A/sharp, B, D, E /flat, F, A, or pitch-class
set 9 –12). (Pitches could recur on the same axes, once Cage’ s dodeca-
phonic requirement was satisﬁed.)
In composing the Music of Changes, Cage sought a sort of perpetual
variation resulting from the continued renewal of his materials. Thiswas accomplished through chart “mobility. ” As noted above, when ele-
ments were selected from mobile charts they were replaced. This pro-cedure guaranteed a high degree of entropy; the relative absence of rep-etition in the Music of Changes contrasts with such works as Sixteen Dances
(1950 –51) or the String Quartet in Four Parts. When repetitions do occur
they are very striking. For example, the repeating occurrences of theconstellation (a) that begins the fourth movement and the reoccur-ring glissandi (b) played with the ﬁngernail inside the piano (ex. 1.9) as-sume a certain motivic signi ﬁcance, which results from Cage’ s precom-
positional plan. The Music of Changes was thus as much a product of the
composer’ s intentions and precompositional decisions as of his chance
operations.
In short, despite their obvious stylistic differences, Cage’ s Two Pieces,
First Construction, and Music of Changes show similarities in compositional
technique. Each work employs an elaborate precompositional plan laidout in a series of charts or sketches. In addition, the realization of thescore was in each case a somewhat mechanical process. Cage’ s precom-
positional work is where the actual composing took place. This approachcharacterizes almost all of Cage’ s oeuvre, right through his last pieces,
as is vividly illustrated in Henning Lohner ’s essay on Cage’ s ﬁlm One
11
(chap. 13). Cage learned from Schoenberg that a composer should al-ways have the end in view and understand the developmental possibil-ities inherent in a work’ s motives and themes. From early on in his ca-
reer, he continually reﬁned this ability to understand the potential of hisDAVID W. BERNSTEIN
38
59. Ibid., 26.
39 EXAMPLE 1.9
Music of Changes, measures 1, 15, 42, 17, and 97, Edition Peters (Henmar Press, 1961).

compositional strategies. Cage maintained this tie to the past, concur-
rent with his use of chance. Thus, the opposition of chance and designinvoked during comparisons of postmodernist and modernist aestheticsis a false dichotomy for Cage, since both operate freely within the samemusical context.
Such observations should not lead us to ignore the revolutionary as-
pects of Cage’ s work. His commitment, for example, to letting “sounds
be themselves” resulted in a radically new form of musical continuitydevoid of intentional relationships between sounds other than their co-existence in musical space and time. As Cage explained in an essay de-scribing the compositional process in his Music of Changes and Imaginary
Landscape No. 4: “It is thus possible to make a musical composition the
continuity of which is free of individual taste and memory (psychology)and also of the literature and ‘traditions’ of art. The sounds enter thetime-space centered within themselves, unimpeded by service to anyabstraction, their 360 degrees of circumference free for an inﬁnite playof interpenetration. ”
60Cage’ s redeﬁnition of form entailed a rejection of
an organicist assumption that a musical work should be a uni ﬁed whole,
an aesthetic criterion that had been as relevant for composers during thenineteenth century as it was for the high modernist composers who ex-plored the limits of integral serialism during the 1950s. Cage’ s concept
of musical form was revolutionary. But the radical results of his com-positional processes were achieved through more conventional means,namely, through modernist precision, with its systematic attention todetail and control of the materials used in composition. When consid-ering Cage’ s compositional methods, one ﬁnds that the postmodern and
the modern coexist without contradiction. The same is true of Cage’ s
political and social agenda. Through his redeﬁnition of musical formCage created works modeling desirable political and social structures.He was able to renew the modernist project dedicated to political and so-cial change through art using postmodernist artistic techniques. As weassess Cage’ s role within the development of twentieth-century thought
and musical style and intensify the critical evaluation of his creative out-put, it is crucial that we consider both the traditional and the radical as-pects of his aesthetics and compositional style. This formidable task mayvery well occupy scholars for many years to come.DAVID W. BERNSTEIN
40
60. Ibid., 59.
TWO
Jonathan D. Katz
John Cage’ s Queer Silence; or, 
How to Avoid Making Matters Worse
To know of some is good; 
but for the rest, silence is to be praised.
—Ser Brunetto Latini, 
speaking of his fellowsodomites to Dante in the InfernoJohn Cage never did quite come out of the
closet. Nonetheless, nearly everybody in theart world who knew him knew of his life-long relationship with Merce Cunningham,and some even knew about the other men in his life. His sexuality was an open secretwithin the avant-garde, and as his famespread, so too did knowledge of his personallife. Still, direct public acknowledgment ofCage’ s sexuality has been, until quite re-
cently, hard to ﬁnd; consigned to the realmof gossip, it has been understood as tangen-tial to his historical importance and achieve-ments. Cage himself, while never denyinghis sexuality, preferred to duck the question.When asked to characterize his relationshipwith Cunningham, he would say, “I cook,and Merce does the dishes. ’”
1As I hope to
41Although originally written for this book, this essay ﬁrst
appeared in the Gay and Lesbian Quarterly 5, no. 2 (1999):
231–52. I would like to thank Moira Roth, without whom
this essay could not have been written, and Kevin Schaubfor his love and patience while it was being ﬁnished.
1. Interview with Remy Charlip, San Francisco,
April 24, 1996. The most signiﬁcant historical account ofCage’ s gay life, based on two remarkably candid interviews
with him, is Thomas Hines, “Then Not Yet ‘Cage’: The LosAngeles Years, 1912 –1938, ” inJohn Cage: Composed in Amer-
show in this essay, such avoidance was not only coy but constituted a
form of active resistance within the homophobic culture of postwarAmerica.
I. Gay Life
Cage ﬁrst met Cunningham at the Cornish School in Seattle in 1938 af-
ter taking a job as piano accompanist for the dance classes. In a rare per-sonal revelation, Cage once remarked that he and his wife, Xenia, hadan open marriage and that both were attracted to the teenage Cun-ningham. Cage stated that during their ménage à trois he realized he
“was more attracted to Cunningham than to Xenia. ”
2The two men
moved to New York, without Xenia, in 1942 and there undertook theirﬁrst collaboration, Credo in Us. Its title is the ﬁrst acknowledgment of the
personal and professional partnership that animated so much of theirsubsequent work. Although they had been involved with one anotherfor nearly four years, Credo in Us, born of their new independent life to-
gether, marked the public emergence of the relationship as muse.
Tellingly, the music Cage composed prior to his acquaintance with
Cunningham was given largely straightforward descriptive titles —So-
nata for Two Voices (1933), Solo for Clarinet (1933), Five Songs for Contralto
(1938), Music for Wind Instruments (1938), for example. That this ﬁrst
joint project should unabashedly express their partnership in such ro-mantic terms seems, in retrospect, remarkable. Yet the titles of many ofthe compositions Cage wrote between his move with Cunningham toNew York and his ﬁnal separation from Xenia (1942 –46) reﬂect —in a
distinctly allegorical, even expressive way —on his involvement with
the dancer: Credo in Us (1942), Amores (1943), Tossed as It Is Untroubled
(1943), Root of an Unfocus (1944), Perilous Night (1944), A Valentine Out 
of Season (1944), Mysterious Adventure (1945). Of the evocatively titled
Amores, Cage admitted that its thematic “concerned the quietness be-
tween lovers. ” It was “an attempt to express in combination the erotic
and the tranquil, two of the permanent emotions of Indian tradition. ”
3JONATHAN D. KATZ
42
ica,ed. Marjorie Perloff and Charles Junkerman (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994), 65 –
99. By contrast, as late as 1988 an Architectural Digest spread on Cage and Cunningham showed
them in a photograph together in the apartment they shared but referred to them only as “life-
long friends” (John Gruen, “ Architectural Digest Visits John Cage and Merce Cunningham, ” Ar-
chitectural Digest, November 1988, 198 –201). Caroline A. Jones provides an excellent analysis of
Cage’ s silence as a means of opposing the abstract expressionist ego in “Finishing School: John
Cage and the Abstract Expressionist Ego, ” Critical Inquiry 19 (summer 1993): 643 –47.
2. Hines, “Then Not Yet ‘Cage, ’” 99 n. 60. Hines kindly let me hear parts of the tape record-
ing of the interview and gave me the entire unpublished transcript. Despite Richard Kostelanetz ’s
rather scurrilous charges as to its genuineness, I can testify to the authenticity of both tape and
transcript.
3.“A Composer’ s Confessions, ” in John Cage, Writer: Previously Uncollected Pieces, ed. Richard
Kostelanetz (New York: Limelight, 1993), 40, 9.
That many of these later, “expressively” titled pieces were written, more-
over, to correspond with Cunningham’ s dances only reinforces the point.
But between Amores and, a year later, Perilous Night there is a change
in mood, as if the volubility of the early works produced in association
with Cunningham could not be sustained. Cage found it dif ﬁcult to com-
municate his feelings in Perilous Night and thus began to question the
very possibility of a traditionally expressive music: “I had poured a greatdeal of emotion into the piece, and obviously I wasn ’t communicat-
ing this at all. Or else, I thought, if I were communicating, then all art-ists must be speaking a different language, and thus speaking only forthemselves. The whole musical situation struck me more and more as aTower of Babel. ”
4
What emotions or feelings was Cage struggling to give form to in Per-
ilous Night? Uncharacteristically speaking in the impersonal, Cage hinted
at their nature: “the loneliness and terror that comes to one when lovebecomes unhappy. ” Derived, as he later explained it, from an Irish folk-
tale, “the music tells a story of the dangers of the erotic life and describes
the misery of ‘something that was together that is split apart. ’” The year
after Perilous Night was ﬁnished, Cage of ﬁcially concluded his separation
from Xenia. It was an especially painful and bitter moment; after inter-viewing Cage, one scholar reports, “Earlier he found it dif ﬁcult to com-
municate with Xenia and . . . their later relationship had not been par-ticularly friendly. ”
5
Cage had had long-term homosexual relationships prior to his mar-
riage, including one with a man named either Don or Allen Sample,with whom he was involved when he met his future wife. Cage andSample enjoyed relationships with other men as well. Cage recalled that“contact with the rest of the [gay] society was through [cruising in] theparks. For me it was Santa Monica along the Palisades. ”
6No less a ﬁgure
than Harry Hay, the founding voice of the modern gay and lesbian rightsmovement, befriended Cage and helped him prepare a course on mod-ern music that he gave to housewives in the mid-thirties.
7Hay even sang
several of Cage’ s compositions publicly; indeed, he was the ﬁrst personJOHN CAGE’S QUEER SILENCE
43
4.For the Birds: John Cage, in Conversation with Daniel Charles (Boston: Marion Boyars, 
1981), 148.
5.“A Composer’ s Confessions, ” 40; Richard Francis, introduction to Dancers on a Plane: 
Cage, Cunningham, Johns (London: Anthony d ’Offay Gallery, 1989), 26; Hines, “Then Not Yet
‘Cage, ’”99.
6. Hines, “Then Not Yet ‘Cage, ’” 84. In an interview with Joan Retallack in October 1991,
Cage refers to his former partner as Allen Sample, but Hines, interviewing Cage in May 1992,
calls him Don Sample. See Musicage: Cage Muses on Words, Art, Music, ed. Joan Retallack (Hanover,
N.H.: Wesleyan University Press, University Press of New England, 1996), 86; and Hines, “Then
Not Yet ‘Cage, ’” 84–85.
7. See Stuart Timmons, The Trouble with Harry Hay: Founder of the Modern Gay Movement (Bos-
ton: Alyson, 1990), 40, 56 –59, 72, 75, 85.
JONATHAN D. KATZ
44
8. Quoted in Hines, “Then Not Yet ‘Cage, ’” 92. On a long car trip across America, Johnson
repeatedly called Cage in an effort to keep the relationship alive. See Franz Schulze, Philip John-
son: Life and Work (New York: Knopf, 1994), 97, 112.
9. Hines, “Then Not Yet ‘Cage, ’” 86, and Kostelanetz, John Cage, Writer, 239.
10. For the Birds, 116; John Cage, interview by Paul Cummings, New York City, May 2, 1974
(transcript housed in the Archives of American Art, National Museum of American Art, Smith-sonian Institution, Washington, D.C.), 36.to do so. In 1933 –34 Cage lived in New York and, through Virgil Thom-
son, met and became involved with the architect Philip Johnson; their
relationship apparently ended in part because of differences in socio-economic standing. Johnson recalled, “With his talent and good looks,everyone in Virgil’ s circle was wild about Cage. ”
8
Xenia knew about Cage’ s past and accepted it. Cage remarked, “Id i d n ’t
conceal anything so that even though the marriage didn ’t work any bet-
ter than it did, there wasn ’t anyone to blame. ” Yet the failure of the mar-
riage came to have an unexpected corollary effect, for it troubled his cre-ative life as well. Cage has acknowledged that during this period “I was
disturbed both in my private life and in my public life as a composer. ”
9
In Perilous Night he seems, paradoxically, to have discovered the impos-
sibility of communication only while working to express some very spe-ciﬁc, highly charged emotions, and his subsequent abandonment of an
expressive musicality was thus intimately interwoven with the changesin his private life that followed the start of his relationship with Cun-ningham. If Perilous Night maps the culmination of the dissolution of
Cage’ s marriage, then its theme of unhappy love is of the heterosexual
and marital variety, the result of his return to a fully homosexual exis-tence after his failed attempt at normative heterosexuality.
Cage more than once remarked that he turned ﬁrst to psychoanaly-
sis and then to Zen in response to what he termed these “disturbances”in his personal and creative life. Indeed, his ﬁrst visit to a therapist andhis subsequent involvement in Zen came almost immediately after he had separated from Xenia. As he ﬂippantly put it: “Do you know 
the story of my relationship to psychoanalysis? It’ s short. It must have
been around 1945. I was disturbed. Some friends advised me to see ananalyst. ” But psychoanalysis did not suit him, and “so through circum-
stances, I substituted the study of Oriental thought ” for it.
10
Cage clearly associates this newfound curiosity about Zen —and his
abandonment of psychoanalysis —with the “personal problems” atten-
dant on his new life with Cunningham: “Well, if you had a disturbance
both about your work and about your daily life, what are you going todo? . . . None of the doctors can help you, our society can ’t help you, and
education doesn ’t help us. It’ s singularly lacking in any such instruction.
Furthermore, our religion doesn ’t help us. . . . There isn ’t much help for
JOHN CAGE’S QUEER SILENCE
45
11. Interview by Cummings, 37.
12. For the Birds, 94. Cage’ s chronology of his studies with Suzuki is problematic, since the
latter arrived in New York during the summer of 1950. See David W. Patterson, “ Appraising the
Catchwords, c. 1942 –1959: Cage’ s Asian-Derived Rhetoric and the Historical Reference of Black
Mountain College” (Ph.D. diss., Columbia University, 1996), 141ff.
13. For the Birds, 56.someone who is in trouble in our society. I had eliminated psychiatry as
a possibility. You have Oriental thought, you have mythology. ”11Seek-
ing resolution to “disturbances” in his work and his life in the dominant,
authoritative Western traditions —medicine, education, religion —Cage
found nothing that was useful. Given the centrality of homophobia toeach of these traditions at the time (the American Psychological Asso-ciation did not remove homosexuality from its list of pathologies until1973), this is hardly surprising. His turn toward the East, then, was in parta response to a personal need unmet by orthodox Western traditions.
Cage later was to characterize his state of mind at the time as one of
desperation. He was separating from his wife; he was embracing his relationship with Cunningham and, concomitantly, his identity as a so-cially marginal gay man; and during these experiences he was comingto the conclusion that communication in art, the hallmark of an expres-sive musicality, was not possible. He began to attend the now famouslectures on Zen Buddhism offered by Daisetz T. Suzuki at Columbia Uni-versity. These lectures seemed to solve both his personal and his artisticproblems: “It was after 1945, between 1946 and 1947 I suppose, that I
began to become seriously interested in the Orient. After studying Ori-ental thought as a whole, I took Suzuki ’s course for three years, up un-
til 1951. ”
12
In essence, Zen repositioned the closet, not as a source of repres-
sion or anxiety, but as a means to achieve healing; it was in not talkingabout —and hence not reifying —one’s troubles that healing began.
Thus, what made Zen so attractive to Cage, perhaps, was its unhingingof the connection between problems and passions. It gave him a way tonegotiate trauma by acknowledging the pain and then moving beyondor through it. This is not to say that problems are to be ignored or pas-sions smothered, but neither are they to become obsessively rehearsed.In this Eastern tradition, the expression or articulation of trauma, so cen-tral to Western notions of healing (from Christian confession to Freud-ian talking cures), is devalued. One can hear just this Zen note in Cage’ s
remarks many years later: “You can feel an emotion; just don ’t think
that it’ s so important. . . . Take it in a way that you can then let it drop!
Don’t belabor it! . . . And if we keep emotions and reinforce them, they
can produce a critical situation in the world. Precisely that situation inwhich all of society is now entrapped!”
13
JONATHAN D. KATZ
46
14. There remains much work to be done on the relationship between homosexuality 
and a Westerner’ s embrace of Zen. A great many inﬂuential queer artists, from Lou Harrison to
Agnes Martin to Allen Ginsberg, drew from Zen during this pre-Stonewall era.
15. For the Birds, 201.
16. See Amelia Jones’ s excellent book Post-Modernism and the En-Gendering of Marcel Duchamp
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994).Weaving seamlessly from an individual to a communal perspective,
Zen Buddhism, as it could be garnered from Suzuki (who, Cage makes
clear, did not “teach” in the Western sense), became the means by which
Cage aligned the perceived social necessity of the closet with what wouldbecome an individual —and ultimately global —liberationist perspective.
Paradoxically, at least from a Western perspective, not talking aboutfeelings would eventually yield a society free of the invidious excessesof emotion enacted on the social plane: hatred and oppression. ThroughZen, Cage could connect his involuntary, highly individuated experienceof the closet with a larger social-ethical politics of monadic noninterfer-ence.
14Through such psychic sleight of hand, social necessity was trans-
formed into moral virtue.
Thus Zen provided a theoretically attractive and emotionally satisfying
resolution to the problematics of communication enforced by the closet.The Zen-inspired call to attentiveness to the present, coupled with itstransparency to doctrinal or dogmatic claims, led Cage out of the swampof his problems and toward a new relationship with his “disturbances. ”
He called this new attitude “nobility”: “To be ‘noble’ is to be detached,
at every instant, from the fact of loving and hating. Many Zen stories il-lustrate that nobility. ”
15Cage had undergone a remarkable alchemy: his
anxiety and pain had metamorphosed into detachment, which was bothmorally superior and actively therapeutic. Through his early Zen in-volvement, then, he ﬁrst theorized a system in which detachment para-
doxically yielded engagement, stemming not from an ideological pre-conception or program, however, but from simple attentiveness to theworld. This detached engagement —what Cage often called, simply, “lis-
tening”— served as a precursor to his detachment from political doc-
trines and engendered his explicitly anarchist convictions.
Clearly, Cage had been driven to Zen by a complex set of needs, some
born of his new gay life. Widely taken to lie at the core of his aesthetic,Zen detachment is now routinely invoked as an originary moment inthe development of postmodernism in the arts: an instantiation of anonexpressive authorial voice, an early indication of the “death of theauthor. ”
16To pursue the authorial origins of a postmodernist precept
that takes meaning making from authors and places it squarely in thehands of the audience may seem a paradoxical, even contradictory, task.Yet meaning as a historical artifact connected to authors (their lives and
JOHN CAGE’S QUEER SILENCE
47
17. Thomson even tried Cage out as a music reviewer for the New York Herald Tribune, but
he found him both too idiosyncratic as a writer and too unreliable about deadlines. See Anthony
Tommasini, Virgil Thomson: Composer on the Aisle (New York: Norton, 1997), 368.
18. For the Birds, 85–86.
19.“Diary: How to Improve the World (You Will Only Make Matters Worse) Continued
1970 –71,” in M: Writings, ’67 –’72 (Middletown, Conn.: Wesleyan University Press, 1973), 106.contexts), as opposed to authorial functions or projections of readerly
desire, was authorized by Cage himself —tellingly —with regard to an-
other closeted gay composer and critic with whom he was once friendly.
In response to a request by Virgil Thomson, Cage spent ten years 
attempting a biography of the composer and critic that was acceptableto its subject.
17Cage found that he simply could not analyze the mean-
ing of Thomson ’s oeuvre apart from the life of its creator. Unfortunately,
Thomson wanted him to do precisely this, and as a result the biographyproved to be not only a source of immense dif ﬁculty in Cage’ s life but
also the end of his friendship with the composer. Despite his own insis-tent antiexpressionism and authorial silence, Cage did not believe inThomson ’s segregation of life and work: “In the ﬁrst chapter, I began by
dealing with both the life and the work of Virgil Thomson. In fact, I ﬁg-
ured that there was no way in this case to separate one from the other.That was what had not pleased him. . . . Once I completed my text, thedifﬁculty arose: he had to ﬁnd a reader to edit my work —to ﬁlter out
everything that had to do with his life, and only leave in print whateverdealt with the works themselves and their analyses. ”
18
Finding that Cage advocated such a situated, even biographical, ap-
proach to music criticism is perhaps a surprising, albeit happy, anteced-ent for my own analysis of the social dynamics of his silences. But it is not dif ﬁcult to reconcile Cage’ s infamous antiexpressionism with his
form of situated, social-historical inquiry, for there is a substantial dif-ference between saying that the work is not about the life (antiexpres-sionism) and saying that the life has nothing to do with the work. Thereare, after all, modes of revelation of self that have nothing to do with ex-pressionism. One of the points of silence, Cage was fond of remindinghis audiences, was to give life itself a more ample hearing: “Sometimeswe blur the distinction between art and life; sometimes we try to clarifyit. We don ’t stand on one leg. We stand on both. ”
19
Indeed, it is only from such a symmetrical, two-legged stance that we
can see how the development of Cage’ s antiexpressive aesthetic corre-
lates with the wholesale changes in his personal life. Repeatedly, his ref-erencing of “disturbances” slips so easily between the spheres of his cre-ative work and his daily existence as to “blur the distinction between art
and life. ” Cage has remarked: “I saw that all the composers were writ-
ing in different ways, that almost no one among them, no one among
JONATHAN D. KATZ
48
20. Interview by Cummings, 36.
21. Philip Brett has argued that music itself constitutes a closet, in which musicians are free
to engage in the most public displays of emotion in exchange for not articulating those emotions
verbally (“Musicality, Essentialism, and the Closet, ” in Queering the Pitch: The New Gay and Lesbian
Musicology, ed. Philip Brett, Elizabeth Wood, and Gary C. Thomas [New York: Routledge, 1994],
9–26).the listeners could understand what I was doing in the way that I un-
derstood it. So that anything like communication was not possible. I de-termined to ﬁnd other reasons [for composing], and I found those rea-sons because of my personal problems at the time, which brought aboutthe divorce from Xenia. ”
20Personal trauma proved artistically fecund.
In understanding himself as homosexual, Cage came to accept as a
corollary a new creed as well: an injunction against self-expression indaily life. His newly embraced gay life —in the context of cold war ho-
mophobic culture —made it clear in a very personal way that “anything
like communication was not possible. ” This is not to say that the closet
alone motivated Cage’ s deepening involvement with Zen and his con-
comitant turn toward an antiexpressive art, nor is it to con ﬁne his pow-
erfully felt theoretical investments to a species of identity politics. Yetthrough Zen, Cage found a means to quiet what had once been so dis-turbing, to transmute trauma into peace. Indeed, in crediting his embraceof Zen to the “personal problems” that had brought about his divorcefrom Xenia, Cage himself relocated the origins of his Zen sensibility fromtheoretical to autobiographical grounds.
The developing relationship with Cunningham thus pointed toward a
new musical voice not tied to the desire for communication. That voice,Cage shortly concluded, was most at home in the de ﬁnitionally noble
(i.e., detached) aleatoric mode, which achieved its most crystalline form,for four minutes, thirty-three seconds, in the embrace of silence.
II. Silent Lives
A new generation of scholars has tried to break through Cage’ s silence
by describing his reticence with regard to his sexuality as coy and ascrib-ing it to his membership in the pre-Stonewall, preliberationist genera-tion of gay men. As to why a person of Cage ’s unconventional lifestyle,
disdain for public opinion, and anarchist leanings would uphold thehighly restrictive social compact of the closet, one longtime acquain-tance (who wishes to remain anonymous) has remarked, “Well, he’ s a
ﬁfties queen, you know. ” Surely according to our contemporary model-
ing of gay and lesbian identity, which holds being out of the closet asperhaps the central measure of freedom and psychic health, Cage was aﬁfties queen; his conspicuous silence regarding his sexuality is an indexof a time thankfully receding into the past.
21
JOHN CAGE’S QUEER SILENCE
49
22. Caroline A. Jones correlates Cage’ s silence to a refusal of the rapacious abstract expres-
sionist ego (“Finishing School, ” 643 –47).
23. R. Wood Massi, “Morton Feldman, John Cage, and Who” (interview, San Francisco,
March 3, 1987 ), 9; Richard Kostelanetz, Conversing with Cage (New York: Limelight, 1988), 177.
24. As Feldman recalls: “Cunningham and Cage did not associate with [all] homosexuals.
They associated with homosexuals like Obey, landed-gentry types. John Ashbery, the young 
poets, Frank [O’Hara], they cruised around. If I went to a party at Frank’ s, I could have straight
friends, or tough Jewish intellectuals like me, Norman Bluhm, Michael Goldberg. He wouldhave all these. . . . And then the party will be, for example, Genet . . . Atmosphere” (Massi,“Morton Feldman, John Cage, ” 9).
25. Massi, “Morton Feldman, John Cage, ” 4.That Cage’ s increasingly unexpressive mien was at least partly strate-
gic is clear from the composer Morton Feldman ’s account of the culture
in which Cage traveled throughout the 1940s: the macho, often homo-
phobic community of abstract expressionism.22Feldman, a friend of his,
underscored the degree to which Cage’ s unexpressiveness may have
done double duty as a shield. As if fearful of violating a con ﬁdence, Feld-
man once told an interviewer, “I don ’t want to exaggerate this point, be-
cause John was very sensitive to it. I remember there was a little gath-ering in a Chinese restaurant, and Jackson Pollock was taunting John. ”
For his part, Cage has remarked of Pollock: “I . . . tried to avoid him. I did this because he was generally so drunk, and he was actually an unpleasant person for me to encounter. I remember seeing him on the same side of the street I was, and I would always cross over to theother side. ”
23
The audience for avant-garde music was notably small, and the ab-
stract expressionist painters, as the chief advocates of an experimental,self-critical art in the postwar American context, became Cage’ s friends
and allies.
24For a closeted gay man, however, not only was the abstract
expressionist premium on self-expression anathema, but so was its too-anxious rehearsal of a performative machismo. The abstract expression-ist agreement with dominant cultural attitudes regarding sexuality andgender —including the general assumption of masculine privilege prem-
ised in part on the exclusion of women and gay men —made the paint-
ers’ alliance with Cage tenuous. Feldman, who was not gay, perceivedjust such a homophobic bias in the abstract expressionist painter RobertMotherwell’ s relationship to Cage, even though the composer had been
his coeditor for Possibilities: “I became quite close to Motherwell. I think
that they may have had some kind of intellectual or artistic falling out.John never talked about Motherwell. . . . Although everybody caredgreatly for him [Cage], and they weren ’t overly critical, I would say there
was a homosexual bias . . . not only against him, but against the youngerpeople who began to associate with him: Rauschenberg, and Jasper[Johns], and Cy Twombly. I would say there was a homosexual bias. ”
25
JONATHAN D. KATZ
50
26. Silence: Lectures and Writings (Middletown, Conn.: Wesleyan University Press, 1961), 109.
27. Ibid., 109, 111, 110.To be homosexual in a homophobic culture was to forcefully realize
that conversation was not always about expression, that it might be
about the opposite: dissimulation, camouﬂage, hiding. But is there an-other frame through which to assess Cage’ s conspicuous silence? For if
his silence was an attempt to escape notice —as the silence of the closet
presumably is —it was a manifest failure. Cage became notable precisely
for his silences —clear proof of the unsuitability of silence as a strategy
of evasion. Closeted people seek to ape dominant discursive forms, toparticipate as seamlessly as possible in hegemonic constructions. Theydo not, at least in my experience, draw attention to themselves withperformative silence, as Cage did when he stood before the fervent ab-stract expressionist crowd and blasphemed, “I have nothing to say andI’m saying it. ”
26If silence was in part an expression of Cage ’s identity as
a closeted homosexual during the cold war, it was also much more. Itwas not only a symptom of oppression but also a chosen mode of resis-tance. This silence was not the passive stratagem of someone unwillingand unable to declare his identity in a hostile culture. On the contrary,in contrast to the codes of the closet, if the point of Cage ’s silence was to
escape notice, its effect was surely the opposite.
III. On Nothing
In his infamous “Lecture on Nothing, ” delivered at the Artists’ Club 
in New York City (c. 1949), Cage denigrated the authorial “I” in favor of the spectatorial “you, ” emblematizing the too-perfect symmetry 
between his vaunted musical silences and the less noted silences of hiscloset. Announcing at the very beginning that “I am here / and there is nothing to say, ” Cage went on to declare, “Nothing more than / noth-
ing / can be said. ” Comparing the lecture to an empty glass of milk, he
asserted, “Or again / it is like an / empty glass / into which / at any mo-
ment / anything may be poured. ”
27The “Lecture on Nothing” is a veri-
table essay in detachment. Whereas ﬁve years earlier Cage had “poureda great deal of emotion ” into compositions like Perilous Night, now he
found a Zen peace in limitation, creating works like empty glasses —ex-
plicit inducements to the listener to pour into them anything desired.Similarly, by the early ﬁfties, his music had become less an expression of his ideas or tastes and more a product of aleatoric compositional pro-cesses in which “meanings, ”if there were any, were clearly chance prod-
ucts of the listener’ s cognition. Indeed, the Concerto for Prepared Piano and
Chamber Orchestra, begun in 1950 and ﬁnished in early 1951, thematized
Cage’ s developing distinction between aleatory and expressive modes: “I
JOHN CAGE’S QUEER SILENCE
51
28. For the Birds, 41. For an excellent discussion of the Concerto for Prepared Piano and Cham-
ber Orchestra, see James Pritchett, The Music of John Cage (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1993), 62 –66.
29. Music of John Cage, 71.
30. Hines, “Then Not Yet ‘Cage, ’” 77–78.
31. For the Birds, 148.made it into a drama between the piano, which remains romantic, ex-
pressive and the orchestra, which itself follows the principles of Orien-tal philosophy. And the third movement signiﬁes the coming togetherof things which were opposed to one another in the ﬁrst movement. ”
28
The agent of that “coming together of things which were opposed”
was silence. The musicologist James Pritchett explains: “What makesthe third movement sound so different from the others is Cage ’s arrival
at the single most important discovery of the concerto: the interchange-ability of sound and silence. ”
29With the recognition that silence is co-
terminous with sound —in that a silence exists as the ground from
which sound springs and to which it ultimately returns —Cage ﬁnally
developed a compositional strategy that favored coexistence ahead ofopposition. Silence preceded and exceeded sound and by so doing dis-solved the binarism of sound-silence into a form of continuity. Throughsilence, the domination of one term over another simply dampened intoquiescence.
One point of silence, then, is to dissolve the oppositional by freely 
allowing other voices to be heard. As early as 1928, while still in highschool, Cage won the Southern California Oratorical Contest with aspeech called “Other People Think, ” in which he proposed “silence on
the part of the United States, in order that we could hear what otherpeople think, and that they don ’t think the way we do, particularly
about us. ”
30Many years later, Cage clariﬁed his vision of an ideal soci-
ety by reference to the notion of conversation: “[The members of thissociety] would not communicate, but they would talk, they would carryon dialogues. I much prefer this notion of dialogue, of conversation, tothe notion of communication. Communication presupposes that onehas something, an object, to be communicated. . . . Communicating isalways imposing something: a discourse on objects, a truth, a feeling.While in conversation, nothing imposes itself. ”
31
Thus communication, which is a form of expression, burdens the lis-
tener. It is an attempt to sway, to impose a discourse. In substituting“conversation ” for “communication, ” Cage sought to replace a desire for
mastery or control with the open-ended free play of ideas. Indeed, inthe “Lecture on Nothing” he described a radical detachment from ideas:
“As we go along / (who knows) / an i-dea [sic] may occur in this / talk.
I have no idea / whether one will / or not. / If one does / let it. Re / gard
JONATHAN D. KATZ
52
32. Cage, Silence, 110.
33. Gordana P. Crnkovic ´, “Utopian America and the Language of Silence,” in John Cage, ed.
Perloff and Junkerman, 167 –87; Daniel Herwitz, “John Cage’ s Approach to the Global” in ibid.,
190. As a gay white man, Cage felt himself subordinated under one set of discourses (hetero-
sexist) but generally could elect to be interpellated under another as equal or even dominant(white male artist/intellectual)— so long as he remained in the closet. This situation is what
Chantal Mouffe terms, in another context, “contradictory interpellation, ” or an experience of
the self in a contradictory manner, as both inside and outside dominant culture (“Hegemonyand New Political Subjects: Towards a New Concept of Democracy, ” in Marxism and the Interpre-
tation of Culture, ed. Cary Nelson and Lawrence Grossberg [Urbana: University of Illinois Press,
1988, 89 –104]). To be at once inside and outside the structures of domination is a rare and
highly revealing subject position, for oppression is most comprehensively understood from theposition, or pose, of the dominant. Mouffe argues that this contradictory self-understandingsows the seeds for the deconstruction and challenging of domination, for it reveals the verystrategies necessary to the maintenance of the power of the dominant. Since the fact of subor-dination itself need not produce a challenge or even, for that matter, an antagonism, Mouffe ar-gues that it is this contradictory self-understanding that provides the tools, and the motive, fora destructuring critique. The margins can generate precise anatomies of domination when al-lowed an insider’ s point of view. See also Earl Jackson ’s systematic development of the implica-
tions of this idea in Strategies of Deviance: Studies in Gay Male Representation (Bloomington: Indiana
University Press, 1995), 17 –52.
34. For the Birds, 111; Cage’ s interpolation.it as something / seen / momentarily, / as / though / from a window /
while traveling. ”32
Elevating conversation above communication entailed refusing what
Gordana P. Crnkovic ´has termed the vertical or hierarchical organization
of discourse in favor of the horizontal, and Daniel Herwitz has written:“Cage symbolically aims to halt the march of language, meaning, andhuman control. ” This analysis of communication as riddled by power
dynamics is, of course, the particular insight of the subordinated sub-ject, and as a gay man, Cage was certainly familiar with the often pain-ful impositions of a hostile discourse over his own.
33
Now replaced by a policy of noninterference, meaning was for Cage
freed from any dependence on such a logos, for it was logos, after all,that had marked him as disturbed, marginal, and unworthy in the ﬁrstplace. Discriminations of meaning or value were, Cage argues, inher-ently discriminatory: “I hold a great deal against this system of organi-
zation, that is, [the separation of things which should not be separated].We categorize everyone. . . . What is a government? That which main-tains these divisions. In other words, our body is divided against itself.Just about everywhere anybody has tried to organize, that is to articulate
that body, it doesn ’t work; we are not dealing with a healthy organism. ”
34
Hence freedom from meaning was also freedom from domination,
deﬁnition, and control in a very real-world sense. After all, to be a sub-ordinated subject is to be deﬁned by power. To articulate the social body,and one’ s place or investments in it, was thus to divide that body against
itself. In silence, there was instead a wholeness, a process of healing: theinterplay between life and art worked both ways. It is just this sense 
JOHN CAGE’S QUEER SILENCE
53
35. Quoted in Martin Duberman, Black Mountain: An Exploration in Community (New York:
Dutton, 1972), 229.
36. As Hines makes clear, however, Cage’ s interest in the politics of silence can be traced
much further back (“Then Not Yet ‘Cage, ’” 77–78). Compare this with the circa 1949 “Lecture
on Nothing” (Silence, 109–27).
37. For the Birds, 103.
38. For a related account of resistance among the visual artists in Cage ’s circle, see my “Pas-
sive Resistance: On the Critical and Commercial Success of Queer Artists in Cold War American
Art,” L’Image, no. 3 (1996): 119 –42. Cage’ s often-stated defense of what had once been thoughtof seamless personal and creative existence that is underscored in Cage’ s
assertion that “there’ s a slight difference between Rauschenberg and
me. . . . I have the desire to just erase the difference between art and life,
whereas Rauschenberg made that famous statement about working inthe gap between the two. Which is a little Roman Catholic from mypoint of view. . . . Well he makes a mystery out of being an artist. ”
35
For Cage, there is no mystery in being an artist: art cannot be segre-gated from the rest of existence —a “noble, ” hence liberatory art and a
“noble, ” hence liberatory life are one.
The “Lecture on Nothing” exempliﬁed Cage’ s new approach to the
problem of communication or expression, especially in the policed coldwar cultural context.
36The lecture was, in Cage’ s sense of the term, a
conversation, not a communication. He offered the abstract expression-ists an empty glass and left them to ﬁll it. He neither endorsed an expres-
sionist practice nor conveyed his opposition to one. Instead, his routelay in the direction of silence.
IV. Silent Music, Silent Politics
INTERVIEWER : In your Eastern itinerary, ﬁrst there was India, then the 
Far East.
CAGE: Yes, you could conclude an evolution of that kind from my
works. . . . It sometimes seemed to me that I manage to “say” something
in them. When I discovered India, what I was saying started to change.And when I discovered China and Japan, I changed the very fact of say-ing anything: I said nothing anymore. Silence: since everything alreadycommunicates, why wish to communicate?
37
In the remainder of this essay, I will attempt to recuperate silence as 
a means of a historically speciﬁc queer resistance during the cold war.Silence was much more than conventionally unmusical; it provided aroute toward an active challenge of the assumptions and prejudices thatgave rise to homophobic oppression in the ﬁrst place. For Cage, silencewas an ideal form of resistance, carefully attuned to the requirements of the cold war consensus, at least in its originary social-historical con-text.
38There are both surrender and resistance in these silences, in a re-
JONATHAN D. KATZ
54
mere “noise”— he defended it as simply another (unaccustomed and disempowered) form of
music —met with much more sympathy than his defense of silence did. The elevation of noise
sought only to expand the category of music; the elevation of silence, however, might be —and
apparently was —thought of as the negation of it. The premiere of 4/H1103233/H11033 Cage informs us, incited
a near riot, a much more forceful protest than any of his earlier compositions had met. None-
theless, silence was simply the other face of noise, just as noise was the other face of music, and Cage set out quite deliberately to deconstruct these false polarities. Of course, 4/H1103233/H11033 sprang
from this intuition, and the incidental noises produced by the audience during its performanceonly drove home the point. In the “Lecture on Nothing, ” Cage (underscoring his theme with
unpredictable silences and idiosyncratic punctuation) said, “Noises, too, / had been discrimi-nated against; / and being American, . . . I fought / for noises ” (Silence, 117).
39. Signiﬁcantly, however, Cage’ s circle did, most notably Rauschenberg, Johns, and
Twombly.
40. A number of scholars have asked Cage if he was gay. Massi, who conducted several in-
terviews while completing his dissertation in musicology at the University of California, San Di-ego, asked Cage this question at Crown Point Press in 1985 and was told, “Yes, but I don ’t like
to be political about it ” (interview by the author, October 25, 1998). Massi then interviewed him
formally at a Cage conference in Palo Alto on February 26, 1988, but Cage, accompanied byfriends, proved evasive. Hines, in a remarkable ﬁve-hour interview in Los Angeles over two daysin May 1992, recorded Cage talking explicitly about his gay life.lation not of either/or but of both/and. It is within this complicated
nexus of what can be viewed as at once compliance and de ﬁance that
the undeniable consistency and congruence in Cage’ s silence about his
sexuality, on the one hand, and all the other manifestations of artistic orcreative silence —such as 4/H1103233/H11033, on the other —need to be understood.
That Cage’ s self-silencing was in keeping with the requirements of the
infamously homophobic McCarthy era should not obscure the fact thatit was also internally and ideologically consistent with his larger aes-thetic politics.
Thus the task at hand is to restore the weight and force of the cold
war social context on Cage while granting that his ideological convic-tions were not simply or purely products of his oppression as a gay man.After all, many similarly oppressed gay artists did not then make si-lence the touchstone of their aesthetics.
39Against a web of connections,
both personal and political, Cage’ s many types of silence can be seen as
queer —in their common repression of expressivity and identity —while
they equally articulate his deeply held aesthetic and political convictions.
Reframing Cage’ s consistent self-silencing as something other than a
timorous refusal to come out of the closet (perhaps even recovering it as a species of politics, however strange, if not self-defeating, it may ap-pear from a contemporary vantage point) may help explain why he wasso persistently closeted well after life in the closet had ceased to holdany instrumental bene ﬁts. When scholars and activists were rooting for
Cage to come out, were they asking him to turn his back on his ownconvictions about silence and the work it could do and thereby ignoringthe distinction between their political claims on him and his own life-long principles?
40Yet it is evident that Cage spoke freely about many
JOHN CAGE’S QUEER SILENCE
55
41. The full title of the series is “John Cage Diary: How to Improve the World (You Will Only
Make Matters Worse). ” The ﬁrst three parts appear in A Year from Monday: New Lectures and Writ-
ings(Middletown, Conn.: Wesleyan University Press,1967), the last two in M.other aspects of his personal life, from his love of mushrooms to the in-
timate particulars of his daily routine. Why, then, this silence about hissexuality?
The easy answer —Cage’ s closeted gay identity compelled his in-
famous antiexpressionism and self-silencing —is at least partly evident.
Indeed, in correlating his embrace of Zen to his personal “disturbances, ”
he says as much himself. And there is a lovely economy to the notionthat a closeted gay man made antiexpressionism the hallmark of his ca-reer, culminating in a work of absolute authorial silence. But this notionmay also put the cart before the horse.
Instead, could it be that Cage’ s antiexpressionist convictions com-
pelled his closetedness, that his belief in the utility of silence caused himto stiﬂe or at least mute his public acknowledgment of his sexuality?Perhaps both factors, his fear of exposure and his belief in the ef ﬁcacy
of silence, simply coexisted, so that his closetedness and his antiexpres-sive ideology reinforced one another. I think that we can best make senseof Cage’ s closetedness by analyzing it as both an individual tendency
and an ideological conviction, as a social-historical phenomenon com-mon among gay men of his generation and as a coherent aesthetic andpolitical philosophy.
How can silence be understood politically, as a remedy for oppression?
I propose that its particular utility as a means of resistance for Cage andhis circle was its evasion of a politics of opposition. Not only could clos-eted homosexuals ill afford to call attention to themselves with an ar-ticulated, entrenched oppositional stance, but actively opposing powerwould only “make matters worse, ” as Cage claims in the eponymous se-
ries of diary entries from which the title of this essay comes.
41Indeed,
he argues that any attempt to improve the condition of the world willonly worsen it. But Cage was hardly one to believe that the world wasﬁne as it was. He objected not so much to a desire to improve the world(a desire that I dare say animated his prodigious output in many differ-ent media) as to what he thought were bad strategies by which to putthis improvement into practice.
Repeatedly, Cage powerfully objects to modes of redress of which 
active opposition to entrenched authority is a hallmark. What silenceoffered was the prospect of resisting the status quo without opposing it. Cage’ s divorce and continuing involvement with Cunningham co-
incided with a dangerous time for gay men in America, a time of longprison sentences, McCarthyite witch-hunts, and cold war hate monger-
JONATHAN D. KATZ
56
42. See John D ’Emilio, “The Homosexual Menace: The Politics of Sexuality in Cold War
America, ” in Passion and Power: Sexuality in History, ed. Kathy Peiss and Christina Simmons, 
with Robert A. Padgug (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1989), 226 –40; and Michael
Hicks, “The Imprisonment of Henry Cowell, ” Journal of the American Musicological Society 44
(1991): 92 –119.
43.“On Robert Rauschenberg, Artist, and His Work, ” Metro, May 1961; reprinted in Si-
lence, 101.
44. Cage has remarked that 4/H1103233/H11033 was his most important work.
45. For a groundbreaking analysis of modes of opposition, to which this entire section is in-
debted, see Ross Chambers, Room for Maneuver: Reading (the) Oppositional (in) Narrative (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1991).ing. Cage knew these dangers well: years before, his friend and teacher
Henry Cowell had been imprisoned at San Quentin on a trumped-up“morals” charge.
42That silence-as-resistance allowed its author to escape
both complicity in the dominant culture and detection as a homosexualwas not the least of its charms.
Cage comes closest to describing his politics of silence in a 1962 ar-
ticle about Rauschenberg, whose White Paintings Cage himself publicly
acknowledged as a precedent for 4/H1103233/H11033. Rauschenberg, Cage wrote, “is
like that butcher whose knife never becomes dull simply because he cut with it in such a way that it never encountered an obstacle. ”
43Cage
might just as well have been —and, I speculate, was —referring to him-
self. To cut yet not encounter an obstacle is paradoxical, for cutting im-plies the existence of what is cut into. But one mode of cutting avoidssuch direct incision: irony.
Few have noted how profoundly ironic it is for a composer to make
silence the hallmark of his work.
44That Cage’ s initial encounter with
Zen may have been motivated in part by an emotional search for a resolution to his postmarital “disturbances” should not obscure the factthat he continued for his entire life to explore its ramiﬁcations, includ-ing the use of irony. The distinction irony draws between what is saidand what is meant opened up for him a space of otherness that was notunderstood as speciﬁcally oppositional. As a “readerly” relation, irony isrecognized, not written; understood, not declared. It would prove ameans through which resistance could ﬁgure in a culture of coercion.By ironizing expression in all of its forms, Cage created room in whichto maneuver against modernist hierarchies; hence his canonization as apostmodern today. But his efforts were not originally oppositional somuch as they were “other”: seductions away from dominant expressivediscourse and toward other meanings for other purposes.
45
What were these purposes? Silent music inaugurated a process of
reading that moved the listener, potentially, from unselfconscious com-plicity with dominant forms of expression (in which the expressive waspassively registered as inherent in the music) toward a degree of self-
JOHN CAGE’S QUEER SILENCE
57
46. In my forthcoming book, Opposition, Inc., I address more fully the notion that it was left
to a man marked as other within the binary authoritative discourse of heterosexuality to de-
velop the potential for resistance inherent in a nonbinary term like silence.consciousness about one’ s role as a listener or a maker of meaning. In
this way silence paradoxically contributed to the destructuring of mu-
sic’s discursive norms. Cage denaturalized heretofore “naturally” expres-
sive musical forms through silence, fostering an awareness that musicwas the result of a reading, an exegetical process that had been natural-ized. (In this context, silence destructures because an audience has gath-ered to hear something; in other contexts, that would not necessarily be so.) Music’ s seemingly automatic or transparent claim to meaning is
thus replaced by an awareness of the conditions in which or throughwhich the subset of sound known as music comes into being.
Importantly, this embrace of silence cannot itself be conceived of as a
politics, a position, or a statement; rather, it exists in perpetual alterity,always appended to its host —music —in a parasitic relationship. Like
any parasite, it eventually weakens its host. But it also works invisibly,never declaring its aims, its purpose, or its project. Having inaugurateda problematizing of dominant expressive forms, it acts like a shock wave,destabilizing the foundations of what was once understood, more sim-ply and solidly, as music. Since silence constitutes an oppositional modethat refuses articulated oppositionality, it offered precisely the cover re-quired to seed destabilization in the policed consensus of the ﬁfties, es-pecially for closeted homosexuals.
Silence achieved these effects without uttering a sound. Cage’ s many
silences did succeed as a form of resistance. That his work was not dis-cussed at the time as speciﬁcally oppositional is in this sense evidence ofits discursive success in the consensus-based culture of the ﬁfties. Silence
made a statement through the absence of statement. It constituted anappeal to the listener for a new relationship to authority and authorita-tive forms in music —and potentially in other arenas as well.
Silence, in short, is not another kind of music but a challenge to the
construction of music itself. Neither musical nor unmusical, Cage’ s si-
lence was quite precisely other, escaping the binaries that circumscribedthe status quo as the sole arena for contestation. As a result, it managedto be an antiauthoritative mode that was nonetheless not oppositional.Revealing the power of the individual to construct meanings unautho-rized by, and under the very nose of, the dominant culture, silence was,in a sense, seditious.
46
Cage’ s silences can in this way give rise to potent “misreadings, ” pro-
foundly unauthorized interpretations that allow, for example, a silenceto be read as a silencing. However, since dominant interests lie above all
JONATHAN D. KATZ
58
47. I take up the question of the peculiar ﬁt between these closeted modes of queer resis-
tance and the cold war cultural climate in my “Passive Resistance. ”
48. See, e.g., Arthur Guy Mathews, “Homosexuals Are Stalin ’s Atom Bomb against Amer-
ica,” Bernarr MacFadden ’s Vitalized Physical Culture, May 1953, 12 –13.
49. See, e.g., Chambers, Room for Maneuver; and Hugh Silverman, “Writing (on Deconstruc-
tion) at the Edge of Metaphysics, ” Research in Phenomenology 13 (1984): 107 –9.in preserving authoritative discursive control (as a means of social con-
trol), such silences are permitted to ﬂourish because they are not pre-sented as a direct challenge or opposition to authority. Misreadings remain the responsibility of the listener, while Cage, ever the cold warwarrior, stays under cover.
47
Signiﬁcantly, Cage’ s silence can recast the audience from passive to
active, from consumer to producer, from co-opted to resistant. Author-ity shifts from outside the individual to inside, and the new relationshipto authority within the concert hall potentially suggests new ways of being outside it as well. Queer culture has long recognized that thissilence-as-resistance not only makes it possible to escape proscription(since the discursive norm is upheld) but, paradoxically, may assist theestablishment of resistance, even nurture it, providing it with preciselythe cover it needs to prosper. In the long history of queer culture, thecloset has emblematized just such a potential. As a requisite effect ofdomination, the silence of the closet in this way opens a space for oppo-sitional existence.
No wonder McCarthyism understood every homosexual as a poten-
tial Communist, the ﬁgure of seditious resistance.
48The most dangerous
enemy is the one that cannot be seen, the most dangerous threat theone that is not heard. And silence —of many different kinds —was what
enabled these threats to thrive. Hence the powerful cultural anxietyover the “invisibility” of homosexuals and Communists in cold war cul-ture—testimony to the oppositional potential of silence, real or imag-
ined, in authoritative discourse.
Yet there is also a second, related political effect of silence. It avoids
the recolonizing force of the oppositional: what permits the dominantculture to consolidate its authority by reference to the excluded other.Some recent poststructuralist analyses of both textual and cultural oppositionality stress the utility of opposition as a means of control.
49
In these accounts, opposition may simply reproduce the binary logicthrough which domination writes itself, and so the oppositional be-comes the outside that allows the inside to cohere in a series of exclu-sions. Given its instrumentality to oppression, then, opposition contin-ually risks co-optation as a mere tool of hegemony; indeed, as we haveseen, the outsider (e.g., the Communist or, for that matter, the homo-sexual) has long supported, if not actually authorized, the production of
JOHN CAGE’S QUEER SILENCE
59
50. M,xiii, 10, 12.
51. See David M. Halperin, Saint Foucault: Towards a Gay Hagiography (New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 1995), 15 –37.
52. Michel Foucault, introduction to vol. 1 of The History of Sexuality, trans. Robert Hurley
(New York: Pantheon,1978), 27.the power that controls him or her. Once marked as oppositional, any
disturbance can be incorporated into a discourse of oppositionality thatonly catalyzes oppressive constructions, just as homosexuality supportedheterosexuality and Communism stabilized the cold war consensus.
Cage had a clear understanding of how to avoid the recolonizing
force of the oppositional, and it was, again, by recourse to silence. Heindirectly attributed this insight to his studies in Zen: “Daisetz Suzuki of-
ten pointed out that Zen ’s non-dualism arose in China as a result of
problems encountered in translating India ’s Buddhist texts. . . . Indian
words for concepts in opposition to one another did not exist in Chi-nese. ” Since, as Cage once wrote, “classiﬁcation . . . ceases when it is no
longer possible to establish oppositions, ” he concluded that “protest ac-
tions fan the ﬂames of a dying ﬁre. Protest helps to keep the governmentgoing. ”
50Cage never protested in the usual sense; yet, through a perfor-
mative silence that refused any direct opposition to dominant culture,his work constituted a seduction away from authority.
Of course, there is a powerful alternative tradition to the Cagean paean
to silence-as-resistance; it is perhaps best represented by Foucault andhis careful analysis of relations of power.
51Surely, the weight of contem-
porary resistant practice falls in line with this Foucauldian tradition. But,as they say, the times have changed. Silence-as-resistance was keyed toa context of constraint that I have thankfully never experienced. EvenFoucault wrote, in an often quoted passage,
that silence itself —the things one declines to say, or is forbidden to name,
the discretion that is required between different speakers —is less the ab-
solute limit of discourse, the other side from which it is separated by a
strict boundary, than an element that functions alongside the things said,with them and in relation to them within over-all strategies. There is nobinary division to be made between what one says and what one doesnot say; we must try to determine the different ways of not saying things,how those who can and those who cannot speak of them are distributed,which type of discourse is authorized, or which form of discretion is re-quired in either case. There is not one but many silences, and they are anintegral part of the strategies that underlie and permeate discourses.
52
Cage would certainly have agreed in principle, and the coexistence of
sound and silence in the Concerto for Prepared Piano and Chamber Orches-
tramakes much the same point. But he would also have demurred from
JONATHAN D. KATZ
60
53. For the Birds, 236.Foucault’ s insistence on determining the import and meanings of what
has been left unsaid. For Cage, the unsaid could never have a meaning;
it would differ for every (non)speaker. In fact, Cage stated quite speci ﬁ-
cally that simple opposition to the dominant culture would never pro-duce real social change:
It is unimaginable that one particular attitude alone would be able to un-
leash what you envision under the name revolution. I believe insteadthat the revolution is in the process of unrolling right before our eyes onall levels —and that we aren ’t aware of it. . . .
Protest movements could quite easily, and despite themselves, lead in
the opposite direction, to a reinforcement of law and order. There is inacceptance and non-violence an underestimated revolutionary force.But instead, protest is all too often absorbed into the ﬂow of power, be-cause it limits itself to reaching for the same old mechanisms of power,which is the worst way to challenge authority! We ’ll never get away from
it that way!
53
In short, there is an “underestimated revolutionary force” in modes of
resistance that are not oppositional, and there is equally the prospect ofbeing co-opted (“absorbed into the ﬂow of power ”) through an opposi-
tion that is “itself . . . reaching for the same old mechanisms of power. ”
That Cage understood his particular form of acceptance —silence —
as an expressly political force is evident in the connections he draws in For the Birds between his composing and the larger social situation 
in 1976:
When I really began making music, I mean composing “seriously, ” it was
to involve myself in noise, because noises escape power, that is, the laws
of counterpoint and harmony. When I spoke about [Pierre] Schaeffer[founder of “musique concrete, ” which used recorded natural sound as
the basis of music], I said that noises had not been liberated but had beenreintegrated into a new kind of harmony and counterpoint. If that werethe case, that would mean that we had only changed prisons! My idea is that there should be no more prisons. Take another example: BlackPower. If blacks free themselves from the laws whites invented to protectthemselves from the blacks, that ’s well and good. But if they in turn want
to invent laws, that is, to wield power in exactly the same way as whites,what will the difference be? There are only a few blacks who understandthat with laws that will protect them from the whites, they will just benew whites. They will have come to power over the whites, but nothingwill change. . . . Today, we must identify ourselves with noises instead,
JOHN CAGE’S QUEER SILENCE
61
54. Ibid., 230 –31.and not seek laws for the noises, as if we were blacks seeking power! Mu-
sic demonstrates what an ecologically balanced situation could be —one
in which whites would not have more power than blacks, and blacks nomore than whites. A situation in which each thing and each sound is inits place, because each one is what it is. Moreover, I ’m not the one who ’s
inventing that situation. Music was already carrying it within itself de-spite everything people forced it to endure.
54
The goal is thus not to challenge power but to escape it. Active oppo-
sition would mean that “we had only changed prisons. ”By“identify[ing]
ourselves with noises instead ”—and noises are, of course, audible only
when the music quiets down —we will free ourselves from our prisons.
And what makes a noise a noise is precisely its freedom from any pre-
ordained conceptual or ideological system. Thus music permeates theculture, and the culture permeates music: change one and you changethe other. As Cage demonstrates time and again, there is life (even hislife), and there is music (even his music), and it is all the same thing.
62THREE
Austin Clarkson
The Intent of the Musical Moment: 
Cage and the Transpersonal
I. The Pragmatic Background
The conversations Joan Retallack recordedwith John Cage during the last two years ofhis life roam through highways and bywaysthat provide fresh perspectives on the majorthemes of his career. While Cage repeats sto-ries and opinions from previous writings andconversations, in these interviews he oftensharpens the focus with fresh formulations.One theme that recurs like a deeply pulsingwave is a spiritual attitude, which through-out his career aroused criticism and even de-rision, but which he continued to af ﬁrm to
the end (see appendix [21a –c]). The ques-
tion that arises, therefore, is whether his interest in spirituality was relatively super-ﬁcial and in service only to his aesthetic program or was, on the contrary, a core con-dition that informed both his life and his art.In her introduction, Retallack responds to
The author dedicates this chapter to the esteemed memory
of David Tudor. I am most grateful to several colleagueswho responded to a draft of this essay, and in particular to John Holzaepfel, Jackson Mac Low, David W. Patterson,and Joan Retallack, whose comments resulted in changes. Iam especially grateful to Professor Patterson, who not onlymade helpful queries and comments, but also generouslysent me a copy of his dissertation.
this theme, observing that Cage’ s spirituality was “not at all ‘transcen-
dent’ in the sense of removal from daily life but in fact a constant return
to pragmatic concerns with a resonant sense of the interconnectednessof things —that we are all, persons and environment, ‘in it’ together. ”
She conjures up a kaleidoscope of other perspectives —from Epicurus,
Kierkegaard, Dewey, Jung, Duchamp, and Wittgenstein to utopianism,dada, Japanese humor, and fractals —but it is the connection with prag-
matism that strikes home. In the end, Retallack ﬁnds that Cage eludesthe categories of current critical theory with a “post-skeptical poetics of
public language, a post-ironic socioaesthetic modeling without denial ornaiveté— a complex, not naive, realism. ” Although this series of “posts”
might suggest that what is “pre” is past, Retallack dubs Cage a “utopian
avant-pragmatist” and links him to Dewey’ s “spiritually rich, aesthetic
pragmatics of everyday life. ” And yet, despite the strong link she makes
with the tradition of pragmatism, she writes: “Very little in twentieth-century Western culture prepares us for Cage’ s work. ”
1On the premise
that Cage’ s project is indeed planted deep in the seedbed of a spiritu-
ally informed American pragmatism, I would like to explore that back-ground in order to better understand his art in general, and in particu-lar the problems raised in the performance of his indeterminate music.
The pragmatic background in philosophy, psychology, aesthetics, and
religion antedates John Dewey (1859 –1952). It includes C. S. Peirce
(1839 –1914), William James (1842 –1910), G. H. Mead (1863 –1931),
Daisetz T. Suzuki (1870 –1966), and C. G. Jung (1875 –1961). A spiritu-
ally rich pragmatism was an everyday reality of abiding interest to thesepioneers, and the empirical attitude to spiritual experience that markedtheir work proved fundamental to many twentieth-century develop-ments in the arts, humanities, and social sciences. As we shall see, Wil-liam James, the crucial ﬁgure in this background, was a seminal thinkerfor both Suzuki and Jung, two of the leading players in Cage ’s story. In
The Varieties of Religious Experience, James credits Peirce with providing his
approach to the study of religious experience. Since pragmatism is at is-sue, here is James’ s synopsis of the method as he took it from Peirce:
Thought in movement has for its only conceivable motive the attainment
of belief, or thought at rest. Only when our thought about a subject hasTHE INTENT OF THE MUSICAL MOMENT
63
1.Musicage: Cage Muses on Words, Art, Music, ed. Joan Retallack (Hanover, N.H.: Wesleyan Uni-
versity Press, University Press of New England, 1996), xxxix, xx, xli. The conversations were
recorded from 1990 until shortly before Cage’ s death in August of 1992. David W. Patterson ’s
thorough-going analysis of the ideas, turns of phrase, and formulations from South and EastAsian texts in Cage’ s writing leads him to conclude that Cage’ s interest in Eastern philosophies
stemmed more from his aesthetic interests than from spiritual concerns. See “ Appraising the
Catchwords, c. 1942 –1959: Cage’ s Asian-Derived Rhetoric and the Historical Reference of Black
Mountain College” (Ph.D. diss., Columbia University, 1996), 241.
AUSTIN CLARKSON
64 found its rest in belief can our action on the subject ﬁrmly and safely 
begin. Beliefs, in short, are rules for action; and the whole function ofthinking is but one step in the production of active habits. ...T oa ttain per-
fect clearness in our thoughts of an object, we need then only considerwhat sensations, immediate or remote, we are conceivably to expect fromit, and what conduct we must prepare in case the object should be true.2
In his own lectures on the subject of pragmatism, James caused a furor
with his attack on idealism and his assertion that “[t]ruth happens to be
an idea. It becomes true, is made true by events. ” In setting out his own
version of the pragmatic method, he said:
You must bring out of each word its practical cash-value, set it at work
within the stream of your experience. It appears less as a solution, then,than as a program for more work, and more particularly as an indicationof the ways in which existing realities may be changed.
Theories thus become instruments, not answers to enigmas, in which we can
rest.We don ’t lie back upon them, we move forward, and, on occasion,
make nature over again by their aid.
3
For James theories are not articles of faith, but instruments for discov-
ery and change. Thus his conception of the “ﬁeld of consciousness” as-serts its vague, shifting, and indeﬁnite “margins” from reports of his
own and others’ ordinary experiences of their mental states:
The important fact which this “ﬁeld” formula commemorates is the in-
determination of the margin. Inattentively realized as is the matter whichthe margin contains, it is nevertheless there, and helps both to guide ourbehavior and to determine the next movement of our attention. It liesaround us like a “magnetic ﬁeld, ” inside of which our centre of energy
turns like a compass-needle, as the present phase of consciousness altersinto its successor. Our whole past store of memories ﬂoats beyond thismargin, ready at a touch to come in; and the entire mass of residual pow-ers, impulses, and knowledges that constitute our empirical self stretchescontinuously beyond it. So vaguely drawn are the outlines between whatis actual and what is only potential at any moment of our conscious life,that it is always hard to say of certain mental elements whether we areconscious of them or not.
4
Incorporating research on parapsychology, automatisms, and medium-
istic and religious experience, James observed that outside the ﬁeld of
2. William James, The Varieties of Religious Experience: A Study in Human Nature (1902; London:
Fontana, 1960), 426.
3.Pragmatism: A New Name for Some Old Ways of Thinking (1907; New York: Dover, 1995), 77 –
78, 21. The emphases are James’ s.
4.Varieties of Religious Experience, 233.
THE INTENT OF THE MUSICAL MOMENT
65 consciousness lies the subliminal consciousness, which contains every-
thing from the instinctual to the spiritual that is not in consciousness.Harry T. Hunt ﬁnds that James’ s contributions to the science of the mind
are still of fundamental value:
William James, in his chapter in The Principles of Psychology (1890) entitled
“The Stream of Thought, ” was probably the ﬁrst western thinker and sci-
entist to address ordinary lived consciousness as an empirical phenome-
non in its own right. How curious that it is this recent. In so doing, healso addressed the relationship between consciousness and physical real-ity in ways which have not yet been fully assimilated. James’ s work in-
formed subsequent schools of thought that are generally held to be anti-thetical —in psychology, functionalism and behaviorism as well as the
Gestalt tradition; in philosophy, Wittgenstein as well as Husserl, Heideg-ger, and Merleau-Ponty. Since subsequent approaches to consciousnesswithin psychology can in no sense be said to have “gotten past” James,
we will need to engage his phenomenology of awareness as “streaming, ”
to consider it as metaphor and as physical and neural reality.
In many ways, William James is one of our ﬁrst modern thinkers.
Within what he would help to establish as an emergent “science” of psy-
chology, and writing in the wake of Nietzsche, he offers his own NorthAmerican version of pluralism and the relativity of truth to human pur-poses. Neils Bohr mentioned his reading of James on consciousness asforeshadowing the principles of complementarity and indeterminism inquantum mechanics. Just as light becomes both wave and particles, con-sciousness is both substantive and transitive, both a pulsing and a con-tinuous wave: “Nature is simple and invariable; makes no leaps or makes
nothing but leaps; . . . what do all such principles express save our senseof how pleasantly our intellect would feel if it had a Nature of that sortto deal with?”
5
As the founder of modern empirical studies of consciousness, James
sets the frame for this essay, in which I hope to sketch the context for
Cage’ s contribution to the science of the musical mind. Studies of the
ﬁeld of consciousness and what lay beyond it in the subliminal realmsfascinated many painters, poets, and musicians, Cage among them, andled them to regard dreams, fantasies, chance occurrences, archetypes ofthe collective unconscious, and numinous experience in general as thematter of art. What marked their pragmatism as non-ironic, non-naive,and complex is the premise that the unconscious has a noetic function
5.On the Nature of Consciousness: Cognitive, Phenomenological, and Transpersonal Perspectives
(New Haven: Yale University Press, 1995), 115 –16.
in supplying the conscious mind with creative portents.6I shall attempt
to show that Cage ’s achievement was to realize the implications of that
premise in experimental music.
II. Experimental Music and the Silent Prayer
In a pioneering study of experimental music from the 1950s and 1960s,Michael Nyman singles out Cage as the creator of a music that departsin fundamental ways from the European concert tradition.
7From Cage’ s
manifesto of 1955, Nyman calls it “experimental music” and distin-guishes it from fully structured and notated contemporaneous compo-sitions, which he names “avant-garde. ” For Nyman the paradigmatic
piece of experimental music is 4/H1103233/H11033, “tacet for any instrument or instru-
ments. ” As the extreme instance of pieces that are not prescriptively no-
tated, 4/H1103233/H11033 is impervious to theories of analysis and criteria of criticism
generally applied to avant-garde music. It forces us to contend withCage’ s statement that he was writing music on the water and was more
interested in the moment of listening than in pieces as such [17a]. Theterm “experimental” was rejected by composers who took their works
to be fully realized creations and not experiments in the sense of trialsor tests. But the idea appealed to Cage: “[Experimental music] is under-stood not as descriptive of an act to be later judged in terms of successand failure, but simply as of an act the outcome of which is unknown.What has been determined?”
8For Cage the outcome of a fully struc-
tured piece is predictable and therefore occludes the act of performingwith memories of historical styles and expectations of deﬁnitive read-ings [8]. And so he conceived of a music of actions that do not have pre-dictable outcomes. If the musical content were reduced to a minimumand the outcome stripped of expectations, the performer would be opento the spontaneous ﬂow of the musical imagination, and performing mu-
sic would be a creative rather than a re-creative act. When each soundis the Buddha [13], then the performer becomes likewise.
Cage’ s experimental music is not an art of representation, where
meaning is derived from the relation between a signiﬁer and a referent.It is presentational. Of presentational states, Hunt writes,
meaning emerges as a result of an experiential immersion in the expres-
sive patterns of the symbolic medium. It appears as spontaneous, pre-emptory imagery and is fully developed in the expressive media of theAUSTIN CLARKSON
66
6.“William James insisted that the state of mind in mystical states was not just affective or
emotional but speciﬁcally ‘noetic’”  (ibid., 111 –12).
7.Experimental Music: Cage and Beyond (New York: Schirmer Books, 1974), 2.
8.“Experimental Music: Doctrine ” (1955), in Silence: Lectures and Writings (Middletown,
Conn.: Wesleyan University Press, 1961), 13.
arts. Here, felt meaning emerges from the medium in the form of poten-
tial semblances that are “sensed, ” polysemic and open-ended, and so un-
predictable and novel. It is the receptive, observing attitude common toaesthetics, meditation, and classical introspection that allows such mean-ing to emerge.
By limiting representation as much as possible, Cage intensiﬁed the pre-
sentational function of music. However, Hunt argues that the two statesare complementary: “Referential language use is ﬁlled with intonation,gesture, and emphasis as its presentational aspect, while presentationalstates, although ineffable in ordinary discursive terms, nonetheless havetheir deﬁnite sense of intentional meaning in the form of an incipient
portent. ”
9To extend the argument from language to music, we can 
suppose that music translates the presentational aspects of language —
intonation, gesture, and emphasis —into properties that have been 
sedimented historically as melody, harmony, rhythm, and so forth. Byrejecting these parameters as representational, Cage set out to explorepresentational aspects of music that are even more elusive —incipient
portents that might be harbingers of the ineffable.
10
“Experiment” and “experience” both come from Latin experiri (to try,
prove, put to the test). Experimental music thus shifts attention from thepiece of music as a representable, transcendent object to the felt mean-ings and potential semblances. Just as Dewey af ﬁrmed that aesthetic ex-
perience “occurs continuously, because the interaction of live creative
and environing conditions is involved in the very process of living, ” so
for Cage experimental music dissolves the boundary between art andTHE INTENT OF THE MUSICAL MOMENT
67
9.On the Nature of Consciousness, 42.
10. The distinction in aesthetics between representation and presentation has had a long
and varied history. For Edmund Gurney, for instance, it is the means for differentiating poetry,
sculpture, and painting, which “represent in various aspects things cognisable in the world out-
side them, ” from architecture and music, whose function it is “to present, not to represent, and
their message has no direct reference to the world outside them” ( The Power of Sound [1880; New
York: Basic Books, 1966], 60). Suzanne Langer makes a more general distinction between twokinds of symbolization: the discursive (i.e., representational) symbolism of language and the pre-sentational symbolism of an art object, which is understood from its direct presentation throughthe interrelations of the symbolic elements within the total structure ( Philosophy in a New Key
[1942; Mentor, 1948], 78 –79). Peter Kivy now advances the important notion that representa-
tional symbolization is at work even within pure music: “Since all music, even the most frankly
representational, has pure musical parameters as well —harmonic, rhythmic, contrapuntal,
melodic —it follows that all music, of the kind we are talking about, has a deep layer of repre-
sentationality” ( Music Alone: Philosophical Reﬂections on the Purely Musical Experience [Ithaca: Cor-
nell University Press, 1990], 44). Kivy’ s “music alone” is “a quasi-syntactical structure of sound
understandable solely in musical terms and having no semantic or representational content, nomeaning, making reference to nothing beyond itself ” (202). But Kivy does not investigate “pre-
sentationality. ” By emphasizing presentationality, Cage seeks to evade both the “deep layer 
of representationality” and the “quasi-syntactical structure ” of Kivy’ s “music alone. ” Hunt’ s
presentation-representation model is founded on Langer, the psychoanalyst Marshall Edelson,and the cognitive psychologist Robert Haskell (41). (I am grateful to an anonymous reader forthe suggestion to amplify the notions of presentation and representation.)
life. Dewey based his philosophy of art on the integrity and abundance
of experience, which he described as follows:
We have an experience when the material experienced runs its course to
fulﬁllment. Then and then only is it integrated within and demarcated in
the general stream of experience from other experiences. A piece ofwork is ﬁnished in a way that is satisfactory; a problem receives its solu-tion; a game is played through; a situation, whether that of eating a meal,playing a game of chess, carrying on a conversation, writing a book, ortaking part in a political campaign, is so rounded out that its close is aconsummation and not a cessation. Such an experience is a whole andcarries with it its own individualizing quality and self-suf ﬁciency. It is an
experience.
11
Cage’ s notion that experimental music should dissolve the distinction
between art and life, between subject and object, follows from the all-
encompassing plenitude and uniqueness of Dewey’ s “experience. ” Aes-
thetic experience, according to Dewey, merges the listener and the mu-sic in a greater whole: “For the unique distinguishing feature of estheticexperience is exactly the fact that no such distinction of self and objectexists in it, since it is esthetic in the degree in which organism and en-vironment cooperate to institute an experience in which the two are so fully integrated that each disappears. ” For Dewey the outcome of an
aesthetic experience is a blissful, procreative union, as “when variedmaterials of sense quality, emotion, and meaning come together in aunion that marks a new birth in the world. ”
12Aesthetic experience is
not merely receptive, but creative, for something new is born from theunion, the “incipient portent. ” Dewey did not speculate on what that
new thing might be, but Cage was interested in deﬁning “what is to be
determined. ” In the essay “Experimental Music, ” he said that magnetic
tape was a means of getting rid of old patterns of thought, as it “intro-
duces the unknown with such sharp clarity that anyone has the oppor-tunity of having his habits blown away like dust. ”
13Later, in conversa-
tion with Daniel Charles, Cage said that the goal was “those experiences
that contribute to changing us and, particularly, to changing our pre-conceptions ” [17e]. Thus the incipient portent for Cage was the po-
tential for bringing into conscious awareness some unknown factor thatwould effect a spiritual and life-changing experience, some hitherto un-conscious content that would promote personal growth and renewal.AUSTIN CLARKSON
68
11. Art as Experience (1934; New York: Capricorn Books, 1958), 35.
12. Ibid., 249, 267.
13.“Experimental Music, ” in Silence, 16.
Presentational listening was a creative agent for change because it ad-
mitted the unknown into the experience of music [5].
Nyman selected 4/H1103233/H11033 as the paradigmatic piece of experimental 
music because it is the most empty of its kind and so the most full of possibilities. The emptiness of 4/H1103233/H11033 is ﬁlled by the listener, whose fo-
cus must be open, free-ﬂowing, and capable of supplying his or her ownmeanings:
4/H1103233/H11033 is a demonstration of the non-existence of silence, of the perma-
nent presence of sounds around us, of the fact that they are worthy of at-
tention, and that for Cage “environmental sounds and noises are moreuseful aesthetically than the sounds produced by the world ’s musical cul-
ture. ” 4/H1103233/H11033 is not a negation of music but an af ﬁrmation of its omnipres-
ence. Henceforward sounds (“for music, like silence, does not exist”)would get closer to introducing us to Life, rather than Art, which is some-thing separate from Life.
14
For Nyman 4/H1103233/H11033 demonstrates a number of theorems: There is no such
thing as silence, music is everywhere, and life and art are indivisible. Let
us survey the literature for other views of the silent piece, on which anytheory of experimental music must turn. Just as Charles Ives asked whathas sound got to do with music, so 4/H1103233/H11033 questions the idea that it is suf-
ﬁcient to deﬁne music as a structure of sounds. Jean-Jacques Nattiez de-scribes 4/H1103233/H11033 as a metamusical critique of conventional music: It is a
“‘speaking’ in music about music, in the second degree as it were, to 
expose or denounce the institutional aspects of music ’s functioning. ”
And so, he concludes, “(without too much soul-searching) that soundis a minimal condition of the musical fact. ” But by bracketing 4/H1103233/H11033 as 
a metamusical thought experiment, Nattiez misunderstands Cage’ s ex-
plicit demand that it be regarded as his most important piece of music.For one does hear sounds at each performance of 4/H1103233/H11033, even though
they are not prescribed. And the experience of listening evokes an en-gagement of the whole being that may well involve soul-searching.Richard Kostelanetz accepts 4/H1103233/H11033 as a piece of music, but brackets it as
the null instance. For him 4/H1103233/H11033 states that “anything is possible in art
including . . . nothing at all.” Thus Kostelanetz thinks that Cage wasspeaking ironically when he said that the music he prefers is “what wehear if we are just quiet, ” and so regards 4/H1103233/H11033 as primarily philosophi-
cal speculation. David Cope also favors the conceptualist stance when hesays that the composer’ s contribution to 4/H1103233/H11033 is the idea alone: “The act
of the creator is minimal and conceptual. ” Or, as Eric Salzman wrote,THE INTENT OF THE MUSICAL MOMENT
69
14. Nyman, Experimental Music, 2, 22.
AUSTIN CLARKSON
70 once you have done 4/H1103233/H11033, you cannot really do it again: “One man ’s si-
lence is, after Cage, much like another’ s.” In general, the conceptualists
interpret 4/H1103233/H11033 as the collection of sounds, whether from the audience
or outside the auditorium, that are noticed during the given time. But by
concretizing the silent piece as a particular collection of physical soundsor as the null and void, they miss Cage’ s requirement that the act of lis-
tening is paramount, and that the minimal condition of the musical factis the reﬂexive relationship between sound and the listener.
15Cage was
not a conceptualist [17e].
By contrast to the conceptualists, the pragmatists accept at face value
Cage’ s statement that 4/H1103233/H11033 is his most important piece and fundamen-
tal to his entire oeuvre. They also take note of David Tudor’ s assertion
that 4/H1103233/H11033 is one of the most intense listening experiences you can have.16
Heinz-Klaus Metzger views Cage’ s oeuvre in light of the Hegelian dialec-
tic between pure being and pure nothingness and sees that Cage pushedthis ﬂux to the extreme, where “the material is expanded to embrace
everything, and contracted to the point of nothingness. ” Metzger evi-
dently regards 4/H1103233/H11033 as an instance of the intersection of pure being and
pure nothingness. For Schwartz and Godfrey, while 4/H1103233/H11033 is purposeless
in the sense that the composer and performer renounce individual cre-ative input, it nevertheless has a serious purpose, because a period of si-lence or nonexpression allows ultimate truths to be realized. JonathanKramer goes a step further. He states that the listener becomes a creativeparticipant in the performance and thus is “more important to the mu-
sic than the composer. ” The distinction between the self and the other,
the listener and the music is minimized. Kramer emphasizes the role of the listener, who, while listening to what he calls “vertical” or “non-
teleological” music, is in a blissful state of “fusion of the self with the en-
vironment. ” Kramer’ s idea of fusion is reminiscent of Dewey’ s notion of
aesthetic experience, but he does not speculate on what is “to be deter-
mined. ” That Cage does not call for the listener to lose contact with con-
sciousness is af ﬁrmed by Eric de Visscher, who understands that a dy-
namic process is involved. For de Visscher the act of listening to 4/H1103233/H11033 is
a process in which the listener takes an active part in negotiating his or her relationship to the outer world. De Visscher also notes that thereis a paradox between Cage’ s clear statement of his intentions and his 
15. Jean-Jacques Nattiez, Music and Discourse: Toward a Semiology of Music (Princeton: Prince-
ton University Press, 1990), 43; Richard Kostelanetz, John Cage (Ex)plain(ed) (New York: Schir-
mer Books, 1996), 11 –12; David Cope, New Directions in Music, 6th ed. (Madison, Wis.: Brown
and Benchmark, 1993), 172 –73; Eric Salzman, “Imaginary Landscaper” (1982), in Writings
about John Cage, ed. Richard Kostelanetz (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1993), 6.
16. Harold C. Schonberg, “The Far-Out Pianist, ” Harper’ s Magazine, June 1960, 49. Thanks
to John Holzaepfel for the source of this reference.
desire for nonintention. He reasons that an art without intention and
preconceptions is probably unfeasible. But de Visscher concludes thatfor Cage it was likely an unattainable ideal.
17
Here de Visscher raises the issue of whether it is possible to under-
stand 4/H1103233/H11033 without admitting contradiction. Those who tackle Cage ’s
favorite paradoxes and oxymorons —“interpenetration and nonobstruc-
tion,” “chance operations, ” “purposeful purposelessness”— often rest
content with demonstrating that they are logically fallible. Like de Vis-scher, they usually conclude that these formulations may be hoped-forideals but are unattainable in practice.
18Which is another way of saying
that Cage approached but never achieved his goal. But Cage knew al-ready in 1948 that his goal was paradoxical [4]. Paradox is designed tosubvert rational cognition, and oxymoron, a form of condensed paradox,is the poet’ s stock in trade for extolling the ecstasies of love and spiritu-
ality. Paradoxical though it seems, 4/H1103233/H11033 offers listeners the opportunity
of performing in the purely presentational mode. If they choose to per-form the piece, they ﬁnd, as Dewey would say, that it calls not for un-derstanding but for “undergoing. ”
That 4/H1103233/H11033 is a spiritual exercise is af ﬁrmed both by David Revill, who
writes that 4/H1103233/H11033 exempliﬁes quintessentially Cage’ s tendency to link
music and spirituality, and by James Pritchett, who recalls that the titleCage originally had in mind when he announced that he was going tocompose a silent piece was “Silent Prayer. ” Pritchett writes that the si-
lent piece serves a “personal, spiritual purpose, ” and he makes an anal-
ogy between experiencing structure that is without content and Cage’ s
intent to follow Eckhart ’s injunction to empty oneself in order to hear
“the hidden word. ” For Pritchett 4/H1103233/H11033 is “a mental, spiritual, and com-
positional exercise, ” and “its literal silence reﬂects the silence of the will
necessary to open up a realm of inﬁnite possibilities. ” In their recent
monographs on Cage, these authors at last acknowledge the spiritual in-tent of the silent piece and so endorse a theory of Cage ’s experimental
music that assumes a transpersonal context.
19But 4/H1103233/H11033 is paradoxical THE INTENT OF THE MUSICAL MOMENT
71
17. Heinz-Klaus Metzger, “Europe’ s Opera: Notes on John Cage’ s Europeras 1 and 2,” 
in Kostelanetz, Writings about John Cage, 240; Elliott Schwartz and Daniel Godfrey, Music since
1945: Issues, Materials, Literature (New York: Schirmer Books, 1993), 214; Jonathan D. Kramer,
The Time of Music (New York: Schirmer Books, 1988), 384, 382; Eric de Visscher, “‘ There’ s No
Such Thing as Silence . . . ’: John Cage’ s Poetics of Silence” (1991), in Kostelanetz, Writings about
Cage, 127, 130.
18. Cf. Charles Junkerman, “‘ nEw / foRms of living together’: The Model of the Musicir-
cus,” in John Cage: Composed in America, ed. Marjorie Perloff and Charles Junkerman (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1994), 58 –60; and N. Katherine Hayles, “Chance Operations: Cagean
Paradox and Contemporary Science, ” in ibid., 226.
19. David Revill, The Roaring Silence: John Cage, a Life (New York: Arcade, 1992); 167; James
Pritchett, The Music of John Cage (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993), 59, 60.
in another way. Cage arrived at the durations of the three “movements”
by means of I Ching operations, yet when one adds up 4 minutes and
33 seconds, the sum is 273 seconds. Translated into negative degrees oftemperature, this happens to be absolute zero on the Kelvin scale (ac-tually /H11002273.2/H11034C). As substances approach that temperature, molecular
motion ceases and they begin to exhibit peculiar properties. AlthoughCage heard sounds in an anechoic chamber and concluded that silencedoes not exist, his silent prayer of 273 seconds is a metaphor for a phys-ical state in which matter is maximally ordered, vibratory activity isstilled, and silence is, in principle, absolute. When Tudor said that 4/H1103233/H11033
is the most intense listening experience you can have, he was describ-ing a state in which mind, body, and spirit are at the highest possiblelevel of concentration, analogous to the condition of minimum entropy.But just as materials at very low temperatures have anomalous proper-ties of superﬂuidity and superconductivity, so a listening experience ofutmost intensity gives rise to surprising epiphanies occasioned by a su-perﬂowing and superconducting imagination.
III. Performance and “The Social Problem”
Cage discovered early that music has a magical effect. While in his mid-twenties he gave a talk in which he said that listening to music atten-tively creates a state in which one experiences an exalted sense of unitywith the order of things, a mysterious participation in the ﬂow of nature
[1]. He found that through music one can enter another world in whichthe natural ﬂow of sounds brings a sense of excitement and mystery.The pleasure, peace, and spiritual abundance that he found af ﬁrmed for
him that this transformed state of being was most desirable. For Cagethe musical piece was merely the agent or conduit for evoking an act oflistening that advances the individual ’s spiritual development. When his
compositions of the thirties and forties did not produce the effects hehoped for, he was ready to make the radical move (at least for a com-poser) from a representational to a presentational aesthetic.
As Cage progressed from pieces that were indeterminate as to com-
position but determinate as to performance (that is, still fully notated)to compositions that were indeterminate in both respects, he ran intoresistance from performers and listeners who did not understand thedemands of a purely presentational aesthetic. Though the tactics of hisexperimental pieces vary greatly, the overall strategy remains consistent,namely, to set in motion processes that engage the musical imaginationof the performer. The success of a performance depends on ﬁnding 
musicians who are willing to put not only their abilities as performerson the line, but their imaginative and spiritual capacities as well. EvenAUSTIN CLARKSON
72
musicians with whom Cage worked individually were unable to meet
the challenge. At the New York and Cologne premieres of the Concert forPiano and Orchestra in 1958, Cage was very disappointed when some of
the musicians made inappropriate sounds, including snippets fromStravinsky. He wanted musicians to be free so that they would becomenoble rather than foolish. He concluded that his problem was not sim-ply musical, it was also social.
20
Giving performers too much freedom had let in regressive and dis-
ruptive behaviors. After the radical openness of pieces like the Concert forPiano and Orchestra, Cage developed ways of limiting choice but still al-
lowing considerable freedom. And yet he continued to run into the so-called social problem throughout his career. In the case of a performanceof Cheap Imitation in Holland in 1972, he put its failure down to a lack 
of devotion in the musicians, and he ascribed that to the faulty organi-zation of society. After a production of Europeras 1 & 2 in 1991, his anger
boiled over. In an open letter to the orchestra of the Zurich Opera, heaccused the musicians of departing from the instrumental parts andplaying operatic melodies that had been reserved for the singers, and,what was worse, playing them in harmony. He berated them for faultytone production, which he believed showed their disgust for his work,and generally for misrepresenting his music and causing Europeras to
fail.
21He stated his credo: society will change only when the individual
changes, and the individual musician changes only by playing musicthat is unfamiliar and does not mean anything in particular, namely,when it is “vibratory activity needing no support to give us pleasure. ”
By failing to understand his music, the musicians showed, according toCage, that they did not know what was best for the future of the world.Although Cage titled his diary “How to Improve the World (You Will
Only Make Matters Worse), ” he clearly intended that his music would
change the world for the better. But at the height of his career, ladenwith fame and honors, he was unable to persuade a professional orches-tra to take the right attitude and practice the needed discipline. Experi-mental music was evidently not in their repertoire. If Cage had graspedthe magnitude of the problem he posed musicians, he would have takenTHE INTENT OF THE MUSICAL MOMENT
73
20. John Cage, A Year from Monday (Middletown, Conn.: Wesleyan University Press, 1967),
136. The retrospective Concert has been reissued (Wergo WER 6247 –2). Sporadic bursts of
laughter and applause from the audience begin at about the eight-minute mark of that twenty-
six-minute version of the Concert for Piano and Orchestra.
21. For the Birds: John Cage in Conversation with Daniel Charles (Boston: Marion Boyars, 1981),
184; “Letter to Zurich” (1991), in John Cage: Writer, ed. Richard Kostelanetz (New York: Lime-
light, 1993), 255 –56. We need to acknowledge the dif ﬁculty Cage had in meeting such resis-
tance to his music and not pass over it by saying that Cage was never impatient. Cf. Junkerman,“nEw / foRms, ” 60. In the ﬁlmed interview 19 Questions (1987), Cage said on the subject of Eur-
operas, “Many people have no regrets. But I must say I regret that I ever said yes. ”
further steps to solve the “social problem” and might not have regretted
composing Europeras. Perhaps a series of exercises in presentational
music-making, including several “run-throughs” of 4/H1103233/H11033, should have
been scheduled before the actual rehearsals began.
Of course Europeras would have succeeded if the orchestra had con-
sisted entirely of David Tudors. As Cage said, “Everything I have com-
posed since 1952 was written for David Tudor. ”22Tudor’ s phenomenal
powers as an executant and his devotion in realizing and performing indeterminate scores are legendary. What marked Tudor ’s approach,
aside from his musical gifts, was his openness to the transpersonal. AsCage recognized, Tudor understood that the unconscious was involvedin bringing about change in the conscious attitude [17d]. Tudor’ s par-
ticipation became a benchmark in performances of experimental music.At a thirty-ﬁfth anniversary presentation of the Concert for Piano and Or-chestra that I attended in New York City, Tudor demonstrated his exem-
plary way of making sounds that, in Cage’ s words, “arise from actions,
which . . . arise from their own centers” [12d]. Had all the musicianspresent noticed and emulated Tudor’ s poised presence as he made sounds
from in and around the electriﬁed piano, the performance would havebeen truly successful. Sounds that seemed connected to the unfoldingsound organism happened when the musicians’ postures and gesturesindicated that the sounds they were making were valued gifts to thewhole ensemble. But too many of the musicians appeared to sit inertlyand play perfunctorily, without a sense of attentively listening to every-thing that was happening and taking full responsibility for their part inthe piece. The proceedings were not marred by ugly sounds from the orchestra and raucous laughter and applause from the audience as in1958, but too many sounds were tossed out casually, even carelessly,unconnected to the fabric of the evolving process. A few weeks after theconcert, I had the opportunity to ask David Tudor how he thought theperformance could have been improved. He replied, “It would havebeen better if they were more fully aware that they are all individuals. ”
By“individual, ”Tudor did not mean someone who is egoistic, willful,
and ethically uncommitted to the enterprise. The individual for Cage andTudor is someone whose actions arise not only from the ego-system, butalso from the guiding center of the personality, the source of ethical im-pulses that link the individual to society. By contrast to the ego-system,that center can be referred to as the self-system [17f]. New music fre-quently challenges performers to reinvent themselves, but Cage ’s con-AUSTIN CLARKSON
74
22. For the Birds, 120. See also John Holzaepfel, “David Tudor and the Performance of Amer-
ican Experimental Music, 1950 –1959” (Ph.D. diss., City University of New York, 1994).
ditions are even more stringent. He requires that musicians not only re-
invent themselves, but do so by means of a “vibratory activity ” that they
themselves must invent. The challenge for orchestral musicians, whosepowers of invention must usually submit to other demands, is to be likecomposers, taking responsibility for their individual creativity and en-gaging the self-system as they play. This cannot be accomplished with afew hours of rehearsal. Even performers long committed to Cage’ s mu-
sic have struggled to meet these demands, as Margaret Leng Tan revealsin the story of her last meeting with Cage.
Tan visited Cage in early August of 1992 to work on some pieces she
was preparing for festivals in Europe that fall. Two years earlier, afterher performance of One
2,a piece Cage had written for her, the composer
had made a comment that still bothered her: “I would really prefer it,Margaret, if you didn ’t take it so seriously, but rather, play whatever
comes to hand when you get to each piano without knowing what youare going to do until you get there. ” Tan had worked out in detail her
earlier versions and felt secure with them, but Cage had said that sheshould forget her planned realization and play what came to her in themoment. This required a change of attitude —a leap of faith —for which
she did not yet feel ready. The problem baf ﬂed her, and so she returned
to work on One
2for the third time with great trepidation. Cage had writ-
ten extensively on what he meant by indeterminate performance [12 –
16], but it was another thing to achieve it in practice. Tan is celebratedfor her renditions of Cage’ s music. Her admission that she was stumped
reveals the humility and dedication that is needed for this work. Thenthe breakthrough happened:
It was very simple: I didn ’t have to do anything. Having prepared the ma-
terial thoroughly, I had only to draw spontaneously on the reservoir of
possibilities at the moment of performance to make a truly indetermi-nate performance, the outcome of which would be different each time andunpredictable even to me. As I arrived at each piano, I would ﬁnd notthat I was going to play but, rather, that I (or “It”) was playing. At the in-
stant of sound, I would be simultaneously performer and audience; eval-uating the results would be irrelevant. “Simply let sounds be sounds, ” in
John ’s words.
The solution had eluded her because she was relying on old habits for
preparing pieces. The moment of illumination came when she discoveredthat if the conscious mind gives up some measure of control, the ego willtrust that a transpersonal “It” will play [15]. From this transpersonal position where the ego-system shares control with the self-system, theego becomes deintegrated and permeable. The conscious attitude of theTHE INTENT OF THE MUSICAL MOMENT
75
performer becomes more ﬂexible and can expand to incorporate the roles
of the composer and the listener. Tan found that when the ego-system
comes in touch with the self-system, the ego becomes less critical andjudgmental, facilitating rather than inhibiting the creative process. Shecontinues:
As I shared these discoveries with John, he made me feel that I was on
the right track. He con ﬁrmed that One2is about “space-time” (embodied
in the Japanese concept of ma, where space and time are perceived as co-
incidental and indivisible). He suggested that I use an I-Ching chart of
possibilities in my various approaches to the three pianos so I would notbe “wandering around aimlessly. ” When I observed that I would be like
the bell ringer who goes about sounding the bells yet letting them speakfor themselves, John beamed and said, “You ’ve got it. ”
Cage was still not satisﬁed with how Tan moved from piano to piano and
suggested that she consult the I Ching to guide her movements. She
must have been surprised at this. First Cage said to prepare less, andnow he was telling her to prepare more. But consulting the I Ching is not
the same as preparing out of the ego-system, for it models how to op-erate out of the self-system. And perhaps Cage knew that in the I ChingTan might ﬁnd the teacher who would replace him when he was gone.As Tan left, Cage was preparing to bake cookies, and twenty-four hourslater he suffered the fatal stroke. At the time he died, Tan relates, shewas practicing and trying to apply what she had learned the previousday. New questions came up, but she did not call right away thinkingthat the issues might resolve themselves. When she heard the news ofCage’ s death, she was ﬁlled with terror that he would no longer be there
to answer her questions. But then she realized that like him she shouldhold onto the questions rather than seek the answers. Tan had foundher new teacher.
23
Tan’s story can be taken as a paradigm of how the self-system has a
noetic function in respect to the ego-system. Cage had to show Tan thatthe task of preparing the materials is a prelude to playing spontaneouslyand creatively in the presentational state. When Cage suggested that shebe less serious, he was implying that she play more playfully, but hemeant the serious play that for D. W. Winnicott is the basis of thehealthy development of the child. It is the kind of play that operates outof the self-system, where “the individual child or adult is able to be cre-ative and to use the whole personality, and it is only in being creativethat the individual discovers the self. ”
24Tan discovered that by playingAUSTIN CLARKSON
76
23. Margaret Leng Tan, “John Cage Poses a Few Last Questions, ” Musicworks 59 (summer
1994): 47 –48.
24. Playing and Reality (London: Tavistock Publications, 1971), 54.
this way she could achieve the presentational state of awareness Cage
desired [17a]. At each moment the ego-system must leave open thequestion as to what is to be next so that the self-system may participate[13]. The ego must let go the fear of failure, have faith that the questionwill be answered and that the self will respond. The sounds that sud-denly happen will not be predictable according to canons of style, butthe ego trusts that they will realize the intent of the moment. The ques-tioning, playful, and devoted attitude of the performer invites the listen-ers to be present openly in the abundance of their own imaginations.The performance is a discovery of the potential of the moment to be infused with meaningful sounds, where meaning does not arise from arhetoric of expressive devices, a grammar of signs, or implications thatdepend on being realized. There is no need for interpretation, as thereis no space between the listener and the sounds for translating symbolsinto discursive meanings. Hermeneutic windows cannot be opened, asthey have no handles. Sending and receiving are simultaneous in a con-tinuous creation of felt meanings. To the critic who says that “musi-cal understanding cashes out in the ability to describe music, ”
25Cage
would reply that “nothing one does gives rise to anything that is pre-conceived, ” and “the complex of existence exceeds mentation ’s com-
pass” [13, 14]. The listener does not stand outside the experience in or-der to describe, analyze, and understand it, but co-creates and undergoesit. Undergoing cashes out in the capacity to reside in the liminal zonebetween consciousness and unconsciousness. Objectivity and subjectiv-ity begin to ﬂoat freely on the sea of selfhood. It is the point in the “Lec-
ture on Nothing, ” before a full-page pause, when the listener is carried
into the borderland between the ego-system and the self-system: “Orig-inally we were nowhere; and now, again we are having the pleasure ofbeing slowly nowhere. If anybody is sleepy, let him go to sleep” [6]. Iflisteners stay awake, they are in the hypnagogic realm, where oppositesinterﬂow —the listener is yin and the sound is yang —or the sound is
yin and the listener is yang. As the music ends and consciousness ﬂoats
back to ﬁrm shores, there is a feeling of awe and fulﬁllment. “That is ﬁn-
ished now, ” Cage continues after the pause. “It was a pleasure. ” The
“Lecture on Nothing” shows the phases of undergoing the act of listen-ing in the presentational mode.
Professional musicians experienced in performing experimental mu-
sic conﬁrm Tan ’s account of letting a transpersonal agency take over. A
pianist remarks on performing experimental music: “You are in a senseoutside yourself. You are anonymous, and the interpreter ’s and author’ s
role[s] are secondary to the moment of now. That now takes precedence.THE INTENT OF THE MUSICAL MOMENT
77
25. Kivy, Music Alone, 101.
That now is almost playing you. ” And a percussionist says: “It’ s not the
instrument alone, it ’s not the player alone, there is an anonymity to that
sound. It is precisely this unanalysable quality, this anonymity, which de-
ﬁes categorization, that allows the sound to communicate to others. ”26
These musicians describe how they enter a transpersonal state wherethere is just “a sound happening. ” The diminished functioning of the
ego-system is felt as a loss of identity, a state of anonymity, and a loss ofrational discrimination among the components of the event. But thereis a gain in the state of heightened awareness that incorporates the rolesof performer, composer, and listener. And a spiritual quality pervadeswhen the musician senses a merging with the instrument and the mu-sic in a holistic “sound” that is happening, as though the musician is 
being played by the music. Moreover, this presentational state enfoldsthe musician and the attentive members of the audience in a commu-nal ﬂow of felt meanings.
IV. The Synthesis: Mace, Eckhart, Jung, Suzuki, and the I Ching
When Oskar Fischinger told the young Cage that “everything in the
world has a spirit which is released by its sound, ” he gave Cage permis-
sion to regard the career of a composer as a spiritual vocation.
27By his
mid-thirties, Cage was sorting out his stance as a composer in regard tothe religious question. In a talk on the impact of Eastern music on theWest, he listed composers according to whether they were openly af ﬁli-
ated to an organized religion (Hovhaness and Messiaen), wrote sacredmusic that was not sectarian in nature (Lou Harrison), or did not writesacred music as such but had a strong element of the spiritual in theirmusic (Varèse, Ruggles, and Thomson) [2]. It is clear that Cage sidedwith the last group, that is, with those who, as he said, “imbue their mu-
sic with the ineffable” by incorporating Oriental or other non-Westernelements. In an aside he declared his opposition to those who, likeSchoenberg, intellectualize music, and who, like the Freudians, dwell onneurosis. Here Cage stood opposed to what he took to be an analyticaland reductionist attitude to both music and the mind. He implied thathis calling was to heal the mind with music grounded in Eastern prin-ciples of spirituality.
From about 1948 on, when Cage spoke about the purpose of mu-
sic he would generally offer two types of statements, one spiritual andAUSTIN CLARKSON
78
26. The musicians were interviewed as part of a research project in presentational states.
The interview with the percussionist was recorded in Toronto, April 26, 1996, and with the pia-
nist on January 19, 1997. The percussionist had known Cage since the 1970s and had workedwith him on many performances.
27. Thomas Hines, “Then Not Yet ‘Cage’: The Los Angeles Years, 1912 –1938, ” in Perloff and
Junkerman, John Cage, 90–91.
the other psychological. For the spiritual statement he quoted Thomas
Mace, the seventeenth-century English composer, lutenist, and author[3a]. Mace’ s book, Musick’ s Monument (1676), does not contain the sen-
tence Cage refers to as such, but the component phrases can be foundin separate passages: “[T]o Season, and Sober his Mind, or Elevate his Af-
fection to Goodness” comes from one passage, and “[M]aking us capable ofHeavenly, and Divine Inﬂuences” comes from another.
28Thomas Mace (ca.
1612 –1706) began as a chorister and then became a clerk of Trinity Col-
lege, Cambridge, where he was closely associated with the school of phi-losophers and theologians known as the Cambridge Platonists. Leadingmembers of the school, Ralph Cudworth and Henry More, appear in thelist of subscribers to his book. Cudworth (1617 –88) was the principal
systematic philosopher of the group, while More (1614 –87) was the
chief exponent of its mystical side. These philosophers and theologiansgathered their ideas from Pythagoras and the supposedly pre-PlatonicHermes Trismegistus and the Chaldaean Oracles. Some of them believedthat the Platonic tradition, which led back from Ficino, Plotinus, andProclus to Pythagoras and Plato, could be traced to the biblical wisdomof Moses and the Jewish Kabbalah. The Cambridge Platonists wereunited in their opposition to Calvinist predestination, sectarianism,atheism, and to certain doctrines of the new generation of experimen-tal scientists and philosophers, in particular, the materialism of Hobbesand the mechanistic theories of Descartes. In fact, More is credited withcoining “materialist” and “Cartesian ” as derogatory epithets for those
modes of thought.
29
Since the sentence from Mace is evidently Neoplatonic in origin, it is
tempting to describe Cage as a Pythagorean, but when Joan Retallacksuggested to him that he stood closer to Pythagoras than to the I Ching,
he disagreed.
30For the Pythagorean numbers have divine powers, and
Mace explains how the Great Chain of Being is organized by musical octaves to draw all existence harmoniously to the Godhead. One of hisdoggerels states the doctrine: “Mysterious Center of All Mysterie; / AllTHE INTENT OF THE MUSICAL MOMENT
79
28.“[W]hich [modern music of which Mace does not approve] is rather ﬁt to make a Mans
Ears Glow, and ﬁll his Brains full of Frisks, &c. than to Season, and Sober his Mind, or Elevate his Af-
fection to Goodness” (Thomas Mace, Musick’ s Monument [London, 1676; Paris: Centre National de
la Recherche Scientiﬁque, 1958], 236). “That They [the “Grave Musick” of the past] have been to
my self, (and many others) as Divine Raptures, Powerfully Captivating all our unruly Faculties, and Affec-
tions, (for the Time) and disposing us to Solidity, Gravity, and a Good Temper; making us capable of Heav-enly, and Divine Inﬂuences” (ibid, 234). The typography is original.
29.“Cambridge Platonists” and “Henry More, ” in The Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy, ed.
Robert Audi (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995). For a survey of the Cambridge Pla-tonists, see Basil Wiley, The Seventeenth-Century Background (1934; New York: Anchor, n.d.),
chap. 8.
30. Musicage, 236.
Things Originate Themselves in Thee; / And in Their Revolution, wholly
tend / To Thee, Their Octave, Their Most Happy End. ”31On one level
the end of music for Cage was not to resound in the perfect consonancesof the cosmos, but to activate the creative process in the individual mu-sician. “Square root” temporal schemes, magic squares, and throwing
the I Ching were not designed to achieve harmony with a transcendent
Godhead, but rather to liberate sounds from the constraints of tradition.And yet Cage’ s ethical intent, while not Neoplatonic as such, was to
strive for a spiritual transcendence. And he did share other traits withMace. Both enjoyed telling amusing anecdotes that were in fact teach-ing stories, and both were opposed to current trends in contemporarymusic. Mace’ s comment on the role of music is drawn from passages in
which he praises the ability of the older styles to achieve the proper ef-fects of music. He utterly disapproves of the music of his own day, whichmakes the “Ears Glow” and “ﬁlls his Brains full of Frisks. ” Cage, too, did
not much like modernist music, and his enthusiasm for the music ofSatie is somewhat similar to Mace’ s defense of the reserved music of the
past. In later years, Cage forgot the original source of this view and attributed it to the musician Gita Sarabhai, who had introduced him in the late forties to Indian music and the writings of Sri Ramakrishna.Thus, for Cage, Mace’ s comment came to stand on a deeper level for a
perennial philosophy of music that links spiritual traditions in both theWest and the East.
32
The psychological rationale for music also appears in Cage’ s lectures
from 1948 and 1949. It is that music brings together the conscious (orrational) and the unconscious (or irrational) by integrating split-off partsof the psyche and so leading to psychological wholeness [3b –c, 4, 5]. He
mentions speciﬁcally a book of essays by Jung with the title The Inte-gration of the Personality.
33These essays were selected and translated by
Stanley Dell so as to cover the principal concepts of Jung ’s psychology —
the unconscious, the complex, archetypes, the dream, the problem ofthe opposites, the transcendent function, the technique of active imagi-nation, the individuation process, the mandala as symbol of the self, andso forth. In this book and perhaps other books by Jung, Cage found aAUSTIN CLARKSON
80
31. Musick’ s Monument, 269.
32. Aldous Huxley and Ananda Coomaraswamy both provided Cage with ideas about a pe-
rennial philosophy. Cf. Pritchett, The Music of John Cage, 36; Patterson, “ Appraising the Catch-
words, ” 73.
33. This was formerly not recognized to be the title of a book. The Integration of the Person-
ality, ed. Stanley Dell (New York: Farrar and Rinehart, 1939), contains the following essays:
(1)“The Meaning of Individuation, ” (2) “A Study in the Process of Individuation, ” (3) “Arche-
types of the Collective Unconscious, ” (4) “Dream Symbols of the Process of Individuation, ”
(5)“The Idea of Redemption in Alchemy, ” and (6) “The Development of the Personality. ” The
essays, somewhat revised and expanded, appear in Jung ’s Collected Works as follows: (1) CW
9/1:275; (2) CW9/1:290; (3) CW9/1:3; (4) CW12; (5) CW12; (6) CW17:167.
pragmatic approach to the psyche that valued religious experience in
general and Eastern spiritual traditions in particular. That Jung linked hispsychology to Zen, Taoism, and medieval mysticism must have strength-ened its appeal for Cage.
Jung was deeply inﬂuenced by the pragmatism of William James,
whose research into the nature of consciousness went beyond the bor-ders of academic psychology into typology, parapsychology, and reli-gious experience. Eugene Taylor shows that for Jung, who also wasgreatly interested in these areas, James was a pioneer of fundamentalimportance to his development. Already in his doctoral thesis on occultphenomena (1902), Jung had cited cases from James’ s Principles of Psy-
chology (1890). During the Clark University conference of 1909 at which
Freud and Jung were both given honorary degrees, Jung met withJames and discussed James’ s work with a medium. James’ s writings
were fundamental to many of Jung’ s basic formulations. In the intro-
duction to his Fordham University lectures of 1912, Jung quoted fromJames ’s Pragmatism the passage given above, which begins, “You must
bring out of each word its practical cash-value. ” He cited James at that
juncture to indicate that after parting ways with Freud he was return-ing to his roots in a pragmatic approach to the mind in which empiricalmethod takes precedence over dogmatic theories. James also provided afoundation for Jung’ s concepts of psychological types and the uncon-
scious.
34In the essay “On the Nature of the Psyche, ” Jung quotes the
passage by James (also given above) that begins “The important factwhich this ‘ﬁeld formula’ commemorates, ” which describes the liminal
realm beyond consciousness as containing the past memories, residualpowers, impulses, and knowledge that constitute the empirical self.
Oriental religions and Jung’ s depth psychology aroused much inter-
est among artists and humanists in the United States during the 1930sand thereafter, and Cage’ s study of these subjects intensi ﬁed when he
came to New York in the early 1940s. He was then friends with JosephCampbell, who published his key to Finnegans Wake in 1944 and his ﬁrst
treatise on mythology, The Hero with a Thousand Faces, in 1949. Campbell
acknowledged his debt to Jung for pioneering studies in comparativemythology and for the concept of the archetypes.
35Artists with whomTHE INTENT OF THE MUSICAL MOMENT
81
34. Eugene Taylor, “William James and C. G. Jung, ” Spring (Dallas), 1980, 157, 163, 166;
Henri F. Ellenberger, The Discovery of the Unconscious (New York: Basic Books, 1970), 706 –7.
35. Cage stayed with Joseph Campbell in the summer of 1942 (Revill, Roaring Silence, 80).
The Integration of the Personality is among the books by Jung that Campbell quotes in The Hero with
a Thousand Faces, which was published the year after Cage gave the lecture at Vassar College.
That lecture concluded with Cage saying that he planned to collaborate in writing operas with
Campbell, who presumably was sitting in the audience (in Kostelanetz, John Cage: Writer, 44). For
Campbell’ s view of Jung, see “Mythological Themes in Creative Literature and Art, ” in Myths,
Dreams, and Religion, ed. Joseph Campbell (New York: Dutton, 1970), 138.
Cage associated in the forties were interested in Jung for similar reasons,
namely, for his view of the unconscious as more than a repository of re-pressed contents and for his concept of the libido as manifesting itself indrives other than sexuality. He was also noted for treating the image notonly as a symptom to be rationally explained, but as the bearer of theunknown factor that points the way to individuation. Thus Jung warnedagainst reductive analyses of images through a ﬁxed system of inter-
pretation. Furthermore, he was known as a commentator on texts thatwere of interest to those who looked to the Orient for alternatives toChristianity.
36Jung was for Cage and many artists an authority on
depth psychology as well as on the psychological implications of East-ern religions. Cage believed that the goal of the creative process was thetransformation of the individual, a concept for which he found muchsupport in Jung, who regarded the purpose of psychological work as dis-covering from images thrown up from the unconscious the meaningsthat guide the individual on the path to wholeness. Jung called it “the
process of individuation ” and looked to the East for an analogy, which
he found in Zen and the I Ching. In particular, the Taoist idea of the Way
accorded with his notion of the individuation process: “The undiscov-ered vein within us is a living part of the psyche; classical Chinese phi-losophy names this interior way ‘Tao,’ and likens it to a ﬂow of water
that moves irresistibly towards its goal. To rest in Tao means ful ﬁllment,
wholeness, one’ s destination reached, one’ s mission done; the begin-
ning, end, and perfect realization of the meaning of existence innate inall things. Personality is Tao. ”
37
Cage’ s search for a new spiritual and psychological basis for his com-
positional practice ended in 1949 when he created a synthesis betweenMeister Eckhart and Jung in the lecture “Forerunners of Modern Mu-sic.” Since Jung himself often quoted Eckhart, the synthesis was readily
accomplished. Cage begins by citing Eckhart to the effect that the pur-pose of music is to set “the soul in operation, ” deﬁning the soul as “theAUSTIN CLARKSON
82
36. Cf. Terree Grabenhorst-Randall, “Jung and Abstract Expressionism, ” and “ Artists’
Roundtable: Jung’ s Inﬂuence, ” in C. G. Jung and the Humanities, ed. K. Barnaby and P. d’Acierno
(Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1990), 185 –216. Artists of New York who acknowl-
edged the impact of Jungian ideas on their work include John Ferren, Adolph Gottlieb, Ibram
Lassaw, Jackson Pollock, Robert Rauchenberg, and Mark Rothko.
Jung wrote commentaries on The Secret of the Golden Flower (London: K. Paul, Trench, Trub-
ner, and Co., 1931), The Tibetan Book of the Dead (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1953), The Ti-
betan Book of the Great Liberation (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1954), Suzuki, Introduction to
Zen Buddhism (London: Rider, 1949), and The I Ching (written in 1945; published in 1950). Also
the essays “Yoga and the West, ” Prabuddha Bharata (Calcutta), 1936, and “The Psychology of
Eastern Meditation ” (1943), in Art and Thought, in Honor of Ananda Coomaraswamy, ed. K. Bha-
ratha Iyer (London: Luzac, 1947).
37. Jung, “A Study in the Process of Individuation, ” in The Integration of the Personality, CW
9/1:340; Jung, “The Development of Personality, ” CW 17:186.
gatherer-together of the disparate elements . . . , its work ﬁlls one with
peace and love. ”38The soul here is not the totality of the psyche, but
rather the several elements that together form the personality, as inJung’ s terminology. Cage then quotes a paragraph verbatim from a ser-
mon of Eckhart that speaks of how “unselfconsciousness” is achieved bymeans of “transformed knowledge. ” This passage, which has puzzled
Cage’ s commentators, becomes clear in the light of the structure of the
psyche as outlined by Jung.
The original version of Cage’ s lecture differs in important respects
from the version reprinted in Silence. The principal change is the omis-
sion of a diagram that Cage drew to illustrate the section titled “Strat-egy” (see ﬁg. 3.1). The diagram has two phrases that do not appear inthe main text and thus are altogether missing from the later version.The two phrases read: “consciously controlled” and “unconsciously al-lowed to be. ” The former is written in the upper margin and positioned
toward the left-hand side, where the word “mind” is inscribed in acircle. The latter phrase is in the lower margin and positioned towardthe right-hand side, where the word “heart” is inscribed in anothercircle. The meaning of the opposition between the “conscious mind”and “unconscious heart” is made clear in the footnote, in which Cage
asserts emphatically that to exclude the irrational from composing is ir-rational in the extreme. Thus the diagram is even more explicit than thetext in presenting Cage’ s new paradigm, namely, that musical form is to
structure as the freedom-to-be of the heart is to the mind, and as the (ir-rational) unconscious is to the (rational) conscious. The phrases “con-
sciously controlled ” and “unconsciously allowed to be” clearly refer
both to Jung’ s concept of unconscious contents that are allowed to ﬂowTHE INTENT OF THE MUSICAL MOMENT
83
38.“Forerunners of Modern Music, ” in The Boulez-Cage Correspondence, ed. Jean-Jacques
Nattiez (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993), 38. This passage is cited more com-
pletely in the appendix to this chapter [5].FIGURE 3.1
Diagram from Cage’s “Forerunners of Modern Music,” in The Boulez-Cage Correspondence, ed.
Jean-Jacques Nattiez (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993), 39.

into consciousness through the activated imagination and to Eckhart ’s
notion of “our ignorance” (that is, Jung’ s ego) being “informed by the
divine unconsciousness” (that is, Jung’ s unconscious). The paragraph
from Eckhart then af ﬁrms the concept of the dynamic process by which
the ego becomes more conscious of the inﬁnite ﬁeld of the unconscious.
The words of Meister Eckhart, that “our ignorance will be ennobled and
adorned with supernatural knowledge, ” could as cogently have been
Jung’ s: “The whole must necessarily include not only consciousness but
the illimitable ﬁeld of unconscious occurrences as well, and that the ego
can be no more than the centre of the ﬁeld of consciousness. ”39The syn-
thesis of Eckhart and Jung that Cage achieved in 1949 formed the basis
for the praxis that became the music of indeterminacy. His later writ-ings, as in the 1958 lecture titled “Indeterminacy, ” continue to elaborate
this paradigm [12a –d].
Cage’ s next step was to introduce chance as the means of breaking
down the “ignorance” of the ego in order to let in the “divine uncon-sciousness. ” In January of 1950, that is, before Cage saw the Bollingen
edition of the I Ching, he wrote to Pierre Boulez about composing mu-
sic for a ﬁlm on Alexander Calder. He recounted how he started thepiece in a dream and wanted to use unrelated sounds by recording ma-terial four times, changing the preparation of the piano each time. Hethen found he had to write the music anyway and concluded, “Chance
comes in here to give us the unknown ” [7a]. In other words, chance
served to break down the ego’ s resistance to the unconscious. Chance is
here for Cage the agent for releasing musical “form” from the uncon-
scious “heart” into the conscious “mind. ” It was this concept of chance
that caused the split with Boulez, who answered Cage many monthslater (December 1951) that “chance must be extremely controlled . . . asthere is already quite enough of the unknown. ” There is an uncanny
resonance here with the split that occurred some forty years before be-tween Jung and Freud, when they broke off their association over a sim-ilar difference of belief.
When Christian Wolff presented Cage with the Bollingen edition of
the I Ching sometime later in 1950, Cage discovered the means for put-
ting the new synthesis into operation. The I Ching, with the foreword by
Jung, brought Eckhart, Jung, Zen, Taoism, and chance into a fortunatesynchrony. From then on the I Ching was Cage’ s sage, whether he con-
sulted it about life issues or used it as a source of numbers for his musicof indeterminacy [18].
The Bollingen edition of the I Ching had been conceived twenty yearsAUSTIN CLARKSON
84
39. Jung, “ A Study in the Process of Individuation, ” 276.
before. Jung had begun to experiment with the Legge translation of the
I Ching in about 1920 and became fascinated with its ability to provide
meaningful answers to his questions. He was soon using the I Ching in
psychotherapeutic sessions with his patients as a means of bringing un-conscious factors into clearer focus. When Richard Wilhelm’ s German
translation of the I Ching came out in 1923, Jung invited Wilhelm to
demonstrate the method of consulting the I Ching to his colleagues and
students at the Psychology Club in Zurich. Wilhelm died in 1930, andJung was invited to give the eulogy. He paid tribute to Wilhelm’ s enor-
mous achievement in translating and commenting on the I Ching, for as
Jung saw it, the I Ching provided “an Archimedean point from which
our Western attitude of mind could be lifted off its foundations. ” Jung
then took the opportunity to articulate for the ﬁrst time his theory of
acausal order, which he believed underlay the operation of the I Ching:“The science of the I Ching is based not on the causality principle but on
one which —hitherto unnamed because not familiar to us —I have ten-
tatively called the synchronistic principle. ” Although Jung had reser-
vations about the applicability of some aspects of Eastern thought andpractice to Western life, he held no doubts about the cardinal impor-tance of the I Ching: “We must continue Wilhelm’ s work of translation
in a wider sense if we wish to show ourselves worthy pupils of the mas-ter. The central concept of Chinese philosophy is tao, which Wilhelmtranslated as ‘meaning. ’ Just as Wilhelm gave the spiritual treasure 
of the East a European meaning, so we should translate this meaninginto life. ”
40
Jung encouraged Cary Baynes, who had already rendered several of
Jung’ s works into English, to translate the German edition under Wil-
helm’ s supervision, and she began work on it in 1929. The translation
was accepted for publication in the Bollingen Series, and the ﬁrst Bollin-gen catalog, issued in the fall of 1943, listed the I Ching, with “Dr. C. G.
Jung’ s valuable commentary. ” Baynes received Jung’ s foreword in late
1945, but she put off translating it because she was worried lest Jung bebranded even more an occultist than he already had been. In the com-mentary, Jung describes how he consulted the I Ching in order to receive
advice from the oracle on the right attitude to take in presenting the bookto Western readers. Baynes was ﬁnally persuaded to translate the fore-THE INTENT OF THE MUSICAL MOMENT
85
40. Jung, “Richard Wilhelm: In Memoriam, ” CW15:55, 56, 59. In a later reminiscence of
Wilhelm included with his memoirs, Jung described in more detail his early experiments with
the I Ching and its application to his work with patients, which led him to the idea of “acausal
parallelism, ” later termed “synchronicity” ( Memories, Dreams, Reﬂections [New York: Vintage,
1965], 373 –77). Thus, Jung ﬁrst articulated the notion of synchronicity in 1930, not in the fore-
word to the Bollingen edition of the I Ching. Cf. Charles Hamm, “Privileging the Moment: Cage,
Jung, Synchronicity, Postmodernism, ” Journal of Musicology 15, no. 2 (1997): 285.
AUSTIN CLARKSON
86 word as Jung wrote it, and the manuscript went to the printer in 1948.
When the proofs came back, Baynes contacted Wilhelm’ s son Hellmut,
also a scholar of Chinese literature, for assistance in checking them withthe original sources. This took another year, and the English edition waspublished at last in April of 1950.
41The copy of the I Ching that Chris-
tian Wolff presented to Cage in 1950 was thus the product of a lengthycollaboration between scholars from the East and the West.
In the foreword, Jung sets out the crisis of chance and necessity in
Western thought in terms that Cage must have found of absorbing inter-est: “The axioms of causality are being shaken to their foundations. . . .
If we leave things to nature . . . every process is partially or totally inter-fered with by chance, so much so that under natural circumstances acourse of events absolutely conforming to speciﬁc laws is almost an ex-ception. ” In respect to the concept of chance, Jung continued:
I have termed synchronicity a concept that formulates a point of view
diametrically opposed to that of causality. Since [causality] is a mere sta-tistical truth and not absolute, it is a sort of working hypothesis of howevents evolve one out of another, whereas synchronicity takes the co-incidence of events in space and time as meaning something more thanmere chance, namely a peculiar interdependence of objective eventsamong themselves as well as with the subjective (psychic) state of the observer or observers.
42
Cage had already been experimenting with chance, but throwing
coins while consulting the ancient Chinese book of wisdom for the
numbers of its hexagrams gave chance the spiritual context for whichCage was searching. Jung’ s enthusiastic advocacy of the I Ching and the
cardinal importance he gave to chance as a corrective to Western mate-rialism could only have strengthened Cage’ s intent. By basing his com-
positional practice on the I Ching, Cage too would assist in applying the
oracle to contemporary life. Cage also fell in with Jung’ s bias against
causality. Like Jung, Cage sought to compensate for the Western em-phasis on logic and causality with an equal and opposite emphasis onchance. However, it has been demonstrated that the I Ching is as open
41. This account of the publishing history of the I Ching is drawn from William McGuire,
Bollingen: An Adventure in Collecting the Past (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1982),
19, 73, 101, 179 –81. The date of publication of the Bollingen edition has been placed somewhat
later. Cf. Revill, Roaring Silence, 131.
42. C. G. Jung, foreword to The I Ching; or, Book of Changes, translated into English by Cary F.
Baynes from the German of Richard Wilhelm (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1950),
xxii–xxiii. It was the foreword to the I Ching that Cage recalled as the source for Jung’ s concept
of synchronicity [11]. Cage recommended to Joan Retallack that she read the I Ching in the
Bollingen edition with the essay on synchronicity by Jung (see Musicage: xviii). Jung wrote sep-
arate essays on synchronicity in 1951 and 1952, see “Synchronicity: An Acausal ConnectingPrinciple, ” in CW 8:419 –519; and “On Synchronicity, ” in ibid., 520 –31.
to causality as it is to chance. Lama Govinda shows that the I Ching does
not reject the principle of causality, but rather includes it as the basis for
the temporal ordering of things.43Nevertheless, Cage thereafter used
the formulation “I Ching chance operations” to describe his method of
putting into operation the Eckhart-Jung paradigm, as though the I Ching
were the source of chance alone [18]. The I Ching was for Cage far more
than a quaint and antique source of random numbers, as it is so oftencharacterized. It was the way of seasoning and sobering the mind, bring-ing Eckhart’ s ignorance in touch with Grund, Jung’ s conscious in touch
with the unconscious, and ﬁnally Suzuki ’s small-m mind in touch with
Mind [17c, 17f].
Cage was working out the compositional applications of the new syn-
thesis while he attended the lectures of Daisetz T. Suzuki. He was al-ready experimenting with the I Ching when he said to Suzuki that he
was making a connection between his work and Zen and asked what themaster had to say about art.
44Cage’ s studies in Oriental thought during
the forties had led him to the Indian theory of rasaas a source for a rep-
resentational aesthetic, but when this did not achieve what he desired,he gravitated toward Zen Buddhism. Suzuki, who was the leading inter-preter of Zen for the Western reader, came to the United States in 1897to work for Paul Carus, publisher of the Open Court Press in La Salle,Illinois, and a philosopher in his own right. Suzuki ’s writings and trans-
lations ﬁrst began to appear in English in the following year. Through
Carus, who was the principal publisher of the writings of Peirce andwho corresponded with William James, Suzuki came to know James’ s
writings and was greatly inﬂuenced by them.
45Suzuki repeatedly casts
his argument in the form of a comparison and contrast between Zen andChristian mysticism as treated by James in The Varieties of Religious Expe-
rience, which he often cites. For instance, he quotes James on the noetic
quality of mystic experience and ﬁnds that this applies to Zen satori. In
characterizing Zen, Suzuki sometimes links it to James’ s pragmatism, as
when he describes “its simplicity, its directness, its pragmatic tendency,and its close connection with everyday life. ” In this fashion Suzuki built
a bridge between Zen and the pragmatism of James, which accounts inpart for the wide acceptance his writings found among Western read-THE INTENT OF THE MUSICAL MOMENT
87
43.“The I Ching is based on the principles of synchronicity and causality, which proves that
they need not be mutually exclusive, but that the one can contain the other, while going be-
yond it. We therefore need not choose between the systems of Fu Hi and King Wen, but can accept both, depending on whether we want to see the world in its universal or its temporal as-pect” (Lama Anagarika Govinda, The Inner Structure of the I Ching [Weatherhill: Wheelwright
Press, 1981], 157).
44. See Revill, Roaring Silence, 124.
45. Harold Henderson, Catalyst for Controversy: Paul Carus of Open Court (Carbondale: South-
ern Illinois University Press, 1993), 102 –7.
ers.46After returning to Japan in 1909, Suzuki remained there as pro-
fessor of English at Tokyo Imperial University. He continued to make
translations of Buddhist texts and publish his essays on Zen Buddhism,while keeping in touch with developments in the West, particularlywith the writings of C. G. Jung. In 1933, as a mark of his regard, Suzukisent Jung a copy of the Second Series of Essays in Zen Buddhism, to which
Jung responded with a letter in which he wrote that he was already anadmirer of Suzuki’ s work and describing Zen as “a true goldmine for the
needs of the Western ‘psychologist. ’” Jung’ s interest in Suzuki ’s writings
continued, and six years later he wrote a foreword to the German edi-tion of Suzuki’ s An Introduction to Zen Buddhism. Jung’ s foreword was
then translated into English for the republication of that book in 1949.In that year, at the age of seventy-nine, Suzuki again left Japan. Hespent a year in Hawaii and another year at Claremont College in Cali-fornia before going on a tour of American universities. He ﬁnally arrived
in New York in 1951, where he taught at Columbia University as profes-sor of religion until 1957.
47
Suzuki continued to engage with developments in depth psychology,
and in his book The Zen Doctrine of No-Mind, which ﬁrst appeared in 1949,
he investigates the similarities and differences between the Zen andWestern ideas of the unconscious. Suzuki criticizes Jung ’s concept of “the
Unconscious” as a concrete entity and writes that the psychoanalyti-cal unconscious cannot go deep enough to include Zen No-Mind-ness.Suzuki develops a structure of the psyche that is based on the James-Jung model but goes beyond it in elaborating the interactions betweenthe conscious and unconscious levels. Thus, when Cage attended thelectures of Suzuki and consulted his writings, he encountered an inter-pretation of Zen that was richly charged with the pragmatism of Jamesand the depth psychology of Jung. And so it is important to keep in mindthe link between James, Suzuki, and Jung when considering the impactof Zen on Western culture in general and on Cage in particular.
48AUSTIN CLARKSON
88
46. Daisetz T. Suzuki, The Essentials of Zen Buddhism, ed. Bernard Phillips (London: Rider,
1963), 8, 164. Suzuki’ s most widely circulated writings: three series of Essays in Zen Buddhism
(London: Luzac, 1927, 1933, 1934); and An Introduction to Zen Buddhism (Kyoto: The Eastern Bud-
dhist Society, 1934), translated into German by Heinrich Zimmer and published in 1939 with a
foreword by C. G. Jung. The English edition of the book was reprinted in London and New Yorkin 1949 with Jung’ s foreword translated by Constance Rolfe; Zen Buddhism and Its In ﬂuence on Jap-
anese Culture (Kyoto: The Eastern Buddhist Society, 1938) was revised and republished as Zen
and Japanese Culture in the Bollingen Series (New York: Pantheon Books, 1959).
47. See C. G. Jung Letters, ed. Gerhard Adler and Aniela Jaffé (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton Uni-
versity Press, 1973), 1:128; and Bernard Phillips, introduction to Suzuki, The Essentials of ZenBuddhism, xxxvii –xil.
48. Suzuki, The Zen Doctrine of No-Mind (1949; York Beach, Me.: Samuel Weiser, 1972), 144.
Cage was eagerly awaiting the publication of Suzuki’ s writings at this time, as he indicates in a
letter to Boulez (January 1950); see The Boulez-Cage Correspondence, 50. Cf. J. J. Clarke, Jung and
Eastern Thought (London: Routledge, 1994), 131.
The central fact of Zen is satori, a mental state to which meditating on
a koan is a guide. Suzuki explains that the koan was devised in order to
counteract two tendencies in Zen Buddhism, one being quietism and
the other, intellectual analysis:
The worst enemy of Zen experience, at least in the beginning, is the in-
tellect, which consists and insists in discriminating subject from object.The discriminating intellect, therefore, must be cut short if Zen con-sciousness is to unfold itself, and the koan is constructed eminently to
serve this end. On examination we at once notice that there is no roomin the koan to insert an intellectual interpretation. The knife is not sharp
enough to cut the koan open and see what are its contents. For a koan is
not a logical proposition but the expression of a certain mental state re-sulting from the Zen discipline.
49
That mental state is satori:
Satori may be deﬁned as an intuitive looking into the nature of things in
contradistinction to the analytical or logical understanding of it. Practi-cally, it means the unfolding of a new world hitherto unperceived in theconfusion of a dualistically-trained mind. Or we may say that with satori
our entire surroundings are viewed from quite an unexpected angle ofperception. Whatever this is, the world for those who have gained a satori
is no more the old world as it used to be; even with all its ﬂowing streamsand burning ﬁres, it is never the same one again. Logically stated, all itsopposites and contradictions are united and harmonized into a consis-tent organic whole. This is a mystery and a miracle, but according to theZen masters such is being performed every day. Satori can thus be had
only through our once personally experiencing it.
50
It was the concepts of the koan and satori that led Jung to ﬁnd in Zen a
validation of some of his more radical conceptions. In looking back on
his work in later years, Jung often cites Zen as a close parallel to his ownthinking. For Jung the Buddha provides a more complete expression ofthe self than does the Christ, and Zen, like his own psychology, is basedon cognition of the self. Satori was for Jung an unmatched expression 
of the numinous, meaningful, and unrepeatable moment when the self-system breaks through into the ego-system:
When the old Chinese master asked the pupil with whom he was walk-
ing at the time of the blossoming laurel: Do you smell it? and the pupilTHE INTENT OF THE MUSICAL MOMENT
89
49. Suzuki, Essentials of Zen Buddhism, 293. This passage is from the second series of essays
(1933).
50. Ibid., 154. Originally from the ﬁrst series of essays (1927).
experienced satori, we can still guess and understand the beauty and full-
ness of the moment of illumination. It is overwhelmingly clear that such
a kairos [the right or proper time, the favorable moment] can never be
brought back by a willful effort, however painstaking and methodical.51
In the foreword to Suzuki ’s Introduction to Zen Buddhism, Jung tries to
ﬁnd analogies between Zen and Western thought, as the conception of
satori, which he takes to be the raison d’être of Zen, is of such “unsur-
passed singularity. ” Jung was fascinated by the concept of satori because,
no matter how strange it may seem to the Western mind, it is a verysimple, natural occurrence akin to Eckhart ’s Durchbruch, and not a sys-
tem of abstract thought. Jung connected this breakthrough with hisown conception of the relation of the self to the ego: “However one may
deﬁne the self, it is always something other than the ego, and inasmuchas a higher insight of the ego leads over to self, the self is a more com-prehensive thing which includes the experience of the ego and there-fore transcends it. Just as the ego is a certain experience I have of my-self, so is the self an experience of my ego. It is, however, no longerexperienced in the form of a broader or higher ego, but in the form of a non-ego. ”
52The only parallel to Zen satori that Jung ﬁnds in the West
is in Meister Eckhart, whose “paradoxical statements, ” he says, “skirt
the edge of heterodoxy or actually overstep it, ” and he quotes a pas-
sage from Eckhart on the “breakthrough. ” Jung is also attracted by the
iconoclasm of the Zen masters and the extreme individualism of theirmethods. And in the technique of the koan he sees a radical attack 
on the integrity of the ego that he could ﬁnd nowhere else in Westernthought:
Since no logical sequence can be demonstrated, it remains to be sup-
posed that the koan method puts not the smallest restraint upon the 
freedom of the psychic process and that the end-result therefore springsfrom nothing but the individual disposition of the pupil. The completedestruction of the rational intellect aimed at in the training creates an almost perfect lack of conscious assumptions. These are excluded as faras possible, but not unconscious assumptions —that is, the existing but
unrecognized psychological disposition, which is anything but empty orunassuming. It is a nature-given factor, and when it answers —this be-
ing obviously the satori experience —it is an answer of Nature, who has
succeeded in conveying her reaction direct to the conscious mind. WhatAUSTIN CLARKSON
90
51. Jung Letters, 2:453 (1958), 601 (1960), respectively.
52. Jung, foreword to Suzuki’ s Introduction to Zen Buddhism, in CW 11:548, 542.
the unconscious nature of the pupil opposes to the teacher or to the koan
by way of an answer is, manifestly, satori.53
Jung explained the ability of the koan to produce satori as a breakdown
of the rational defenses of the ego-system so that contents from the un-
conscious can ﬂow in and activate the self, which for Jung was the keyto spiritual and mental health and to the successful outcome of the in-dividuation process. Jung’ s comments on the koan and satori illuminate
Cage’ s description of the music of indeterminacy, his call for danger-
ous, sudden listening, and his belief that a piece of music should be likea work of Nature [12a –c, 16]. Cage’ s compositions provide musicians a
koan-like guide to a breakthrough that brings musical enlightenment.
V. The Tertiary Process
Working with chance and the Eckhart-Jung-Zen paradigm, Cage de-vised an extraordinarily rich and varied repertoire of schemas for ac-tivating the musical imagination. Representation continued to play apart in his later compositions, as in Lecture on the Weather, but the time-
bracket pieces emphasize the presentational state. The time-bracketmethod fulﬁlls Cage’ s desire for actions without symbols or intellectual
references [8], actions that provide little knowledge about what is goingto happen next [17e], actions that are about attention to the soundssuddenly appearing [20], actions that have an element of risk [21c –d],
and actions that result in the continuous creation of meaning [17b]. Theact of letting sounds happen evokes presentational states of musical cognition. But, as Suzuki said about the koan, there is no room in the
presentational state to insert an intellectual operation. The analyticknife is not sharp enough to cut the music open and examine its contents, because the meaning is not in the sounds alone. We can re-cord performances of time-bracket pieces and transcribe them, but the sounds carry limited meaning in themselves when detached fromthe act of producing them and from the felt meanings of the per-formers and the listeners —which is why Cage said that a recording 
is as much like the thing itself as a postcard is of a landscape [12c]. Arecording provides audial documentation of the musical event, but does not convey the transpersonal outcome. Experimental music re-quires us to orient our discovery procedures away from structures ofsounds as such to encompass the presentational aspects of performingand listening.
Harry T. Hunt sets out a framework of concepts for researching the
presentational states that Cage regarded as central to his music. After aTHE INTENT OF THE MUSICAL MOMENT
91
53. Ibid., 549.
survey of the ﬁeld, Hunt points to the “peak experience” of Abraham
Maslow and the “ﬂow experience ” of Mihalyi Csikszentmihalyi as con-
cepts of the core condition:
All these terms describe a special sense of felt reality and clarity, with a
concomitant sense of exhilaration, freedom, and release. Such experi-ence is also involved in many accounts of lucid dreaming, where the sud-den realization that one is dreaming entails a special attention to one’ s
immediate here-and-now experience for its own sake and in a way thatis rare, not only within ordinary dreaming but in everyday life as well.This sense of vital presence is sought more formally as the “subtle” or
“imaginal” body experience of the meditative traditions.
54
Performing and listening in the presentational state allow felt meanings,
a sense of vital presence, and subtle or imaginal body phenomena tocome into consciousness, and so we need to develop a methodology forworking with such outcomes of aesthetic experience. These features ofthe peak or ﬂow experience are vital elements of Cage’ s musical actions,
but he would prefer that, like satori, they be natural, everyday occur-
rences rather than occasional ﬂights into “higher consciousness. ”
Experimental music as Cage conceives it greatly emphasizes presen-
tation over representation and, by so doing, points up the fundamentalimportance of presentation to all aesthetic experience. As we have already found, representation and presentation are complementary. Infact, it can be shown that activating the presentational state enhancesgreatly reception of the representational aspects of an artwork.
55If pre-
sentational states in music are valued, then felt meanings, subtle bodyexperiences, and creative outcomes will be accepted as an essential partof musical experience. This calls for understanding how the liminalzone between the conscious and the unconscious is mediated by theimaginal intelligence. The dadaists and surrealists were familiar withthese principles from their experiments with automatic writing, dreamimagery, collage, frottage, and the stream of consciousness. In this re-spect, Cage’ s experimental music belongs to the history of artistic and
psychological investigations of the active imagination.
56We must bewareAUSTIN CLARKSON
92
54. On the Nature of Consciousness, 200.
55. An installation at the Art Gallery of Ontario (Toronto) was designed to evoke the pre-
sentational state in the visitor while in the presence of an artwork. Visitors listen to a thirteen-
minute audio program that guides them through an active imagination exercise while viewingthe painting The Beaver Dam by J. E. H. MacDonald. The installation has been in operation since
January 1993. See my “The Sounds of Dry Paint: Animating the Imagination in a Gallery of Art, ”
Musicworks 63 (fall 1995): 20 –27.
56. Among many sources for this literature, see Lucy R. Lippard, ed., Surrealists on Art
(Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall, 1970), and Dadas on Art (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice
Hall, 1971).
the rationalistic prejudice that the data of mental experience cannot be
independently tested and veriﬁed. But support is now on its way evenfrom the tough-minded (as James liked to call rationalists). Some lead-ing neurobiologists now af ﬁrm that the era of stimulus-response behav-
iorism is well and truly dead, that all mentation is mediated by imagery,and that concepts of value and the self may have a neural basis.
57Nev-
ertheless, it will take still more evidence to persuade the tough-mindedthat the unconscious is a domain of the mind and has a noetic functionfor consciousness.
Those who are interested in the background to James’ s pragmatism
will ﬁnd it fascinating to explore the extensive literature of research in
psychic phenomena from the late nineteenth century.
58In the present
era, psychologists and psychiatrists have come to posit a border zone be-tween consciousness and the unconscious in which mental experiencesoccur that confound logical reasoning and literal thinking. James de-fended his interest in this area from those who want to reduce everymental phenomenon to biology, for whom “ideals appear as inert by-products of physiology, ” and who explain what is higher by what is
lower and treat it forever as a case of “nothing but something else of aquite inferior sort. ” In his book on religious experience, James referred
to the liminal zone as the region where we come in touch with what hereferred to as the mind’ s “germinal higher part”: an individual “becomes
conscious that this higher part is conterminous and continuous with a
MORE of the same quality, which is operative in the universe outside of
him, and which he can keep in working touch with, and in a fashion geton board of and save himself when all his lower being has gone to piecesin the wreck. ”
59“Primary consciousness” for James is what we now re-
fer to as ordinary ego consciousness, whereas the “primary process” forFreud is the unconscious, and the “secondary process” refers to ordi-nary ego consciousness. That the notion of what is primary shifted fromconsciousness with James to the unconscious with Freud conveys thefundamental change of emphasis that ushered in the era of depth psy-chology. The intermediate or liminal zone between the unconscious andthe conscious is called by Jung the “transcendent function ” because it
transcends the standpoints of both the ego and the unconscious. In lan-guage reminiscent of Dewey ’s description of aesthetic experience, JungTHE INTENT OF THE MUSICAL MOMENT
93
57. See, for instance, Antonio Damasio, Descartes’ Error: Emotion, Reason, and the Human Brain
(New York: Putnam, 1994), 280. Damasio gives a nod to William James, who, he says, “might
be pleased to discover that today there are plausible if not yet proven hypotheses for the neural
basis of the self ” (244).
58. Cf. Ellenberger, “On the Threshold of a New Dynamic Psychiatry, ” chapter 5 in Discov-
ery of the Unconscious.
59. James, Pragmatism, 6; Varieties of Religious Experience, 484.
deﬁnes the transcendent function as the union of the opposites, the con-
scious and the unconscious, but goes further in de ﬁning the outcome of
this union. For Jung the transcendent function generates an irrationallife-process that expresses itself in images out of which arise new con-scious attitudes. This “rounding out of the personality into a whole may
well be the goal of any psychotherapy that claims to be more than amere cure of symptoms. ”
60The idea of a transcendent function that has
a noetic value for the ego also underlies Cage’ s descriptions of the effects
of the music of indeterminacy [12b].
The study of the liminal zone between the conscious and the uncon-
scious was advanced by D. W. Winnicott, who referred to a “transitional
space, ” which he deﬁned as a potential, or intermediate, or third area in
which the cultural experience that is a derivative of play arises. SilvanoArieti was the ﬁrst to name the area of intersection between the primaryand secondary processes the tertiary process and to identify it as thesource of creativity: “The tertiary process ultimately comes into being asa ‘click, ’ or match, between the primary and secondary processes, which
brings about an accepted emerging representation. Eureka! The newunity is created!” The psychoanalyst Nathan Schwartz-Salant describesthe phenomenon of the “tertiary process” as follows: “This space is a transitional area between the space-time world (where processes are characterized as an interaction of objects) and the collective un-conscious —the pleroma. This area has a fundamentally different quality
from the space-time world. In its pathological form, the pleroma invadesthe conscious personality as primary-process thinking. But in its crea-tive form, it is the source of healing through one ’s experience of the nu-
minosum.”
61The experience described here, one that occurs between
two individuals, is similar in many respects to presentational states aris-ing from aesthetic encounters with an artwork. Both have outcomes thatare felt to be illuminating, healing, and numinous.
Cage regarded experimental music as a means of investigating hidden
regions of the mind and spirit, and the excitement he conveyed to Bou-lez in their correspondence is that of someone setting off to explore anunknown continent. Cage believed that he was conducting leading-edge research in an area of immense potentiality, which was correct sofar as music was concerned. Although composers such as Richard Wag-ner have reported that they create music by activating the imaginationin the tertiary process, Cage intended that musicians perform from thatmode also.
As one enters the tertiary process, the categories that appear distinctAUSTIN CLARKSON
94
60. Jung, “ A Study in the Process of Individuation, ” 289.
61. The Borderline Personality: Vision and Healing (Wilmette, Ill.: Chiron Publications, 
1989), 107.
in the secondary process of the rational space-time world begin to blur
and the imagination takes over as the principal faculty. Synaesthesia is the norm, with sense modalities (vision, hearing, touch, bodily sen-sations, and spatial perceptions, etc.) blending in surprising combina-tions.
62Past and future interﬂow with the here-and-now. Logical and
causal orderings give way to acausal synchronicities. And last but notleast, the borders between body, mind, and spirit begin to dissolve, whichaccounts for subtle body phenomena and the numinosity of experiencesin the tertiary process. Cage indicated his familiarity with the tertiaryprocess in a rich trove of language: lost awareness of time and space[3b], deeply pleasurable moments of completeness [3c], the air so alivethat one is simply part of it [7d], sounds centered within themselves inan inﬁnite play of interpenetration [9, 10a], the union of spirit and mat-ter that partakes of the miraculous [10b], moving out in all directionsfrom the center when time is luminous [11], not interrupting the ﬂu-
ency of nature [12a], and the participation of life in sounds [17b]. Theseevocations of the presentational state convey the effects of the mind,body, and spirit as they merge with sound, and in particular the per-ception that the individual ’s physical body takes on an imaginal or vir-
tual form, which is sometimes referred to as the subtle body. That thesubtle body experience is a normal outcome of activating the tertiaryprocess is af ﬁrmed by Schwartz-Salant: “The subtle body can be experi-
enced imaginally as a kind of energy ﬁeld that extends from our physi-cal being. While invisible to ordinary perceptions, it can be seen imagi-nally. . . . The question is not whether or not the subtle body exists, butwhether or not its existence can be perceived. For when we deal withthe subtle body, we are concerned not with ordinary perceptions butwith imaginal ones. ”
63Since the presentational state immerses one in
“imaginal” perceptions, it is not surprising that many musicians havefound it dif ﬁcult to adapt to indeterminate music. Some of the resis-
tance that Cage encountered, and which he interpreted as opposition tochange and labeled the “social problem, ” can be understood as a justi-
ﬁable apprehension about activating the tertiary process among thosewho are unfamiliar with its effects.
In 1912 and 1913, when Jung undertook explorations of his own
psyche during the crisis that followed the break with Freud, he discov-ered that the tertiary process can be employed in a therapeutic fashion.Later he used the technique with his patients and soon recognized thatTHE INTENT OF THE MUSICAL MOMENT
95
62. Hunt makes an important case for synaesthesia, or cross-modal translation, as the basis
of cognition in presentational states. See On the Nature of Consciousness, chap. 7. My own research
in musical imagery from the tertiary process documents many narratives that embody cross-
modal and numinous experiences, and archetypal images for music. See “Uncursing the Silence:An Exploration of Sonic Imagination, ” Musicworks 57 (winter 1994): 38 –46.
63. The Borderline Personality, 132–33.
he needed to make a distinction between the passive fantasy, which 
is dystonic and harmful to the ego standpoint, and the active fantasywhich is syntonic and highly creative:
Whereas passive fantasy not infrequently bears a morbid stamp or at
least shows some traces of abnormality, active fantasy is one of the high-est forms of psychic activity. For here the conscious and the unconsciouspersonality of the subject ﬂow together into a common product in whichboth are uniﬁed. Such a fantasy can be the highest expression of a per-son’s individuality, and it may even create that individuality by giving
perfect expression to its unity.
64
During the 1920s, Jung developed what he called the active imagi-
nation method in order to stimulate the active fantasy through drawing,
body movement, and automatic writing. When Richard Wilhelm in1928 sent Jung his German translation of the Taoist manual on medi-tation and alchemy, The Secret of the Golden Flower, Jung was delighted to
ﬁnd conﬁrmation of his work on active imagination from a hitherto un-known source. His commentary on that text describes active imagina-tion as a technique that needs to be continued until the rational mindrelaxes its hold, that is, “until one can let things happen, which is the
next goal of the exercise. In this way a new attitude is created, an atti-tude that accepts the irrational and the incomprehensible simply be-cause it is happening. ”
65
At the same time as Jung was experimenting with active imagination
as a therapeutic method, and in the same city of Zurich, Jean Arp, So-phie Tauber, and others were investigating the tertiary process in the in-terests of revolutionizing art. Arp describes how he and Tauber began in 1915 to paint, embroider, and do collages drawn from the simplestforms, which were the ﬁrst examples of what he came to call “concreteart.” For Arp, concrete art rather than abstract art gives direct and pal-
pable shape to inner reality, “for nothing is more concrete than the psychic reality that it expresses. ” And so he focused on presentational
states: “We rejected all mimesis and description, giving free rein to the
elementary and the spontaneous. ”
66Max Ernst admitted images from
dreams and active fantasy, but did not paint his dreams as such. In 1934he wrote that surrealists do not paint their dreams, which would be de-scriptive and naive naturalism, but rather, “they freely, bravely, and self-
conﬁdently move about in the borderland between the internal and AUSTIN CLARKSON
96
64.“Psychological Types” (1921), in CW 6:428.
65. Jung, foreword to the second German edition of The Secret of the Golden Flower, in CW
13:16 –17. Wilhelm’ s German translation of the Chinese text together with Jung’ s commentary
was published in 1929. It appeared in English, translated by Cary F. Baynes, in 1931.
66. Arp on Arp: Poems, Essays, Memories, ed. Marcel Jean, trans. Joachim Neugroschel (New
York: Viking, 1966), 222, 232. The items were written in 1948.
external worlds which are still unfamiliar though physically and psy-
chologically quite real (‘sur-real’), registering what they see and expe-rience there, and intervening where their revolutionary instincts advisethem to do so. ”
67Ernst is describing here the artist’ s experience of
James ’s subliminal consciousness and Jung’ s transcendent function. For
these pioneers of the tertiary process, chance was an essential means forexploring the liminal zone between the conscious and the unconscious.Arp wrote, “Since the arrangements of planes and their proportions andcolors seemed to hinge solely on chance, I declared that these workswere arranged ‘according to the law of chance, ’ as in the order of na-
ture, chance being for me simply a part of an inexplicable reason, of aninaccessible order. ”
68Arp’s friend and colleague Hans Richter also re-
called discovering the importance of chance: “Chance appeared to us asa magical procedure by which one could transcend the barriers of cau-sality and of conscious volition, and by which the inner eye and ear be-came more acute, so that new sequences of thoughts and experiencesmade their appearance. For us, chance was the ‘unconscious mind’ thatFreud had discovered in 1900. ”
69
Chance was the path of liberation out of the categorical constraints
that separated art from life. But chance also had another purpose,which was to restore to the work of art its immediacy and primevalpower: “By appealing directly to the unconscious, which is part and par-
cel of chance, we sought to restore to the work of art something of itsnuminous quality of which art has been the vehicle since time imme-morial, the incantatory power that we seek, in this age of general un-belief, more than ever before. ” Richter linked Arp ’s belief that the law of
chance could only be comprehended by complete surrender to the un-conscious to Jung ’s notion of synchronicity.
70Richter and Arp found
that engagement in the tertiary process had a numinous effect, and theylooked to Kandinsky as the artist who reclaimed for art the spiritual di-mension. In an appreciation of Kandinsky, Arp wrote, “He discovered‘the spiritual in art. ’ An explorer like Kandinsky particularly stresses the
invisible, impalpable life that our defective eyes cannot distinguish andthat sometimes leads the explorer along the angel’ s road. ”
71
Thus more than three decades before Cage created his experimental
music with chance operations in a search for “the spiritual in music, ”THE INTENT OF THE MUSICAL MOMENT
97
67.“What Is Surrealism, ” in Lippard, Surrealists on Art, 136.
68.“Dadaland, ” in Arp on Arp, 232.
69. Dada: Art and Anti-Art (New York: Abrams, 1965), 55. The The term “unconscious mind”
is from the book Jung wrote in collaboration with the physicist Wolfgang Pauli, The Interpreta-
tion of Nature and the Psyche (New York: Pantheon Books, 1955).
70. Ibid., 59, 57.
71.“Kandinsky” (1948), in Arp on Arp, 228.
the dadaists and surrealists found that chance engaged the tertiary 
process and released numinous felt meanings from the liminal zone ofimaginal cognition. Arp describing what happened in 1917 preﬁguresCage in 1950: “I became more and more removed from aesthetics. Iwanted to ﬁnd another order, another value for man in nature. . . . Dadawanted to replace the logical non-sense of the men of today by the il-logically senseless. . . . Dada is for nature and against art. ”
72Both Arp
and Cage regarded chance as the means by which they could removetaste, memory, and tradition from art and infuse it with the numinous.
In this perspective, Cage’ s experimental music is the long-delayed 
application to music of a development that had begun thirty-ﬁve yearsearlier in the other arts. This conﬁrms the notion that in some respectsmusic is an extremely conservative art form. That the experimental revolution in music was delayed does not diminish the achievement ofCage and others who sought to revolutionize the traditional concept ofthe musical composition as the opus perfectum et absolutum. Cage’ s ac-
complishment as a composer can be seen in the imaginative and re-sourceful playfulness with which he adjusted the framing of the pre-sentational state that will activate the musician ’s tertiary process. If the
schema is too loose, the musician has too much freedom and the imagi-nation is not suf ﬁciently engaged. If the schema is too tightly controlled,
the response is not spontaneous enough, and the musical imaginationhas too little scope. Finally, in the time-bracket pieces, Cage achieved asensitive balance between too tight and too loose a frame. And yet in the1990s, in the city that had seen the inception of depth psychological approaches in the arts and psychotherapy, the musicians of the opera or-chestra were not able to perform Cage’ s Europeras satisfactorily. Conser-
vatories and music schools evidently still do not equip musicians to makemusic out of the presentational state. Cage ’s contribution as a composer
will be fully realized only when musicians can make music in the ter-tiary process by engaging in spontaneous music making that activatesthe creative imagination. The fear that experimental music seeks the destruction of composed music will abate if we can establish that pre-sentational and representational states are complementary. But this callsfor a program that will help traditionally trained musicians make whatMargaret Leng Tan described as her leap of faith.
VI. Preparing to Perform Experimental Music
Research into musical experience in the presentational state is neededso that we can guide students to perform and listen to experimental mu-AUSTIN CLARKSON
98
72.“I became more and more removed from aesthetics” (1948), in Arp on Arp, 237–38. The
analogies between Cage’ s music post-1950 to the aesthetic of Satie and to the experiments of 
sic. It is only by undergoing such activities and discovering the results
for ourselves that we overcome our mistrust. We need to take a leaf outof James and look “away from ﬁrst things, principles, ‘categories, ’ supposed ne-
cessities” and turn “towards last things, fruits, consequences, facts. ”
73A prag-
matic attitude to transpersonal experience accepts the outcomes in spiteof inhibitions and preconceptions. A pilot project in the application ofthe presentational state was designed with that objective in mind. In thefall of 1996, over the course of seven weeks, a small group of graduatestudent volunteers from York University in Toronto undertook a pro-gram of musical exercises that activated the tertiary process. Meetingonce a week for about three hours, the students engaged in a variety ofactivities. There is space here to mention only one component of theprogram, a two-phase exercise for imagining music in silence: Workingin pairs, participants sit in chairs facing each other.
74First they are asked
to imagine a musical solo. After six minutes, they are asked to writeabout or draw what they have imagined. Then they share their experi-ences and the discussion is taped. For the second phase, they again sitin pairs and this time imagine performing a musical duet with the part-ner. After six minutes, they again write or draw the results and thenshare with the group.
In general, participants respond to the duet exercise by imagining
that they are engaged in a musical exchange as separate individuals.Then, after a while, they experience an entity to which both partnersseem to contribute actively. In the pilot project, Participant A (female,candidate for the master’ s degree in education) and Participant B (fe-
male, vocalist, candidate for the master’ s degree in women ’s studies and
music) were partners at the beginning of the exercise. Participant A re-ported the imagined entity as light energy that formed a strong, harmo-nious bond with her partner, while Participant B reported that it was acolumn made of sounds and colored lights that took shape betweenthem and became an egglike form: “I felt that right between us therewas this round thing made out of lights and blues and purples. It wasmusic also. It was both of our musics together, so it wasn ’t one answer-
ing the other —it was both of them occurring at the same time as one. ITHE INTENT OF THE MUSICAL MOMENT
99
Arp, Richter, and others in the visual arts after World War I put in question the view that Cage ’s
experimental music is a precursor of postmodernism (cf. Hamm, “Privileging the Moment, ”
278–79), or “ultra-modernism” (cf. Patterson, “ Appraising the Catchwords, ” 241). If Cage’ s po-
sition can be demonstrated to be postmodern, we may have to posit that the seeds of the reac-
tion to modernism were sown simultaneously with those of modernism itself, and that the twoposition have coexisted as shadow aspects of each other throughout the twentieth century.
73. Pragmatism, 22; James’ s italics.
74. The exercise was modeled after one used by Henry Reed. See “Close Encounters in the
Liminal Zone: Experiments in Imaginal Communication, ” Journal of Analytical Psychology 41,
no. 1 (1996): 81 –116 (part 1); 41, no. 2 (1996): 203 –26 (part 2).
knew that both of our sounds were together. ” With no other stimulus
or guidance than the instruction to imagine a musical solo and then a
duet, the transitional space between the participants became a highlycharged transpersonal ﬁeld of synaesthetic images. Each participantperceived that her separate identities had merged in a mutually gener-ated “third thing” that was different from what either contributed alone.
At the next session, the same exercise was repeated with differ-
ent partners. The following is a synopsis of the exchange between Par-ticipant A and Participant C (female, zheng player, Ph.D. candidate inmusicology):
PARTICIPANT A: We started with spirals and it kept turning into ﬁgure
eights. And it was all over the place. It wasn ’t just going up, it was all
over, and it was all movement. Waltzes kept coming in. There was this
spiral that’ s pulling down and collecting up. Plunging and diving. That is
bizarre! It was so physical! We were just dancing and colliding togetherand moving in and moving out. Very amazing! My jaw was just droppingwhen you were speaking. Wow! Those ﬁgure eights, and moving!
P
ARTICIPANT C: It was really, really amazing —swirling upwards. It is also
a geometric ﬁgure that gets into my mind, and I also started off with
woodwinds. A very sinuous ﬁgure goes in the shape of an eight, but inthree dimensions, deﬁnitely. Full of motion and energy at a very, veryfast pace. At ﬁrst this shape goes at a plane level between my head andyours, and we are exchanging. This really comes back and forth betweenus and includes our bodies, so it goes around us. And then it runs into avertical shape where we dance around, kind of up and down. The wholeshape is moving all the time, never ending. And we bump against eachother; we are dancing. And a whole orchestra was there —I can ’t even
differentiate the sound. It was such a lively, vibrant situation! We werejust having fun frolicking.
This exercise again produced an intense engagement between the par-
ticipants, who imagined a highly active and playful exchange of audial,
spatial, and kinesthetic elements. The mutual energy ﬁeld was mani-fested in a geometrical form, which for C was a ﬁgure eight that was atﬁrst horizontal and then became vertical, and for A was a spiral thatturned into a ﬁgure eight, which also had a vertical orientation. The sim-
ilarities between their images astonished the two participants greatly.
The results of this exercise have a precedent in the ﬁndings of psy-
chologist Henry Reed, who conducted experiments in transpersonalcommunication with large numbers of participants. His informants re-ported similar spiraling energy forms, heightened states of awareness,AUSTIN CLARKSON
100
synchronous images, synaesthesias, and intense felt meanings.75It can
be af ﬁrmed that sitting and intending mutual musical communication
results in the activation of a transpersonal ﬁeld of collaborative images
that are valued as enriching, pleasurable, and creative. We can supposethat musicians who have developed this ability will bring an awarenessof the tertiary process to any music they play, whether a Haydn trio ora time-bracket piece by Cage.
Although he was active as a writer and a visual artist, Cage found
music appealing as a medium because the performance situation offersa model for the relationship between the individual and society. Cageoften deﬁned his goal as the spiritual transformation of the individualon the assumption that social change begins with individual change.The data from the pilot program in presentational states lend support toCage’ s premise that focusing on transpersonal communication has an
effect on social interactions. Four to six weeks after the last session, theparticipants were interviewed and asked to comment on the effects of the program. Participant A remarked in particular on how impressedshe was by the silent solos and duets. She spoke of the exchanges withher partners as deﬁnitely changing her idea of how to relate to anotherperson. She had realized that communication is more than just separateindividuals sending and receiving information —“something else” is also
present: “It became a living breathing entity, we created another life, or
another experience, or another energy. . . . Just the awareness of doinga duet with somebody changed the whole communication process interms of relating with other people and realizing that it ’s not just an ex-
change of my words and their words, and my hearing and their hearing,but this ﬂow starts to happen. ” She found that becoming aware of the
“ﬂow ” experience revealed that communication takes place against a
transpersonal background. She said, “It creates a kind of sacredness about
life or about the connection between people. It gives a whole differentidea of what community really is. And it is totally the unseen world. ”
Cage evidently trusted that musicians who bring a similar attitude to
performing his pieces will create music together in a spiritually enrich-ing social context. His experimental music assumes that with suf ﬁcient
discipline and devotion the ﬂow experience will happen, and the musicwill become manifest as “the third thing. ” But, as Margaret Leng Tan
shows us, it takes practice to ensure that that “it” will play. At the coreof the musician ’s problem is what Cage identiﬁed as the alienation of Art
from Nature, which on a personal level becomes a split between musicand the musician. A fourth participant in the pilot program, a Ph.D. can-THE INTENT OF THE MUSICAL MOMENT
101
75. Ibid., part 2, 220.
didate in musicology and professional pianist spoke to this issue when
she reﬂected on the effect the program had on her:
PARTICIPANT D: I did feel a kind of reconnection with the musical part of
myself. I didn ’t feel as much as if it was me here and music over there. . . .
I was the music in a sense. . . . The music was already there, and it was a
question of just letting go, and relaxing, and letting it happen. In sum-mary, I felt music was within me, and music was a part of who I was, whoI am. . . . It was a blending of the exercises in which we discovered thingsabout ourselves, like the drawings, or when we threw the I Ching and 
interpreted it, that blended with the idea of the music, of listening to music, and talking about music, made me feel more like the music wasmy own too. I didn ’t feel that it was an object of study. It was just very
natural.
For this participant, the program had allowed the music, which had
been identiﬁed with the ego-system, to ﬁnd a place in the self-system.Her words resonate with Cage’ s desire that music provide a moment
when the multiplicity of elements that make up an individual becomeintegrated and she is one [3b].
VII. Conclusion
In the tertiary process, opposites conjoin and paradox is at home. It is where we experience nonobstruction and interpenetration, and pur-poseful purposelessness. We should expect that here, too, the compet-ing claims between the individual and the social will be reconciled.Harry Hunt points out that the fathers of the pragmatic approach to thetranspersonal addressed this problem, which they saw as the need forspirituality: “James, Jung, and contemporary transpersonal psychology
understand our crisis as a loss of ‘soul, ’ ‘inwardness, ’ or ‘sense of mean-
ing’— the loss of a sense of being and felt reality of equal concern to Hei-
degger’ s analysis of culture and to the psychoanalysis of Winnicott. ” As
I noted at the beginning of this essay, when Cage expressed the sameneed, many interpreted it as a retreat into solipsism. But, Hunt argues,the move to inwardness and transpersonal experience is not a denial ofthe social:
Indeed their psychological conception of religious experience makes
James, Jung and contemporary transpersonal psychology both the be-ginnings of a “science” of what is traditionally termed “soul” and the out-ward expressions of this sociocultural shift toward inner-worldly mysti-cism. The search for a holistic cognitive psychology and neurophysiologyof the transpersonal can be seen both as a genuine extension of the sci-ence of mind and as an expression of incipient social collectivity.
76AUSTIN CLARKSON
102
76. On the Nature of Consciousness, 279–80, 281.
In this perspective, Cage belongs among those who suppose a radical
reﬂexivity between the individual and the social. Hunt suggests that
Durkheim’ s conception of an emergent collective consciousness is most
directly expressed in the shared unity of presentational states. He ﬁndsthat while Durkheim’ s collective consciousness has been studied in re-
spect to public opinion in complex societies, what has been bypassed isDurkheim’ s assertion “that the fullest access to a collective conscious-
ness will be through the maximum development of the very presenta-tional states that modern society has come to regard as the most inwardand subjective. ”
77While the surrealists had explored this premise in the
years between the world wars, Cage was in the forefront of its applica-tion to music in the second half of the century. Cage focused on a mu-sic of satori-like presentational states because he found they generate experiences in which individual and social meanings interpenetrate. Hispieces offer occasions for realizing the intent of each moment in in-vented musical images that are both personally and collectively mean-ingful even though the meanings cannot be otherwise represented thanin their effects. The tough-minded continue to look askance at Cage’ s
belief in the immanence of spirit in music and nature. They will need toreckon with the facts of experience evoked readily and reliably from activating the tertiary process through experimental compositions orother exercises for the musical imagination. Hunt proposes that suchfacts be referred to a holistic cognitive psychology or a neurophysiologyof the transpersonal. On the basis of such an approach, music theoristsand historians would be able to treat the effects of performing music, in-cluding 4/H1103233/H11033, as constitutive of the music itself.
For James, the universe of the rationalist has many editions, “one real
one, the inﬁnite folio, or édition de luxe, eternally complete; and then the
various ﬁnite editions, full of false readings, distorted and mutilated each
in its own way. ” Indeed Joan Retallack ﬁnds that the irony and skepti-
cism of critical theory is inimical to Cage, who like James recommendsto us the universe as it actually is. Cage thus stands in the tradition ofJames, who ﬁnds “only one edition of the universe, unﬁnished, grow-
ing in all sort of places, especially in the places where thinking beingsare at work. ” By insisting on the transpersonal effects of musical expe-
rience, Cage asks that we regard the acts of performing and listening asmeans of continuing the process of creating that pragmatic universe.And so he would surely have agreed with James:
Our acts, our turning-places, where we seem to ourselves to make our-
selves and grow, are the parts of the world to which we are closest, theparts of which our knowledge is the most intimate and complete. WhyTHE INTENT OF THE MUSICAL MOMENT
103
77. Ibid., 286.
should we not take them at their face-value? Why may they not be the
actual turning-places and growing-places which they seem to be, of theworld —why not the workshop of being, where we catch fact in the 
making, so that nowhere may the world grow in any other kind of waythan this?
78
Cage hoped that his music of indeterminacy would provide a means of
contributing to that pragmatic universe the “facts in the making” from
the individual and shared invention of such music.
APPENDIX
Quotes
1.What can we expect to be the result of attentive listening to music? 
I believe that listening to music makes for our lives another world, living 
in which, somehow, our hearts beat faster and a mysterious excitement ﬁlls us. And the natural ﬂow of sounds which music is reassures us of order
just as the sequence of the seasons and the regular alternation of night and day do.
“Listening to Music ” [c. 1937], in John Cage: Writer, 19
2.Schoenberg analyzes and fragmentizes his music, so that he seems
with Freud to be a founding father of today’ s cult of the neurosis. The com-
posers who today wish to imbue their music with the ineffable, seem to ﬁnd
it necessary to make use of musical characteristics not purely Western; theygo for inspiration to those places, or return to those times, where or whenharmony is not of the essence.
“The East in the West” [1946], in John Cage: Writer, 25
3a.Lou Harrison found a passage by Thomas Mace written in England in
1676 to the effect that the purpose of music was to season and sober themind, thus making it susceptible of divine inﬂuences, and elevating one’ s 
affections to goodness.
“A Composer’ s Confessions” [1948], in John Cage: Writer, 41
b.After eighteen months of studying oriental and medieval Christian
philosophy and mysticism, I began to read Jung on the integration of thepersonality. There are two principal parts of each personality: the consciousmind and the unconscious, and these are split and dispersed, in most of us,in countless ways and directions. The function of music, like that of any otherhealthy occupation, is to help to bring those separate parts back togetheragain. Music does this by providing a moment when, awareness of time andspace being lost, the multiplicity of elements which make up an individualbecome integrated and he is one. This only happens if, in the presence ofAUSTIN CLARKSON
104
78. Pragmatism, 100, 111.
music, one does not allow himself to fall into laziness or distraction. . . .
Neuroses act to stop and block. To be able to compose signi ﬁes the over-
coming of these obstacles.
Ibid., 41 –42
c.If one makes music, as the Orient would say, disinterestedly, that is,
without concern for money or fame but simply for the love of making it, itis an integrating activity and one will ﬁnd moments in life that are complete
and fulﬁlled. Sometimes composing does it, sometimes playing an instru-ment, and sometimes just listening. . . .
We were simply transported. I think the answer to this riddle is simply
that when the music was composed the composers were at one with them-selves. The performers became disinterested to the point that they becameunselfconscious, and a few listeners in those brief moments of listening for-got themselves, enraptured, and so gained themselves. It is these momentsof completeness that music can give, providing one can concentrate one’ s
mind on it, that is, give one ’s self in return to the music, that are such deep
pleasure, and that is why we love the art.
Ibid., 42
4.The function of a piece of music and, in fact, the ﬁnal meaning of mu-
sic may be suggested: it is to bring into co-being elements paradoxical by na-ture, to bring into one situation elements that can be and ought to be agreedupon —that is, Law elements —together with elements that cannot and
ought not to be agreed upon —that is, Freedom elements —these two orna-
mented by other elements, which may lend support to one or the other ofthe two fundamental and opposed elements, the whole forming thereby anorganic entity.
Music then is a problem parallel to that of the integration of the person-
ality: which in terms of modern psychology is the co-being of the consciousand the unconscious mind, Law and Freedom, in a random world situation.Good music can act as a guide to good living.
“Defense of Satie” [1948], in John Cage: An Anthology, 84
5.The purpose of music. Music is edifying, for from time to time it sets the
soul in operation. The soul is the gatherer-together of the disparate elements(Meister Eckhart), and its work ﬁlls one with peace and love. . . . Strategy. As
is repeated . . . schematically [see ﬁg. 3.1 above], structure is properly mind-
controlled. Both delight in precision, clarity, and the observance of rules.Whereas form wants only freedom to be. It belongs to the heart; and thelaw it observes, if indeed it submits to any, has never been and never will bewritten. [ footnote: Any attempt to exclude the “irrational” is irrational. Any
composing strategy which is wholly “rational” is irrational in the extreme.]
“Forerunners of Modern Music” [1949], in 
The Boulez-Cage Correspondence, 38THE INTENT OF THE MUSICAL MOMENT
105
6.Slowly, as the talk goes on, slowly, we have the feeling we are getting
nowhere. That is a pleasure which will continue. If we are irritated, it is not
a pleasure. Nothing is not a pleasure if one is irritated, but suddenly, it is apleasure, and then more and more it is not irritating (and the more andmore and slowly). Originally we were nowhere; and now, again, we arehaving the pleasure of being slowly nowhere. If anybody is sleepy, let himgo to sleep. * * * That is ﬁnished now. It was a pleasure.
“Lecture on Nothing” [1950], in Silence, 123–24
7a.I have just ﬁnished recording my cinema music. I started that piece
of work in a dream: I wanted to write without musical ideas (unrelatedsounds) and record the results 4 times, changing the position of the nailseach time. . . . I abandoned the dream and I wrote some music. . . . Chancecomes in here to give us the unknown.
Letter to Pierre Boulez, January 1950, in 
The Boulez-Cage Correspondence, 48
b.All this brings me closer to a “chance” or if you like to an un-aesthetic
choice. I keep, of course, the means of rhythmic structure feeling that thatis the “espace sonore” in which [each] of these sounds may exist andchange. Composition becomes “throwing sound into silence” and rhythmwhich in my Sonatas had been one of breathing becomes one of a ﬂow ofsound and silence.
Letter to Pierre Boulez, December 1950, in ibid., 78
c.[Re the Calder music] No synchronizing was attempted and what the
ﬁnal result is is [sic] rather due to a chance that was admired. . . .
...A t  t his point my primary concern became: how to become mobile 
in my thought rather than immobile always. And then I saw one day thatthere was no incompatibility between mobility & immobility and life con-tains both. This is at the basis of the manner of using the I-Ching for the ob-
taining of oracles. . . .
[After explaining the use of the I Ching.] I have the feeling of just begin-
ning to compose for the ﬁrst time. I will soon send you a copy of the ﬁrstpart of the piano piece [Music of Changes]. The essential underlying idea is
that each thing is itself, that its relations with other things spring up natu-rally rather than being imposed by any abstraction on an “artist’ s” part.
Letter to Pierre Boulez, May 1951, in ibid., 93, 94, 96
d.The experience of the 8 loudspeakers is extraordinary. There is no
room for anything but immediate listening. The air was so alive one wassimply part of it.
Letter to Pierre Boulez, May 1953, in ibid., 143
8.[T]he accepting of what comes without preconceived ideas of what
will happen and regardless of the consequences. This is, by the way, why itis so dif ﬁcult to listen to music we are familiar with; memory has acted toAUSTIN CLARKSON
106
keep us aware of what will happen next, and so it is almost impossible to
remain alive in the presence of a well-known masterpiece. Now and then ithappens, and when it does, it partakes of the miraculous. Going on aboutwhat someone said: at the root of the desire to appreciate a piece of music,to call it this rather than that, to hear it without the unavoidable extrane-ous sounds —at the root of all this is the idea that this work is a thing sepa-
rate from the rest of life, which is not the case with Feldman ’s music. We are
in the presence not of a work of art which is a thing but of an action whichis implicitly nothing. Nothing has been said. Nothing is communicated. Andthere is no use of symbols or intellectual references. No thing in life requiresa symbol since it is clearly what it is: a visible manifestation of an invisiblenothing.
“Lecture on Something” [1951], in Silence, 136
9.It is thus possible to make a musical composition the continuity 
of which is free of individual taste and memory (psychology) and also of the literature and “traditions” of the art. The sounds enter the time-space
centered within themselves, unimpeded by service to any abstraction, their360 degrees of circumference free for an in ﬁnite play of interpenetration.
Value judgments are not in the nature of this work as regards either com-
position, performance, or listening. The idea of relation (the idea: 2) beingabsent, anything (the idea: 1) may happen. A “mistake” is beside the point,for once anything happens it authentically is.
“Composition: To Describe the Process of Composition Used in 
Music of Changes and Imaginary Landscape No. 4 ” [1952], in Silence, 59
10a. And I imagine that as contemporary music goes on changing in the
way that I am changing it what will be done is to more and more completelyliberate sounds from abstract ideas about them and more and more exactlyto let them be physically, uniquely, themselves. This means for me: know-ing more and more not what I think a sound is, but what it actually is in allof its acoustical details and then letting this sound exist, itself, changing ina changing sonorous environment.
They are with respect to counterpoint, melody, harmony, rhythm, and
any other musical methods, pointless. They are indeed without purpose butin their purposelessness expressing life itself which centers out from themin every direction. Silence surrounds many of the sounds so that they existin space unimpeded by one another and yet interpenetrating one anotherfor the reason that Feldman has done nothing to keep them from beingthemselves.
“Juilliard Lecture” [1952], in A Year from Monday, 100
b.To accept whatever comes, regardless of the consequences, is to be un-
afraid or to be full of that love which comes from a sense of at-oneness withwhatever. . . .THE INTENT OF THE MUSICAL MOMENT
107
. . . In other words there is no split between spirit and matter. And to re-
alize this, we have only suddenly to awake to the fact. I have noticed it hap-
pens and when it does it partakes of the miraculous.
Ibid., 105, 111
11.That two or more / things happen at the same time is / It is entirely
possible for something to // their relationship: Synchronicity. That / Breakfor instance / means at the center moving out in all // directions and thentime is clearly / Should one stop and mend it? / luminous. It could not beeasily otherwise.
“45/H11032 for a Speaker” [1954], in Silence, 184
12a. [The performer] may perform his function of colorist in a way
which is not consciously organized (and therefore not subject to analysis) —
either arbitrarily, feeling his way, following the dictates of his ego; or moreor less unknowingly, by going inwards with reference to the structure of hismind to a point in dreams, following, as in automatic writing, the dictatesof his subconscious mind; or to a point in the collective unconsciousness ofJungian psychoanalysis, following the inclinations of the species and doingsomething of more or less universal interest to human beings; or to the“deep sleep” of Indian mental practice —the Ground of Meister Eckhart —
identifying there with no matter what eventuality. Or he may perform hisfunction of colorist arbitrarily, by going outwards with reference to thestructure of his mind to the point of sense perception, following his taste; or more or less unknowingly by employing some operation exterior to his mind: tables of random numbers, following the scientiﬁc interest inprobability; or chance operations, identifying there with no matter whateventuality.
“Indeterminacy” [1958], in Silence, 35
b.How is each performer to fulﬁll this function of being alert in an inde-
terminate situation? Does he need to proceed cautiously in dualistic terms?On the contrary, he needs his mind in one piece. His mind is too busy to spend time splitting itself into conscious and not-conscious parts. Theseparts, however, are still present. What has happened is simply a completechange of direction. Rather than making the not-conscious parts face theconscious part of the mind, the conscious part, by reason of the urgency andindeterminacy of the situation, turns towards the not-conscious parts. He istherefore able, as before, to add two to two to get four, or to act in organizedways which on being subjected to analysis successfully are found to be morecomplex. But rather than concentrating his attention here, in the realm of relationships, variations, approximations, repetitions, logarithms, his at-tention is given inwardly and outwardly with reference to the structure ofhis mind to no matter what eventuality. Turning away from himself and hisego-sense of separation from other beings and things, he faces the GroundAUSTIN CLARKSON
108
of Meister Eckhart, from which all impermanencies ﬂow and to which they
return. “Thoughts arise not to be collected and cherished but to be dropped
as though they were void. ” . . . Similarly in the performance of Duo II for Pi-
anists, each performer, when he performs in a way consistent with the com-
position as written, will let go of his feelings, his taste, his automatism, hissense of the universal, not attaching himself to this or to that, leaving by hisperformance no traces, providing by his actions no interruption to the ﬂu-ency of nature. The performer therefore simply does what is to be done, notsplitting his mind in two, not separating it from his body, which is keptready for direct and instantaneous contact with his instrument.
Ibid., 39
c.A performance of a composition which is indeterminate of its perfor-
mance is necessarily unique. It cannot be repeated. When performed for asecond time, the outcome is other than it was. Nothing therefore is accom-plished by such a performance, since that performance cannot be graspedas an object in time. A recording of such a work has no more value than apostcard; it provides a knowledge of something that happened, whereas theaction was a non-knowledge of something that had not yet happened.
Ibid.
d.There is the possibility when people are crowded together that they
will act like sheep rather than nobly. That is why separation in space is spoken of as facilitating independent action on the part of each performer.Sounds will then arise from actions, which will then arise from their owncenters rather than as motor or psychological effects of other actions andsounds in the environment.
Ibid.
13.What is the nature of an experimental action? It is simply an action
the outcome of which is not foreseen. . . . However, more essential thancomposing by means of chance operations, it seems to me now, is compos-ing in such a way that what one does is indeterminate of its performance.In such a case one can just work directly, for nothing one does gives rise toanything that is preconceived. . . .
Why is this so necessary that sounds should be just sounds? There are
many ways of saying why. One is this: In order that each sound may becomethe Buddha. If that is too Oriental an expression, take the Christian Gnos-tic statement: “Split the stick and there is Jesus. ”
“History of Experimental Music in the United States ” [1958], 
in Silence, 69–70
14.One cannot determine exactly what effect the notation causes —thus
indeterminacy. The observer-listener is able to stop saying I do not under-stand, since no point-to-point linear communication has been attempted.He is at his own center (impermanent) of total space-time. How are his earsTHE INTENT OF THE MUSICAL MOMENT
109
and eyes? Serious questions. The complex of existence exceeds mentation ’s
compass. Emptiness of purpose does not imply contempt for society, rather
assumes that each person whether he knows it or not is noble, is able to ex-perience gifts with generosity, that society is best anarchic.
“Form Is a Language” [1960], in John Cage: An Anthology, 135
15.We see that to look at an object, a work of art, say, we have to see 
it as something happening, not as it did to him who made it, but as it doeswhile we see it. We don ’t have to go anywhere: it comes to us.
“Where Are We Going? and What Are We Doing?” [1961], in Silence, 223
16.We learned from Oriental thought that those divine inﬂuences 
are, in fact, the environment in which we are. A sober and quiet mind is onein which the ego does not obstruct the ﬂuency of the things that come inthrough our senses and up through our dreams. Our business in living is tobecome ﬂuent with the life we are living, and art can help in this.
“Memoir” [1966], in John Cage: An Anthology, 77
17a. I have decided that my task is to open up the personality; I also want
to open up the work so that it may be interpreted in various ways.
For the Birds, [1970 –71], 59
b.Sounds have no goal! They are, and that’ s all. They live. Music is this
life of sounds, this participation of sounds in life, which may become —but
not voluntarily —a participation of life in sounds. . . .
...I  believe that information never stops appearing.
Ibid., 87, 89
c.That is precisely the ﬁrst thing the I Ching teaches us: acceptance. It es-
sentially advances this lesson: if we want to use chance operations, then wemust accept the results. . . . If I am unhappy after a chance operation, if theresult does not satisfy me, by accepting it I at least have the chance to mod-ify myself, to change myself. But if I insist on changing the I Ching, then it
changes rather than I, and I have gained nothing, accomplished nothing!
Ibid., 94 –95
d.When David Tudor began work on Variations II, he decided to begin
with what was unknown —to start with the unknown rather than to force
the unknown to become the known. His point of view was that we must usethe unknown to make the known unknown. And not the other way around.
Ibid., 128
e.[On performing Vexations, by Satie] In the middle of those eighteen
hours of performance, our lives changed. We were dumbfounded, becausesomething was happening which we had not considered and which wewere a thousand miles away from being able to foresee. So, if I apply thisobservation to conceptual art, it seems to me that the dif ﬁculty with this
type of art, if I understand it correctly, is that it obliges us to imagine thatwe know something before that something has happened. That is dif ﬁcult,AUSTIN CLARKSON
110
since the experience itself is always different from what you thought about
it. And it seems to me that the experiences each person can have, that every-one is capable of appreciating, are precisely those experiences that contrib-ute to changing us and, particularly, to changing our preconceptions. . . . I,on the contrary, attempt to deconcentrate attention, to distract it.
Ibid., 153 –54
f.The Self is not an ego; it is rather the fact that each of us is at the 
center, is the center of the world, without being an ego. The Self is what I do not impose on others. It is not a kind of “subjectivity, ” but a reference
to something which comes much before that and which —beyond that —
allows that “subjectivity” to be produced. It is a reference to the Nothing-ness that is in all things, and thus also in me. It would be more appropriatehere to invoke, as I did concerning Suzuki, the soul ’s Base, Meister Eckhart’ s
Grund. Or society!
Ibid., 234
18.Following my studies with Suzuki Daisetz in the philosophy of Zen
Buddhism, I have used in all my work, whether literary, graphic, or musi-cal, I Ching chance operations in order to free my mind (ego) from its likes
and dislikes, trusting that this use was comparable to sitting crosslegged, andin agreement with my teacher that what Zen wants is that mind not cut it-self off from Mind but let Mind ﬂow through it.
“Notes on Compositions III” [1967 –78], in John Cage: Writer, 107–8
19.I began using chess and the hunting of wild mushrooms as a balance
to my involvement with chance. They are both situations in which chancecannot be used. They are both life and death matters of winning and losing.One prefers to live.
“42 Seconds on Chess, ” from 19 Questions, a ﬁlm by Frank Scheffer [1987]
20.We are living in a period in which many people have changed their
minds about what the use of music is or could be for them. Something thatdoesn ’t speak or talk like a human being, that doesn ’t know its deﬁnition in
the dictionary or its theory in the schools, that expresses itself simply by thefact of its vibrations. People paying attention to vibratory activity, not in re-lation to a ﬁxed ideal performance, but each time attentively to how it hap-pens to be this time, not necessarily two times the same. A music that trans-ports the listener to the moment where he is.
“An Autobiographical Statement” [1989], in John Cage: Writer, 246–47
21a. We have the feeling that many people pay no attention to culture.
And that they also don ’t pay any attention to anything else that is connected
with spirituality or with things other than physical necessity. . . . I do misswhat one might lump together under the word “spirituality. ”...
I think that the hope, any hope, any future in fact, has to be viewed from
the viewpoint, not of the masses, but from the viewpoint of the individu-THE INTENT OF THE MUSICAL MOMENT
111
als. . . . If the masses are going to get any culture that is really useful to them,
they will get it individually rather than as a group. . . .
Because no individual knows how his life is going to change, hmm? Even
the cultured ones (laughter), let alone the uncultivated ones. But even the
uncultivated ones, the hopeless ones, the homeless ones —all of those —
can in the next ten minutes change their lives. And we don ’t know why, or
what will have stimulated them to do that. But they do it. And that is howlife is . . . don ’t you think?
Musicage [1992], 46 –47
b.But, what is marvelous is that the opposites are not opposite. And
that’s part of what we might call the spirituality —art in life.
Ibid., 110
c.But in the sudden school [of Buddhism] —which I prefer —there are
three principal truths. They’ re called the whispered truths. Which means
you oughtn ’t to talk about them. People shouldn ’t know about them. And
the reason people shouldn ’t know about them is because they won ’t un-
derstand them, hmm? So they have to be spoken of so that they won ’t know
that they’ re being talked about. (laughs) And the ﬁrst is that creation is end-
less, hmm? That it’ s vast! Incomprehensibly . . . great. And the next is that
your action in that situation —of vast creation —your action should be as
though you were writing on water. Isn ’t that beautiful? Or, pulling yourself
up into the tree in winter. In other words, not to make an impression. Andthe ﬁnal thing is to realize that the opposites are not opposite. (pause) And
that’s what’ s so dangerous. And what’ s why it’ s whispered. Because if you
learn that the important thing is to meditate when you’ re not meditating,
hmm? then how will we persuade people to meditate? (laughter)
Ibid., 163 –64
d.It challenges, well, how you behave in the face of uncertainty, hmm?
And that’ s one of the exciting things about music —that it’ s instantaneous
behavior, hmm? . . .
...I t ’s dangerous to make an action, hmm?
Ibid., 252AUSTIN CLARKSON
112
FOUR
Gordon Mumma
Cage as Performer
In the last part of his life, John Cage’ s perfor-
mance virtuosity was mostly vocal: reading
(or singing or chanting) from his writings,and responding to questions in lively publicencounters. Most currently available record-ings of his performances were made duringthis time. And since his work seems to havehad greater impact on people younger thanhimself, most of those who heard him areprobably less familiar with his earlier instru-mental and live-electronic performances.
Cage’ s performances in the earlier part of
his career were unique and as memorable ashis later vocal performances. Typical of mu-sicians who have considerable playing expe-rience, he had developed a reliable techniquewhile accompanying modern dance classesand during many years of concerts. Thoughat no time in his career was he primarily a performer (as, say, the composer Rachma-ninov was), his performances were alwaysremarkable.
Cage made use of four performance re-
sources in the course of his career: piano,percussion,electronic-musicequipment,andvoice. His performing life, which began in1933, divides roughly into three periods,
113
GORDON MUMMA
114 each about two decades long. In the ﬁrst period, 1933 –53, Cage was pri-
marily a performer with piano and percussion; during the 1940s, he also
conducted percussion ensembles. In the second period, after 1953, Cagecontinued as a pianist (and sometimes as conductor) and developed per-formance with electronic equipment and with his voice. In the third pe-riod of his creative life, after 1973, he performed mostly with his voice.
Cage’ s early formal musical training was as a pianist. After the ﬁve-
ﬁnger exercises of his elementary school years, he studied nineteenth-century piano music with his aunt, Phoebe James, and during the mid-1920s with pianist-composer Fannie Charles Dillon in Los Angeles. Hisformal study of piano concluded in the 1930s, with Richard Buhlig inLos Angeles. As a performer of percussion and electronic resources, andwith his voice, Cage was essentially self-taught. He did not develop hisperforming skills as a percussionist by learning the classical rudimentsof the orchestral or band percussionist. Rather, he learned what wasnecessary for each situation. Cage developed as a percussionist as onedoes in gamelan traditions, by progressing through levels of skill fromrelative beginner to mature virtuoso. The development of his creativeskills with electronic equipment resulted from a disciplined explorationof possibilities (rather than a formal background in science and engi-neering), nourished by his productively unorthodox imagination. Hisvocal skills developed from his love of writing and speaking and grewout of his major innovations as a poet with the written word. (It was alsoin this third period that he extended his creativity as a graphic artist.)
Throughout his ﬁrst period, Cage performed as a pianist in concert and
as an accompanist for dance. His repertory included his own composi-tions. He had good sight-reading proﬁciency and considerable technicalskill, suf ﬁcient for notably challenging pieces such as The Perilous Night
(1944) and the Sonatas and Interludes (1946 –48). He also performed with
piano virtuosos, such as Maro Ajemian, Grete Sultan, William Masse-los, Marcelle Mercenier, and David Tudor. With these colleagues he per-formed his Experiences No. 1 (1949), Music for Piano 4 –84(1953 –56), and
34/H1103246.776/H11033 (1954).
In the late 1940s, Cage was introduced to Tudor by composer Stefan
Wolpe. Merce Cunningham was at work on choreography (Pool of Dark-ness, premiered in January 1950) for a technically dif ﬁcult piano piece
by the American composer Ben Weber; Cage engaged Tudor to performthe Weber piece. The profoundly nourishing creative relationship be-tween Tudor, Cage, and Cunningham did not end with Cage’ s death in
1992. As a pianist Tudor established benchmarks for performance of thechallenging, innovative piano music by Cage, Pierre Boulez, KarlheinzStockhausen, Christian Wolff, Wolpe, and many others. Tudor ’s associa-
CAGE AS PERFORMER
115 tion with Cage and with the Cunningham Dance Company relieved Cage
from a sense of obligation about performing as a pianist.
Cage continued to perform as piano soloist with the Cunningham
Dance Company into the late 1960s, notably in the work Nocturnes(1956; the music was Erik Satie’ s Three Nocturnes). Cage’ s approach to
the Satie was lyrical, gently liquid rather than markedly articulated, andwith a subtle lilt like a barely perceptible perfume. In this second period,several Cunningham repertory works involved Cage and Tudor as duopianists; these included Minutiae (1954) and Suite for Five (1956), both 
of which used Cage’ s Music for Piano 4 –84.The piano duo of Cage and
Tudor also performed Morton Feldman ’s Ixion (1958) for Cunningham’ s
choreography entitled Summerspace (1958). After the early 1970s, Cage
performed as a pianist mostly in one work, Cheap Imitation (1969). The
context of this work offers insight into an aspect of his creative life.
In the late 1960s, Cage and Cunningham returned to work on a 
project begun many years earlier: a choreography for Satie’ s Socrate.
The situation was extraordinary for the Cunningham ensemble: thechoreography was coordinated with the music, and the dancers re-hearsed with the music. (In most of the Cunningham repertory, thedance and music are independent of each other, created, rehearsed, andperformed independently, though in performance their independenceoccurs simultaneously.)
Cage had made a two-piano transcription of Socrate, intending that he
and Tudor would perform it. In the many years since the project’ s in-
ception, Cage had become busy with commissions and other creative ac-tivity (and was increasingly troubled with arthritis). Cunningham wascompleting the Socrate choreography while Cage was at work on the 
extravagant, multimedia HPSCHD (1969; a compositional collaboration
with Lejaren Hiller). Unforeseen legal issues interfered: the Satie estatedenied permission for the use of Cage’ s transcription. He resolved the
problem by composing Cheap Imitation for solo piano, in which he main-
tained the architecture of Socrate but, by using chance operations, re-
placed Satie’ s music with his own. In response to the situation and to
Cage’ s title for the music, Cunningham gave the title Second Hand to this
long-gestated choreography.
Cage’ s Cheap Imitation is now well known. It is a half-hour single
melodic line in three movements for solo piano, and Cage performed itwidely on the Cunningham tours into the early 1970s. He also madeother versions of it, including one for solo violin, and an orchestration.Playing Cheap Imitation was the last substantial performing that Cage did
as a pianist.
As a percussionist during the ﬁrst period of his creative life, Cage was
GORDON MUMMA
116 encouraged particularly by Henry Cowell and inspired by compositions
of Amadeo Roldán and Edgard Varèse. His collaboration with Lou Har-rison is celebrated, both for their percussion ensemble and for the col-laboratively composed Double Music (1941). The members of this per-
cussion ensemble included Doris Dennison, Margaret Jansen, and XeniaKashevaroff (to whom Cage was then married). His work with percus-sion media continued after the 1950s primarily as a resource for live-electronic music.
In the late 1930s, and continuing through the second period of his
creative life in collaboration with David Tudor, Cage developed perfor-mance skills with live-electronic resources. His Imaginary Landscapes(1939) and the classic Cartridge Music (1960), as well as the works using
ampliﬁed plant materials —Child of Tree and Branches (1975) —are im-
portant examples. He also performed with live-electronic resources inCunningham repertory with music by other composers, such as DavidBehrman ’s For Nearly an Hour for the choreography Walkaround Time
(1968) and Alvin Lucier’ s Vespers for the choreography Objects (1969).
The reasons for Cage’ s progression from piano to percussion to elec-
tronic instruments to voice, were both practical and artistic. Though thepractical circumstances may seem mundane, they were important. Hiscontributions to the percussion genre declined as he grew weary oftravel with a cumbersome menagerie of heavy instruments. One reasonfor his development of the prepared piano was to have a multi-timbralresource of sonorities without the heavy labor of moving percussioninstruments.
Cage’ s gradual retirement as pianist was due to arthritis. By 1960 his
hands were already troubled with this af ﬂiction. He had increasing dif-
ﬁculty performing the music for Suite for Five, an exquisite choreography
that had an unusually long life in the repertory. In 1960, following theﬁrst performance I saw of this work with Cage and Tudor as duo pia-nists, I expressed my appreciation to Cage at intermission and shookhands with him. He said, “Please be careful, ” and continued: “The spon-
sor worries that we are hurting the pianos by playing inside them, andsome of the audience think the sound hurts their ears. ” Then, with his
unique grin: “But this piece hurts me more than it hurts them. ”
By the late 1970s, Cage had changed his diet to minimize fatty foods
and alcohol, and had given up smoking. Though his arthritis improvedfor a time, it gradually became a burden again, along with sciatica, in the1980s. But by this time he had developed his activities as a vocal per-former into a major effort and had also extended his proliﬁc creative lifeas a writer and graphic artist, activities that were less physically stress-ful. I last saw Cage in May 1992, between a rehearsal and performance
CAGE AS PERFORMER
117
1. And notorious for those familiar with his Charles Elliot Norton Lectures at Harvard Uni-
versity in 1988 –89, published as I –VI(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1990).of Music for (1984) by the San Francisco Contemporary Music Play-
ers. Cage, Betty Freeman, and I walked ﬁve blocks to a vegetarian res-
taurant for dinner. His arthritis made the journey for him slow and
uncomfortable.
Cage’ s performing voice and the writing that he performed with it in
his third creative period are well known.1An early example is his read-
ing of the one-minute stories from Indeterminacy (1958). He also read
these stories to accompany Merce Cunningham’ s celebrated choreogra-
phy How to Pass, Kick, Fall, and Run (from the 1960s repertory). Some of
his vocal skills were developed with the Cunningham Dance Company’ s
many Events, which date from 1964. Events were not repertory works,
but were collaboratively conceived for single performance occasions, of-ten in non-proscenium spaces, using materials from the choreographicrepertory. By 1995 the Cunningham Dance Company had made severalhundred unique Events. The music for Events was often a collaboration
between several musician-composers. Cage sometimes performed withelectronic equipment and sometimes used his voice.
This vocal aspect of Cage’ s contribution to Events was concurrent with
the development of his mesostics (1971) and similar asyntactical writ-ing. Cage commonly performed mesostics as a solo vocalist. But on oc-casion he presented them in other contexts, such as in simultaneousperformance with David Tudor’ s live-electronic composition Untitled
(1972). In a performance at Pro Musica Nova in Bremen, Cage stood before four microphones, each of which was ampliﬁed to a loudspeakerin a different corner of the performance space. He spoke close to eachmicrophone and moved from one to another, sometimes rapidly. Thesound of his voice moved weightlessly around the space.
Cage was usually comfortable as a performer. In show-business ver-
nacular, he was a “trouper. ” But some circumstances made him anx-
ious. One of these was his performance in Lukas Foss ’s clever produc-
tion of Stravinsky ’s L’Histoire du soldat in New York in the late 1960s. The
three speaking parts were to be performed by the “three C’ s of Ameri-
can music”— Aaron Copland as narrator, Elliott Carter as the soldier,
and John Cage as the devil. Cage accepted the invitation with misgiv-ings. He told me that he did not think he would be able to do the rhyth-mic coordinations between his part and the instruments. He said “itshould be devilish, not foolish. ” Cage overcame his apprehension, partly
because he wanted to meet Stravinsky to ask for a manuscript for his in-progress book Notations (1969). Perhaps Cage thought that his L ’Histoire
GORDON MUMMA
118
2. With the London Sinfonietta, Kent Nagano, conductor, on Pangea CD-6233.
3. The speciﬁc interval vocabulary was limited to m3, P4, m6, M7, M9, and P12. Among the
syntactical restrictions each of the two simultaneous pitches had to be different from the
pitch(es) sounded just previously by the other player. Further, a player could not use any pitchfrom the immediately previous choice, and not more than one pitch from the two previouschoices.participation would give him some cachet. And they did meet, in Stra-
vinsky’ s New York City hotel suite —it was the ﬁrst meeting between
two twentieth-century giants in the development of rhythm in West-ern art music. The L ’Histoire performance was a glamorous success, and
Cage had no trouble with the rhythmic coordinations. He was a brilliantdevil, equaled only in devilish virtuosity by Vanessa Redgrave’ s recorded
performance.
2
With the Cunningham Dance Company, Cage often played the mu-
sic of other composers; examples besides the Behrman and Lucier worksalready cited include the work of Toshi Ichiyanagi for Scramble (1967)
and Pauline Oliveros for Canﬁeld (1969). Separate music concerts were
sometimes presented as part of the dance tours. On one of these, at Cor-nell University in New York State, Cage and I played one of my works,entitled Swarm. This music was for two vernacular, or “folkloric, ” in-
struments, concertina and bowed saw. Cage played the concertina.
The Cornell concert was a last-minute arrangement. We had time for
only one rehearsal, Swarm was a new piece, and Cage said he had never
played the concertina. He learned what was necessary during a morn-ing rehearsal that preceded our afternoon concert. Swarm required close
and responsive connections between the two players. We did not playfrom a notated score; similar to many folkloric musics, Swarm was a mu-
sic of “oral tradition. ” I explained the piece to Cage at the beginning of
the rehearsal. The rules of Swarm speciﬁed a limited number of choices.
Each player could choose a single pitch, or at the most two pitchesplayed simultaneously. When two pitches sounded together, a limitednumber of pitch intervals could be used.
3After each choice was made,
it could not be used again. Thus each player had to remember what hadbeen previously played in the performance. This is similar to chess andsome card games, and Cage was an avid player of both.
During that one rehearsal Cage chose only single pitches. He said,
“I’ll make the easy choices ﬁrst. ” Because he was unfamiliar at ﬁrst with
the concertina, he made a few incorrect choices. But he was from thevery start skilled in matters of continuity, grasping immediately whensounds occurred in time, and how they overlapped. Owing to limitedtime, Cage did not use the two-pitch sonorities in rehearsal. Just beforethe performance was to begin, I assured him that it was legitimate toplay only the single-pitch choices. He smiled (again with his uniquegrin) and said, “I think it will be ﬁne.”
CAGE AS PERFORMER
119 We began the performance. Cage ’s ﬁrst choice was a two-pitch sonor-
ity. After my responding sound from the musical saw, he continued
with the next choice —a single pitch. As the performance continued,
Cage used, variously, single pitches and two-pitch sonorities. He fol-lowed securely the logic I had explained during the rehearsal. By theend of the performance he had included many of the possible two-pitchsonorities, including some that were quite dif ﬁcult. I never heard him
repeat a choice that he had already used. The continuity of his concer-tina part with my musical saw was excellent. He was bold with choicesand subtle with musical nuances. It was as though he had learned theconcertina and we had rehearsed the piece many times.
This performance of Swarm contradicts the legend that Cage had “no
ear for pitch or melody. ” Cage encouraged this legend. He enjoyed say-
ing that he could not do solfège, and that Schoenberg had told him that
he had “no sense for harmony. ” I do not think this is the truth —cer-
tainly not the whole truth. Cage told those stories about his being “un-
musical” because they were good stories. He was a virtuoso storyteller,a happy raconteur. But Cage was also quick with complex ideas andstructures, and a fast learner. As a performer he was disciplined, reli-able, and imaginative with creative decisions.
Cage loved performing. He was nourished by the performing experi-
ence, even under dif ﬁcult circumstances. He usually found an appro-
priate match of his technical pro ﬁciency with a given situation. Indeed,
quite often his unique performance virtuosity —with music, with words
and verbal repartee, and with graphic materials —was astonishing, even
to practitioners of those arts not easily astonished.
120FIVE
Deborah Campana
As Time Passes
.
The work of John Cage is dif ﬁcult to describe
and nearly impossible to codify. The variety
of musical forces and their uses, the compo-sitional techniques he developed over almostsix decades, serve to delight and, at times,confound audiences. The air of mystery hiswork evokes may be attributed, in part, tohis use of chance operations, yet there is oneconstant that can be examined to elucidatehis compositional process: from his earli-est compositions for chamber ensembles tohis last works for large-scale forces, the pa-rameter of time appears to be Cage ’s initial
and often dominant concern when planninga work. This essay focuses on temporal de-sign, on how Cage fashioned ideas and chan-neled them through a variety of temporalstructures. By analyzing several pieces rep-resenting different aspects of his output, I attempt to demonstrate how this temporalelement helps deﬁne his distinctive compo-sitional style.
The shaping of musical time, so prom-
inent in Cage’ s work, can be viewed from
two angles: formal concerns, or the shape ofsomething, the essential nature as distin-guished from its matter (or, in Cage’ s com-
positions, the musical materials), and structure, something that is con-
structed or arranged in a deﬁnite pattern often evolved from, or resultedfrom, temporal organization. Seven compositions can act as examples:Imaginary Landscape No. 1, Sonatas and Interludes, the time-length pieces,
Concert for Piano and Orchestra, Score and 23 Parts: Twelve Haiku, Roaratorio,and 108.It is impossible to discuss time and its evolution in Cage ’s music
without considering three speci ﬁc aspects of a composition: the sounds,
or musical materials, as Cage has referred to them; the score’ s notation,
or the manner of designing ideas on paper to instruct performers how toplay; and ﬁnally, the organization of the work, how its formal or struc-tural design reﬂects an integral whole.
To those whose musical training derives from a Western art mu-
sic tradition, the idea of musical time passing evokes many images. Vi-sually, one recognizes the symbolic representation of sound and timbreexpressed by notes and rests assigned to particular instruments orvoices. One reads a page of music from left to right, proceeding from topto bottom. With training, one can read a score and mentally hear a spe-ciﬁc sound upon seeing a note; for example, a loud clarinet pitch in its
high register is associated with a notated symbol for a high D above thetreble staff marked fortissimo.
Traditionally, time in music has been described in terms of measure-
ment represented on the page as measures, phrases, and movements. Im-plied in the designation of measures, for example, is meter, or recurringpulses grouped in a variety of patterns related by strong and weak stressesand by their proximity to one another. Groups of measures or phrasesand, on the larger scale, movements suggest the recurrence of events ora periodicity, planned contrast, and return. In essence, such patternsimplicitly acknowledge the role memory plays in the musical experi-ence. Cage was fond of referring to the fact that “composing’ s one thing,
performing’ s another, listening’ s a third. What can they have to do with
one another?”
1I posit that the awareness of time passing could be a pri-
mary level for observing how this interaction brings the three together.
Composed in 1939, while Cage was working at the Cornish School 
in Seattle, Imaginary Landscape No. 1 is scored for what he called muted
piano, sizzle cymbal, and sound-effects recordings (ex. 5.1).2He com-
mitted the work to paper by employing rather traditional notation: pitchwas indicated insofar as possible, and measures marked the passage oftime. By looking deeper, one can distinguish phrases: motives are linkedto speciﬁc instruments and reappear intact throughout the course of theAS TIME PASSES
121
1.“Experimental Music: Doctrine, ” in Silence: Lectures and Writings (Middletown, Conn.:
Wesleyan University Press, 1961), 15.
2.Imaginary Landscape No. 1 (New York: C. F. Peters, 1960).
DEBORAH CAMPANA
122
 EXAMPLE 5.1
Imaginary Landscape No. 1, measures 1–40, Edition Peters. © 1960 by Henmar Press, Inc. Used
by permission.
short work. A rather roughly deﬁned rondo form evolves from the jux-
taposition of a general feeling of stasis or undulation provided by the piano in contrast with the sensation of moving forward exhibited in thesound-effects recording. In the Peters catalog of 1962, compiled by Rob-ert Dunn, Cage described this contrast in formal terms:
AS TIME PASSES
123 EXAMPLE 5.1 continued
Each interlude is one measure longer than the preceding one. The ﬁrst,
one measure long, introduces three rhythmic elements which one byone are subtracted from the interludes to be added one by one to themiddle parts of the second and third and to the ﬁnal part of the fourth 15-
measure section. The completion of this process reestablishes the originalform of the interlude, which, by means of repetition (ﬁrst of the wholeand then of the second half only) is extended, concluding the piece.
3
3. Notes to Imaginary Landscape No. 1, in Robert Dunn, John Cage (New York: C. F. Peters,
1962), 35 –36.
During the mid-1940s, having moved to New York a few years ear-
lier, Cage composed music for dancers and made the acquaintance of
others in the arts community. Although this was a time of tremendouscreativity for Cage, he was unhappy with the general reception of hiswork. Too often his heartfelt expressions cast in percussive sound orpresented on his newly inspired prepared piano were misinterpreted byaudiences. His serious moments were considered ﬂights of fancy and,therefore, at times rewarded with laughter.
One of Cage’ s most popular works, the Sonatas and Interludes, com-
posed in 1946 –48 for prepared piano, reﬂects a pre-chance mindset, not
unlike Imaginary Landscape No. 1.
4Cage employed the prepared piano to
compose the Sonatas and Interludes “by playing the piano, listening to 
differences, making a choice. ” In fact, he described his compositional
method as “considered improvisation (mainly at the piano), thoughideas came to me at some moments away from the instrument. ”
5
Because Cage improvised or composed the Sonatas and Interludes pri-
marily at the piano, the construction of motives or thematic materialgrew out of a tactile awareness of the piano keyboard and a familiaritywith those ﬁngering patterns associated with traditional music. Themanner in which a musical idea is played or “felt under one’ s ﬁngers”
inﬂuenced him. Scalar passages, arpeggios, and triadic-chordal construc-tions found throughout the score reﬂect a feeling for the ﬁngering pat-terns or hand positions more closely associated with traditional key-board music than with the more exotic timbres of the prepared piano.
6
Cage found a certain tonality in the work, as he noted in a letter datingfrom 1968, in which he discussed the preparation of the piano for So-natas and Interludes: “At the time that I wrote the music, the sounds were
in my memory, so to speak, and I was able, going to another piano tocapture them. There is a certain gravity or ‘tonality’ about the piece, and
this can generally be known from the cadences. If at those points, themusic seems to come ‘to earth, ’ then it is right preparation. . . . The
pitches resulting from preparation were intentional, picked up as onedoes shells on a beach. ”
7
In considering the organization of the Sonatas and Interludes, beyond
merely that of the overall collection (four sonatas followed by an in-terlude, four sonatas and an interlude, followed by the mirror image DEBORAH CAMPANA
124
4.Sonatas and Interludes (New York: C. F. Peters, 1960).
5.“Composition as Process, ” in Silence, 34, 19.
6. See Deborah Campana, “Form and Structure in the Music of John Cage” (Ph.D. diss.,
Northwestern University, 1985).
7. Cage to Gregory Clough, Champaign, Illinois, typed and signed letter, January 18, 1968,
John Cage Archive, Northwestern University Music Library, Evanston, Illinois.
of this pattern), one must acknowledge what Cage has described as an
example of his macro-microcosmic structure. Sonata 4, for example, isone hundred measures long, divided into ten-measure units that aregrouped according to a proportion 3, 3, 2, 2; the same proportion is usedinternally within the ten-measure units (ex. 5.2).
8
Cage claimed that the musical materials employed in the Sonatas and
Interludes were not related to the actual temporal structure, yet there 
is no denying that the musical elements ﬁt within the prescribed over-all or macro-, if not the microstructure of each movement. In the ear-lier work, Imaginary Landscape No. 1, Cage consciously deﬁned the tem-
poral evolution as indicated in both the changing length of the work’ s
interludes and the shifting of the motivic characters to suit this process.In Sonatas and Interludes, this idea appears to have crystallized. In spite of
the formal traits associated with the term “sonata, ” and the resurfacing
of the interlude as a means of contrast, each movement is organizedaround a proportional scheme that is conﬁrmed aurally only by ca-dences, or in Cage’ s words, by coming “to earth. ” Cage noted the dom-
inance of what he termed “rhythmic structure” in a 1944 article in theDance Observer: “It may seem at ﬁrst thought that rhythmic structure is
not of primary importance. However, a dance, a poem, a piece of music(any of the time arts) occupies a length of time, and the manner inwhich this length of time is divided ﬁrst into large parts and then intophrases (or built up from phrases to form eventual larger parts) is thework’ s very life structure. ”
9
From 1952 through 1956, Cage wrote a series of compositions all
titled by lengths of time. Although these works capture the ﬂavor of the
temporal structures in the Sonatas and Interludes, they are actually quite
different. The ﬁrst and perhaps his most notorious work, 4/H1103233/H11033, is in
three movements, the lengths of which were determined by chance.The work may be performed by any instrument or combination of in-struments. The other ﬁve time-length works —two for string players
(59
1/2/H11033[1953] and 26/H110321.1499/H11033 [1955]), two for pianists (31/H1103257.9864/H11033 and
34/H1103246.776/H11033 [1954]), and one for percussionist (27/H1103210.554/H11033 [1956])10—are
presented in graphic notation with space on the page measured horizon-tally to represent time (ex. 5.3 on p. 128). Cage speciﬁed that the rhyth-mic structure’ s divisions indicate points at which other instruments or
works may join in the performance. According to the notes to 27/H1103210.554/H11033
for a Percussionist in the 1962 catalog published by C. F. Peters, “ThisAS TIME PASSES
125
8. Cage, “Composition as Process, ” 19.
9.“Grace and Clarity, ” from “Four Statements on the Dance, ” in Silence, 89–93; originally
published in Dance Observer, November 1944, 108 –9.
10. All were published by C. F. Peters in 1960.
DEBORAH CAMPANA
126 EXAMPLE 5.2
Sonata 4 from Sonatas and Interludes, Edition Peters, 13. © 1960 by Henmar Press, Inc. Used by
permission.

AS TIME PASSES
127 piece may be segmented at structural points indicated by dotted lines and
the segments superimposed in any way to provide duets, trios, etc. ”11
Cage might have described these works as indeterminate with respect
to performance. In committing such musical ideas to paper, he gave theperformer great responsibility for interpreting the notation of the indi-vidual parts as well as in determining how each musician will play withothers. There are prescribed sections, but whether or not they will be-come aurally distinctive to a listener is up to the performers who chooseto enter or exit on these cues. With the performance of 4/H1103233/H11033, the audi-
ence can perceive the opening and closing of the keyboard cover, for ex-ample, when a pianist performs the work and thereby deﬁnes the sec-tions of the composition.
12
The Concert for Piano and Orchestra was completed in 1958, one decade
after the Sonatas and Interludes and a few years after the series of time-
length compositions.13The work has no master score, but comprises in-
dividual parts for piano, three violins, two violas, and one cello, doublebass, ﬂute, clarinet, bassoon, trumpet, trombone, and tuba. The Concert
may be performed by one part or any combination of parts, or in conjunc-tion with other works, such as Aria and Fontana Mix, two works written
soon after.
Cage composed the Solo for Piano for the Concert by selecting events
from either Winter Music or Music for Piano and using them exactly as
they appear, or by varying them, or, a fourth possibility, by composinga completely new event.
14Although the work is not Cage’ s ﬁrst graphi-
cally notated score, the piano part in particular is one of the most elab-orate examples of this technique. The notation resembles traditionalmusic notation that has been calligraphically altered. In the piano part,individual letters or combinations of two letters precede all events. Theseletters refer to eighty-four different descriptions or, according to Cage,“kinds of composition ” included in the preface to indicate how particu-
lar notational elements in a given event should be interpreted.
15
Time is represented by the horizontal dimension of the score, read
from left to right. Cage did not deﬁne a scale or standard for measure-ment, but left this determination to the performer.
16In lieu of metric
speciﬁcations, duration is measured chronometrically: a conductor ’s
11. Cage, Notes to 27/H1103210.554/H11033 for a Percussionist, in Dunn, John Cage, 26.
12. Instructions to 4/H1103233/H11033 read: “If performed by a pianist, the 3 sections are indicated by
opening and closing the keyboard lid” (New York: C. F. Peters, 1960).
13. The Concert for Piano and Orchestra (New York: C. F. Peters, 1960).
14. Cage to author, June 25, 1985, typed and signed letter.
15. Notes to Concert for Piano and Orchestra in Dunn, John Cage, 31.
16. Preface to Concert for Piano and Orchestra.
DEBORAH CAMPANA
128
right arm takes the function of the second hand of a clock, incorporat-
ing varied motions, while the left hand indicates the proportion of theentire work that has passed. In this way, the performer can judge at anygiven point his or her temporal standing on each page and within thework based upon the position of the conductor ’s arms. The page becomes
the basis for temporal organization, because the proportion of notatedEXAMPLE 5.3
Excerpt from 34/H1103246.776/H11033 for a Pianist, Edition Peters, 14. © 1960 by Henmar Press, Inc. Used by
permission.

AS TIME PASSES
129 elements to blank space, or the spatial arrangement of the page, conveys
to the performer the number of events, density of texture, and soundvolume that should occur within the period of time expressed by thepage (see ex. 5.4).
The spatial arrangement on the page also plays a signi ﬁcant role in
deﬁning a composition that dates from a decade and a half later, com-missioned by Dennis Russell Davies and the St. Paul Chamber Orches-tra: Score (40 Drawings by Thoreau) and 23 Parts (for Any Instruments and/or
Voices): Twelve Haiku, Followed by a Recording of the Dawn at Stony Point, NewYork, August 6, 1974. The score itself consists of illustrations that Henry
David Thoreau drew in the margins of his Journals (ex. 5.5a, below on
p. 134). Having selected certain images by chance operations, Cage re-produced them on a grid, which is marked for the passage of time, thatis, divided into seventeen sections grouped ﬁve plus seven plus ﬁve, inkeeping with a haiku-like structure. Since the musicians’ improvisa-tions are to be based on segments of images that appear on the pages oftheir parts (ex. 5.5b), the conductor alone can see the complete imagesor the entire work.
To perform Score, Cage indicates that horizontal measure refers to time
and that the performance of an individual haiku should be followed bysilence approximately equal to the length of its performance. All twelvehaiku are to be followed by a recording by David Behrman that is equalin length of performance to the entire set of haiku.
17
In one sense, Cage used the haiku proportions, seventeen units in 
a 5–7–5 grouping, as a template, or a means for organizing time on a
micro-level. It is apparent that he did not intend these measures toframe recurring pulse patterns. Instead, they aid the conductor and per-former by serving as indication of icti-occurrences, marking the passageof time. Each haiku serves as a section, deﬁned by the silence that sur-rounds it. The musicians’ performance is but half the work’ s duration,
however, since Cage indicated that the tape of environmental soundsshould be heard after the musicians complete their performance, spe-ciﬁcally, as long as the sum of the twelve haikus ’ durations.
Periods of silence also frame the sections of one of Cage’ s more pop-
ular late works, Roaratorio. Composed in 1979 as a radio play, or Hörspiel,
Roaratorio is a compilation of four basic layers of sound activity all taken
from or directly related to James Joyce’ s Finnegans Wake. In “writing
through” the entire book, Cage derived mesostics based on the words oridentity of James Joyce; this process resulted in a forty-one-page textthat serves as the basis for the most signiﬁcant layer of Roaratorio, the
17. Preface to Score (40 Drawings by Thoreau) and 23 Parts (for Any Instruments and/or Voices):
Twelve Haiku, Followed by a Recording of the Dawn at Stony Point, New York, August 6, 1974 (New York:
Henmar, 1974).
EXAMPLE 5.4
Solo for Piano, from Concert for Piano and Orchestra, Edition Peters, 56 and 63. © 1960 by Henmar Press, Inc. Used by permission.

EXAMPLE 5.4 continued

DEBORAH CAMPANA
132 time template. Cage’ s intention in composing mesostics using Finnegans
Wake as the source of material was to magnify the many different mean-
ings associated with single words in Joyce ’s text and to point up the po-
etry inherent in his language. When asked to write music to this text,
Cage created an Irish circus —music for which “there is not one center
but . . . a plurality of centers. ” As Cage put it, “I wanted to make a mu-
sic that was free of melody and free of harmony and free of counter-point: free of musical theory. I wanted it not to be music in the sense ofmusic, but I wanted it to be music in the sense of Finnegans Wake. ”
18
Cage taped his own reading of the text, preserving the line and page
numbering of Joyce’ s work as well as the author’ s designation of seven-
teen chapters assembled in four books. Determining that the tape ofRoaratorio would be one hour long, he took the difference in time that
remained after his reading of the mesostics and inserted periods of si-lence or unrecorded tape between each of the seventeen chapters. Thedivisions between the four books are emphasized by longer periods of silence. In effect, the divisions of line, page, chapter, and book act as mensural increments that deﬁne his temporal framework and be-come a ruler or standard by which the remaining three layers are added.These layers include (1) tapes of ambient sounds recorded at chance-selected locations mentioned in Finnegans Wake as derived from Louis
Mink’ s A Finnegans Wake Gazetteer; (2) recordings of sounds mentioned
in Joyce’ s text (“baywinds” or “lute, ” for example); and (3) traditional
Irish music performed by Irish musicians. The sounds in the ﬁrst twolayers were added to Cage’ s taped reading of the mesostics at precisely
the points corresponding to those at which they were encountered inJoyce ’s text.
One of Cage’ s last large-scale works, 108, is scored for orchestra and
constructed as a series of time brackets or durational ranges. Within agiven range, for example, a performer may choose to begin and end thesound of traditionally notated pitches at any point during the temporalwindow. Such actions need not be coordinated speci ﬁcally with another
individual’ s performance; in fact, it is better for the performers to focus
only on their own parts, rather than think in accord with what and whenother members of the ensemble are playing. Cage speci ﬁed that in a
given time bracket, pitches should not be repeated. The 108-memberensemble is divided into ﬁve groups: the ﬁrst group includes four per-cussionists; the second, violins; third, violins, violas, and cellos; fourth,cellos, basses, upper woodwinds; and ﬁfth, clarinets, bassoons, brass,
18. Roaratorio, ein irischer Circus über Finnegans Wake/An Irish Circus on Finnegans Wake, edited
by Klaus Schöning (Königstein: Athenaum, 1982), 85, 107, 89.
AS TIME PASSES
133 and one percussionist.19The large ensemble is seated onstage according
to these groups. In performance, its playing is coordinated by a video-
clock, a videorecording that marks the passage of minutes and secondsand provides the metric standard for the sound material performersplace in their temporal windows.
To say that time is the element common to all the works described
herein would be a truism. Yet, among Cage’ s many compositions, com-
monalties do exist with regard to temporal organization that can serveto illuminate his compositional process. On a basic level, the variety of notational practices notwithstanding and in spite of his understand-ing of Zen Buddhism and other Eastern philosophies, the temporal ele-ments found in the scores examined here hold to the convention of timemoving on a horizontal plane and the performer reading from left toright. This is not to say that the performer ’s work is accomplished easily,
however, for even when employing conventional symbolic music no-tation, a half note does not necessarily maintain a relation to two quar-ters, nor do bar lines designate a metric ﬂow. In fact, the performer mustnegotiate considerable differences in notational practice in order to in-terpret the composer’ s wishes.
Today we recognize that Cage’ s own description of “object” and “pro-
cess” surfaced in the early to mid-ﬁfties, after he adopted chance proce-dures and began exploring aspects of indeterminacy.
20Thus, the term
“object” referred to his earlier works, which were notated fully and leftlittle room for interpretation if one were a musician trained in the West-ern art music tradition. On the other hand, the works considered to ﬁt
the category “process” were usually indeterminate and gave great inter-pretative license to the performer. For this reason, it is interesting tonote that even as early as 1939, Cage described what is in essence anearly manifestation of rhythmic structure in Imaginary Landscape No. 1
as an evolving process. Evidently, in striving to work with a plan for designing this rhythmic evolution, he talked about the composition interms he was more apt to use in describing indeterminacy, a conceptthat he didn ’t fully articulate until nearly two decades later.
While it is possible to trace seeds of Cage’ s interest in process back to
his earliest work, we can also reﬂect on a convention he employed thenthat changed little over the passing of time. In Imaginary Landscape and
the Sonatas and Interludes, for example, we observe temporal patterns —
metric patterns, phrase patterns, and even sectional patterns —all of
19. Michael Bach to author, facsimile transmission, October 22, 1991. Bach, the solo violon-
cellist for whom One8,a solo work written to be performed with 108, was written, provided a
copy of the orchestration and how the orchestra members should be grouped.
20. Cage, “Indeterminacy, ” part 2 of “Composition as Process, ” 35–40.
EXAMPLE 5.5
Score and 23 Parts: Twelve Haiku, Edition Peters, 1 and 3. © 1974 by Henmar Press, Inc. Used by permission.
a.
b.
AS TIME PASSES
135 which can be perceived by a listener. But even within his chance-
inspired works dating from several years later and those works that are indeterminate with respect to performance, Cage composed sectionswithin the score that could serve as indication of a number of changes,including (1) the point at which an ensemble might be altered, as in thetime-length pieces and 108, (2) a change in physical action as in 4/H1103233/H11033,
and even (3) contrasts in texture, as in Score and 23 Parts and Roaratorio.
In all these examples, the divisions into sections are not merely cos-metic, but instead act in a functional capacity. Indication of metric pat-tern does not necessarily represent the means by which an ensemblestays together, as in traditional music notation. Instead, meter serves toindicate when ensemble members might choose to enter or exit thework and thereby effect a change in texture. Moreover, they can be per-ceived by listeners, who are thus enabled to organize their sense of thetime ﬂow.
In Score, the recurrence of musical haiku interspersed with silence
and ultimately followed by the tapes of environmental sound sets theaudience’ s mood: expectation of the alternating texture, then at last 
resolution in the dawn, or the environmental sound captured on tape.Such sections deﬁned by silence in Roaratorio may appear less evident to
the audience, yet their design and meaning as based upon an extramu-sical device, the chapters and books of Finnegans Wake, act as a means of
organizing the ﬂow of time.
Even in the absence of meter and phrases, or of preexistent or liter-
ary forms, Cage sought creative solutions to the organization of time. Inthe Concert, the page itself stood as a temporal unit that was conducted
based on real time, rather than symbolic or meter-derived time. Simi-larly for 108, the durational windows may be the means of temporal 
organization, though rather than expressing this visually to the audi-ence by a conductor, a videoclock seen only by the musicians serves thisfunction just as well.
To move from the perception of time and meter to its interpretation
by performers, the score and its parts pose an intriguing conundrum. Of particular interest are the later examples or those works for largerforces. In the Concert, for example, there is no score, but a conductor is
needed in performance. His only job, however, is marking the passageof time, both at the micro-level (as a second hand of the clock) and themacro-level (as signaling the portion of the work that has passed in theperformance). In Score, the conductor does have a score, at least for that
part of the piece that is performed by musicians. However, aside fromthe haiku-grid it has in common with the parts, the score bears little re-semblance to what the players themselves see. In essence, the conduc-
DEBORAH CAMPANA
136 tor again marks time; he oversees the work’ s unfolding so that musicians
can enter at their respective cues, which are indicated by the icti-points
on the haiku-grid. In 108, again there is no score and, moreover, no con-
ductor. The videoclock takes the place of such a leader, and templatemarkings in each performer’ s part provide guidance toward interpreting
her performance.
As demonstrated in these examples, Cage was fascinated with the so-
cial relationships that arise between a score and the performers’ parts or,more precisely, the conductor and the members of an ensemble thatmust interpret them. How do instrumentalists play for a given period oftime without playing together? Can a group of musicians become an en-semble without each person losing his own identity or individuality?Can musicians come together without becoming an ensemble or group?Can a group come together without a leader? Can a leader lead with-out becoming more important than any one member of the group sheleads? Can a conductor lead without imposing personal inﬂuence (es-pecially with regard to expressivity)?
Although we cannot be certain that Cage ultimately was able to an-
swer these questions, the continuum of his thoughts is apparent in theseexamples. Moreover, one must wonder if he did not feel that he hadachieved a point of satisfaction in the latter works that employed tem-plates similar to that of 108, considering the number of works he com-
posed that exhibit its traits. We can speculate that perhaps he had ﬁnallydevised a notational method that pleased him —one that would success-
fully communicate his thoughts about sound through a two-dimensionalmedium of writing on a page. Whatever the truth, an audience may hearCage’ s music as free ﬂowing and ever changing, and the basis for such
change rests on a temporal plan that he established early in his compo-sitional process. While the template takes on a variety of guises, it al-ways functions as the “work’ s very life structure. ”
21
21. Cage, “Grace and Clarity, ” 90.
SIX
John Holzaepfel
David Tudor and the Solo for Piano
Although David Tudor spent the last three
decades of his life creating his own music,his name continues to be inseparably linkedwith the music of John Cage. For ﬁfteenyears, from his performance of Music of
Changes in 1952 to his recording of Varia-
tions II in 1967, Tudor gave the ﬁrst perfor-
mances of all of Cage’ s post-1950 piano mu-
sic. By 1962, when Cage’ s publisher, C. F.
Peters, issued its descriptive catalog of thecomposer’ s works, Tudor’ s name appeared in
the indices of performances at least as oftenas did that of Cage himself. From this profu-sion of musical activity one work stands outin affording a comprehensive view of Tudor’ s
methods in preparing his performances ofCage’ s scores. It can, in other words, illumi-
nate Cage’ s reﬂection that, during the 1950s
and 1960s, “David Tudor was present in ev-erything I was doing. ”
1
The scope of the Concert for Piano and Or-
chestra of 1957 –58 was the largest of Cage’ s
works since the Music of Changes of 1951. The
Concert was an encyclopedic summary of his
compositional development as well as a fore-
1371.For the Birds: John Cage in Conversation with Daniel
Charles (Boston: Marion Boyars, 1981), 178.
runner of its immediate future. Moreover, the pianist’ s part of the Con-
cert,called Solo for Piano, is a compendium of notational techniques in
experimental music (and not only Cage’ s). As a result, it offers an op-
portunity to consider Tudor’ s solutions to a large number of notational
problems, which are in many cases identical to those found in other
works by Cage that he performed in the 1950s.
The Solo for Piano is a collection of eighty-four different notational
techniques distributed across sixty-three pages 11 by 17 inches in size(ex. 6.1). Each of the notational techniques produced a discrete graphicobject whose coordinates, or visual and spatial dimensions, may be plot-ted in order to obtain information for preparing a performance. It is forthis reason that Tudor referred to the eighty-four techniques as “graphs, ”
a term I shall employ here.
Tudor began by tabulating all the occurrences of the eighty-four
graphs according to the page number or numbers (several graphs over-lap two pages) on which they appear in Cage’ s score. He then had to 
decide whether to use all eighty-four graphs or to make a selection fromthem. Probably because of the predetermined length of the performance,Tudor chose the latter course. The basis for his selection was the inclusionof at least one of each graph type; that is, his realization would representeach of the eighty-four notational techniques found in Cage’ s score. By
surveying his list of graphs, Tudor could quickly note not only Cage’ s
multiple uses of the same graph type but also those graphs which were,in Cage’ s words, “varieties of others. ” In eliminating these varieties, Tu-
dor found a total of sixty-three distinct graph types; he used each of theseonce. (That the number of graph types is identical to the number ofpages in the score of the Solo for Piano is, so far as I know, coincidental.)
After making his selection of graphs, Tudor referred to Cage’ s instruc-
tions, which are frequently little more than clues, for reading eachgraph type. Where necessary, he made content sketches, translatingCage’ s more abstract graphs into conventional notation. These sketches
show that Tudor’ s readings of the graphs are complete and cumulative;
each sketch represents the entire content of each graph used. He thentranscribed the contents, in timings based on the dimensions of Cage’ s
graphs, to separate sheets of staff paper, which he gathered in a smallring-binder notebook. The result was Tudor’ s ﬁrst realization of the Solo
for Piano; it was from this realization that Tudor played when he gave the
premiere of the Concert for Piano and Orchestra on May 15, 1958, as part
of the Twenty-ﬁve Year Retrospective Concert of the Music of John Cage,given in Town Hall in New York.
2JOHN HOLZAEPFEL
138
2. The concert was recorded by George Avakian and has been reissued on compact discs
(Wergo 6247 –2).
EXAMPLE 6.1
Solo for Piano, from Concert for Piano and Orchestra, Edition Peters, 1. © 1960 by Henmar Press, Inc. Used by permission.

I shall devote the remainder of this essay to Tudor’ s second realiza-
tion of the Solo for Piano. In doing so, I follow Tudor’ s own emphasis.
Taken as a whole, the two realizations of the Solo for Piano constitute Tu-
dor’s most extensive preparation of any composer ’s work. But Tudor used
the ﬁrst realization for a rather brief period, perhaps for no more than
two years. In contrast, he continued to use his second realization, in var-
ious and evolving forms, from the time of its inception in 1959 until aslate as 1993, on one of the rare occasions when he still performed at thepiano. Furthermore, Tudor made two recordings of the later realization,and a third recording, of a live performance in 1992, has also appeared.
3
Another reason for addressing Tudor’ s second realization of the Solo for
Piano is more personal: it has been my long-standing belief that the orig-
inal recording of the work documents the ﬁrst great culmination of theTudor-Cage collaboration.
In the spring of 1959, Cage was invited to give a lecture at Teachers
College of Columbia University in New York. Fearing that he would nothave enough time in which to write a new text, Cage expanded a lecture he had read the previous fall at the Brussels World’ s Fair, a lecture that had 
consisted of thirty stories, each read over the course of one minute. Forthe Columbia lecture, Cage added sixty more stories and asked Tudor toprovide music of his choice to complement the lecture, now ninety min-utes long. Tudor used the Solo for Piano again. But this time he took a new
approach to Cage’ s score by including only the graphs that, as he put it,
“had the possibility of being read as single icti, ” that is, those graphs
whose notations could be played as discrete and separate attacks. Therewere, Tudor found, ﬁfty-three graphs in the Solo for Piano conforming to
this criterion.
Tudor next prepared any content sketches needed for the graphs 
he had not used in his ﬁrst realization. He determined the contentsmuch the same way as he had done previously, transcribing Cage ’s
graphs to more standard notation and drawing up lists of calculations ofthe more morphological graphs, some of which I shall discuss below. Asbefore, Tudor sketched the contents of each graph in its entirety. An ex-ception are those graphs, such as graph BY on pages 54 –55 of Cage’ s
score, whose contents are to consist of otherwise unspeciﬁed noises. InJOHN HOLZAEPFEL
140
3. The ﬁrst recording comprised two simultaneous performances: Tudor playing the Solo for
Piano and Cage reading his lecture “Indeterminacy: New Aspect of Form in Instrumental and
Electronic Music. ” Made in July 1959 and released on Folkways Records during the same year,
the recording has been reissued on compact discs (Smithsonian/Folkways SF40804/5). In 1982,
Tudor recorded the Solo for Piano alone (Atonal 3037). The third recording (Mode 57), the only
current documentation of Tudor performing this realization with orchestra, is of a performancein Frankfurt on September 4, 1992. The occasion was the Festival of Anarchic Harmonies, origi-nally planned as a celebration of Cage ’s eightieth birthday on September 5; owing to the com-
poser’ s death the previous month, the concert became a memorial tribute.
these cases, Tudor used tape tracks from Cage ’s sound collage Fontana
Mix(1958).
At this point, Tudor had determined the overall content of the new re-
alization. He compiled the results in a master table written on ﬁve pages
of typescript (ﬁg. 6.1). The underlined numbers represent the ninety-
minute duration of the realization. Under the number 0, the ﬁrst column
of ﬁgures shows the attack point, in seconds, of each of Tudor ’s readings;
column 2 identiﬁes the graph on which the reading is based, followedby the ordinal number of the speciﬁc graph notation being used; andcolumn 3 refers to the page on which the graph begins in Cage ’s score.
For example, the second entry under minute 0, “24.3 T-1 41, ” means
that Tudor’ s ﬁrst reading of graph T, as that graph appears on page 41 of
Cage’ s score, is to begin at attack point 24.3 seconds (the ﬁrst, paren-
thetical entry “.0 BV-1 53, ” was not used in the realization). The next
entry, “27.65 I-1 46, ” means that the attack point of Tudor’ s ﬁrst read-
ing of graph I on page 46 is to be 27.65 seconds, and so forth.
But the master table gives no indication of why these readings occur
at these attack points, or, for that matter, how Tudor generated the at-tack points themselves. Nor does it explain why Tudor’ s ﬁrst two read-
ings from graph BB 45, both of them occurring at attack point 90, are,according to the master table, the eighth and eleventh readings of thegraph, rather than the ﬁrst and second. And neither Cage’ s notations
nor his instructions for reading them have anything to say about thesequestions. The answer lies in the internal temporal structure Tudor con-ceived for the new realization.
To determine the attack points of his readings of Cage ’s graphs within
the ninety-minute time frame of the realization, Tudor measured eitherthe area or the length of each graph according to its particular morphol-ogy and with whatever means of measurement he found appropriate toa graph’ s individual form and shape. Each measurement gave him an
area or length A for each graph. Next, he measured the position of each
ictus, or notational point, within the graph, usually in terms of its dis-tance from the beginning of the graph. Then he multiplied each positionmeasurement by the total duration of the realization, 5,400 seconds(90 minutes) and divided the result by the number representing the relevant area or length A.The quotient was the attack point, in Tudor ’s
realization, of the ictus from Cage’ s score. In this way, Tudor designed a
temporal structure that reﬂected both the speciﬁc attack points of thesource material in Cage’ s score and the order of their occurrence.
This structure placed a new restriction on Tudor’ s knowledge of his
own actions. With his content sketches and calculations he had de-termined the actions he would perform but not the times at which heDAVID TUDOR AND THE SOLO FOR PIANO
141
142
FIGURE 6.1
David Tudor, second realization of Solo for Piano, ﬁrst page of master table, the David Tudor
Papers, 1884–1998 (bulk 1940–1996), Getty Research Institute, Research Library, accession
no. 980039.

would perform them. And to keep this aspect beyond his control, he for-
mulated a temporal structure that was at once unpredictable and deter-minate.
4A secondary consequence of the new temporal structure was
the coincidence of as many as ﬁve graph readings, whose individual con-
tents may be mutually exclusive, at a single attack point (as happens atattack point 2025, for example). There is nothing new, of course, aboutrequiring a pianist to do a number of things at once. But as a rule thesesimultaneous acts of performance are, like the musical results to whichthey are directed, interrelated. In Tudor’ s second realization of the Solo
for Piano, the performer’ s actions are intentionally disconnected, then
reassembled in new and unforeseeable ways.
To prepare the performance score itself, Tudor typed his list of attack
points and their sources into his master table, then transcribed the ap-propriate reading to its place in his score. But this transcription took twoforms.
Tudor may have originally intended to use the entire contents of his
master table, although its total 789 attack points implies a resulting tex-ture of extreme density. Moreover, if Cage had insuf ﬁcient time in which
to write his Columbia lecture, then Tudor had probably less time to pre-pare his realization. In any event, he divided the readings in his mastertable into two parts, copying 472 entries into a small packet of paper andthe remaining entries into a second packet. The packets are complemen-tary; together, they contain all the information in the master table.
Referring to the ﬁrst packet of paper, Tudor transcribed the contents
from Cage’ s score on ninety miniature sheets of staff paper. This was the
ﬁrst version of his second realization of the Solo for Piano, which he per-
formed in conjunction with Cage’ s lecture at Teachers College in April
1959. Later, Tudor began a second version, if for no other reason thanto use up the “leftovers, ” so to speak, which he had copied from the
master table into the second packet of paper. This version, too, was writ-ten on small sheets of staff paper, but after thirty-two pages the manu-script breaks off. Tudor then began again, writing out the entire secondversion on ninety pages (forty-ﬁve sheets) of blank, rather than staff pa-per. The result was the second version of his second realization of theSolo for Piano.
The reason for the incomplete manuscript seems clear: blank paper
offered a notational advantage. Because the new realization consistedentirely of discrete events, Tudor did not need a continuous staff, only ameans of denoting the ninety-minute time scale. In both versions, eachpage equals one minute; at two systems per page, each system, denotedby vertical lines on the left and right, represents thirty seconds. To enterDAVID TUDOR AND THE SOLO FOR PIANO
143
4. We can show Tudor’ s method formulaically, where attack point ap /H11005position measure-
ment p times total duration Ddivided by area or length A, or (p /H11003D) /H11004A /H11005ap.
each of his readings of Cage’ s graphs, Tudor simply placed the entry,
whatever its notational form, at its proper location on the timeline. In
the second version, if a reading called for more or less conventional notation, Tudor used a rastrum. If the notation was in graphic or verbalform, Tudor dispensed with lines and spaces. Staff notation became sim-ply one notational tool among many.
In reconstructing Tudor’ s process of preparing both versions of his
second realization of the Solo for Piano, I traced the derivations of his 472
readings of Cage’ s graphs used in the ﬁrst version as well as his ﬁrst read-
ing of each graph used in the second. Using his master table and the twopackets derived from it, plus his work sheets, sketches, and two perfor-mance scores, I have been able to identify and describe Tudor ’s methods
of determining both the content and the attack point of each sonorityin the realization. I shall discuss here a few of the problems posed byCage’ s notations in the Solo for Piano and Tudor’ s solutions to them, be-
ginning with the more straightforward notations in Cage ’s score.
Some graphs present no particular problems in reading or interpre-
tation. In the family of graphs labeled “B, ” for example, the notation is
fairly standard, consisting of noteheads on a staff, and the pitch contentis partly determinate. The only ambiguity lies in individual pitch iden-tity, owing to the “ﬂoating” clef signs: if both clef signs are present at a
given sonority, they are accompanied by numbers signifying how manyof the noteheads in that sonority are to be read in each clef, although theassignment of the speciﬁc clef is indeterminate. All the B graphs in Cage’ s
score are notated in this manner (that is why they are labeled “B”).
The ﬁrst sonority of graph B 9 consists of six noteheads (ex. 6.2). Ac-
cording to Cage’ s instructions, four of these are to be read with the treble
clef, the remaining two with the bass. Tudor’ s content sketch for the
graph sorts out the pitch identity of all twenty-seven of its sonorities(ex. 6.3). The sketch dispenses with Cage’ s numerical dispositions, but
Tudor’ s determination of pitch content of sonority 1 is clear. Reading
from bottom to top, the four noteheads Tudor read with the treble clefare noteheads 1, 3, 4, and 5, or G/sharp
2, B/sharp4, E /flat5, and G5. The remaining two
noteheads, therefore, he read with the bass clef, so that these became C /flat2
and E5. In his content sketch, Tudor renotated the sonority enharmoni-
cally. He then entered the notation on the ﬁrst page of his score at its
proper attack point of 40.5 seconds (ex. 6.4). The ﬁrst entry in the lowersystem shows Tudor’ s ﬁrst reading of graph B 9 in Cage’ s score. In his
subsequent readings of graph B 9, Tudor replaced Cage ’s numerous
ledger lines with octave signs to facilitate reading; this alteration is un-necessary in the case of sonority 1.JOHN HOLZAEPFEL
144
Some graphs appear to be more abstract than they actually are. An
example of this is the group of K graphs, beginning with graph K 8
(ex. 6.5), one of the most famous of Cage’ s notations (it adorns the cover
of the 1962 Peters catalog of Cage’ s works). Graph K 8 consists of eight
geometric shapes in which pitch names are entered in each angle, sothat the number of pitches corresponds to the number of angles in eachshape. Some of the shapes overlap, and overlaying all of them is a largegrand staff. The instructions for the K graphs read: “Disregard time. Play
only odd or even number of tones in a performance, using others of agiven 3, 4, 5, or 6 sided ﬁgure as graces or punctuations. ”
Tudor saw that Cage had notated not simply pitch classes but speci ﬁc
pitch content inside each geometric shape, since the pitch names arealso aligned with the corresponding lines and spaces on the grand staff.He numbered the eight shapes and wrote down the pitch names foundin each, transcribing the resulting sonorities to standard notation in hiscontent sketch. The sketch appears at the bottom of the page containingDAVID TUDOR AND THE SOLO FOR PIANO
145 EXAMPLE 6.2
Solo for Piano, from Concert for Piano and Orchestra, graph B 9, Edition Peters, 9. © 1960 by
Henmar Press, Inc. Used by permission.

EXAMPLE 6.3
David Tudor, second realization of Solo for Piano, content sketch for graphs B 9 and K 8, the David Tudor Papers, 1884–1998 (bulk 1940–1996), Getty
Research Institute, Research Library, accession no. 980039.

EXAMPLE 6.4
David Tudor, second realization of Solo for Piano, the David Tudor Papers, 1884–1998 (bulk 1940–1996), Getty Research Institute, Research Library,
accession no. 980039. The ﬁrst notation, the hexachord B1–G/sharp2–C5–D/sharp5–E5–G5, reﬂects Tudor’s ﬁrst reading of graph B 9.

148 EXAMPLE 6.5
Solo for Piano, from Concert for Piano and Orchestra, graph K 8, Edition Peters, 8. © 1960 by
Henmar Press, Inc. Used by permission.

Tudor’ s content sketch for graph B 9 (ex. 6.3). The ﬁrst sonority in the
sketch, for example, the hexachord G1 –A/flat1–C2–E/flat2–F/sharp2–G/sharp2in the bass
staff, shows the pitch content of the hexagon near the bottom of Cage ’s
graph.5When the graph is read from the left, however, the ﬁrst shape 
is the square inside the bass clef and containing the letter-names for
pitches A2–B2–E3–F/sharp3. Consequently, the ﬁrst reading of graph K 8 in
Tudor’ s realization corresponds to the fourth notation in the content
sketch (the third group of noteheads in the bass staff); both show thetetrachord A
2–B2–E3–F/sharp3. In accordance with Cage ’s instructions to play
either an odd or an even number of notes within each group within ashape, Tudor extended three of the noteheads with a brace to signify anodd number, leaving the F/sharp
3to serve as “punctuation ” (ex. 6.6).
The most abstract notation in the Concert for Piano and Orchestra is the
series of graphs made with line-and-point drawings, beginning withgraph BB 45 (ex. 6.7). The line-and-point drawing was the most ef ﬁcient
of Cage’ s early techniques of indeterminate notation. While many of the
graphs in the Solo for Piano primarily confound the order of occurrence
of an otherwise speciﬁc content, the line-and-point drawings place themusical material itself beyond the composer’ s control. This in turn re-
quires the performer to determine a content that embodies the charac-ter of each sound. And to do this, the performer must ﬁrst obtain a suf ﬁ-
cient description of the sound’ s characteristics by measuring the graph
according to Cage’ s instructions. The instructions for reading graph BB
45 are as follows: “Notes are single sounds. Lines are duration (D), fre-quency (F), overtone structure (S), amplitude (A), and occurrence (suc-cession) (O). Proximity to these, measured by dropping perpendicularsfor notes to lines[,] gives, respectively, longest, lowest, simplest, loudest,and earliest. ”
There are twelve notes or noteheads in graph BB 45. Tudor measured
the distance in centimeters of each notehead from each of the ﬁve lines
D, S, F, O, and A and from their hypothetical extensions beyond thegraph when this was necessary. He compiled the results in a list of speci-ﬁcations (ﬁg. 6.2).
6Under the column showing order of occurrence O,
the measurements of entries 8 and 11 are both 0.1 cm. This does not re-ﬂect a literal reading of Cage ’s score, where the corresponding note-
heads 8 and 11 in fact touch line O and where their distance from theDAVID TUDOR AND THE SOLO FOR PIANO
149
5. The sketch actually shows seven noteheads in this sonority. Tudor may have initially read
the extra A2, which belongs to the group written within the square above the hexagon in Cage ’s
graph, as part of the ﬁrst sonority. If this was the case, he saw his error, for he omitted the note
from his realization.
6. Graph BB 45 has been reduced in the reproduction shown in example 6.7. All of Tudor ’s
measurements refer to the original 11-by-17-inch dimensions of Cage’ s score.
EXAMPLE 6.6
David Tudor, second realization of Solo for Piano, ﬁrst reading of graph K 8, the David Tudor Papers, 1884–1998 (bulk 1940–1996), Getty Research
Institute, Research Library, accession no. 980039.

EXAMPLE 6.7
Solo for Piano, from Concert for Piano and Orchestra, graph BB 45, Edition Peters, 45. © 1960 by Henmar Press, Inc. Used by permission.

152
FIGURE 6.2
David Tudor, second realization of Solo for Piano, list of speciﬁcations for graph BB 45, the
David Tudor Papers, 1884–1998 (bulk 1940–1996), Getty Research Institute, Research Library,
accession no. 980039.

line is therefore zero. But Tudor needed a positive number in order to
calculate the attack points of these noteheads; therefore, he used thenearest available integer, which in centimeters is 0.1.
The ﬁgure “/H110036” above column O is Tudor’ s measurement of the area
Aof graph BB 45. I confess I do not know how he arrived at this ﬁgure,
for the area of the graph in Cage’ s score is eighteen square inches (two
inches high by nine inches long). But whatever Tudor’ s scale of mea-
surement may have been, the factor A /H110056 works in determining the or-
der of occurrence of each of the twelve noteheads in the graph. For ex-ample, multiplying position measurement 0.1 of noteheads 8 and 11 bythe duration 5,400 and dividing the result by 6 yields the common at-tack point of ninety seconds.
Tudor later revised his list of speciﬁcations for graph BB 45, grouping
the measurements pertaining to overtone structure S into four cate-gories (these categories also appear at the top of Tudor’ s ﬁrst list). Note-
heads measuring less than one centimeter from line S (numbers 11 and8), went into category H. Those more than one but less than two cen-timeters from the line were labeled C.
7He also converted the frequency
measurements F to piano-key numbers, multiplying each measurementby 10. But the largest product of this operation was 92 (i.e., the 9.2 cmshown in the F column for notehead 12), and the piano has of courseonly 88 keys. Consequently, Tudor reduced the product of each multi-plication by 4; this is the meaning of the ﬁgure “/H110024” above the F col-
umn in the ﬁrst list of speciﬁcations. At some point (this is not re ﬂected
in the surviving work notes), Tudor replaced all but the ﬁrst two piano-
key numbers with nonpitched sounds, probably because the invertedscale of Cage’ s instructions for reading line S, representing the “simplest”
overtone structure, required sounds more complex in overtones —
noises, in other words —than could be obtained by pitches played on
the piano. Finally, Tudor converted the amplitude measurements to adynamic scale of 0 to 10.5 and equated the largest measurement, 9.2, tothe highest degree on this scale, adjusting the other measurements ac-cordingly and incrementally: 0, 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 2.5, etc. Only the durationmeasurements remained unchanged in the new list (ﬁg. 6.3).DAVID TUDOR AND THE SOLO FOR PIANO
153
7. The meaning of these initials, though not entirely clear, can be inferred from the re-
sults in Tudor’ s realization. H refers to the two notes (C/sharp
6and F1) played as harmonics; N prob-
ably stands for “noise, ” since the corresponding notations are cues for the use of a Klaxon; and
the two appearances of A —”Tap Klaxon ” and “Ruler End on Tenor C[enter] B[ar]”— seem 
to mean the use of auxiliary sound sources. Finally, the realization of all six of the noteheads
grouped under category C is the same cue FB, meaning a sound to produced with the fall-boardof the piano; on Tudor’ s ﬁrst two recordings of the Solo for Piano one hears at these six attack
points a sound suggesting that Tudor knocked or clapped the fall-board against the case of theinstrument.
154
FIGURE 6.3
David Tudor, second realization of Solo for Piano, second list of speciﬁcations for graph BB 45, 
the David Tudor Papers, 1884–1998 (bulk 1940–1996), Getty Research Institute, Research Library,
accession no. 980039.

EXAMPLE 6.8
David Tudor, second realization of Solo for Piano, concurrent readings 8 and 11 of graph BB 45, the David Tudor Papers, 1884–1998 (bulk 1940–1996),
Getty Research Institute, Research Library, accession no. 980039.

The revised list enables us to distinguish the two readings at attack
point 90 in Tudor’ s realization by noticing that the dynamic level 9 in
the upper portion of the notation corresponds to that found at reading
number 11 on the list of speciﬁcations, and that dynamic level 5 in thelower part of the notation corresponds to reading number 8 (ex. 6.8). Inplace of frequency (or piano-key number) 36 shown in the entry forreading 8 on Tudor’ s list, the realization shows the cue FB for a sound
to be produced with fall-board at dynamic level 5. Above this nota-tion is an entry whose amplitude level 9 shows that the notehead rep-resents reading 11 on Tudor ’s list. In Cage’ s score, notehead 11 lies one
centimeter from the line S. Since proximity to the line represents “sim-
plest” overtone structure, Tudor represented this quality through thefrequency itself, that is, piano key 65, or C/sharp
6, played as a harmonic H.8
/flower13 /flower13 /flower13
With his second realization of Cage’ s Solo for Piano, Tudor began to move
beyond piano playing as he had redeﬁned it in the 1950s. His ﬁrst re-alization of the Solo, which merits an extended discussion it has not 
received here, offered Tudor the opportunity to summarize both his vir-tuosity as a pianist and his innovations in the techniques of piano play-ing. In his second realization, Tudor entered a new phase. While show-ing connections with his earlier work, Tudor ’s second realization of the
Solo for Piano marks the beginning of a transition from pianist to what
Larry Austin has called sonic artist. It was a journey that would lead himaway from the piano and into the world of live electronic music. Char-acteristically, Tudor would create much of this new world himself.JOHN HOLZAEPFEL
156
8. Tudor treated the other notehead closest to line S in like manner: page 35 of his real-
ization shows his reading of notehead 6 to be an F1(frequency/piano key 9) to be played as a
harmonic.
SEVEN
Paul van Emmerik
Here Comes Everything
I
John Cage’ s death in 1992 is not only a loss,
but also a challenge for a new appreciationof his work. This is not to suggest that Cagewas somehow “in the way” to anyone in-terested in his work, since everybody whoknew him knows that he considered beingaccessible “a part of twentieth-century eth-
ics.”
1However, with the death of this charis-
matic composer, events that seem so recenthave unexpectedly become history. Conse-quently, especially for those who knew himpersonally, experiences and recollections arebeing overgrown by the problems of histori-cal method, of interpreting what remains in order to testify about Cage and his work,as happens with all interesting relics fromthe past.
My own involvement with these “relics”
began during Cage’ s lifetime, in the early
1980s, during the compilation of a bibliog-raphy of writings by and about him. Sinceample attention, including bibliographicalattention, had been given to American mu-
157This chapter is dedicated to Charles Hamm.
1.“Conversation with John Cage, ” in John Cage, ed.
Richard Kostelanetz (New York: Praeger, 1970), 6.
sic in the now defunct German annual Neuland, I approached its editor,
the German pianist Herbert Henck, about publishing this bibliography.
It turned out that Henck had also been working on a Cage bibliography.Nevertheless, he generously accepted me as coauthor, since our indepen-dent efforts had produced quite different lists. Our joint effort resultedin the Cage-Bibliographie 1939 –1985, published in the ﬁfth and ﬁnal vol-
ume of Neuland.
2Comprising about two thousand entries, it is the most
comprehensive bibliography of Cage to date.
After the publication of this bibliography, Henck and I agreed that it
should be published as a book and that a catalog of works should beadded. It was Cage himself who told us about the catalog of his worksalready compiled by the Hungarian musicologist András Wilheim, whichhad resulted from Wilheim’ s research in Cage’ s apartment in New York
in late 1984. When approached, Wilheim agreed to join the project, andhis compilation became the basis for the catalogue raisonné included in A
Cage Compendium, a book currently in preparation. In addition to the cat-
alog and the bibliography, the Compendium will include an extensive bio-
graphical chronology and, of course, an index. The original bibliographyhas been expanded and updated steadily in the past few years, and it nowcomprises approximately ten thousand entries, documenting the recep-tion of Cage’ s work as extensively as possible. In the catalogue raisonné,
separate sections are given to Cage’ s music, writings, and works of art —
even though in several cases there is no clear line of demarcation be-tween the three categories —and the arrangement of items within each
section is chronological. The following entry exempli ﬁes the format of
the music section in the catalog, this particular composition having beenchosen for a reason that will become clear below.
Three
For three recorder players using sopranino, soprano, alto, tenor (player 1);
sopranino, soprano, alto, basset, tenor, bass (player 2); and soprano,alto, basset, tenor, double bass (player 3)
Extent: 6 sentences (instructions for performance); (1) 2 systems; A
through I, each part 3 systems; (2) 2 systems; duration indeterminate
Completed in July 1989 in New York; ﬁrst performed 27 July 1990,
Speyer, Dom, Internationale Ferienkurse für Neue Musik Darmstadt;Trio Dolce: Christine Brelowski, Geesche Geddert, Dorothea Winter(Clemens 1990, Lenz, S. 1990)
Dedicated to Trio DolceManuscripts: New York Public Library at Lincoln Center, JPB 94 –24
folder 786 (worksheets, 2 leaves, 28 cm, white paper, ink), folders 787–788 (sketches and draft, 8 leaves, 32 cm, vellum music paper, ink),PAUL VAN EMMERIK
158
2.“Cage-Bibliographie 1939 –1985, ” Neuland 5 (1984 –85): 394 –431.
folder 789 (galley proof and draft of instructions for performance,
29 leaves, 28 cm, white paper, ink, pencil, colored pencil)
Publication: New York: Henmar Press (C. F. Peters 67303), 1989Literature: Cage/McLellan 1989; Geddert 1994 –95; Gronemeyer 1993,
21–22)
This example can be used to clarify the basic set-up of the catalog.
Where known or applicable, details about a composition in the catalogare presented under several headings: the title of the work, appearing instandardized form; the performing forces; models, musical or otherwise,used by Cage; for vocal works, the author of the text or libretto; for worksoriginally conceived as music for dance, ﬁlm, or theater, the name of thechoreographer, director, or playwright; the extent, that is, the numberof measures, systems, or sentences (in the case of performance notes orverbal notation) and the duration; dates and places of beginning and ofcompletion of the work, information about the ﬁrst performance andabout commissions and dedications; basic information about the manu-scripts, described on the basis of direct examination or taken from libraryor exhibition catalogs (unless otherwise noted, all items listed are Cage ’s
autograph); publication data; publicly distributed recordings on record,tape, and compact disc; and ﬁnally, references to literature discussingthe work in some detail. Such references usually range from Cage’ s own
statements in published writings, interviews and conversations, accountsby performers of his music, reviews of published scores, ﬁrst perfor-mances and recordings, to analytical or critical essays or studies. The en-tries for literature on Three are given below.
Cage, John / McLellan, Joseph. 1989. “John Cage’ s Realm: the Din of
Manhattan, ” International Herald Tribune (9 May), 18.
Clemens, E. 1990. “Länge statt Meditation, ” Speyer Tagespost (30 July), 10.
Geddert, Geesche. 1994 –95. “Three —das Blockﬂötentrio von John
Cage, ” Tibia 19–20, 40 –43.
Gronemeyer, Gisela. 1993. “‘ I’m ﬁnally writing beautiful music ’: Das
numerierte Spätwerk von John Cage, ” Musiktexte, no. 48 (February),
19–24.
Lenz, Sonja. 1990. “Sternenmusik, ” Darmstädter Echo (30 July), 21.
I continued in early 1992 to expand upon Wilheim ’s 1984 research and
also began an inventory of Cage’ s music manuscripts in his New York
apartment. With more than twenty-ﬁve thousand leaves, this assem-blage constitutes the largest and most important collection of Cagemanuscripts. Shortly after the composer’ s death, the estate of John Cage
requested a team of musicologists to continue this work. In 1993, Wil-heim, Martin Erdmann, Laura Kuhn, James Pritchett, and I completedHERE COMES EVERYTHING
159
our assessment of the music manuscripts in Cage’ s possession at the time
of his death. After considering the sale of the music manuscripts to a Eu-
ropean archive, the estate of John Cage made the wise decision to keepthem in the United States. They are now housed in the Music Divisionof the New York Public Library at Lincoln Center.
II
The six parts of the Cage-Bibliographie were arranged chronologically in
an attempt to document the reception, scholarly and otherwise, of Cage ’s
work from year to year as closely as possible. Unfortunately, at the timethe bibliography was published critics were only just beginning to writeabout Cage’ s music on the basis of analysis of the sketches. Conse-
quently, many items testifying to this approach are missing from the list,especially the dissertations of Deborah Campana, James Pritchett, Mar-tin Erdmann, in addition to my own.
3In the preface to his dissertation,
Pritchett defended his use of sources for a study of Cage ’s chance mu-
sic of the 1950s as follows: “Some may ﬁnd the notion of applying suchtraditional methods to chance music a peculiar one. In my work, I havefound otherwise: the methods of source study are not only appropriate,but are, in fact, uniquely suited for this task. ”
4Taking Three —the com-
position referred to above —as an example, one may demonstrate how
productive this approach can be for an understanding of Cage’ s music,
by pointing out several facets that could not have come to light withouta study of the sources for this work.
The essay by Geesche Geddert on Three consists of a descriptive analy-
sis with several suggestions for performance of the work, based on a re-hearsal of the Trio Dolce with the composer on the day of the ﬁrst per-
formance in Speyer. As appears from her description, Cage composedseventeen groups of three tones for each of the outer movements of thework, numbered 1 and 2. Using chance, he selected the individual pitchesfor these thirty-four groups from the total range of the recorders used,F to c/H11032/H11032/H11032/H11032/H11032, or sixty-eight chromatic pitches. The constituent tones ofeach three-tone group were then distributed among the three players,who change recorders constantly, mostly as a melody and occasionallyas a chord.
Between the outer movements of Three are interpolated nine shortPAUL VAN EMMERIK
160
3. Deborah Ann Campana, “Form and Structure in the Music of John Cage” (Ph.D. diss.,
Northwestern University, 1985); James William Pritchett, “The Development of Chance Tech-
niques in the Music of John Cage, 1950 –1956” (Ph.D. diss., New York University, 1988); Mar-
tin Erdmann, “Untersuchungen zum Gesamtwerk von John Cage, ” (Ph.D. diss., Rheinische
Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität, Bonn, 1993); Paul van Emmerik, “Thema’ s en Variaties: Syste-
matische tendensen in de compositietechnieken van John Cage” (Ph.D. diss., Universiteit vanAmsterdam, 1996).
4. Pritchett, “Development of Chance Techniques, ” iv.
movements lettered from A to I, any number of which may be per-
formed. On one of the unfoliated worksheets for these lettered move-ments (folder 786 in the entry for Three given above), the numbers 91,
728, and 3003 appear, followed by twenty-seven 3s, 4s, and 5s, ar-ranged in nine groups of three. The former numbers stand for the num-ber of entries in three tables listing collections of all conceivable harmo-nies consisting of three, four, or ﬁve tones, respectively, having a rangenot exceeding a major ninth. These tables resulted from Cage’ s wish 
to use chance in order to compose harmonies that can be played by one hand on a piano, beginning with Etudes Australes, composed in 1974
and 1975. “Thus, ” he stated, “by means of chance operations I am able
to introduce harmonies into a music which is not based on harmony but rather on the uniqueness of each sound, of each combination ofsounds. ”
5In slightly revised form, Cage used these tables in almost 
all his subsequent music involving keyboard instruments. So the lasttwenty-seven numbers on the worksheet stand for three-, four-, or ﬁve-tone harmonies to be selected from these tables, three for each of thenine lettered movements of Three.
Before delving into the question of what numbers referring to key-
board music may possibly have to do in a work for recorders, it will be necessary to detail the selection process insofar as it can be deducedfrom the sketches (folder 787 in the list of manuscripts). The twenty-seven harmonies to be selected from the precompositionally deﬁnedcollections or “gamuts” of harmonies were but abstract constellations of interval relationships, which had to be “concretized” by assigningpitches to each. The starting point for this assignment was a given tone,henceforth to be called the “basic tone. ” (Using the term “root”— Ra-
meau ’s son fondamental —would result in a misleading and contradictory
terminology, misleading since the tone in question exclusively acted assuch during the compositional process and contradictory since the con-text of these harmonies is atonal.) The basic tones themselves were se-lected from the twelve-tone range from g/H11032 to f/sharp/H11033. In the tables they are
represented by the number 0, and the distance to them, counted in minor seconds, by numbers from 1 through 14, positive numbers forpitches higher than the basic tone, negative ones for pitches lower thanit. The basic tone never is the lowest or highest tone of the chord. Tak-ing the three harmonies Cage composed for movement A as an example(ex. 7.1), the ﬁve-tone harmony b/sharp,c/sharp/H11032,d/H11032,a/H11032,c/sharp/H11033(henceforth to be called
harmony 1) must have arisen from the interval constellation /H11002 9, /H110028,
/H110027, 0, 4, its basic tone being a/H11032; the three-tone harmony 2, f/H11032, b /flat/H11032, e /flat/H11033,HERE COMES EVERYTHING
161
5.“Etudes Australes I, II, and VIII,” Stagebill 2, no. 5 (January 1975): 23.
must have arisen from the constellation /H110025, 0, 5, its basic tone being b /flat/H11032;
and the four-tone harmony 3, b/H11032, d /flat/H11033, a/H11033, d /flat/H11032/H11032/H11032from the constellation 
/H110022, 0, 8, 12, d /flat/H11033being its basic tone. (The basic tones are not given in
the sketches, but they can be deduced, since potential basic tones falling
outside the given range from g/H11032 to f/sharp/H11033are to be excluded.)
Using chance, Cage then distributed the constituent tones of these
three harmonies among the three parts by assigning random numbers1, 2, or 3 (denoting player I, II, or III) to each pitch. As a rule (a rule thathas exceptions), Cage copied the individual tones from the original har-monies as a sequence of pitches in descending order. This procedure re-sulted in the following sequences within each part: d /H11032(from harmony 1),
a/H11033, c/sharp/H11033, b/H11032(all from harmony 3) for player I; c/sharp/H11033, a/H11032, d /flat/H11032, c/H11032(all from har-
mony 1) for player II; e /flat/H11033, b /flat/H11032, f/H11032(from harmony 2), and b /flat/H11033(misread by
Cage while copying d /flat/H11032/H11032/H11032from harmony 3) for player III (ex. 7.2). (En-
harmonically equivalent tones are considered identical in this work.) Fi-nally, the sequences were notated within what Cage called “time brack-ets.” These brackets, three in each of the nine movements in this case,
are periods of time indicated in terms of elapsed time. During these periods of time, performers may begin and end the tones at their dis-cretion, the actual durations being indeterminate for each player. Con-sequently, it is unpredictable which tones will sound together withineach bracket, if at all. (All the tones within each “measure” in music ex-ample 7.2 have the potential to sound together, except for the individ-ual tones from the two-tone groups within each part, which are actualsequences of pitches.)
Armed with this knowledge, one can attempt to answer the question
why Cage used a collection of harmonies originally intended for key-board instruments in a piece for recorders. It will be recalled that foreach of the outer movements of the work, Cage composed seventeenthree-tone groups, for which he selected the individual pitches from thetotal range of the recorders used, F to c/H11032/H11032/H11032/H11032/H11032, or sixty-eight chromaticpitches. Given these extreme ranges, it is no surprise to ﬁnd the com-
poser, who obviously wanted to contrast the nine inner movementswith the two outer ones, looking for a solution in the realm of ranges.PAUL VAN EMMERIK
162 EXAMPLE 7.1
Three, harmonies for movement A.
1. 2. 3.
By using keyboard harmonies that have a maximum range of a major
ninth and by restricting himself to the twelve-tone range from g /H11032to f/sharp/H11033
for the basic tones, he assured himself of a restricted range for the innermovements, which indeed turns out not to exceed the range from g/sharpto
c/H11032/H11032/H11032, or twenty-nine chromatic pitches. Conversely, Cage expanded thethree-tone groups of the outer movements into a gamut of three-, four-,or ﬁve-tone groups for the inner movements, in order to vary the num-
ber of tones within each of the three time brackets of each movement.
The transformation, then, of the original harmonies for the nine 
inner movements of Three into sequences of pitches in parts that have
no ﬁxed rhythmic relationship results in a partially unpredictable order
and sounding-together of these pitches, related to the original harmo-nies only by virtue of the mechanism used. Not only is this highly ab-stract compositional technique strongly reminiscent of Schoenberg’ s par-
titioning of twelve-tone rows into hexachords conceived as harmonicunits, with little concern for the ordering of the tones; it also points toStravinsky ’s method of deriving “verticals” (i.e., harmonies) from a given
twelve-tone row by means of transposition-rotation. As Paul SchuylerPhillips has deﬁned it, this transposition-rotation is “produced by fol-lowing the presentation of a source set with ﬁve successive rotations of the set, each rotation beginning one note further into the set andaligned directly below the previous set or rotation, with transpositionlevels determined by the ﬁrst note of each rotation being the same pitchas the ﬁrst of the original set. ”
6By reading the six resulting sequences
of pitches vertically, Stravinsky obtained a series of harmonies resultingHERE COMES EVERYTHING
163 EXAMPLE 7.2
Three, outline of movement A.
Player IIIPlayer IIPlayer I
6.“The Enigma of Variations: A Study of Stravinsky ’s Final Work for Orchestra, ” Music Analy-
sis3 (1984): 70.
from a mechanism partly beyond his immediate control. In this context,
it is a matter of secondary signiﬁcance that a serial mechanism logicallyspeaking is the exact opposite of a chance mechanism. In the ﬁnal analy-
sis, this does not change the fact that the resulting music comes aboutthrough mechanisms a substantial part of whose workings are unpre-dictable and therefore escape the composer’ s control.
IIIReferring to the music of Schoenberg as well as to his own, Stravinskyonce drew attention to the importance of numbers in musical composi-tion. His remark that “numbers are things”
7illustrates an aesthetic at-
titude that has been summarized more than once by the phrase “workin progress” and that has characterized a large part of twentieth-centuryart music, especially since World War II: the tendency among compos-ers to shift their attention from products to procedures, procedures inwhich numbers play an important part. In the case of Three, however,
the principle of numbers generating musical structures is ambiguous.On the one hand, numbers act as a means to control a variety of musi-cal characteristics in a systematic fashion. “With endless inventiveness,Cage assigned compositional parameters to numbers, ” Mark Swed has
observed.
8On the other hand, the music thus composed could have
been different from what it is, since it came into being by means ofchance mechanisms. Moreover, it was composed in such a way that theaudible structure varies from performance to performance. Yet it is an-other illustration of the tendency mentioned at the beginning of thisparagraph. “The urge not to bind oneself, but to keep possibilities open,
compositionally means that instead of the product which one creates,the materials and methods that one uses come to the fore and attract attention. ”
9Richard Taruskin is right in arguing that Cage “embodied
what may be called the ‘research model’ (as opposed to the ‘communi-
cation model’) of composerly behavior, so characteristic of midcenturymodernism. ”
10
Indeed, generalizing about Three, one may argue that these observa-
tions testify to a facet of Cage ’s compositional technique that has largely
been ignored: its modernist nature. “Most people who believe that I’mPAUL VAN EMMERIK
164
7. Igor Stravinsky and Robert Craft, Dialogues and a Diary (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday,
1963), 58.
8.“Cage and Counting: The Number Pieces, ” brochure in Rolyholyover: A Circus, ed. Rus-
sell Ferguson and Sherri Schottlaender (Los Angeles: Museum of Contemporary Art and Riz-
zoli, 1993).
9. Carl Dahlhaus, “Die Krise des Experiments, ” in Komponieren heute: Ästhetische, soziologische,
und pädagogische Fragen, ed. Ekkehard Jost (Mainz: Schott, 1983), 90.
10.“No Ear for Music, ” New Republic, March 15, 1993, 29.
interested in chance, ” Cage once said in an interview, “don ’t realize that
I use chance as a discipline —they think I use it —I don ’t know —as a
way of giving up making choices. But my choices consist in choosing
what questions to ask. ”11This statement alone suf ﬁces to demonstrate
that the common belief that Cage ’s music since 1951 is based exclusively
on chance is untenable. Incredulity about the fact that in his music ra-tional and irrational factors go together has often led to an overempha-sis on the latter. These irrational factors have then been ascribed to therole Eastern thought played in his aesthetics. Chou Wen-chung’ s con-
tention, in his study on the inﬂuence of Asian concepts on Western com-posers, that Cage’ s aesthetic thought since the late 1940s “is actually 
a modern American product for which certain external aspects of theEastern originals served as the stimulant, ” should warn against seeking
an explanation for his use of chance exclusively in the Far East.
12Cage’ s
eclecticism can be illustrated by the fact that in chance composition, heused only the mechanism and ignored the oracular utterances of the an-cient Chinese book of wisdom, the I Ching. It can also be seen in the way
he justiﬁed the use of a book of wisdom presumably dating from thetwelfth century before Christ by calling upon Zen Buddhism, a form ofBuddhism that developed in Japan in the twelfth century after Christ.
However, calling attention to Cage’ s eclecticism is less important 
than pointing out that the advent of chance and unpredictability at theexpense of musical cohesion can be traced back to a musical problemthat fascinated Cage from the very beginning of his career, namely, thesearch for systems of composition enabling him to disavow inherent relationships between sounds and to emphasize the identity of each in-dividual sound. “Each sound must be considered as essentially differentfrom and independent of every other sound, ” the composer had already
written in the early 1940s.
13Because of his disavowal of the inherent re-
lationships, the characteristics of the sounds themselves no longer of-fered him criteria for their continuity or simultaneity. In using system-atic techniques having unpredictable results, Cage ’s conception of music
as a universe of sounds that can be freely related to each other but whoserelations are arrived at by means of systematic compositional techniqueswas put into practice long before he adopted the twin concepts “unim-pededness” and “interpenetration ” from Zen Buddhism to formulate his
notion of relations between sounds, human beings, and objects.HERE COMES EVERYTHING
165
11. Interview by Robin White at Crown Point Press, Oakland, California, 1978, View 1, no. 1
(April 1978): 5.
12.“Asian Concepts and Twentieth-Century Western Composers, ” Musical Quarterly 57
(1971): 225.
13.“For More New Sounds, ” Modern Music 19 (1941 –42): 245.
Now this unimpededness is seeing that in all of space each thing and each
human being is at the center and furthermore that each one being at thecenter is the most honored one of all. Interpenetration means that eachone of these most honored ones of all is moving out in all directions pen-etrating and being penetrated by every other one no matter what thetime or what the space. . . . In fact each and every thing in all of time andspace is related to each and every other thing in all of time and space.
14
In addition, Cage’ s conception is remarkably similar to Schoenberg’ s no-
tion of twelve-tone music as a phenomenon manifesting itself in a “unity
of musical space” in which
there is no absolute down, no right or left, forward or backward. Everymusical conﬁguration, every movement of tones has to be comprehendedprimarily as a mutual relation of sounds, of oscillatory vibrations, appear-ing at different places and times.
15
Whether the similarities between these quotations were intended by
Cage or not, it is beyond doubt that his conception of a universe ofsounds that can be freely related to each other but whose relations arearrived at by means of systematic compositional techniques would havebeen inconceivable without Schoenberg’ s “method of composing with
twelve tones which are related only with one another. ”
Living at the end of the twentieth century, an era in which notions
such as poststructuralism, deconstruction, and ideology critique havechallenged the traditional historical method based on source studies andphilology, one cannot avoid being aware of the possibility of different interpretations of Cage’ s work. Nevertheless, in light of the far-reaching
implications contained in just thirty-nine leaves —the manuscripts for
Three —out of more than twenty- ﬁve thousand, it is hard to agree with,
for example, Rose Rosengard Subotnik ’s contention that “Cage has ex-
erted inﬂuence on Western music through a career that produced rela-tively little of musical interest —at least in the sense of interesting mu-
sic.”
16Referring back, then, to the opening statement of this essay, one
cannot escape the conviction that the study of “interesting relics fromthe past ” will profoundly change the image of Cage ’s work as we know
it now. As far as the Nachlass is concerned, scholars are sitting on top of
a gold mine or, to put it differently, “here comes everything. ”
14.“Communication, ” in Silence: Lectures and Writings (Middletown, Conn.: Wesleyan Uni-
versity Press, 1961), 46 –47.
15. Arnold Schoenberg, Style and Idea, ed. Dika Newlin (New York: Philosophical Library,
1950), 113.
16. Deconstructive Variations: Music and Reason in Western Society (Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press, 1996), xx.PAUL VAN EMMERIK
166
EIGHT
Gordon Mumma (chair), Allan Kaprow, 
James Tenney, Christian Wolff, Alvin Curran, and Maryanne Amacher
Cage’ s Inﬂuence
A Panel Discussion
GORDON MUMMA : The topic is Cage’ s inﬂu-
ence, and the extraordinary group of peoplewe have here are probably not enough, inthe sense that we have four composers andAllan Kaprow. It seems to me that Allancomes close to ﬁlling in some of the gaps, butwe really need poets and printmakers andbiologists and God knows what to be appro-priately extravagant with the topic.
Let me introduce the other speakers:
James Tenney, Christian Wolff, MaryanneAmacher, and Alvin Curran.
1This group has
one thing in common, and that is they are all individuals in the great American tradi-tion. And when I say “American, ”I mean the
Americas. The whole Western Hemisphere isﬁlled with people like this who don ’tﬁt. They
have made their own worlds, without beingin some sense “bent, ” without being in ﬂu-
enced in pushy ways by what other peopledo. These are really unique creative artists,as John Cage was a totally unique ﬁgure.
One of the panelists said to me yesterday,
“Why this business about in ﬂuence?” Well, I
1671. Maryanne Amacher’ s comments now appear as a
postscript to the panel discussion, having been revised and
expanded for this volume.
don’t think of us analyzing or constructing and deconstructing the syn-
tax of inﬂuences between this, that, and the other. But maybe in ﬂuence
is not such a con ﬁning word as long as we don ’t expect to ﬁnd connec-
tions that are absolutely clear: this happened and then that followed.
No, how Cage might have inﬂuenced people is not a cause-and-effectkind of activity.
A
LLAN KAPROW : Just to ﬁll in a bit of background. I ﬁrst became aware
of John Cage’ s music in 1952. I remember the year exactly. The occasion
was the new Living Theater’ s concert series down in Greenwich Village.
I remember sitting with an art critic I knew and looking at the crowd,
most of them from the visual arts and very few musicians, at least veryfew that I could recognize as such. I asked this critic whether that didn ’t
seem peculiar to him because the reputation of John Cage as a kind ofenfant terrible was widespread at the time and should have attracted alot of musicians, but didn ’t. He said something to the effect that Cage
was appreciated more by artists than musicians because he really wasn ’t
a musician. For a moment I bristled at that, thinking it was unkind. Butthen a moment later I thought, well, maybe there ’s something interest-
ing here.
I suppose I met Cage on the level of a handshake here and there for
the next few years, and indeed throughout his life I remained a ratherdistant friend. That is, I was not a part of his social circle, while at thesame time beneﬁting very much from many acts of kindness on his parttoward me —getting grants, for example, and getting teaching jobs. He
was always there for me, and I never doubted his friendship.
As some of you may know, in the mid-ﬁfties I started to break away
from being an action collagist, that is to say, someone who makes whatare basically paintings with lots of torn-up material stuck to a surface,and began to expand into environmental proportions so that now youdon’t just look at what is shown but actually move in and amongst its
parts the way you would in a thicket, a thorn thicket. And I began atthat time (very quickly in fact, in ’56) to incorporate lots of other sen-
sory elements, like sounds. Among the sounds were those produced bythose wonderful Japanese toys you could buy in those days; some ofthese you could wind up and some had batteries, and they would growl.There was a gorilla that I loved very much; it had ﬂashing lights andraised its arms up and would go “uhrrr! ” So I bought these at some
wholesale house in Manhattan by the cartload (as many different ones,of course, as possible) and ﬁxed them into hidden recesses around theceiling and underneath the lights of the old gallery-like spaces that mostof us used in those days (loft space essentially, not the fancy galleries wehave today). And I remember the artist Bob Watts made for me a bigMUMMA, KAPROW, TENNEY, WOLFF, CURRAN, AND AMACHER
168
wheel that had little bumps on it with micro-switches that rode on the
bumps so that the sounds could be randomized (or to the point wherethey would seem random), so that they would come on at various timelengths and places, here at this side of the room, there at that, and so on. For a while I was pleased with the result, but very quickly I beganto ﬁgure out the sequences so that as they recurred, though nobody else
might hear them in any order, I began to hear the order and grew tiredof the repetition. So I called up John Cage and I said: “You may not have
any experience with this”— although I expected he did —“but what
would you do?” And I explained what the problem was. He said, “Why
don’t you come to my class at the New School and we can chat. Come a
little early. ”
The very next week, when the class was given, he drove up in a
Model A Ford, and I drove up in my Model A Ford, which immediatelystruck a bond between us. (I asked him where he got his extra parts.)He would drive all the way from a small co-op dwelling up on the Hud-son River (where he lived at that time) in that ﬂivver, and I drove fromRutgers University (where I was teaching at the time) in my ﬂivver. And
I can tell you it was a foolhardy venture trying to get on the freeway in that machine and wondering if it would break down. In a sense, a“baling wire” attitude of you-can- ﬁx-anything-with-chewing-gum pre-
vailed even in driving that car, as it did with those Japanese toys. Every-thing had a sleaze element to it. If you remember, that was a part of thetaste of the time; it was a period of artists and musicians ﬁnding junk in
the environment and just incorporating it or in some way pointing to itas Duchamp might and saying, “That’ s interesting, that’ s it.” We were
paying attention to a world that had been disfavored up until that mo-ment. So the fact there was a meeting in heaven, Model A Ford heaven,did something to both of us that we never actually mentioned again, butit was always there.
I came to that class —this is the more meaty part of these memories —
with George Brecht at that time, who also lived in New Brunswick, NewJersey, as a research scientist for Johnson and Johnson. (He once toldme with great pleasure that he held a patent on Kotex production for acertain number of years.) We drove in and had lots of time in the thirty-odd miles between the two cities to discuss things. George had actuallydecided to join the class a few weeks before I did, and he told me a littleabout it: how open-ended it is and how Cage in a way encourages youto experiment, experiment, experiment.
The class was called “Experimental Music” or something like that. I
sat in, waved to Cage and he waved back, and the class began. Studentworks were immediately performed by everyone, including Cage, and CAGE’S INFLUENCE
169
I joined in with great pleasure. I mean, here were the kinds of experi-
mental works which required no unusual skills. So, although I do notplay a musical instrument, I was able to simply jump in and bang on theside of the desk or scrape my ﬁngernail on the blackboard and it ﬁt inperfectly, because that’ s what everyone was doing. Afterward I went up
to speak to Cage, and as the class ﬁnished I explained what my problemwas with those toys which made those repetitive patterns and how Icouldn ’t stand it any more. I said, “Nobody else notices this, since they
come in and poke around for a while, but I see that every day and hearthat awful sequence. Tell me what to do!” He smiled in a pixyish wayand said, “You ’re a collagist, aren ’t you?” and I said, “Yes . . . so?” and he
said, “Well, why don ’t you go into tape?” (I knew what he meant be-
cause I had heard concerts by him and others using tape sounds, whichwas the newest rage in music-making possibilities.) Then he said, “ All
you have to do is record a whole lot of sounds and stick them into en-velopes marked accordingly, such as high sounds, low sounds, middlesounds, scratchy sounds, smooth sounds, glissandi, whatever you want,and just put them together the way you do a collage. ” Except, he said,
“I have my way and you’ll probably have yours, ” and he went “Hm-
mmm . . . ” We all remember that kind of pregnant silence. And he ac-
tually wrote down an address where I could get wholesale tape decksvery cheap, unboxed, with just the motors on them, and he said thatthose would be called slaves. You paste all the pieces together in someway, run them on the slaves in the right speed combinations, and recordon the recording machine, which has to be technically better than theslaves. I said, “That’ s pretty easy. ”
I applied at Rutgers University for a research grant, which I got. They
knew very little about me in those days, and they lived to regret that. Iimmediately found an of ﬁce space at the university and set up my stu-
dio, which miraculously started to produce sounds that I could not fol-low the pattern of. And I remember having the joy of running tape loopsfrom one end of the room to the other on spools, big bumps of tape go-ing by and breaking off in the middle and causing all kinds of static onthe recording machine. My musician friends will know what I’m talk-ing about. Remember when we had those little grooved cutting toolswith the single-edge razor with which we would cut out long angles andput them together, would cut out short ones and absolutely perpen-dicular ones, so that you get a real shut-off sound and a harsh attack af-ter that. I got to know a good bit about what musicians were doing inthose days because among them was Richard Maxﬁeld, who was ad-vanced beyond anyone I knew in electronics and just collage and tape.This opened up a whole new area which I tried to learn from, but IMUMMA, KAPROW, TENNEY, WOLFF, CURRAN, AND AMACHER
170
found myself outclassed and out-knowledged by almost all my musician
friends, so I didn ’t pursue the electronic side at all beyond a few exper-
iments done with Richard Maxﬁeld’ s expert help.
What I am driving at here is that Cage at the end of our ﬁrst meeting
asked me one more question. He said, “I would like to invite you to jointhis class, but if you do join the class, why would you want to be here?You seem to know what you want to do. ” I said, “Well, the reason is 
because I want to make noise. And I don ’t want to make music. ” And 
he said, “ Ah, that’ s nice. ” He said, “Please come and you don ’t have to
pay anything. ” I discovered subsequently that just about everyone in
the class had the same privilege. And that’ s where I met most of our
friends —Jackson Mac Low and so on —in that class.
On the pedagogical level Cage was very helpful, because I was a young
teacher at the time, as I’ve said. He introduced me to a kind of permis-sive teaching that I had not expected from a specialist in some kind ofart. That is, usually as you become a teacher you become an authorityand have all sorts of assumptions about how learning takes place, whatyou should do to get that, and so on, including homework assignments.To the best of my memory, Cage never assigned anything; he’d say, “Ihope you will consider this class a place where we can experiment and,if you wish, you can bring in pieces and we will, as well as we can, per-form them here all together. ” But he also suggested possible homework
projects, such as “prepare a two-minute piece for barely audible sounds. ”
It was like a playground. It was really marvelous; someone came upwith some kind of plan and we all carried it out. I remember that my in-terests at the time were mainly interests in sound rather than in what Isomewhat challengingly call noise (everybody enjoys that). This kind ofthing, to exploit attention, was something that was not allowed or wasfrowned on and considered out of the range of proper behavior in tra-ditional musical circles. But we discovered that hearing a pin, for ex-ample —an ordinary straight pin —being dropped on the ﬂoor required
an enormous amount of attention. One of the pieces that became in-triguing to me after ﬁnding Cage’ s interest in apparent silence was if you
prepare to be as quiet as you can, the world is very noisy. You can evenhear a pin drop! So I prepared a number of pieces of torn paper follow-ing Hans Arp’ s early experiments and suggested that everybody have a
handful of these according to some plan of how many pieces were in eachﬁst and when they would be dropped. They were usually short “com-positions ” lasting two or three minutes, and you would see, using your
eyes along with your ears, everybody ’s hand like this, then a thumb
would pull apart from the fore ﬁnger and one piece of paper would ﬂut-
ter down and everyone would watch it —there would be one on thisCAGE’S INFLUENCE
171
side and one over there (or two over there and ﬁve over here). There
were some people, like myself, who desperately wanted to hear whatthey couldn ’t. Afterwards, in the discussion period, they would say, “I
heard that piece of paper drop. I did, I did; it was like a butterﬂy. ” Well,
that was fabulous —what we would later call sensitizing. It was an amaz-
ing kind of teaching, Cage’ s encouraging in a playful way what would
ordinarily sound very academic, and perhaps intolerable to practice ifone were a traditional teacher.
Finally, I would say that Cage’ s teaching not only affected me, but it
also affected all the others in the class, which included Dick Higgins andAl Hansen, one coming from literature and the other from visual arts.A much deeper inﬂuence, I think, probably grew —I was going to say
“like mushrooms, ” but really much more slowly —over the years, that
has to do with my Zen interest, which was something I was always drawnto but had not practiced. As you know, Cage studied under one of Amer-ica’s most distinguished importers of Zen Buddhism to Western think-
ing, Daisetz Suzuki, and beneﬁted greatly. Cage talked a lot about that —
about the implications of Zen practice. I think that this philosophicalside of Cage, which was by no means playful but actually quite dedi-cated, affected me (and many others in the class), so much so that I be-gan to practice Zen and found an excellent teacher —and to this day I
study with her. So that was a very big in ﬂuence, having more to do with
attitude than speciﬁc kinds of behavior or belief systems, none of whichreally matter that much. Attitudes about such things as being the boss,being in control, having others follow my will, making art as a contestbetween my creative powers and the imperfection in the world —all of
these unquestioned assumptions and attitudes that we ordinarily put upwith in the West were questioned very openly by Cage ’s study of Zen
and in what he taught in the class and what he seemed to exemplify asan artist. I didn ’t say as a musician but simply in the broadest sense of
the word: an art-making person.
A very important point to consider: I think the profoundest in ﬂuence
on me and, I suspect, on many, many others who have been touched byJohn Cage is that it doesn ’t matter if you make music, or art, of any kind.
Ultimately music is what he quoted from one of his colleagues, an In-dian student: “The purpose of music”— I paraphrase here —“is to calm
the mind to make it receptive to divine in ﬂuence. ” Well, that sounds ter-
ribly mystical and very pious, and it’ s not the kind of language I would
use, being, as Gordon said, an American (we have little patience withthis kind of stuff). Nevertheless, and, I think, cutting through the linguis-tic problem, there is the sense of being quiet (ﬁrst intending to be andthen ﬁnding that it is possible, as one’ s own behavior makes it possible)MUMMA, KAPROW, TENNEY, WOLFF, CURRAN, AND AMACHER
172
in everything. Whether you call the result divine in ﬂuence or simply
being attentive, which I would prefer, it is very, very important to me
and, I expect, to many others. One sees this openness translated not intogoing to a concert or making music or whatever, but taking place in themeeting of friends, in conversations, without thinking. It ’s like what the
Buddhists call “right living. ” This begins to replace ambition. I think
that’s the most profound inﬂuence of all: that John Cage the artist made
it possible to give up art.
J
AMES TENNEY : I want to tell you what I think is Cage’ s historical role.
In a sense this is a conclusion that I ’ve come to after many years of his
inﬂuence. (Later, I can talk about that in ﬂuence on me.) Somewhere —
I think it’ s in a postface to A Year from Monday: New Lectures and Writings —
he wrote, “Sounds we hear are music. ”If we take that as a deﬁnition and
take it seriously, it implies a very radical redeﬁnition of music, which is
very interesting. There is no composer implicit in that deﬁnition. Thatis, the sounds in the forest —or on the street corner —may be music.
And it’ s my sense that in that deﬁnition, if we take it seriously, Cage
caused us to shift the attention, the focus, of the music-making enter-prise from the mind and thoughts and emotions of the composer to theexperience of the listener. I think this is a very profound shift.
It begins in 1951 with the Music of Changes and marks a change in aes-
thetic viewpoint such that 1951 can be said to be the beginning of theend of a period of about 350 years, a period that began with the begin-nings of opera, with Monteverdi and the Camerata. I think a case couldbe made —I’m not a historian so I can ’t make it, but I believe the case
could be made —that this whole 350-year period, from 1600 to 1950
roughly, is really the operatic era, that the conception of the function ofmusic (and here was a wonderful new discovery on the part of the com-posers of opera in the early seventeenth century) was a new conceptionof what music could do: it can express human emotion. Wow! And itcan generate similar, perhaps parallel emotions on the part of the listen-ers. That was a new idea in 1600. It wasn ’t long before it came to be
taken for granted that this was what music was about and that it was allthat music should be —that this was somehow natural. Well, that’ s OK,
but it’ s not the only thing that it can be. Cage shifted our attention from
the composer to the listening experience by repeatedly talking aboutsound, the nature of sound, and a music based on the nature of soundand by not focusing on the ideas or the emotions of the composer. I thinkit’s going to turn out that although the history books now tend to as-
sume that a new era somehow began around the early part of this cen-tury, we’ll see the work of Schoenberg and the second Viennese school,Stravinsky, and so forth, as really an end: the end of the long period,CAGE’S INFLUENCE
173
closing with what Charles Hamm called “terminal modernism. ” (I liked
that term.) Although I don ’t care for the term “postmodernism, ” I think
that Cage’ s importance is to be understood as implying the end of a 350-
year period.
Nineteen ﬁfty-one was just the beginning —Music of Changes and when
he wrote about Music of Changes. Read again what he said. I can ’t quote
it, but if you again take it seriously and literally, it ’s astonishing. And it
was scary to a lot of people. I believe the negative reaction to Cage —
which continues, as you all know —was more to what he said than to
the music, because the music can be heard as part of something that was
happening in 1950. But what he said about it was that this is music freeof the history and traditions of the art, free of psychology and the like.Amazing. And that was the beginning, I think. The Europeras were the
coup de grâce, the end of the operatic era. (I hope somebody argues withme on that!)
To talk about John Cage’ s inﬂuence really is to talk about the future,
isn’t it? The future is in all of our hands; it will be what we make of it.
The dilemma that we all face is how to go on doing something which isnot simply continuing to do what John Cage did. We can ’t. We can ’t do
that in good conscience. But how to go on doing something else whichis not a reaction against what Cage taught us? (There’ s a lot of that
around —not here, but in the world out there.) As Gordon suggested, I
think the future will be as diverse and individual as there are individualartists working.
In my own case, twenty some years ago I began to get interested in
the question of harmony. Again, after what seemed to me to have beena good half-century in which it was considered more or less irrelevantto new music, I began working on this both in my composing and intheoretical ways, thinking about problems in the theory of harmony.But very soon I realized that it was not going to be a good thing just to try to replace all the rules, all the old ideas about harmony, withoutdeeply renovating what the idea of theory might be. My thoughts onwhat we had to do about theory were very deeply in ﬂuenced by Cage’ s
aesthetic. What’ s needed in this area is not another prescriptive body of
rules but a descriptive theory where we try to understand what happenswhen we hear sounds. Is there an aspect of this that we can distinguishand refer to as a harmonic aspect? I ended up, as some of you know,writing an article that seemed very strange to some people because it is called “John Cage and the Theory of Harmony. ” It’s in two parts. 
The ﬁrst part is about John Cage, and the second is about the theory of
harmony. In fact, at one point a certain editor of books, many aboutCage, asked me if he could include that essay, but only the ﬁrst part. IMUMMA, KAPROW, TENNEY, WOLFF, CURRAN, AND AMACHER
174
said, “No, it has to be both parts or none. ” Well, with some kicking and
screaming, it ﬁnally got published, both parts together. Cage read the
article, and I think it inﬂuenced his thoughts about harmony, which isenough to say here. We are all going to be doing individual things. Manyof them will be very strange —or seem so —because they’ll be things
you might not predict. Who would ever have thought that Cage couldbe connected to harmony in spite of all his protestations about it! But itcan happen and it will.
C
HRISTIAN WOLFF : I think I’m the one that Gordon referred to who’ s
uneasy about the subject of this panel —Cage’ s inﬂuence —partly be-
cause on the one hand it’ s extraordinarily diffuse and in some ways it
seems very obvious.2It seems to me that no one (except a complete id-
iot) who had met Cage or encountered his work could fail to be affected
by him in some way. It’ s just unthinkable. So his inﬂuence is there and
it will be, no matter what. Also, I haven ’t looked into this carefully, but
my impression is that Cage has never written a mesostic on the word in-ﬂuence. It is not a subject that he seemed to be very interested in, andthat also tells me a little bit. In fact, once I was supposed to write aboutinﬂuence, and I told him about it and he just made a face.
But, anyway, I did ﬁnd one reference to the word inﬂuence in the
writing Themes & Variations, where he so conveniently lists one hun-
dred and ten ideas that he gleaned from the reading of his work up to that time (I think, around 1980). This is what he said: “Inﬂuence de-
rives from one’ s own work, not from outside it, ” which is quite a mys-
terious thing to say, I think. I guess my ﬁrst take on this was that which
affects your work is doing it, is the very process of doing it —having
done it, doing it, and what you are going to do with it. Then, perhaps amore ordinary meaning would be what inﬂuences you is work —not the
person attached to the work nor the ideas surrounding the work, butthe actual, practical work, the piece of music, the process of preparingit, presenting it, and so forth. But in any case, it ’s quite distant from the
very notion of what we think of as in ﬂuence. The other idea I found in
that collection that might be connected to in ﬂuence —at least I thought
I might connect to it —is the following: “Impossibility of repeated action,
loss of memory —to reach these two is the goal. ” And, in parentheses,
“Duchamp. ” I don ’t know enough about Duchamp to know where that
comes from, and again it’ s a little mysterious. But let me read it again:
“Impossibility of repeated action, loss of memory —to reach these two is
the goal. ” What this seems to be saying is that you ’re trying to repeat theCAGE’S INFLUENCE
175
2. The reader may wish to refer to Christian Wolff ’s essay on this subject, “Under the Inﬂu-
ence, ” in A John Cage Reader, ed. Peter Gena and Jonathan Brent (New York: C. F. Peters, 1982),
74–76.
inﬂuence —go back to something that’ s already there, but you should
try to do it in such a way that when you achieve it, you have forgotten
what it was you were repeating, which may be another way of thinkingabout the whole issue of inﬂuence.
The other thing I like to remember is Cage ’s citing of Willem de Koo-
ning’ s remark when de Kooning was asked, “What painters of the past
have inﬂuenced your work?” De Kooning responded, “The past doesn ’t
inﬂuence my work, my work inﬂuences the past. ” In this connection
one could mention Cage’ s inﬂuence on ﬁgures like Satie and Thoreau. I
think that his engagement with them has meant a drastic change for us.
While dealing more generally with inﬂuence, I’m happy to talk about
particulars too. It seems to me that one could think about Cage ’s inﬂu-
ence in two terms: one is what I call negative in ﬂuence and the other,
which is perhaps very similar, is the notion of facilitating. Let me startwith the last one, because there is a very famous remark by MortonFeldman, who when asked what was the inﬂuence of Cage or how Cagehad affected his work, simply answered, “It gave me permission to domy work. ” (Rather similar to what Allan was talking about.) I ’ve also
thought of the notion of negative in ﬂuence in this sense, actually in sev-
eral senses. The simplest one is, if Cage did something, I felt I didn ’t have
to do it. So, for example, I didn ’t have to use the I Ching; I didn ’t have 
to use chance operations to make my compositions. Perhaps I should sayparenthetically that when I met him, I was sixteen years old and so in-evitably very impressionable, and he was in his late thirties then and aﬁgure of potentially great authority. He fascinated me in many ways,and his work I found extraordinarily interesting. So you might expectthat I would fall under that spell very powerfully, and in some ways I ob-viously did. Yet at the same time, I was given the feeling (how, I don ’t
quite know) of this negative in ﬂuence about not having to do it because
he had done it. I’ve already mentioned the I Ching; also I didn ’t feel I 
had to do theater pieces, I didn ’t feel I had to do sound text pieces, and
so forth.
To put this in a rather different way, which struck me at the concert
last night, concerning several of the pieces —not all of them, certainly
not the ﬁrst one, Imaginary Landscape, and perhaps not the Cartridge Mu-
sic,but certainly the Variations and the last piece, the Sculptures Musicales.
I enjoyed the performances immensely (they were very beautiful), yet Ialso thought that what I was hearing was not the music of John Cage,but the music of those particular performers. A friend of mine who wasthere, Chris Bobrowski, said she knew a number of the performers andcould identify their sounds. It was their presence that was there, and insome way that seems to me the most striking example of Cage ’s inﬂu-MUMMA, KAPROW, TENNEY, WOLFF, CURRAN, AND AMACHER
176
ence. It was Cage’ s piece that allowed these people to make those sounds
and have those sounds be their own sounds. It was an opening of the
space for other people to do their own work in and to do it in the bestpossible way.
A
LVIN CURRAN : I might begin by saying that I was inoculated against the
Cage virus in 1961; the inoculation, however, didn ’t take. I was a student
of Elliott Carter’ s at Yale, and at the same time John Cage was in residence
at Wesleyan University —a very fruitful residency that has had lasting
repercussions. Getting to Middletown from New Haven was an easy trip,
but for the quarantine placed on the Yale students, con ﬁning them to
New Haven only during that period —such was the administration ’s 
reaction to that fearful virus imagined to be centered in Middletown,Connecticut. Nonetheless, the students, even though largely steeped intwelve-tone theology, had a natural curiosity to know who the devil thisdevil was —and thanks to Richard Teitelbaum and the music theory lec-
ture series he curated, we were able at last to bring the musical anti-christ to New Haven.
Cage at last appeared, talked and performed, unleashing an uproar 
of raucous contestation —the expected scandale. Yet at this memorable
event I saw a man, unﬂappable and simple as he was brilliant and mag-netic (and as it turned out for me highly contagious), though what mypoor Ivy League ears were hearing in 1961 was deﬁnitely not music,that I was sure of. Extramusically speaking, I was deeply impressed bythe full-length leather coat that Cage wore —conferring on him instant
elegance and distinction. Today we’d call it “cool. ” But then it simply
conveyed an air of European chic, and struck me in some way as a magi-cal garment. We —the pro-Cage group among whom were Joel Cha-
dabe, Tom Johnson, David Barron, and Richard Teitelbaum —hung out
with Cage after his lecture in a nearby tavern, delighting in Cage’ s aura
and his ability to ﬁeld anything thrown at him, good or bad. Relaxedand funny, he spoke about things no twelve-tone composers would dareconsider: sound and silence. Some years later I got one of these coatsmyself —bought it in the ﬂea market in Rome —such was Cage’ s inﬂu-
ence. In all seriousness, this was the beginning of a wonderful friend-ship; his inﬂuence seeped in bit by bit without my even knowing it.
In the mid-sixties I moved to Rome, and as most of you know, I 
was joined by a group of people there: Frederic Rzewski, Richard Teitel-baum, Carol Plantamura, Ivan Vandor, Alan Bryant, John Phetteplace,and Steve Lacy. A group was formed known as Musica Elettronica Viva.Largely unaware of and unconcerned by the direct Cage/Tudor in ﬂu-
ence on the origins of MEV (primarily through Rzewski’ s enthusiastic
stay in Buffalo with them, prior to his own return to Rome), we foundCAGE’S INFLUENCE
177
ourselves busily soldering cables, contact mikes, and talking about “cir-
cuitry” as if it were a new religion. By amplifying the sounds of glass,
wood, metal, water, air, and ﬁre, we were convinced that we had tappedinto the sources of the natural musics of “everything. ” We were in fact
making a spontaneous music which could be said to be coming from“nowhere” and made out of “nothing”— all somewhat a wonder and a
collective epiphany. And learning that Cage had done these things eventen years earlier was no shock, but a conﬁrmation of a “mutual” dis-covery. What really mattered to us then was not who got there ﬁrst, but
that we were in fact there —a radical group of young people making mu-
sic from zero. And in the spirit of Cage, that was the issue.
Like many Americans of my generation, I had an abysmal ignorance
of history and social and political ideas. At the time, I am sure I neverheard the word “anarchy, ” and I’d just begun to discover the signiﬁ-
cance of Marxism. Nonetheless I was there in the midst of a tumultu-ous student revolution, barricades, occupations, riots, tear gas, dogs anddope —this was 1968. Consonant with all of this —considering our ba-
sic paciﬁst position —was our aim to make a spontaneous music which
we began to call “collective, ” a timely buzzword that resounded then in
almost all activity. MEV, its music and behavior, was highly chargedwith all of the complex psychosocial dynamics of group behavior, saveour willingness to relinquish our individual egos completely. We werenot a cult. What was happening here was that we were improvising inways to question and to test the limits of all known and even unknownmusical codes and behaviors; more often than not, musics —forms of
pure transcendent energies —emerged, though no one could rightly say
who made them or how. You all know that Cage abhorred improvisa-tion—he shunned the word, concept, and practice all his life. But this
didn’t seem to dampen his affection for all of us whom he continued to
support and inﬂuence as well for many years, as we inevitably took ourplaces in the American experimental-music family.
To get back to the story, it seemed to me that with all the discussions
about utopia, anarchy, etc., the interesting thing is that we (MEV) wereclearly making a new kind of chance music —not made from known 
or invented systems, but based on the risk (in every sense) of bringingpeople together to make music anywhere without a score. This is some-thing that Cage could not consider nor likely ever approve of. And inview of his voracious imagination and rigorous radicalism, it is curiousto imagine that this one small step toward liberating the music from thecomposer and ultimately from itself, is one Cage never took. That is, forall his dedicated commitment to freedom, liberation of the spirit, mind,and body, he remained a modernist composer true to his time —fullyMUMMA, KAPROW, TENNEY, WOLFF, CURRAN, AND AMACHER
178
horri ﬁed at the thought of taking one’ s own music and throwing it
away. This may be in essence the most signi ﬁcant contribution made by
the MEV group. It was our manifesto: music made with no composer,
no conductor, no written signs, no music, no money, and no expecta-tions. And for this we have to thank John Cage; it would have been im-possible without him. It ’s very much like what Maryanne Amacher 
says: it was the next step, the next evolutionary notch. Spontaneousmusic is now being practiced all over the world and very much alive —
thanks to Cage.
My professional baptism occurred on December 31, 1969, in Pa-
lermo, where as part of Winter Music, performed by Rzewski, Cardew,
Teitelbaum, and myself, we were instructed to open all the doors andwindows of the Teatro Biondo at a given time. The glacial music alongwith the added noises from the street caused a near riot in the theater.In 1984 I invited John to collaborate as one of the ten soloists in my Mar-
itime Rites project. I asked him to record ﬁve monosyllabic words of his
choice (“Ice, Do, Food, Crew, Ape”) for me. “Is that all?” he asked, in-genuously. I paired those beautifully soft-spoken words —in hocketed
loops —with one of the most powerful foghorns ever built, installed 
on the Nantucket Lightship II. On two occasions —one a seventy-ﬁfth
birthday party and twenty-four-hour concert broadcast live by the Stu-dio Akustischer Kunst of the Westdeutcher Rundfunk —I played roles in
his delightful Hörspiel, An Alphabet, and once he honored me with the
part of Satie. In the late eighties, as he was preparing his Europeras in
Frankfurt, he had heard that I had made a mix of some seventy operasall playing at once and wanted to hear it. He listened and loved it —he
thought he might like to include that in the foyer of the theater since hedidn’t think he had time to do a similar one. Of course he found the
time, as he always did, but his invitation remains a precious memory.
One more thing: Cornelius Cardew. Cornelius was one of my early
mentors. He came to Rome in 1964 on a study grant with Petrassi at theAccademia Santa Cecilia. Cornelius too was a revolutionary and verymagnetic person. He revered Cage and as you know performed his pianomusic a lot. In a genuine search for a coherent belief, Cornelius passedfrom Buddhism to Marxism, Maoism, and ﬁnally to Hoxa-ism. In thislatter period he wrote inﬂammatory manifestos denouncing all forms ofbourgeois behavior, and personally attacking his former mentors, Stock-hausen and Cage. I happened to be on hand with Cornelius —perform-
ing with Steve Reich in Pamplona —when Cage read Cardew’ s denun-
ciation of him. Cage did not take it lightly, nonetheless he alwaysreminded me how much he admired my solo piano work: For Cornelius,paciﬁcally linking himself to all the wayward sons and daughters.CAGE’S INFLUENCE
179
MARYANNE AMACHER : I would like to continue some comments made
by Jim and Christian. Rather than start with music ’s historical tradition,
let’s imagine more radically. Imagine a “time before music”— a world
without music, so different from the world we are in, where we have so
much recorded music and every possible form of so many sounds. Imag-ine ancient beings listening long before music appeared on the earth. Noone knows exactly what they were listening to —some say that is how
all the legends and myths got started —that they were listening to their
“own voices. ” These were virtual sounds, existing in their minds only.
They had no music, and the young nerve cells were restless —so they
began producing sonorities and rhythms inside their minds to satisfythem. Mind became an instrument they played, creating the colors andrhythms of voices and stories. For there was nothing outside to matchneural rhythms and movements, no corresponding shapes to comple-ment their patterns of “aliveness” (as music provides). And the youngreceptors needed partners complementing their existence.
Was this perhaps the origin of our ﬁrst music? Did the sonic traces 
of music exist ﬁrst in the mind, responding to an essential biologicalcoding? Consider the sonorities John Cage created, illuminating a “life”
of the mind —before grammar, before musical conditioning —in Empty
Words and I–VI.Letting the sonorities of his voice project the numinous
radiance of his mind, he elicits ﬂuent geographies of consciousness: lib-erating the mind from the automatic responses of musical conditioning,intelligence awakes to unrecognized and new perceptual modes.
The beautiful writings of the great nineteenth-century scientist/
thinker, Hermann Helmholtz, articulate the urgency of bringing the“listening mind” into the picture. I am reminded here of a passage fromOn the Sensations of Tone: “There arises in our mind a feeling that the
work of art which we are contemplating is the product of a design whichfar exceeds anything we can conceive at the moment, and which hencepartakes of the character of the illimitable. . . . The contemplation of areal work of art awakens our conﬁdence in the originally healthy natureof the human mind, when uncribbed, unharassed, unobscured, and un-falsiﬁed. ”
3Helmholtz’ s detailed and penetrating investigations were the
ﬁrst in a young tradition of music science to explore human auditory responses to sound and music, to appreciate the sensitivity of the “lis-
tening mind’ s” range, and the variations of its operation. His monumen-
tal research was the very beginning, the foundation for a new under-standing that advanced to new levels with Cage’ s cognitive methods and
explorations.MUMMA, KAPROW, TENNEY, WOLFF, CURRAN, AND AMACHER
180
3.On the Sensations of Tone, trans. Alexander J. Ellis (New York: Dover 1954), 367.
In a wonderful essay, “On Thinking about Thinking, ” Lewis Thomas
proposes that “[m]usic is the effort we make to explain to ourselves how
our brains work. ”4I returned recently to Thomas’ s inspiring essays, be-
cause of my desire to understand how neurobiology informs in somevery basic ways the music I create. These short essays are beautifullyconcrete; Thomas’ s insights into some of the more profound features 
of musical response are exhilarating. For example, he recommends thatinstead of using thought to explain the nature of music, we begin withmusic to see what it can tell us about the sensation of thinking: “We lis-
ten to Bach transﬁxed because this is listening to a human mind. TheArt of the Fugue is not a special pattern of thinking, it is not thinking
about any particular thing . . . it is about thinking. . . . [A]s an experi-ment, to hear the whole mind working, all at once, put on the St. Mat-thew Passion and turn the volume up all the way. That is the sound of the
whole central nervous system, all at once. ”
5
Thomas considers music to be among the most profound problems
for human biology. In “Things Unﬂattened by Science, ” he includes mu-
sic in his list of top-priority puzzles, things that puzzle him more thananything else. Urging biomedical researchers to pursue critical questionsabout the experience of music, he proposes an imaginary situation inwhich he is allowed to ask neurobiologists three or four questions. Oneof the scenarios he describes was completely startling to me.
6
In the early 1980s, the German government set a large advisory com-
mittee to work out the next scienti ﬁc mission of the Max Planck Insti-
tute. After a long time, the committee recommended that the new mis-sion be dedicated to the problem of music —“What music is, why it is
indispensable for human existence, what music really means —hard
questions like that. ” The government turned down the idea. Thomas
says that the U.S. will have grown up when we assemble a similar com-mittee for the same purpose and begin developing a National Instituteof Music, such as other national research organizations.
In 1977, I put similar questions to Marvin Minsky. He later wrote a
paper, and I wrote detailed “treatments” for a ﬁctional screenplay, setsome years in the future, addressing a number of these questions: Whydo we seem to need music? Why do people like music? Why do peopleenjoy experiencing the same rhythms, melodic patterns over and overagain, day after day, even year after year? Why is so much taken forgranted about music, while at the same time there is so little under-CAGE’S INFLUENCE
181
4.The Medusa and the Snail: More Notes of a Biology Watcher (Toronto: Bantam, 1980), 127.
5. Ibid., 128.
6.Late Night Thoughts on Listening to Mahler’ s Ninth Symphony (Toronto: Bantam, 1984), 79.
standing of its operations? (As Wittgenstein suggests, “ Animals come
when their names are called. Just like human beings. ”)7Why is music
profound?
“Other People Think” was written by John Cage in 1927.8He was
ﬁfteen years old. We all know the incredible scope of his in ﬂuence on
twentieth-century art. But I think he will come to in ﬂuence the science
of mind as well. I imagine that his procedures, multidirectional meth-
ods, and radical questionings will one day be examined very carefully,and that they will become part of cognitive science in the twenty-ﬁrstcentury.
About seventy-ﬁve years after Helmholtz published On the Sensations
of Tone, Cage took a critical step: he investigated cognitive approaches to
music. His unique, multifaceted ways of thinking opened radical ques-tions that were the beginning of a totally new “musical mind. ” I believe
that Wittgenstein ’s remark is important here: “What a Copernicus or a
Darwin really achieved was not the discovery of a true theory but of afertile new point of view. ”
9This applies equally to Cage and the poten-
tial evolution of musical thought. Cage created a point of view that didnot exist before him. There were no recognized cognitive procedures foradvancing thought and imagination out of the more mechanical condi-tioned responses. There existed minds driven by stereotypical musicalresponses.
Cage understood many of the problems that had built up over time,
that accompany the habitual practice of music: namely, that it becomesdifﬁcult to “hear” new thoughts. Only by the creation of new methods
of listening and studying can we transform these automatic thoughtprocesses. What Cage understood was that the main activity of mostcomposers is not that profoundly creative, after all. He realized this longbefore our current digital technologies, which make it very clear, sincewe now have software even more adept at carrying out many familiar“compositional” procedures. Most “composing” had not meant isolatingacoustic features, beginning with the physical spectrum itself, discov-ering its energies, and shaping it accordingly (as did Varèse). The un-settling truth was that most approaches to creating music began with ex-
istent ﬁgures —melodies snatched from the great fragments of musical
memory.
In truth, composing usually amounted to a rearranging and modify-
ing of these patterns, that is, other men ’s tunes, giving them personal-MUMMA, KAPROW, TENNEY, WOLFF, CURRAN, AND AMACHER
182
7.Culture and Value (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1984), 67.
8.John Cage: An Anthology, ed. Richard Kostelanetz (New York: Da Capo Press, 1970), 45 –49.
9.Culture and Value, 18.
ized sequences in time. Throughout the ages, new musical compositions
were made by rearranging and individualizing such ﬁgurative patternsand giving them personalized time frameworks. (“Silicon composers”are now achieving this faster and often better.) More dramatically, Cageunderstood that music had come to mean “nod and tap” recognition of
secure tunes, melodies, and shapes, prepared ages ago. What developed
from this approach was a music sustaining itself through memory pat-terns —ﬁgurative fragments snatched out of the air and rearranged in
time. He decided new, more fertile approaches were needed. It was timeto open minds. Now composers would have to listen in ways they hadnever listened before. They would have to hear, think, and explore the“unformulated. ” And with prevision, he foresaw our time now.
It’s 1937. How do minds approach the creation of music?
Visualize the time. John Cage was twenty- ﬁve years old when he de-
livered the lecture “The Future of Music: Credo ”in Seattle. And consider
his birth year, 1912. Women were still wearing long skirts, and musicalactivity was dominated (perhaps more than today) by unquestionedand habitual patterns. Simulate the time, and imagine his presence in it.In the halls of conservatories, musicians are practicing eight to ten hoursa day, ﬁlling the building with every kind of possible melodic pattern;composers scribbling “notes without ears. ” (Yes, today this still goes on
and on, owing to that unfortunate aspect of music that is mechanical,“without mind, ” grounded in habit.)
Imagine Cage in this environment, questioning how minds approach
the creation of music; initiating totally new models of cognition into the“hitherto unheard or even unimagined” (Cage’ s expression for the fu-
ture sonic worlds he anticipated).
What antennae did Cage use? He looks into the musical environment
around him and understands percussion music to be a contemporarytransition from keyboard-inﬂuenced music to the “all-sound music ofthe future. ” How will these sounds become available? How did he arrive
at this observation? Why is he thinking about such future developmentsat all? Cage announces in “The Future of Music: Credo”: “I believe the
use of noise to make music will continue and increase until we reach amusic produced through the aid of electrical instruments which willmake available for musical purposes any and all sounds that can beheard. . . . [I]t is now possible for composers to make music directly,without the assistance of intermediary performers. ” Sweeping across
the ﬁeld of thought, how does his mind know what it knows?
He looked outside his own musical activities, discovering the ﬁrst
traces of these developments, in ﬁlm studios and acoustic laboratories.Totally alive to his time, he recognizes the very beginnings of a sonic CAGE’S INFLUENCE
183
expansion to be achieved with electronic technologies. Interpreting, syn-
thesizing this information, his imagination distinguishes how the courseof music will beneﬁt. He is alert to trends in other disciplines —engi-
neering, physics, and acoustic research. He is informed about the libraryof “sound effects” recorded on ﬁlm that every ﬁlm studio had at the
time; especially ﬁlm phonographs which made it possible “to control the
amplitude and frequency of sounds and give them rhythms within orbeyond the reach of anyone’ s imagination. ”
10
He imagines the sound of things unheard, and considers them to 
be future musical instruments. Today, we take for granted this world of all possible sounds, available to us through synthesizers, computers,recorders, microphones, and various means of sound modiﬁcation. Cagedid not only foresee the availability of the “total ﬁeld of sound, ” includ-
ing noise, he also imagined the precise modiﬁcation of the harmonics,frequency, and intensity of this sonic spectrum years before it became areality.
It’s the turn of a new century. Why choose music to cultivate mind?
In a few years, neuroscience may provide some important clues. Com-
posers today live at a moment of extraordinary transition. Discoveries,especially in the ﬁelds of biotechnology, neuroscience, and molecu-lar engineering, as well as ubiquitous digital, converging media, and VR(virtual reality) platforms and the all-encompassing habitation of theInternet, will profoundly affect the multisensorial arts. Already a num-ber of such innovations have appeared. There are parallels today thatcorrespond to 1937. In the immediate future, breakthroughs in emer-gent technologies will act as catalysts for unprecedented changes in thecreation and reproduction of musical experiences, as the advent of newtechnologies did in the second half of the twentieth century, radically ad-vancing the development of musical thought in the next twenty years.
Visualize John Cage, twenty-ﬁve years old today. Imagine how he
would approach the emergent evolution in knowledge and technolo-gies. Simulate his far-reaching, telescopic mind, look forward in time, ashe did in 1937, to the next half century. Model his approach; recognizethe ﬁrst traces of future developments.
For example, today’ s CD has a memory of 640 million bytes. The pre-
dictions are that this will increase to 10 billion bytes in ﬁve years, and in
ten years to 100 billion bytes and beyond. Recent research includes optical discs the size of a quarter, capable of storing eight days or moreof music; memory sticks the size of a piece of gum; ubiquitous sensoryMUMMA, KAPROW, TENNEY, WOLFF, CURRAN, AND AMACHER
184
10.“The Future of Music: Credo ”(ca. 1938 –40), in Silence: Lectures and Writing (Middletown,
Conn.: Wesleyan University Press, 1961), 3 –5.
particles the size of dust motes; and bio- and molecular engineering
promise even greater capacity.
New visual and aural experiences are being explored as a result of 
recent advances in multisensorial and immersive technologies, someunlike any past experiences, particularly those being created for con-verging media platforms, such as 3-D sonic imaging and graphics, tele-presence, and cyberspace.
Modeling Cage’ s telescopic perspective, we can ask: How will such
developments affect our thinking about the content, duration, and pre-sentation of experiences in the works that we create? How will we takeimaginative account of these and other developing trends in planningnew work for the future? I believe that it is especially urgent to give se-rious attention and recognition to groundbreaking innovations in theﬁeld of the “emerging arts. ”
Today media exist that begin to approach the range and subtlety of
our perceptual modes. As immersive technologies expand and grow tomirror the sensitivity of our responsive energies, will the auditory artsdelve consciously into these expansive sensory worlds? And in whatways? Or instead, will our sonic worlds be created with simpleminded“variation makers”— computer software that makes subtle or not so
subtle variations and developments of preexistent musical materials?
In “The Future of Music: Credo, ” Cage described percussion music as
a contemporary transition from keyboard-inﬂuenced music to the “all-sound music of the future. ” A similar transition is occurring now, as we
move from concert, CD, and DVD temporally based music to media withinﬁnitely greater memory. Instead of the availability of all sounds, it isthe availability of vast memory that will make possible an unprecedentedexpansion of musical time and inﬂuence a new course of composition:the “all-time” music of the future.
The development of this expansive time spectrum in emergent tech-
nologies is for me today what an extended sonic spectrum that includednoise was for Cage in 1937. As the possibilities of the “all-sound music
of the future” were to Cage, the possibilities of “all-time music” are tome. In the twenty-ﬁrst century, new time worlds will be explored justas composers in the twentieth century explored new sounds.
Music will be ﬁlled with extraordinary surprises. These will be
achieved through a new mastery of time, which composers will gradu-ally acquire. To paraphrase Cage, the present methods of writing will beinadequate for the composer who will be faced with the entire ﬁeld oftime. I believe that there will be magniﬁcent changes in how we createmusical forms over time. Completely new worlds of musical experiencewill be produced in the next ﬁfteen years.CAGE’S INFLUENCE
185
What becomes exciting to think about in creating this music is that it
will require the creation of completely new ways of thinking about du-
ration and structure developing over time. Composers will “sculpt newtime” in totally new ways. Long-standing time conventions that haveapplied to the creation of musical experiences will no longer apply. Wemay choose to keep them, but there will be an inﬁnite range of tem-poral choices: a complete “spectrum of time dimension ” in the repro-
duction of music. For example, there will be the possibility of creatingmultisensorial or entirely musical worlds to be experienced over twenty-four hours, or over much longer or shorter periods of time. In theory,years, months, weeks, days, minutes, seconds will be possible. As Cagesaid in his “Credo”: “The principle of form will be our only constant
connection with the past. ”
11
But more signiﬁcant and ultimately more intriguing than the ex-
tension of the macro-time dimension will be the advent of somethingunprecedented in musical experience. It will no longer be necessary toproduce music as uninterrupted sound, to have it continue nonstop, asin the past, or as on current CD and DVD formats. This will be the mostunique feature of the new musical worlds produced with advancedmemory technologies. Expansive memory will allow composers to cre-ate sonic worlds that may last many hours yet include long periods of silence. For example, music might sound for ten minutes, followed by a long span of silence, say an hour or two, and then maybe threeminutes of sound. In any given twenty-four hours, for example, therecan appear many wonderful musical surprises. Music will now take on a totally new dimension, similar to our experiences of time with itsevents in life.
I think of this unprecedented feature as a magniﬁcent temporal-
magniﬁcation of “musical form, ” as though using a macro- or telephoto
lens to expand the silence and differentiation of phrase structures, en-hancing their scale and presence over time. The challenge of composingits dimensions is very exciting. It will involve learning a number of newcomposing skills.
Advanced memory will inspire new ways of presenting music. Imag-
ination is no longer limited solely to pieces, or continuous sonic in-stallations, and nineteenth-century concert halls. Even now, I compose“Sound Characters” that interact with each other in different ways, de-pending on the architectural staging of my installations. One of the mostvivid things I learned from Cage is how much everything we do is takenfor granted and that we have to turn it around, discover other views. IMUMMA, KAPROW, TENNEY, WOLFF, CURRAN, AND AMACHER
186
11. Ibid., 5.
remember shortly after having read Silence, I was preparing to present
one of my ﬁrst works, but I did not like the hall where the concerts were
being given. I thought, “Why do you have to produce your work in thisconcert hall? Go out and ﬁnd a beautiful space, a wonderful architec-ture. ” Right now we have no buildings dedicated solely to sonic experi-
ences, other than frontal concert stages built for presenting nineteenth-century music. This has been a serious problem, even in the last half ofthe twentieth century, alive with electronic media, multi-loudspeakers,and interactive media.
Rather than being staged frontally, as in traditional concerts with the
audience seated, immersive aural architectures are often best experi-enced interactively, as the audience explores the sonic world by listen-ing at different locations in the space. There is a critical need for build-ings that are dedicated completely to these new musical and sonicworlds, just as galleries are to the visual arts. And I believe in the imme-diate future we will be able to provide the kind of enriched public ex-periences of these new musical environments that can only result fromarchitectural staging, and that are absolutely impossible to experience inone’s home, even with multichannel systems.
All possible sounds and their modiﬁcations are available with cur-
rent technologies. However, there remains one area of sound that hasnot been fully explored, though I anticipate it soon will be: speciﬁcally,the tones and patterns our ears produce in response to music, which isunfortunately referred to as “psychoacoustics. ” Produced interaurally,
these virtual sounds and melodic patterns originate in our ears and neu-roanatomy. In fact, recent scientiﬁc experiments at Johns Hopkins haveshown that our ears continue to emit sound for a few seconds after death,establishing that our ears not only receive and absorb sound, but alsoemit sound (referred to by researchers as “otoacoustic emissions”). Suchresponse tones exist in all music, but they are usually registered sub-liminally, often masked by complex timbres. They are a natural and veryreal physical feature of auditory perception, similar to the fusing of twoimages resulting in a third three-dimensional image in binocular per-ception, and they play a crucial role in the experience of music. I like tothink of our ears acting as neurophonic instruments, sounding their owntones and melodic shapes. I expect in the future more composers willwant to release this music produced by the listener, to bring it out of sub-liminal existence and consciously make it an important sonic dimension.
Jim talked about Cage introducing at a historical moment a real fo-
cus on the experiential. This focus is also very much part of our time. Nolonger limited to writing notes on paper, with current sound technolo-gies composers may access real-time auditory experiences. In the pro-CAGE’S INFLUENCE
187
cess of composing, they can investigate in depth the aural worlds they
create; they can examine different ways of hearing, whether sound isvery far away, very close up, vibrating an elbow, appearing on top oftheir head, or “inside” their head and streaming out of their ears intospace in front of their eyes.
Amazingly varied, abundant possibilities exist for creating interactive
worlds in art and popular entertainment. (How different from today’ s
CDs played over and over again.) Instead of preparing scores that onlymusicians play, composers will prepare new kinds of “scores” for lis-teners to explore at home. We have seen how the emphasis shifted withCage from the composer to the musicians who perform the score. Hereit will shift from the composer to anyone who might have the “score” intheir living room. With recent developments, we may delve into evenmore intense possibilities: entering the interior of the music in startlingnew ways, perceptually. Composers will soon learn how to develop the“perceptual geographies” that will become the maps for vivid, personal-ized experiences in the sonic worlds of these “home scores. ”
A widespread conception about music is that it has to be for millions
of people, whether in the form of pop music or art music. Beethoven inevery bar, Bach in every bookstore. In the coming decade of custom-ization, the expectation that music be created for millions only, will nolonger exist. Of course, it will still be an option, but composers will alsobe able to tailor sonic experiences, individualizing them for speciﬁcrooms, architectures, and listeners. I think there are many exciting pos-sibilities to think about —and to think about them as Cage would have.
Imaginative narratives and experientially adventurous, compelling sce-narios can be created in stunning, transformative worlds.
The experiential designs of real-time “ﬁrst-person ” sensory interac-
tivity in converging new media are powerful because they individualizechanging perceptual viewpoints, expanding visual, auditory, tactile, andmotion-based experiences. Even more speciﬁc customization will be pos-sible through materials science, neuroscience, and genetics, in health, inmedicine —all these will have a relation to music as well. Perhaps we
will soon tailor our sonic worlds for each individual’ s uniquely person-
alized bio-neuro proﬁle, because it is clear that in the next ﬁfteen years
the foundations for a real knowledge of neurobiology will be achieved.Quite possibly, composers, besides learning harmony, will learn moreabout synaptic modulations. Recently I read an interview with NicholasNegroponte (author of On Being Digital); he discusses ways in whichbiotechnology will become increasingly important for computer sciencein the twenty-ﬁrst century. Current articles describe research advancesin quantum computing and detailed computing systems based on bio-MUMMA, KAPROW, TENNEY, WOLFF, CURRAN, AND AMACHER
188
logical memory (DNA) instead of silicon that eventually may become
very interesting for composers. Perhaps one day, composers will makescores that will include bioenhancements for hearing, ornamenting ourauditory system.
In 1980, during the New Music America Festival in Minneapolis –
St. Paul, I created Living Sound, Patent Pending (Traveling Musicians BeingPrepared), the ﬁrst large-scale multichannel installation in my “
MUSIC
FOR SOUND –JOINED ROOMS ” series for the Walker Arts Center. The music
and visual sets were staged architecturally throughout the nearly emptyVictorian house of the conductor Dennis Russell Davies and ﬁlmmakerMolly Davies. The house, on a hill in St. Paul with its panoramic view ofMinneapolis, was lit by tall quartz spots, as if a movie set. The time:midnight. The visual elements gave clues to a story discovered in the dif-ferent rooms, and in the outside garden. Davies ’s music room, where
two grand pianos had stood, was now an “emergent music laboratory”where twenty-one petri dishes with “something” growing in them (the
musicians and instruments of the future) were placed beside metal in-strument cases marked “Fragile: Traveling Musicians Being Prepared”and “The Molecular Orchestra. ” TV story boards referred to “symbiotic
aids” (biochemical companions tailored to enhance neurophonic rec-ognition) and “making new scores. ” DNA photos and biochemical dia-
grams were placed on music stands. Meanwhile, the entire house wasfull of sound, circulating throughout the rooms, out the doors and win-dows, down the hill, past sedate Victorian mansions. For me, what wasmost interesting about this work was that I did not know that the law to patent life forms was about to be passed. I was thrilled to discover that this law (the Diamond V. Chakrabarty decision) followed a few days later. As the possibilities of biocomputers and emerging media ap-proach, perhaps this work was not as much fantasy as it may have seemedat the time.
For music students, I hope that Cage’ s inﬂuence gets deeper and
deeper, that right now we’ve only touched the tip of the iceberg and thatone day we’ll have minds for music. Imagine, there are six listeningposts where people are currently studying sound on the sun in a proj-ect called “The Gong. ”In the last few decades, interferometry techniques
have revealed deﬁned patterns of acoustic oscillations corresponding to a series of harmonics produced as sound waves reﬂect off the ther-mal boundaries surrounding the sun ’s core. Separated from us by 93 mil-
lion miles of vacuum, the sun is in effect a big silent gong. In its interior,middle C (which on our earth has a wavelength of roughly four feet inair at room temperature) has a length of about one half mile. Imaginethe sound.CAGE’S INFLUENCE
189
190NINE
James Pritchett (chair), James Tenney, 
Andrew Culver, and Frances White
Cage and the Computer
A Panel Discussion
It took six weeks to teach the
computer how to toss threecoins six times. Somewhatworried, I tossed the coinsmanually to discover from theI Ching how I Ching felt about
being programmed. It was delighted.
—John Cage, “Diary: How to
Improve the World (Y ou WillOnly Make Matters Worse)Continued 1969 (Part V)”JAMES PRITCHETT : Let me welcome every-
body to this session, which deals with Cage
and the computer. We have three panelists.
James Tenney is a pioneer of computer
music, of the application of algorithms tocomposition with computers. He was therebefore the beginnings —in the 1960s at Bell
Labs, contributing to the development of theﬁrst computer music languages. I thoughtthe ﬁrst such language was called Music 4,
but he informs me that he had worked withMusic 3. That’ s like reading galleys from the
Gutenberg Bible.
Andrew Culver collaborated with John
Cage on computer-related projects. I thinkof him as John ’s “human-user interface for
the computer. ” He ﬁlled this important role
for many years, making Cage’ s ideas happen
on the computer.
Frances White writes music using the
computer largely for the synthesis of sound.She worked with John on his Essay pieces.
J
AMES TENNEY : Cage’ s relationship with the
computer was rather tenuous in the begin-ning. Before Andrew Culver began workingwith him he was interested in it, but asidefrom his connection with Lejaren Hiller and
CAGE AND THE COMPUTER
191 the development of HPSCHD, I don ’t know of any direct involvement
that he’d had.
Long ago I was active at Bell Labs in the very early development of
computer sound generation. Beginning in 1961, I was employed there
for two and a half years. This was a period in my work when I not onlywas involved with this medium but also followed with great interestwhat Cage was doing. These two things were not separate; both were cen-tral to my concerns as a composer at the time. In thinking about what Imight say here, I realized that this coincidence —my being caught up in
the early development of the medium and my interest in Cage —made
his ideas a very important early inﬂuence on the development of com-puter music simply because certain things I wanted to do were greatlystimulated or inspired by his ideas, and I had been brought to Bell Labsto help them develop the medium.
This was a fantastic situation, the start of what we all now take 
for granted as digital sound recording and processing. But what my colleagues at Bell Labs were doing then was generating digital soundcompletely from scratch, not working from recorded sounds. Basicallythis involved the same technology that we use with compact discs. Bellbrought me in fresh out of graduate school from the University of Illi-nois with a mandate to work with the medium and, by trying to use it,propose developments of it. I was in the incredibly privileged situationof being asked to give input. What Bell didn ’t realize but gradually be-
came aware of was how subversive my activities there were bound to be, due to the fact that my aesthetic philosophy was very close to Cage ’s
thinking, whereas that was not the case with the people at Bell Labs.They didn ’t have the faintest notion of what he was up to.
To be more speciﬁc, when I got there even the sound-generating pro-
cess itself was limited to oscillators and the equivalent of mixers. Howabout that! You could make a series of these and produce what MaxMathews called an instrument, which was in effect a series of blocks ofcomputer code that you strung together. My ﬁrst proposal to them, be-
cause of what I needed for the ﬁrst piece, Noise Study, was, “You need a
random noise generator in this”; they didn ’t have one. So, although
they were primarily engaged in developing the tools that were designedalready, they also started to expand in an unexpected direction.
Soon after this there were other things I felt I needed, for example,
ﬁlters that would control timbre. These would produce sounds from aconceptual model based not on the sounds of traditional musical in-struments but on sounds of the world outside, which are very complexand rich and full of noise. I didn ’t want to imitate them but to create 
a world of sounds that might approximate the variability that we hear
PRITCHETT, TENNEY, CULVER, AND WHITE
192 when we listen to environmental sounds. The so-called instrument had
to be very complicated, and a number of what were called unit genera-tors had to be added to the set of possibilities.
Soon I was saying to myself, “We have an interesting situation here. ”
The user would compose a piece, presumably in the conventional wayor in whatever way, coming up with a series of numbers that became input speciﬁcations for the instrument. According to the numbers yougave, this series went into the computer, and sounds were generatedthat had their characteristics determined by these numbers. I thought,“Now what would happen if one could write another program thatwould generate numbers that went into the input to control sounds? ”
In other words, I became interested in what in other quarters and laterwould be called algorithmic composition, which is to say, working froma computer program to generate not just the sounds but the controls onthe characteristics of the sounds. I proposed this to Max Mathews. Ittook him a few hours to set up a programming situation in which, if theuser wanted to learn a little programming, he or she could write such aprogram, which would determine the nature of a particular piece. WhenI began to use this, I was immediately working with random numbergeneration in a kind of process that I ended up calling a stochastic pro-cess, adapting the term from Xenakis ’s writings, but rede ﬁning it in a
way that seemed more suitable to my own musical ideas and that is alsoapplicable to a good deal of Cage’ s work.
I deﬁne a stochastic process as a constrained random process. The
constraints are very important, although one condition that has to beincluded is the completely unconstrained random process; that’ s the de-
fault condition of constraints, namely, no constraints at all. But of courseI don ’t think there ’s a piece by Cage that doesn ’t involve some kind of
constraint. Every choice that he made precompositionally entailed oneor more constraints on the interpretation of the I Ching results.
Near the end of my work at Bell I did two pieces, Ergodos 1 and Ergo-
dos 2, which represented for me not just the culmination of the experi-
ments that I’d done in developing the range of timbres I wanted but alsoa manifestation of a compositional approach that I felt, that I still feel,brought me closest to Cage’ s aesthetic. Since then, I ’ve gone in other di-
rections, but then I was consciously trying very hard to come to termswith the implications of Cage’ s aesthetic. These two pieces represent
that, and they are both dedicated to him. I was not surprised when, ﬁf-
teen or twenty years later, I heard that he was using the computer forhis own process.
There is a kind of mystique about the I Ching that may or may not be
true: that you have to be right there to handle the coins or whatever to
make it meaningful. I never took that seriously enough to see it as cre-
ating a problem in my use of the computer for generating random se-quences, and it seemed to be a conﬁrmation of my attitude when Cagestarted to do the same.
A
NDREW CULVER : What’ s up on the screen is a table of the computer
programs (table 9.1) between 1984 and 1995 that John and I used and
others used for him. In the battle with technology, I ’ve had to leave out
the credits for who wrote the programs. Only two names should appear,mine is one and the other is Jim Rosenberg’ s. He wrote the two pro-
grams Mesolist and Mesomake, which were quite powerful utilities forgenerating the two kinds of mesostics that John was making.
In considering what I might say today, a number of recollections and
thoughts came to mind. The ﬁrst thing I want to tell you about is a blue
proofreader ’s pencil. For a while John was never far from it. He may
have gotten it from Paul Sadowsky, the autographer who, even when I started with John in 1981 on 30 Pieces for 5 Orchestras, was producing
copy for Peters, the publisher. Anyhow, John had this blue pencil. Oneday I opened my copy of Kernighan and Ritchie’ s C Programming Lan-
guage, which is the bible for C programmers, and I saw that on the sly
somebody had been underlining numerous words, several on each line,with the blue pencil. They were just words like “hard disk”; they wereeven more general words. It was as though someone —I assume John —
had detected some special meaning in the words he underlined, wordslike “system, ” “language, ” “structure, ” “constant, ” “general purpose, ”
“low-level. ” This underlining went from the beginning of the introduc-
tion all the way through the ﬁrst page. I thought, “This is amazing, he’ s
actually studying on his own. ” The underlining went on to page 2 and
then it stopped abruptly, in mid-sentence. There was a time when Johnhad expressed the hope that he would lay things aside and tackle thecomputer, and I think that this was the beginning and the end of thateffort. I thought maybe he’d come in and say, “Let’ s talk about this C
programming language, ” or at least, “Let’ s talk about these words of
Kernighan and Ritchie’ s,” but it never happened. He never brought it
up, and neither did I.
Here I want to throw together the word “computer” with a few things
that John did, the ﬁrst of which is of course music. Recall that I was withhim full-time from December 1983 through 1988, then on and off al-ways in contact, still working but often at home, from 1988 until hedied. My observations will center on the changes that the computermade in our various activities.
Major change brought about by the computer vis- à-vis Cage’ s music
can be summed up in the word “notation. ”John was intensely interestedCAGE AND THE COMPUTER
193
TABLE 9.1 Computer Programs Used by Cage
Name Description Y ear Type By Language
Babbrook Generated record player and 87 process Culver C
sound parts for Truckera
Chairbar Generated chair positions for 91 process Culver C
Essay installation in Barcelona
Europera End-user, integrated program 93 database Culver PAL, C
for Europeras 3 & 4 and Eur-
opera 5: setups, lights plots, 
gels list, light cues, and parts 
generation for photo ﬂashes, phonographs, and Truckera
Flatcues Generated the time plan for ﬂat 87 process Culver C, ZIM
movements in Europeras 1 & 2
IC Generic command-line I Ching 84–91 utility Culver C
number generator with options: sort, nonrepetition, bias, immo-bile bias
Imagecue Generated image selections 86 process Culver C, ZIM
for the Frankfurt ﬂats of Europ-
eras 1 & 2
Lghtcues Light event generation for Eur- 86 process Culver C, ZIM
operas 1 & 2 (Frankfurt version)
Lieop Light event generation for Eur- 91 process Culver C
operas 1 & 2 (Zurich version)
Liess Light event generation for Essay 90 process Culver C
Lilcu Light cue compilation for lieop 90–91 utility Culver C
or liess output
Mattress Generated chair and artwork 91 process Culver C
positions for the changing instal-lation at the Mattress Factory
Meso Combines all mesostic routines 89 process Culver C
in one program (incomplete)
Mesolist Finds all the words in a source 85, 89 process Rosenberg C
text that match all the letters in a string
Mesomake Takes a source text and a source 84 process Rosenberg C
string and produces a “writing through” mesostic
Mesorule Proofs a mesostic poem for con- 88 utility Culver C
formity with the 50% rule
Mlcount Counts the number of words 85 utility Culver C
for each mesoletter found by mesolist
Mlﬁnd Finds one word for each meso- 85 utility Culver C
letter in a mesolist list
Mlfmt Formats a text for mesolist 85 utility Culver C
processingPRITCHETT, TENNEY, CULVER, AND WHITE
194
CAGE AND THE COMPUTER
195 TABLE 9.1 (continued )
Name Description Y ear Type By Language
Muoyce Generated performance times 91 process Culver C
for Muoyce
Musicfor Generates time brackets, 88 process Culver C
pitches, dynamics, specials 
for the Music for...series
Piaggs Lists all three, four and ﬁve note 84, 89 utility Culver C
piano aggregates
Rengamix Chance mixes a group of 85 process Culver C
mesostics with identical strings
Rover End-user program for 93–95 database Culver Object PAL, C
Rolywholyover: A Circus; inte-
grates the design of the chance operations with every process necessary to run the main circus
TB Generic time bracket generation 90–91 process Culver C
(numbered pieces style)
TIC Time values version of IC 84–91 utility Culver C
Yroverx Generates pencil and stone 87 process Culver C
selections for Ryoanji drawings
in notation. He made the anthology called Notations; his early autogra-
phy has been exhibited in museums and published in books of graphic
art. Right from the beginning (August 1981), when I arranged to helphim with 30 Pieces for 5 Orchestras, I came in, and on the round table in
the loft was this extraordinary collection of tables and charts with thechance operations that came out of Bell Labs. And way over here, lostamong everything, was the manuscript. The ﬁrst thing he did was togive me a pencil and ask me to write notes on the manuscript. I couldn ’t
believe it. I thought that manuscripts were revered things (perhaps I was suffering from a musicological imperative or something). What he did was keep the chance operations going. He diligently marked offwhenever we used a number, and after that anytime we worked togetherJohn stayed at the chance-operation end of the process. He pushed thenotation in the process my way. I have mentioned Paul Sadowsky ’s place
in the ﬁnal step, and now in the intermediate step there was I. Not tosay that John never put his hand on notation anymore, or on a manu-script, but when we worked side by side he generally left it up to me. He was distancing himself from notation, letting go of it. Or he had al-ready let go of it. The computer brought this development to greater extremes.
There were notations like the Europeras databases, for instance —such
things as were given to the lighting crew or the stage director: dances,
charts, drawings, costumes. Cage’ s interest in how these things looked
was about what you’d expect, though many times he had nothing to say
about how they were designed. Frequently their layouts stemmed fromthe constraints of our printer. The size of the fonts, for example, wasbased simply on how much data had to ﬁt across the page. As to all thenotation that carries instructions to the performers, its designs were leftcompletely to others; it was a kind of indeterminacy. I’m not referringto the early pieces for which John made scores giving the player thekinds of choices and freedoms that came to be known as indeterminatescores. I mean that the process of making the notation had become indeterminate from his point of view, that he had stepped back from the process and was willing to let it go wherever it would. The computerand my involvement along with that of others, including Paul, were theagents of that happening.
In the years before Cage had a computer and the operators to work
it, he was making large mesostics, the earlier of his writings through Fin-
negans Wake. Making these was terribly laborious and demanded an in-
credible discipline. And all of a sudden comes the computer, and Jim Ro-senberg writes the program that does all the searching automatically, sothe devotional aspect of composing a mesostic is usurped by the machine.
This had several side effects, the most immediate of which was that
he sought outlets that required that kind of devotion in other places. Itwas auspicious that around that time Kathan Brown and Crown PointPress provided the opportunity for John to make visual artwork on aregular basis. His need to undertake dif ﬁcult tasks was addressed by his
making drawings where one of ﬁfteen stones was placed by chance operations on a brass plate to be etched or on a piece of paper; then oneof seventeen pencils was chosen by chance and a drawing was madearound the stone. Sometimes the process went on as often as —was it a
power of ﬁfteen?
1And several hundred placements of a stone —was it
two to the ﬁfteenth? In place of making mesostics, John had a new out-let for his desire to have a laborious task at hand.
I think there was another side effect, which affected performance,
computer performance. You know John ’s famous aphorism about com-
posing a piece of music having nothing to do with performing a piece ofmusic, which has nothing to do with listening to a piece of music. Well,with the computer and the removal of the devotional aspect of mak-ing the mesostic, you now have a situation where making the mesostichas nothing to do with producing the mesostic, which has nothing to do with performing the mesostic. The producing, the middle stage, wasPRITCHETT, TENNEY, CULVER, AND WHITE
196
1. It was 152, 225, the most often one of the ﬁfteen stones was outlined on one draw-
ing—A.C.
taken over by the machine. John would thereafter be involved in the
early stages, composing the selection of texts, the mesostic string; this is a compositional process. Then the performance of these processeswould be given over to the machine in the end; this can be seen as a typeof performance. He was removed one step from the composition of thematerial by its production by the machine and was now free to step inas a noncomposing individual, to become a performer at the ﬁnal stage.
Concurrent with this was the removal of other performance outlets. Pi-ano and percussion were now behind him because of his arthritis. And,signiﬁcantly or coincidentally, after a few years of composing using acomputer, he stopped touring with Merce Cunningham and David Tu-dor, so he no longer had the third main component of his performanceoutlet. With percussion performance, piano performance, and the useof electronics relegated to the past, all he had left was text reading.
In the theater John had few chances to take charge of the light sys-
tem, until the computer allowed him to work with this medium. Withthe Cunningham Dance Company —his main theatrical outlet until Eu-
roperas —he was only rarely and with little success given general control
over lighting. The dancers complained that they couldn ’t see what they
were doing. Only in the late 1980s comes the computer facility as wellas the invitation to make the Europeras and, later, the Essay as installa-
tion. Cage now had machinery and lightboards that were computerized;he had the opportunity to do something brand new. He was very excitedabout being able to do his own lighting. He spoke of it as the princi-pal experimental aspect of making the Europeras and as theatrically the
most radical result of the whole process. He wanted to treat light as he ’d
been suggesting people consider sounds, that is, as individual pointseach the center of its own universe, the multiplicity of the interpene-tration being without regard for what the viewer experiences. In light-ing the phrase generally used was “without regard for illumination. ”
You may have noticed the words “utility, ” “process, ” “database” in my
table (table 9.1). These name the three main ways to categorize the soft-ware that was generated over the years. Utilities are such programs as ICor TIC or the various mesostic formatting programs that facilitate somesort of task, whether it ’s searching for a mesostic word or tossing coins.
Next are the processors. These are programs that call the utilities in-ternally, so they’ re the next level of a Russian egg. They include lists of
procedures and parameters and algorithms. The procedures are put intoeffect, and the program acts on the procedures according to the resultsof the chance operations and according to the parameters and lists of parameters. The program that made all the time brackets for all the“number pieces” is one of these; the other signiﬁcant one is Musicfor,signiﬁcant because it’ s the process program that embodies, more thanCAGE AND THE COMPUTER
197
any other, the entire compositional process.2It goes 99 percent of the
way. It left one thing for John to do. Much as I tried to suggest that we
automate that too, he wouldn ’t let me.
Beyond utilities and processors, the third kind of program involves
the databases. The database programs contain within themselves pro-cess programs, which in this context are called “utilities. ” The signiﬁ-
cance here is that with the databases you not only can generate results,you can gather results —observe them in different ways and output
them in different ways. If you look at these three in comparison with alltypes of computer programs that are possible, you will see where John ’s
interests lay. The database is really the most complete and accurate ana-log to his use and interest in the computer.
F
RANCES WHITE: In preparing for this session, I found myself think-
ing a lot about computers in general and about John Cage and comput-
ers speciﬁcally. I feel that the relations of musicians to computers arefrequently problematic. (I know they have been for me.) I don ’t like 
to make a distinction for computer music, and anyhow, it seems to grow increasingly less valid. Years ago you had to go to specialized cen-ters and work on very specialized equipment to make sound with com-puters, but now they are almost ubiquitous, and it’ s a much less spe-
cialized ﬁeld. You see composers who never think of themselves as
computer musicians now write tape pieces and work with computersound generation. The historical distinction is fading, and I think that ’s
a good thing.
One of the big dif ﬁculties for me personally in dealing with comput-
ers is that I think the essence of music is ultimately something very mys-terious. Somehow with computers some of the mystery seems to belacking. Certainly what I don ’t know about computers would ﬁll hun-
dreds of books, though I am interested in the essence of what comput-ers are. Part of the problem involves a composer ’s or performer’ s rela-
tionship to a computer as opposed to a traditional acoustic instrument.Both are artifacts made by human beings, but for me computers aremore than just an instrument and also somehow less than that. To somedegree they do incorporate human ideas about human thought, andhere my remarks should return to John Cage. Cage once said that hethought it might be very interesting if you had a computer that actedmore like nature than like human beings. I interpret this statement asgetting at something like what I am talking about, the whole aspect ofmystery.
My dealings with Cage and the computer occurred when I was doingPRITCHETT, TENNEY, CULVER, AND WHITE
198
2. See Culver’ s comments below regarding the “special column ” in the Musicfor outputs.
CAGE AND THE COMPUTER
199 the technical work on the Essay pieces. I saw his interaction with tech-
nology only in a very limited way; he didn ’t work on the system every
day. I always picked up from him a certain shyness around the technol-
ogy. The equipment was intimidating; it was not user-friendly. He waseager for us to tell him what we were doing with the signal processingand such. He wanted to know what was behind the speech synthesiswork we were doing. He never seemed to have an interest in a hands-on approach to the equipment. I observed a sort of reserve from himabout technology. We think of him as focusing on the future of music,and yet he didn ’t get involved in the technology directly and personally.
A
UDIENCE QUESTION FOR TENNEY : What were you doing before going
to Bell Labs and how did you get your job there?
TENNEY : I attended the University of Illinois because I had read a tiny
little notice in the New York Times saying that for the ﬁrst time anyplace,
certainly for the ﬁrst time in North America, a course in electronic 
music was going to be given at that university toward the end of 1958.(There was a primitive electronic studio at Columbia University, but it was not accessible to students. Only Otto Luening and some invitedguests could use it; it was not part of the teaching program.) I had beencasting about for a place to do graduate work. Here was a course that wasto be given by Lejaren Hiller, the guy who with a collaborator (LeonardIsaacson) did the famous or infamous Illiac Suite, which resulted from
the ﬁrst signiﬁcant use of the computer in a quasi-compositional pro-
cess. They weren ’t really trying to create original music, but rather to
simulate existing styles. I went to Illinois and took Hiller ’s course. He also
gave a course in musical acoustics and information theory, which wasfabulous. At the same time, I had the fantastic good luck of getting toknow and work with Harry Partch.
The university had a very primitive studio —nothing but a few tape
machines and Lafayette oscillators that you had to set by hand. You ’d re-
cord a note, then take the tape and splice it to the next. This was beforeMoog and Buchla came up with their synthesizers, which made it pos-sible to program, in analog fashion, a whole sequence of sounds, so thetask was horribly tedious and cumbersome. I had been turned on byVarèse’s vision of electronic music in the future. When I saw this studio,
I said, this is not the future, this is terrible!
So in desperation I got the idea of using concrete sounds or, in this case,
Elvis Presley. In one week of twenty-three-hour days in the studio I madethe piece called Blue Suede. It was done in spite of the medium (the me-
dium being electronic music), not because of it. Before I had ﬁnished,Hiller mentioned an article by Max Mathews in the Bell System Technical
Journal that described a new computer sound generation process. After
PRITCHETT, TENNEY, CULVER, AND WHITE
200 the dif ﬁculty I had had, reading this article about the new process made
me think that that was the medium for me, that would work. There was
something about it I liked. I ’m not a knob turner; I ’m not particularly
comfortable with equipment. So I went back to New York during theChristmas break and made an appointment to see some of the people at Bell Labs. I wanted to learn if outsiders could make use of the equip-ment. I had an interesting conversation with Mathews, John Pierce, andanother person at Bell Labs. After going back to Illinois, I got a letterfrom Pierce saying, “We enjoyed talking with you, and we want you toknow that you are welcome to come and use our system. ” I responded
by saying “Thank you, it’ s a fantastic opportunity, and if I am nearby
next year I will take you up on that. I don ’t know where I’ll be because
I have to ﬁnd a job. ” They sent me back a letter offering me a job.
Just incredible. I wanted to move back to the New York area if pos-
sible, so this was an enormous opportunity. It put me in contact withthe new technology and also with the whole artistic climate in New Yorkin the sixties, which was pretty amazing. Of course, John Cage was cen-tral to that as far as I was concerned.
A
UDIENCE QUESTION : How did Hiller meet Cage?
TENNEY : I believe they met when Cage came out to Illinois with the
Cunningham dance troupe for a performance. By this time I think he
was beginning to open up to new technological possibilities, and Hillergot to him at just the right moment.
P
RITCHETT : I know that it was in 1953 at the University of Illinois that
Cage put on one of the ﬁrst concerts of electronic music in the country.
Tape pieces by Boulez and Cage were played, including the ones thatwere part of the project called Music for Magnetic Tape that resulted in Williams Mix. So I think Cage may have had a long-standing relation-
ship with the University of Illinois. Did you learn about him when youwere there?
T
ENNEY : No, I had met Cage in 1954 when I was a student at Juilliard.
My roommate was Stan Brakhage, the ﬁlmmaker; I had done the mu-
sic for his ﬁrst ﬁlm. His third or fourth ﬁlm, called In Between, used some
of Cage’ s Sonatas and Interludes as soundtrack, and he wanted to get
Cage’ s permission —he had put the music on the ﬁlm without actually
getting permission. So he called Cage and made an appointment to meetwith him, and I tagged along. We met at a little bar down in the Village,and Cage bought us a beer. This was in 1954, and I’ll never forget whatCage said: “You know, I’m into something else now. I am no longer in-terested in the Sonatas and Interludes or any of my music from that pe-
riod. You can do what you want with it. ” It was like he was washing his
CAGE AND THE COMPUTER
201 hands of all that earlier music. He had no proprietary feelings about it.
(Incidentally, a little clip from In Between was shown in the MOCA ex-
hibit Rolywholyover. When you hear Sonatas and Interludes there, it’ s from
Stan’s ﬁlm.)
AUDIENCE QUESTION FOR ANDREW CULVER : When you talked about
the Musicfor program, you said that there was only one thing left forCage to do, and I didn ’t hear you say what it was.
C
ULVER : The program outputs something called the “special column. ”
Either it is empty or it has an asterisk. If it has an asterisk, it was up toJohn to devise something for the player to do that was special, unusual,depending on the instrument. For a string instrument, he might comeup with little glissandi, for instance.
P
RITCHETT : Since Cage wasn ’t much of a hands-on technologist, to what
degree was he insulated from the changes that technology could have
made in his composing?
CULVER : I think John liked to be the ﬁrst person in on a new technol-
ogy rather than the second or later. Perhaps this was a heritage from his
father, the inventor. I ’ll tell you two anecdotes. One day he introduced
me to someone he wanted me to know; he said. “This is Andrew Cul-ver, he understands Buckminster Fuller. ” I said, “John, I never under-
stood Buckminster Fuller. ” I found out that what John meant was that
I could read texts in “Fullerese” and he couldn ’t. He’d trip over the ﬁrst
word, couldn ’t get past it. He just didn ’t want to go with it.
T
ENNEY : But he said many times that he lost interest in things once he
understood them.
CULVER : Well, in this case, he never even got started. The other anec-
dote concerns his father. I gave John this little stopwatch, which I had
bought at Radio Shack. I told him I thought it was the ultimate musi-cian’s stopwatch. He took me up on it, but he used it more for cooking,
of course.
I showed him how it worked: “Look, John, it has this amazing little
thing on the back which can hold it in place in three different ways: it ’s
a clip, so you can clip it to your pocket or your music stand; it ’s got a
magnet on it, so you can stick it on your refrigerator or something else;and it’ s got this little bar that you can ﬂip down and then you can put it
on a table. ” John is sitting there, looking at this thing, investigating all
three ways, and now he wanted to get the clip ﬂat again. He’ s holding
onto it with his ﬁngers —you remember the big post-arthritic ﬁngers —
and trying to push this little thing in there and get his ﬁngers out before
it closes on them. I say, “Oh here, John, just turn it upside down and let
gravity do it, ” and he answers, “That’ s something my father would have
said!” I took that to mean that he wasn ’t interested in gravity, never got
into it, because his father had talked about gravity.
This may be exactly what we mean when we say he wasn ’t interested
in technology. He saw something that was already there, and he wasn ’t
going to explore it. It was something human beings had made, and so
he didn ’t want to devote himself to its exploration.
TENNEY : Doesn ’t this connect also to what he used to say about 100 per-
cent unemployment? He wanted the computer and you to do the work,which left him free to ﬁnd other challenges. That’ s exactly what his eco-
nomic arguments meant when they talked about what automation isgoing to do for us.
W
HITE: Certainly I have always felt that I was working against the tech-
nology to some extent, and I too feel a desire to get closer to natural
sounds. For me and for every composer that I have talked to who hasworked with computer music, a strange thing occurs that affects theway you think about writing for acoustic instruments as well. I have got-ten used to the idea of making sounds by hand, and with it comes a per-sonal involvement with the sounds; I have tried to bring that to my writ-ing for instruments. I can ’t even imagine what it was for Cage not to be
involved on that level, not to have had hands-on experience. I do knowthat the whole Essay project would not have happened the way it did 
if before proposing the piece he had sat down at a computer and exper-imented with the speech synthesis programs and such. I really don ’t
think the project would have taken the path it did. So I de ﬁnitely think
that the fact he didn ’t work with it affected the piece.
A
UDIENCE QUESTION FOR ANDREW CULVER : Concerning the computer
version of the I Ching coin oracle, how did it compare with the origi-
nal? How does it differ from just generating random numbers? Also, wasthere any special care given to your brand of number generator, and didCage care about that?
C
ULVER : There was a great deal of care on my part, but John couldn ’t
have cared less, didn ’t want to know about it really. There was a pseudo-
random number generator down at the bottom of it that has been
through several generations. I ran across something in a magazine —
chi-square tests on random number generators and such. The one that ’s
in there now is a deck-shuf ﬂing scheme. The dirty little random num-
ber generator down at the bottom is used to stack a bunch of decks,which are shuf ﬂed. The cards are read to a point, and if a certain event
occurs, that whole shuf ﬂe is thrown out and done again. All this is used
to produce a zero or a one, a head or a tail. From then on it’ s strictly the
I Ching. So three times you get a head or a tail, add it up to get a brokenor solid line, or a changing broken or changing solid line. That ’s done sixPRITCHETT, TENNEY, CULVER, AND WHITE
202
times. You get a hexagram, you look at it. If there’ s a changing hexa-
gram, that’ s what you ﬁnd.
AUDIENCE COMMENT : So those numbers aren ’t random in the same
sense . . .
CULVER : . . . as the random number generator underneath it all? Right.
TENNEY : Just a different distribution of random numbers. They are
pseudo-random. You can regenerate the same sequence if you want.C
ULVER : There is one more difference. With the I Ching not only do you
produce a string of numbers, but more often than not, because there is
a changing line involved, you generate one more number hanging offone of those numbers. Let’ s say ten numbers come up. That’ s not ten
numbers out of the random number generator. It might really be sixnumbers of which the ﬁrst, third, fourth, and second are changing. Youhave a changing hexagram hanging on to it.
A
UDIENCE COMMENT : When you ﬂip coins there very often tend to be
streaks, but depending on your random number generator, you may have
more variety and a greater tendency toward streaks. Some may have dif-ferent ﬂavors of number generators.
C
ULVER : There are deﬁnitely different ﬂavors to the different uses of this
whole package of algorithms. One time you ask for a number from 1 to
33, and you ask for it again immediately and the second group is differ-ent from the ﬁrst. Whether that can be traced back to the random num-ber generator or not I don ’t know. I hope it can ’t be because that’ s why
I went to all the trouble to ﬁnd a good one.
A
UDIENCE QUESTION : Did it have a noise source in it?
CULVER : No. Way down at the bottom is a random function.
AUDIENCE QUESTION : Are you against using random numbers per se?
CULVER : I think it is like standing on a bridge and facing in one direc-
tion or the other. If you are concerned about the randomness of your
music, say, the way the music sounds, you are standing on the bridge,with the generator behind you, looking over at the other side of the river,which is where the results are. But John was doing the opposite. He hadhis back to the results and was looking at what was coming out of the I Ching. Does that make any sense? I think that the reason he didn ’t like
the term “randomness” or “stochastic” was because he felt it describedthe results rather than indicating what he was up to when he was doingit. He liked to use chance operations because it emphasized that he was
asking questions.
A
UDIENCE COMMENT : I thought that what was crucial were the uneven
probabilities.CAGE AND THE COMPUTER
203
CULVER : He was excited about that. He’d sometimes jump up and down,
saying “Oh look at all those! ”
AUDIENCE QUESTION : Why did he like unequal probabilities more than
equal probabilities?
CULVER : You know he also invented this little thing called “bias. ” Any-
one who has used IC knows that it has a bias ﬂag. Aminus Bafter all
your other input produces a biased output. What does the bias do? We
talked about the random number generator becoming the I Ching. The
output of that is numbers 1 to 64. Then there is another layer where yourelate the numbers to the number range of the questioner; it might be33 to 62. It’ s different from 1 to 64. The way we did it was to use the
“mail slot” concept: we had sixty-four slots and we needed thirty-twoslots, so we took the ﬁrst two and put them into slot one. Then 3 and 4
go into slot two. But if you want a bias, then the program will ask for anumber from 1 to 64 and make dividing points by chance. It will ask it-self to make a chance redistribution of the sixty-four slots.
P
RITCHETT : Which was a process that he had developed early on. Music
for Piano of 1952 uses just such a process, in which the notes are supposed
to be muted or plucked or normally struck, and the way you decide,
which is to divide the sixty-four into three, would be ﬁrst to toss two
numbers with that being the division point. So if the numbers are 2 and6, there are two very rare possibilities, and then anything from 6 to 64 up.The points are randomly chosen. Then perhaps another number will de-termine how often the distribution is to be used; for a while you ’d have
a certain ﬂavor of bias for so many notes and then go on to the next.
For me this raises the issue of the degree to which the computer made
a difference, if any at all, in John ’s work. I remember seeing manuscript
pages of long division that Cage was forced to do to get those fractionsof seconds. I mean, we might have had a panel of “Cage and the Calcu-lator. ” I was trying to express the same idea by talking about technol-
ogy changing what we do. What is involved seems to be largely reimple-menting existing processes. The computer inﬂuenced him by relievinghim of having to think about the earlier implementations anymore.
C
ULVER : Which gave him time to think about something else, not nec-
essarily something he’d planned but by necessity something else. One
day he told me, “I have never wasted my time. ”
AUDIENCE QUESTION : Did Cage ever mention or discuss the main differ-
ence between the IC computer program and ﬂipping a coin, which wasthe pseudo aspect of it? Did he ever want the program to be able to re-peat stuff?
C
ULVER : No, he never asked for stuff to be repeatable. Well, actually
what happened was that as we moved from the 8086 to the 286 and thePRITCHETT, TENNEY, CULVER, AND WHITE
204
CAGE AND THE COMPUTER
205 486 computer. I discovered I was getting the same “seed” over and over
again because it was running so much faster and not enough time had
elapsed. And that was the day I looked down at a page of ones and twosand saw to my horror that starting with the ﬁfty-eighth item it was re-peating what had started with the ﬁrst one.
A
UDIENCE COMMENT : In one part of Empty Words there occurs a repeti-
tion of a large text segment, which resulted from a computer error that
Cage decided not to correct. Maybe this happened more than once.
ANOTHER COMMENT FROM AUDIENCE : I am interested in asking the
panel generally about how, if at all, the computer inspired any new
technique or new method.
WHITE: I feel strongly that the way he used the computer was to im-
plement more easily what he was already doing. I don ’t believe that it
changed what he was doing.
CULVER : But the example of Essay itself says exactly the opposite. For 
instance, Essay is the only sound installation that I know of that ever
toured galleries and was installed for months on end as a sound installa-
tion of John ’s. And this came about because somebody had told him that
there was a computer program capable of stretching or compressing his voice without changing the pitch; that ’s when he called up Charles
Dodge to see if it was true. And Charles said, “Yes, we can do it. ” Cage
wasn ’t intending to make an installation; it could never have come about
without the technology.
W
HITE: That’ s right. But it does seem to me that this is primarily the tra-
jectory of an individual piece. True, he could not have predicted this 
trajectory, but as for his work in general I don ’t think of Essay as having
changed it.
PRITCHETT : As the ﬂip side of this I would ask, How many of his num-
ber pieces are there that differ from one another but for which the tech-
nique is conceptually, essentially, the same? Or take Musicfor, which isone program that still could be generating pieces.
T
ENNEY : And when you increase quantity beyond a certain number 
of orders of magnitude, you get a different quality. For example, would
Cage have lived long enough to have realized Europeras if he’d had to 
do it the old way? I don ’t think so. The technology made possible some
large-scale projects that he otherwise would never have thought of em-barking on.
P
RITCHETT : Such as “writings through ” that became more and more
elaborate.T
ENNEY : A relevant personal experience may explain my position. I re-
member ﬂying over Arizona and seeing all the land forms and realizing
that, if I were down there on the ground, I wouldn ’t be able to see these
incredible land forms. And I thought, “That’ s what working with a com-
puter is like!” It gives you the possibility of distance. You can all at once
take in this large thing that you couldn ’t take in without the technology.
Instead, you’d be involved in details.
AUDIENCE COMMENT : But the advantages his chance operations actu-
ally gained from technology are hard to specify.P
RITCHETT : Maybe that’ s why he left that one thing to be done by hand.
I say this partially in humor, but it may be true. It is true when you think
about a program’ s being a composition that has all these various real-
izations. You could do something like the trombone piece; just say, “Do
something special. ” In fact, I myself did something of this sort with some
pieces that were never intended for such treatment. In doing researchon some pieces from the 1950s, I tried to reconstruct what the systemswere and thereby discovered that Cage was perhaps the ﬁrst algorithmiccomposer. He was so systematic that you could look at his leftover papers and reconstruct how a piece was made. And to make sure that Ihad reconstructed it correctly, I would go ahead and do the piece; thiswas very educational. I strongly recommend doing this sort of thing. Tolearn what it’ s like to compose such a piece, just sit down and start
working it through. You’ll ﬁnd out how laborious and tedious it is. And
I had a calculator, too. Even in a ﬁnished piece there is always a level at
which decisions still have to be made. John always left decisions, ques-tions to answer, and judgment calls like the special codes.
A
UDIENCE QUESTION : You said that at some point Cage had stopped be-
ing devoted to throwing coins and was focusing on other aspects. What
were these aspects?
CULVER : Well, it depends on the period, but the example I gave was the
automation of mesostic-making. Concurrent with that seemed to be the
arrival of the laborious drawings. Cage quite simply went from the labo-riousness of making mesostics to the laboriousness of making his draw-ings. A laborious process was chosen on purpose, I am sure; from thestart he could have made it easier.
A
UDIENCE COMMENT : But he kept on making mesostics. It became eas-
ier for him to do more.C
ULVER : Yes, but since the dif ﬁculty was removed from mesostic-
making, he found it elsewhere.A
UDIENCE QUESTION : Did he perhaps put some of that extra energy into
the performance of the mesostics?C
ULVER : I’m not sure about that. I think the need to perform was life-
long, and it ended up in the mesostics because, as I’ve said, his handsPRITCHETT, TENNEY, CULVER, AND WHITE
206
and the rest of his body made piano and percussion performance im-
possible. Then the need to do Europeras ruled out electronics, that is 
to say, touring with Merce and David. So by process of elimination heended up with mesostics, readings as performance.
P
RITCHETT : Let me ask James Tenney: Having written algorithmically
oriented pieces, would you say that your act of composing ended when
the program was designed and ready to roll or, after the piece was ﬁn-
ished, would you have to make changes with it or reserve the right tochange what it would be?
T
ENNEY : Generally, the decisions about instruments and other decisions
that have to be made are compositional decisions. Nobody can just push
a button and turn out a piece. However, someone could make similardecisions; they are not impossible for me to imagine. I ’m wondering if I
should put them in my will.
C
ULVER : A composition doesn ’t change. Take 0/H1103200/H11033. Anybody can do
anything with it; the piece won ’t change if I do something with it differ-
ent than anybody else. The score is still the same.T
ENNEY : I would like to speak to this issue. Until recently I don ’t believe
I have ever used the same computer program for more than two pieces,
even though I wrote a program that could generate a whole series ofpieces. Finally, in the last year or so, I have gotten past this point, maybeemboldened by Cage’ s example. I am now working on what I call a fam-
ily of pieces all generated by the same basic algorithm but with differentkinds of input speciﬁcations that not only are determined by a particu-lar instrumentation but also have to do with the shape of the piece, howit evolves in time.
I am beginning to have new feelings about the work. Even though at
one time I imagined generating a series of pieces by the same algorithm,my ideas about what I want have changed so rapidly that I’ve had towrite a new program. In addition, I sometimes (in fact, quite often)compose in other ways even within the ﬁeld of algorithms. My desirechanges so fast; it doesn ’t last long. In this recent series I felt I was able
to distinguish each member of the family; each had its own personality.
I have developed a certain feeling about John ’s two series, the Music
forand the number pieces. What he was really making was a very gen-
erous gesture to the world at large. All kinds of people wanted him towrite pieces for them, and nobody could dream up new ideas that fast.I think he said to himself, “Well, they want some music from me, and so
I’ll give it to them. ”
P
RITCHETT : I remember going up to John ’s one day and —Andrew, you
were there, talking to John about all the things he had to do before heCAGE AND THE COMPUTER
207
went somewhere. You were laughing about it. Among the items on his
list was, you know, write that orchestra piece. And indeed it got done!
CULVER : Yes, he called Mimi Johnson that day to ask if the tickets were
ready and such. He said to her, “Oh, by the way, I wrote that orchestra
piece. It took twenty minutes. ” And she said, “Oh my god, don ’t tell
them about it. I haven ’t even answered their request. You don ’t have a
contract or anything. ”
PRITCHETT : To be fair, that ’s one of the pieces in which everybody plays
in unison, so there really weren ’t that many notes to be generated. It’ s
a beautiful story, in any event. It seems that by having the whole orches-tra play in unison Cage was trying to make a qualitative difference in thesound that would come from this mysterious place. I recall being veryexcited by that. It was a beautiful sound. The last time I spoke to Cagehe told me about this microtonal music he was working on, trying toﬁnd a way to make the freedom that happened in the time domain inthose pieces happen with pitch and timbre, in all domains. These arethings that no computer is going to redo. These are the sorts of thingsthat went with him.
A
UDIENCE COMMENT : In 1982 Cage was asked if he still enjoyed com-
posing music, and he said no. Then, asked why he was still composing,
he said, “People keep asking me for new pieces. I never want to say no. ”
As you all have suggested, the computer actually helped him to say yesas best he could.
C
ULVER : “Just say no, ” we should have said to him.
WHITE: I know he changed his answer to that question periodically.
Mostly he answered yes, but just at some moments he felt no.P
RITCHETT : He said it in the sixties as well. It’ s one of those statements
that should be taken with heavy grains of salt.A
UDIENCE COMMENT : He gave a reason for it. He said, “I have said
everything I have to say in music, and I would now rather do different
things, ” which is why he began to do more word pieces, radio pieces, in-
stallations, printmaking, and such. He had many outlets rather than be-ing just a composer.
C
ULVER : Before we close, something I ought to tell you is how John de-
cided to buy a computer and how I got involved in helping him learn to
operate it. For years he had been thinking about working with a com-puter, but he kept saying no, no, no. Then, when he was in Banff in No-vember 1983, he met a man who had been teaching photography. Thiswas Hubert Hohn. In his spare time Hugh had begun poking around onApple II computers and discovered that every Apple II has its own thumb-print. He managed to write a program that, before it did anything else,PRITCHETT, TENNEY, CULVER, AND WHITE
208
could print out the initial conditions of all the memory bits, whether they
were zeros or ones. He then printed them all out and stuck the printoutson the wall. You could look at them; you could put the Apple II belowit and say here’ s this computer’ s thumb print. And you ’d look around
the room and see that every computer had its own thumb print. He tookthat to Apple and the engineers couldn ’t believe it. Anyhow Hugh was
telling all this to John, who gets excited and enthusiastic. He found en-joyment in it. He came right back from the trip and called me up. Hesaid, “Now I think I should get a computer, but I don ’t want to operate
it myself, ” and so he asked me to do it. He lined himself up with both
the promise of great enjoyment and the security of escaping the botherof having much to do with it. So I came in, and we went shopping andbought a computer.CAGE AND THE COMPUTER
209
210TEN
Jackson Mac Low
Cage’ s Writings 
up to the Late 1980s
I myself feel more committed
the more diverse and multi-plied my interests and actionsbecome.
Somewhere in Virginia, I lost
my hat.
And so we hesitate before
crossing the great waters.
—John Cage, “Lecture on
Commitment,” A Year from
MondayTo give a complete account of John Cage as
a writer one would have to consider his workas a composer, thinker, mycologist, and un-orthodox Buddhist as well as his other activ-ities, and to show the relation between theseactivities and his writings. The following sur-vey, however, does not deal with all his writ-ings and touches only peripherally and gen-erally upon his work in music and the visualarts or upon his other interests. Instead, Idiscuss a limited number of his writings, certain poems in particular, describing eachas completely as possible. I also examine hisprincipal motivations for writing as he did.
“Cage’ s Writings up to the Late 1980s” is a thoroughly re-
vised and expanded version of an essay entitled “Some-
thing about the Writings of John Cage, ” the ﬁrst version of
which appeared in the catalog Music Sound Language Theater:Etchings from Crown Point Press (Crown Point, 1980). Its ﬁrst
revised version appeared in Writings about John Cage, ed.
Richard Kostelanetz (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan,1993). The last of these earlier versions was revised and ex-panded, after Cage died, for presentation at the Cage con-ference, concert series, and exhibit “Days of Silence” (War-saw, October 1993). That version was further revised andexpanded for the conference “Here Comes Everybody: TheMusic, Poetry, and Art of John Cage” (Oakland, November1995) and again revised, with the addition of several exam-ples, at the end of November 1995. During the ﬁnal stagesof the most recent revision, Anne Tardos gave me invalu-able editorial help and suggestions for improving the text.
What Cage said in a 1979 interview can provide a theoretical ground-
work for the descriptions and interpretations of particular works:
[V]alue judgment . . . [i]s a decision to eliminate from experience certain
things. [Dr. D. T.] Suzuki said Zen wants us to diminish that kind of ac-tivity of the ego and to increase the activity that accepts the rest of crea-tion. And rather than taking the path that is prescribed in the formalpractice of Zen Buddhism itself, namely sitting cross-legged and breath-ing and such things, I decided that my proper discipline was the one towhich I was already committed, namely the making of music. And that Iwould do it with a means that was as strict as sitting cross-legged, namelythe use of chance operations, and the shifting of my responsibility fromthat of making choices to that of asking questions.
1
Cage often called the use of chance operations and the composition of
works indeterminate as to performance “skillful means” (Sanskrit: upaya,
a Buddhist term for means employed by Bodhisattvas to help all sentient
beings attain enlightenment). I think he viewed the experiences of com-posing, performing, and hearing such works as being equally conduciveto the arousal of prajña —intuitive wisdom/energy, the essence/seed of
the enlightened state —by allowing the experience of sounds as per-
ceived in themselves, “in their suchness, ” rather than as means of com-
munication, expression, or emotional arousal or as subordinate elementsin a structure.
These considerations are as relevant to his writing as to his music —
especially to the poems he wrote from 1967 to 1992, most of which arealogical and “asyntactical” collage word-strings of language elements:letters (which Cage seemed not to distinguish from phonemes), syllables,words, phrases, and/or sentences. By “asyntactical” (Cage often usedthe term “nonsyntactical”), I mean that these strings are ones “depart-ing from conventional [normative] syntax”— freed from “the arrange-
ment of an army, ” which Norman O. Brown told him was the original
meaning of “syntax, ” derived from the Greek word su vntaxi~. Such
“asyntacticality” rendered (or was meant to render) the component lin-guistic units, like the sounds in the music he wrote after 1950, perceiv-able in themselves, as are objects of perception when one regards themwith “bare attention ” during vipas ´yana¯(contemplation leading to in-
sight), the basic form of Buddhist meditation.
There is some question, of course, as to whether any arrangement 
of language elements, no matter how different from normative syntax,CAGE’S WRITINGS UP TO THE LATE 1980s
211
1. Interview with Cage conducted by Bill Womack at the Los Angeles County Museum of
Art, March 27, 1979, Zero3 (1979): 70.
JACKSON MAC LOW
212 doesn ’t in itself constitute a new, non-normative syntax. (For this rea-
son I never use Cage’ s term “nonsyntactical. ”) Some theorists would say
that Cage and others who eschew normative syntax are “evading the
army” by producing their own newsyntaxes, over which the “generals”
have no sway (or, at least, less than they usually do). Nevertheless, such
non-normative syntaxes may well conduce to the reader’ s or listener’ s
giving words, phrases, phonemes, and other linguistic elements some-thing approaching “bare attention. ” To utilize a term introduced by Rus-
sian Formalist critics, notably Viktor Shklovskii, non-normative syntaxes“defamiliarize” their linguistic elements, thereby bringing them into theforeground of the reader ’s awareness. “The habitual is ‘made strange’; 
it is presented as if it were seen for the ﬁrst time. ”
2The transition from
this awareness of familiar linguistic elements as “strange” to giving them“bare attention ”is not of course inevitable, but it is certainly possible and
probably does take place for a certain number of readers and listenersfrom time to time.
From 1961 to 1986, Wesleyan University Press published ﬁve substan-
tial volumes of Cage’ s writings: Silence (1961), A Year from Monday (1967),
M: Writings ’67 –’72 (1973), Empty Words: Writings ’73 –’78 (1979), and 
X: Writings ’79 –’82(1983, 1986). Moreover, the University of Tulsa Press
published his ﬁrst Writing through Finnegans Wake as a special supple-
ment to the James Joyce Quarterly (vol. 15) and as number 16 in its Mono-
graph Series (1978), and Cage himself, as a member of the now defunctpublishing co-op Printed Editions, published in 1978 a deluxe edition ofhis ﬁrst two writings through Finnegans Wake.
3In addition, Station Hill
Press published his Themes & Variations (1982). While most of what Cage
wrote before the late 1980s is included in the Wesleyan collections, manyof his writings have also appeared in magazines, anthologies, record bro-chures, and exhibition catalogs, and as forewords to other people’ s books.
Several of his verbal works are available on LP records, audiotapes, andcompact discs.
Cage wrote verbal works from time to time throughout his life, al-
though the earliest work in the Wesleyan volumes, “The Future of Mu-
2. Victor Ehrlich, Russian Formalism: History-Doctrine, 3d ed. (New Haven, Conn.: Yale Uni-
versity Press, 1981), 76. See also 177 and other pages indexed under “Disautomatization vs. au-
tomatism (of perception). ” Formalism was a school of literary scholarship and criticism that
originated in 1915 –16, ﬂourished in the early 1920s, and was suppressed by the Stalin regime
around 1930. It was informally allied with the Cubo-Futurist poets, notably Velimir (orig., Vik-tor Vladimirovich) Khlebnikov (1885 –1922), Alexei Yeliseyevich Khruchenykh (1886 –1970),
and Vladimir Vladimirovich Mayakovsky (1894 –1930).
3. He wrote ﬁve of them, the last two of which, “Writing for the Fourth Time through
Finnegans Wake” and “Muoyce (Writing for the Fifth Time through Finnegans Wake), ” appear
in X: Writings ’79 –’82(Middletown, Conn.: Wesleyan University Press, 1983), 1 –49 and 173 –87,
respectively.
CAGE’S WRITINGS UP TO THE LATE 1980s
213 sic: Credo, ” dates from 1938 –40.4While his principal subject was mu-
sic, of course, especially modern experimental music, he discussed other
music of the past, present, and future as well. And in addition to writ-ing extensively on his own music, he often commented on that of othercomposers, including Earle Brown, Henry Cowell, Morton Feldman,Charles Ives, Erik Satie, Arnold Schoenberg, Karlheinz Stockhausen,James Tenney, Edgard Varèse, Christian Wolff, and myself. He dealt, too,with visual artists such as Marcel Duchamp, Morris Graves, JasperJohns, Joan Miró, Nam June Paik, Robert Rauschenberg, and Mark To-bey; the social and religious thinkers Norman O. Brown, BuckminsterFuller, Marshall McLuhan, D. T. Suzuki, and Henry David Thoreau; anddance and dancers, in particular Merce Cunningham and his choreog-raphy. He also wrote on “something, ” “nothing, ” and mushrooms.
5
Much of his writing consists of elegantly composed expository prose
and skillfully told stories, most of them drawn from his friends ’ lives or
his own. However, the discussion that follows is limited to the writingshe composed by I Ching chance operations, by use of materials originally
composed to generate realizations of indeterminate musical works, by“writing through” certain texts to produce “mesostics, ” and by related
methods. These fall ostensibly into two categories: lectures and poetry,much of it “asyntactical, ” but as we shall see, the categories are really
“not-two. ”
6
The I Ching, or Book of Changes, is a “wisdom book” and one of the 
basic Chinese classics. It is consulted by means of certain chance-operational methods —involving yarrow stalks or coins —in which 
the probabilities of particular answers occurring are not equal. Cage notonly derived from it basic attitudes toward the world and toward ques-tions and answers but also —around 1950 —adapted the coin method of
consulting it to musical composition, and somewhat later, to writing lec-tures, poems, and the like. By “chance operations, ” he meant preemi-
nently ones involving unequal probabilities like those he considered tobe embedded in the somewhat ritualistic methods through which the I Ching is consulted.
7
4. In Silence: Lectures and Writings (Middletown, Conn.: Wesleyan University Press, 1961), 
3–6.
5.“Lecture on Something, ” in Silence, 128–45; “Lecture on Nothing, ” ibid., 108 –15; “Mush-
room Book, ” in M: Writings ’67 –’72 (Middletown, Conn.: Wesleyan University Press, 1973), 
117–83.
6. A Zen Buddhist term often alluded to by D. T. Suzuki and other writers on Zen, “not-two”
implies that polarized aspects of reality, e.g., matter and mind, are neither/both the same nor/
and different.
7. See The I Ching, or Book of Changes, the German translation by Richard Wilhelm rendered
into English by Cary F. Baynes, foreword by C. G. Jung, Bollingen Series 19 (New York: Bollin-gen Foundation and Pantheon Books, 1950). A composer-friend who understands the mathe-
JACKSON MAC LOW
214 In the 1950s and 1960s Cage composed several works for speak-
ers, most of which he called “lectures. ” An early example is “45/H11032 for a
Speaker. ” Here he adapted the numerical rhythmic structure of his
34/H1103246.776/H11033 for Two Pianists, in which the structural units of each piano
part become different in duration through use of a factor obtained by
chance operations.8When he applied the chance factor to the numeri-
cal rhythmic structure of the speech, he obtained 39/H1103216.95/H11033, whichproved to be too short a time for him to perform the speech. After ex-periments he found that forty-ﬁve minutes for the whole, two secondsfor each line, was the shortest practical duration: “Not all the text can be
read comfortably even at this speed, ” he writes, “but one can still try. ”
Material from previously written lectures along with new material,make up this work, and by chance operations he obtained answers to sixquestions that determined all the characteristics of its spoken contentsand silences.
When the poet, potter, and educational author M. C. Richards asked
him “why [he] didn ’t one day give a conventional informative lecture, ”
which she called “the most shocking thing [he] could do, ” Cage replied,
“I don ’t give these lectures to surprise people, but out of a need for 
poetry. ” Then he added: “[P]oetry is not prose simply because poetry is
in one way or another formalized. It is not poetry by reason of its con-tent or ambiguity but by reason of its allowing musical elements (time,sound) to be introduced into the world of words. ”
9
In writing “Where Are We Going? and What Are We Doing? ” for de-
livery by four readers at the Pratt Institute, Brooklyn, in January 1961,Cage used the materials for his Cartridge Music to compose four texts that
are to be heard simultaneously.
10They are divided into lines, twenty-
matics of probability better than I do has informed me that Cage was mistaken: that the proba-
bility that any particular hexagram, or place on one of Cage’ s charts, would be arrived at by the
coin-oracle method, is equal to the probability that any other would. I have not yet been able toinvestigate this matter further.
8.“45/H11032 for a Speaker” can be found in Silence, 146–92. 34/H1103246.776/H11033 for Two Pianists, a piece for
prepared pianos, was commissioned by the Donaueschinger Musiktage in 1954; it ’s also known
as 34/H1103246.776/H11033 for a Pianist.
9.Silence, x. See also M. C. [Mary Caroline] Richards, Centering: In Poetry, Pottery, and the Per-
son(Middletown, Conn.: Wesleyan University Press, 1964); The Crossing Point: Selected Talks and
Writings (Middletown, Conn.: Wesleyan University Press, 1973); and most recently, Imagine In-
venting Yellow: New and Selected Poems of M. C. Richards (Barrytown, N.Y.: Station Hill Press, 1991).
10.“Where Are We Going? and What Are We Doing? ” in Silence, 194–259). Cartridge Music
was composed in 1960. “(A cartridge is an ordinary phonograph pick-up in which customarilya playing needle is inserted.) This is a composition indeterminate of its performance, and theperformance is of actions which are often indeterminate of themselves. Material is supplied,much of it on transparent plastics, which enables a performer to determine a program of actions(causing ampliﬁcation and modiﬁcation of small sounds by insertion, use, and removal of vari-ous objects from a cartridge and production of auxiliary electronic sounds) ” (from Cage ’s note,
in the catalog of his works compiled by Robert Dunn [New York: Henmar Press/C. F. PetersCorp., 1962], 34).
ﬁve of which may be read in one, one and a quarter, or one and a half
minutes, so that the printed relationship between the four texts is onlyone of many possibilities. Empty lines indicate silences. Despite thesepauses, which come at different places in each of the parts, much of thelecture (I was there) was unintelligible because of the simultaneity. Twosentences in one of the texts tell us more about Cage ’s conceptions of
poetry (they are broken as indicated, but so printed that lines of theother three texts, as well as spaces, separate their segments):
We who speak English were so
certain of our language and thatwe could use it to communicatethat we have nearly destroyed its potential for poetry. Thething in it that’ s going to save
the situation is the high percentageof consonants and the natural wayin which they produce discontinuity.
11
These “lectures”— in which discontinuity in the form of silences longer
than punctuational pauses and abrupt shifts in subject matter, tempo of
delivery, and other aspects have been brought about mainly by use ofchance operations and materials for realizing musical compositions inde-terminate as to performance —are really Cage’ s earliest published poems.
In 1967 he began composing two types of works that are avowedly
poems: (1) “asyntactical” sequences of letters, syllables, words, phrases,
and/or sentences drawn from the Journal of the American philoso-
pher and naturalist Henry David Thoreau and arranged by I Chingchance operations; (2) poems in which the capitalized letters of a namerun down the center of each strophe, for which Cage adopted the term“mesostics. ”
12
Many of the latter, for example, “36 Mesostics Re and Not Re Marcel
Duchamp” are haiku-like poems that are normatively syntactical, if of-ten elliptically so, but most of them are “asyntactical, ” or fragmentarily
normative, compilations of phrases, words, and/or word fragments. Alarge group, “62 Mesostics re Merce Cunningham, ” which are both vi-
sual poems and performance texts and comprise over seven hundredtype faces and sizes, was drawn from Merce Cunningham’ sChanges: Notes
on Choreography and other works on dance. A later “mesostic poem, ”
“Writing through the Cantos, ” comprises linguistic strings drawn from
Ezra Pound’ s magnum opus. However, by far the largest number of mes-CAGE’S WRITINGS UP TO THE LATE 1980s
215
11. Silence, 224.
12. The Journal of Henry David Thoreau, edited by B. Torrey and F. H. Allen (New York: Do-
ver, 1962).
JACKSON MAC LOW
216 ostics were drawn from James Joyce’ s Finnegans Wake. I discuss each of
these works below.13
Cage’ s ﬁrst “asyntactical ” poems are the texts of Song Books (Solos 
for Voice 3 –92),which he began in 1967. I quote the ﬁrst three and last
three strophes of the irresistibly beautiful “No. 30, ” which appears in M
as “Song. ”14
Wasps are building
summer squashessaw a ﬁsh hawkwhen I hear this.
Both bushes and trees are thinly leaved
few ripe ones on sandy banksrose right up high in the airlike trick of some pleasant daemon to entertain meand birds are heard singing from fog.
Burst like a stream
making a worldhow large do you think it is, and how far? To my surprise, one
answered three rods.
********************
The ﬁeld plantain, the narrow cotton grass
tobacco pipes still pushing up dry leaveslike the wild cat of the woodspine wood.
I am surprised to ﬁnd these roots with white grubs.One or two ﬂashes of lightning, but soon over
ridge of meadow west of herenaked eye.
Each solo in the Song Books is either “(1) song; (2) song using elec-
tronics; (3) theatre; [or] (4) theatre using electronics” and “is relevant
or irrelevant to the subject, ‘We connect Satie with Thoreau. ’”15Each
13.“36 Mesostics Re and Not Re Marcel Duchamp” and “62 Mesostics re Merce Cun-
ningham, ” in M, 26–34, 4 –211, passim; Cunningham’ s Changes: Notes on Choreography (New
York: Something Else Press, [1965?]) and other works on dance; “Writing through the Cantos, ”
Unmuzzled Ox 23 (1984): 5 –13; X,109–15; James Joyce’ s Finnegans Wake (New York: Viking
Press, 1939).
14. Song Books (Solos for Voice 3 –92)(New York: Henmar Press / C. F. Peters Corp., 1970); 
M,86–91.
15. Empty Words: Writings ’73–’78(Middletown, Conn.: Wesleyan University Press, 1979), 11.
CAGE’S WRITINGS UP TO THE LATE 1980s
217 exempliﬁes one of the twenty-ﬁve possible combinations or single in-
stances of ﬁve linguistic units: letters (presumably any of the pho-nemes —or any English phonemes —each letter may stand for), syllables,
words, phrases, and sentences, all drawn by I Ching chance operations
from Thoreau’ s Journal.
His ﬁrst extensive “asyntactical” text, “Mureau” (1970), includes all
the possibilities and was written “by subjecting all the remarks of . . .Thoreau about music, silence, and sounds he heard that are indexed inthe Dover edition of the Journal to a series of I Ching chance operations.
The personal pronoun was varied according to such operations and thetyping [in a number of different typefaces that often begin or end withina word] was likewise determined. Mureau is the ﬁrst syllable of the
word music followed by the second of the name Thoreau. ”
16
“Mureau” differs signiﬁcantly from the texts in the Song Books in 
that it is a poem to be read, aloud or silently, rather than a text to be, in some sense, sung. Hearing Cage read it aloud on the very ﬁne sixty-
ﬁve-minute S Press tape offers one of his “asyntactical” poetry’ s most ac-
cessible delights.
17As he reads in his calm, precise voice, the sequence
of language elements and silences glides through the listener’ s mind 
as “naturally”— reader, choose your own adverb —as the constantly
changing conﬁgurations of the water in a stream ﬂow between its banks.It is curious how this continuum of discontinuities seems always to bespeaking directly to us. Even the separated and recombined letters func-tion as speech —enigmatic interjections in this stream of language and
silence about silence and sound.
Subsequently (ca. 1973 –75), Cage subjected the whole Journal,
including eventually Thoreau’ s sketches, to I Ching chance operations 
to produce the long four-part poem “Empty Words. ” In this work a 
transition takes place, as Cage says, “from language to music. ” All 
four parts include silences; however, part 1 includes no sentences, butmixes phrases, words, syllables, and letters; part 2 mixes the last three;part 3, the last two; and part 4 includes only letters and silences. Thelanguage elements throughout were not only drawn from the Jour-nalby I Ching chance operations but also placed on the page by them.
Cage also used such operations to answer the question, “Of the fourcolumns on two facing pages which two have text?” and to select andplace the Thoreau drawings, which had been photographed by BabetteMangolte.
18
16. M,ix.
17. S Press Tonband/Tape No. 14 (Hattingen, [West] Germany: Edition S Press, 1972).
18. Empty Words, 65, 33.
Here are the ﬁrst “strophes” (i.e., series of lines before empty lines)
of the four parts of “Empty Words”:
I: notAt evening1
right can see
suited to the morning hour
II: s or past another
thise and on ghth wouldhad
andibullfrogswasina - perhapes blackbus
each f nsglike globe?
III: theAf perchgreathind and ten
IV: ie tha h bath
ic rt
on o19
Cage often performed one or more parts of “Empty Words” sitting
quietly at a small lamplit table with text, stopwatch, and microphone,
emanating an aura of quiet even when he spoke. Mangolte’ s photo-
graphs of Thoreau’ s sketches were often projected beside him.
Thoreau’ s writings, not only his Journal but also Walden and the essay
“Civil Disobedience, ” were the sources of the collage performance text
“Lecture on the Weather, ”composed by means of I Ching chance opera-
tions. The work fulﬁlled a 1975 commission from Richard Coulter of theCanadian Broadcasting Company for “a piece of music to celebrate theAmerican Bicentennial. ” Cage had returned to Thoreau after looking in
vain for “an anthology of American aspirational thought, ” in searching
for which he “began to realize that what is called balance between thebranches of our government is not balance at all: all the branches of ourgovernment are occupied by lawyers. ”
20Cage’ s preface to this work is
his strongest and most direct political statement before the late poemsdealing with anarchism (or “anarchy”). This af ﬁrmation is reinforced 
by his “stating his preference that [the twelve speaker-vocalists and/orspeaker-instrumentalists] be American men who had become Canadiancitizens, ” presumably to avoid being forced to ﬁght the Vietnamese.
21He
writes that although chance operations may seem
counter to the spirit of Thoreau, [who] speaks against blind obedience to
a blundering oracle, [they] are not mysterious sources of “the right an-JACKSON MAC LOW
218
19. Ibid., 12, 34, 52, 66.
20.“Preface to ‘Lecture on the Weather, ’” in Empty Words, 3–4.
21. Ibid., 1.
swers” [but] a means of locating a single one among a multiplicity of an-
swers, and . . . of freeing the ego from its taste and memory, its concernfor proﬁt and power, of silencing the ego so that the rest of the world hasa chance to enter into the ego’ s own experience whether that be outside
or inside. . . .
We would do well [he concludes] to give up the notion that we alone
can keep the world in line, that only we can solve its problems. . . .
Our political structures no longer ﬁt the circumstances of our lives. . . .
I dedicate this work to the U.S.A. that it may become just another part ofthe world, no more, no less.
22
Norman O. Brown suggested to Cage the term “mesostics” to distin-
guish such poems from acrostics, in which a person ’s names or other “in-
dex words” run down one or the other side, rather than the middle of the
verses. Cage’ s earliest mesostics were poems written for friends on vari-
ous occasions, somewhat akin to Mallarmé’ s “Vers de circonstance. ”23
His “ﬁrst mesostic was written as prose to celebrate [the poet and dance
critic] Edwin Denby’ s birthday”:
Present
rEmembering a Day i visited you —seems noW 
as I write that the weather theN was warm —i 
recall nothing we saiD, nothing wE did; eveN so(perhaps Because of that) that visit staYs.
24
“The following ones, each letter of the name being on its own line,
were written as poetry. [As Cage used it, the word “poetry” seems usu-
ally to have denoted verse.] A given letter capitalized does not occur be-
tween it and the preceding capitalized letter [Cage’ s ﬁrst Mesostic Rule,
see below]. ” His earliest extensive group, “36 Mesostics Re and Not Re
Duchamp, ” is normatively syntactical, with either “Marcel” or “Du-
champ” running down the middle of each verse, as in the ﬁrst one:
a utility aMong
swAllows
is theiR
musiC.
thEy produce it mid-air
to avoid coLliding.25CAGE’S WRITINGS UP TO THE LATE 1980s
219
22. Preface, ibid., 5.
23. Oeuvres complétes (Paris: Gallimard, 1945), 81 –186.
24. M,94.
25. Ibid., 26.
It was only when Cage began “62 Mesostics re Merce Cunningham”
that he began to write “asyntactical” mesostics, employing I Ching chance
operations and “writing-through” methods, or as I prefer to term them
when I use such methods, “reading-through text-selection procedures. ”
In these procedures, the writer searches through source texts to ﬁnd,successively, words and/or other linguistic units that have speci ﬁc char-
acteristics —or uses a computer program to conduct the searches. In
writing the Cunningham series, Cage
used over seven hundred different type faces and sizes available in Letra-
set and, of course, subjected them to I Ching chance operations. No line
has more than one word or syllable. Both syllables and words were obtained from Merce Cunningham’ s Changes: Notes on Choreography and
from thirty-two other books most used by Cunningham in relation to hiswork. The words were subjected to a process which brought about insome cases syllable exchange between two or more of them. This processproduced words not to be found in any dictionary but reminiscent ofwords to be found everywhere in James Joyce’ s Finnegans Wake.
26
These poems thus intrinsically anticipated the long series of mesostics
constituting Cage’ s writings through Finnegans Wake.
The “62 Mesostics re Merce Cunningham” not only constitute daz-
zling visual poems that “resemble waterfalls or ideograms”, but havebeen performed by Cage and others, notably the late Egyptian-born vo-calist Demetrios Stratos, who recorded them in 1974.
27
Of the ﬁve writings through Finnegans Wake, all except the last fol-
low Cage’ s principal Mesostic Rule: “[T]he ﬁrst letter of a word or name
is on the ﬁrst line and following it on the ﬁrst line the second letter ofthe word or name is not to be found. (The second letter is on the second
line). ” At Brown ’s suggestion, Cage omitted punctuation marks from
the ﬁrst “Writing through Finnegans Wake, ” but kept the omitted marks
“not in the mesostics but on the pages where they originally appeared,the marks disposed in the space and those other than periods given anorientation by means of I Ching chance operations. ”
28(These marks are
omitted from the example below.) The beginning mesostics of the ﬁrst“Writing through Finnegans Wake” must serve to exemplify the mesos-tics of all of them:JACKSON MAC LOW
220
26. Ibid., x.
27. Ibid.; see Gli anni di Demetrio: Nelle immagini di Giovannetti, Silvia Lelli, e Roberto Masoti [pho-
tographs of Stratos and essays by the photographers, Daniel Charles, and others], ed. Gianni Sassi,
Milano-poesia 1989 (Milan: Cooperativa Nuova Intrapresa / Ente Autonomo Milano Suono /Fondazione Mudima, 1989), 8.
28. Empty Words, 134, 135.
wroth with twone nathandJoe
A
Malt
jhEm
Shen
pftJschute
Of ﬁnnegan
that the humptYhillhead of humself
the knoCk out
in thE park29
“Writing for the Second Time through Finnegans Wake” differs from
the ﬁrst “Writing. ” As Cage explains, “I did not permit the reappearance
of a syllable for a given letter of the name. I distinguished between the
two J’ s and the two E’ s. The syllable ‘just’ could be used twice, once for
the J of James and once for the J of Joyce, since it has neither A nor O after the J. But it could not be used again. To keep from repeating syl-lables, I kept a card index of the ones I had already used. . . . [T]his restriction made a text considerably shorter” than the ﬁrst “writing-
through. ”
30
“Writing for the Third Time through Finnegans Wake” follows a rule
suggested by the late Louis Mink, a professor of philosophy at Wes-leyan University. Between any two letters of a name or other indexword, it does not let either letter appear in any intervening word (here-
after referred to as “Mink’ s Rule. ”) When composing “Writing for the
Fourth Time through Finnegans Wake, ” Cage followed both his Mesos-
tic Rule and Mink ’s Rule; in addition, as he had when composing the 
second “writing-through, ” he kept a syllable index and did not permit
the reappearance of any syllable for a given letter of the name “James
Joyce. ”
31
“Muoyce (Writing for the Fifth Time through Finnegans Wake) ”is not
a series of mesostics, but was composed by means of I Ching chance op-
erations, jumping from chapter to chapter, and is made up of four sec-tions, which comprise, respectively, eight “strophes, ” four, four, and one
“strophe, ” all formatted as narrow, justiﬁed, unpunctuated paragraphs
of very different lengths, which reﬂect, more or less, the proportions ofthe seventeen parts of Finnegans Wake. The “stanza” paragraphs are notCAGE’S WRITINGS UP TO THE LATE 1980s
221
29. Writings through Finnegans Wake (Tulsa: University of Tulsa Press, 1978), unpag., ﬁrst
page of poem.
30. Empty Words, 135–36.
31.“Writing for the Fourth Time through Finnegans Wake,” in X,1–49. As far as I know,
the third “writing-through ” has never been published in a book. But I hope it has.
JACKSON MAC LOW
222 initially indented, though they end with indentations from the right,
and none begins with a capital letter. “Muoyce [Music-Joyce] is with re-
spect to Finnegans Wake what Mureau [Music-Thoreau] was with respect
to the Journal of Henry David Thoreau, though Muoyce . . . does not in-
clude sentences, just phrases, words, syllables, and letters. . . . [P]unc-tuation is entirely omitted and space between words is frequently withthe aid of chance operations eliminated. ”
32
An interesting variant of the writing-through method is found in
“Writing through the Cantos [of Ezra Pound]. ”33In writing this poem,
Cage followed Mink’ s Rule. He also observed the same restrictions on
syllable repetition as he had when composing the third and fourth writ-ings through Finnegans Wake. “Writing through the Cantos” was ﬁrst
published in issue 23 of Michael André’ s magazine Unmuzzled Ox as
“Canto CXXIII. ” This issue was the ﬁrst part of André’ s project “The
Cantos (121 –150) Ezra Pound, ” which appears in issues 23 –25 and in-
cludes “fake Cantos” by many poets, including Cage and myself. These is-
sues are in “tabloid” format, with pages measuring 11
1⁄2by 163⁄4inches,
and Cage’ s “Canto” extends over eight double-column pages and half of
a ﬁnal column. It comprises 344 mesostic strophes (28 on each page),
having “Ezra” and “Pound” alternately down their centers, and a ﬁnal
line with “E” in the center.
In X,however, this poem does not consist of mesostic strophes but of
ﬂush-right lines, each made up of ﬁve or more words: in alternate linesthe letters of “Ezra” and “Pound” are capitalized in the words selectedthrough Mink ’s Rule and the syllable index. (In both this and the ear-
lier format, a small number of other words that accord with Mink ’s Rule
sometimes appear between successive name-letter words.)
Each mesostic strophe of the version published in Unmuzzled Ox has
become a single line in the one published in X; also, the empty lines be-
tween the strophes in the ﬁrst version have been eliminated. As a result,the poem occupies only seven much smaller pages (7 by 8
1⁄4inches) in
X.Below are the ﬁrst two mesostic strophes of the Unmuzzled Ox version
(in which a double space appeared between the ﬁrst two words), fol-lowed by the ﬁrst two lines of the Xversion:
and thEn
with bronZe lance heads
beaRing yet
Arms
32. Ibid., 173. It is not clear whether Cage considered Muoyce “prose” or “poetry. ”
33. Unmuzzled Ox 23 (1984): 5 –13; X, 109–15.
sheeP slain
Of
plUto
stroNg
praiseD
and thEn with bronZe lance heads beaRing yet Arms
sheeP slain Of plUto stroNg praiseD34
As far as I know, this radical change of format between two publi-
cations of a text is unique in Cage ’s poetic oeuvre. Unfortunately, I had
forgotten the earlier mesostic format by the time I saw the version in X,
so it didn ’t occur to me to ask Cage about this change. I can only specu-
late about why he made it. While the second format preserves the mes-
ostic generative structure, it does change the way the poem would beread aloud. I think that most people would read the earlier one, with itsmany short lines and line and strophe breaks, much more slowly anddeliberately, and probably with more breath pauses and longer silences,than in reading the later one. Though the words and capitalized lettersare the same in both formats, the verse is quite different. The more I read
aloud sections of each one, the more I am convinced that they are twodifferent, though verbally identical, poems.
It may be relevant that Cage seemed to be dissatis ﬁed with “Writing
through the Cantos, ” and that he more than once remarked, to my sur-
prise, that he thought that my “Canto” was “better” than his. Mine was
made by applying a “diastic, ”or“spelling-through” text-selection proce-
dure, which in this case selected words and “ends” of words successively
from the source. Each “end” was either the ﬁnal letter of a word or a
string running from any letter except the ﬁrst to the last. These wordsand ends have the letters of Pound ’s name (capitalized) in places corre-
sponding to those they occupy in Pound ’s two names (sometimes I was
forced to go back into a previous word to achieve this correspondence).Unlike Cage’ s “Canto, ” mine was drawn from only the ﬁrst thirty of
Pound’ s Cantos. Later it became the ﬁrst section of a ten-part work, as I
expanded it by applying the procedure to the rest of the Cantos, into the
book-length poem Words nd Ends from Ez.
35
If Cage’ s assessment of his “Canto” was correct, the difference in our
results may have been due to the fact that he was basically much less insympathy with Pound —aesthetically as well as politically —than with
Joyce, Thoreau, and the other authors from whose works he often drew.CAGE’S WRITINGS UP TO THE LATE 1980s
223
34. Unmuzzeled Ox 23 (1984): 5; X, 109.
35. Jackson Mac Low, Words nd Ends from Ez (Bolinas, Calif.: Avenue B, 1989).
On the other hand, while disagreeing profoundly with Pound’ s political
ideas as represented in the Cantos and elsewhere —my ﬁnally voicing
my disagreements in fact ended our ten-year correspondence when 
he was held in St. Elizabeth ’s Federal Hospital for the Insane, in Wash-
ington, D.C.— I still felt sympathetic to him as a poet. His early work es-
pecially had been an inspiration to me, both in high school and later.Like others, notably Robert Duncan, Allen Ginsberg, and Charles Olson,I was able to value his poetry highly, while abhorring his fascism, andby reading and writing through the Cantos as I did, I may have all but
purged the latter from the former —peeling from that great verbal col-
lage most of the fascist montage with which Pound had burdened it.(Charles Bernstein makes this valuable distinction between collage andmontage in his essay “Pound and the Poetry of Today, ” near the end of
which he writes, “At an allegorical level, Words nd Ends [from Ez] exor-
cises the authoritarianism that underlies the Cantos”).
36That I was able
to make this highly problematic and ﬁercely contested distinction be-tween great poet and abysmal political thinker may indeed have helpedto give my poem the qualities that led Cage to like it better than his.
The change of format from the ﬁrst to the second publication of
“Writing through the Cantos, ” then, may have been due in part to
Cage’ s dissatisfaction with the poem. Though he did not want to disown
the poem, he may not have wanted it to occupy a large number of pagesin X.In addition, he may have needed to keep the length of the book
within certain limits, which would have reinforced his choice of the re-duced format.
The “writing-through” methods used in composing the ﬁrst four
writings through the Wake and “Writing through the Cantos” are not
chance operations. For one thing, the inclusion or omission of “wing
words” (single words or strings on either side of a “name-letter word”)in mesostics (and the analogous non-name-letter words in the X version
of “Writing through the Cantos”) was a matter of choice, as long as the
writer obeyed the Mesostic Rule, Mink’ s Rule, or the Syllable Rule.
Cage’ s “tendency was toward more omission rather than less. ” More im-
portant, the name-letter words were already there in the source, wait-ing to be found, even though Cage could not predict them, and he strovefor accuracy: “I read each passage at least three times and once or twiceupside down. ” As he explained, “It is a discipline similar to that of coun-
terpoint in music with a cantus ﬁrmus. ”
37
In 1994, while discussing my acrostic and diastic reading-through
text-selection procedures (developed respectively in 1960 and 1963),JACKSON MAC LOW
224
36. Yale Review 75 (summer 1986): 640.
37. Empty Words, 135, 136; Charles Bernstein, My Way (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1999), 165.
my son, Mordecai-Mark Mac Low, who is an astrophysicist, remarked
that though they are “nonintentional ”—in that I cannot predict to any
extent what will be brought into a text through using them —they are
at the same time “deterministic. ” If followed out to the letter, they must
ﬁnd, and bring into the work being written, the same linguistic units in the source texts each time. However, human errors (and when thesemethods are automated, computer errors) provide an unlooked-for butinevitable element of chance. One can check the work —as Cage did —
many times, but still errors will creep in, and one must eventually ac-cept the ones that have not been found and corrected before a certaintime. This acceptance is the last act in the making of the work; often (inmy experience) it takes place only after the work’ s publication in a book.
Acceptance can only take place if the writer feels that the acciden-
tal departures from the deterministic writing-through procedure do not impair the overall aesthetic value of the work. This requires that thework as a whole be considered more important than the minute detailsof its structure and unerring accordance with its generative procedure.These acts of valuation would seem to be departures from the originalproject. For me, they are ineluctable.
How Cage might have dealt with such departures is something we
can never know unless there is some record of his thoughts on this mat-ter that is as yet unknown. However, what he said to Joan Retallackabout accepting the results of errors in a computer program is relevant.He discovered, while writing the poem “Empty Words, ” that he was get-
ting repetition:
I knew that it was impossible with the process that I was using for a repe-
tition to occur! So, I examined the chance operations I was using and dis-covered that the error lay in the chance operations themselves, hmmm?In other words, in the computer program that made them. So they werenot chance operations “correctly, ” hmmm? They contained repetition,
which is the great no-no with chance operations! (laughter) So what
should I do? I was momentarily nonplussed . . . until I realized that at no point had I wanted . . . that to happen, hmmm? And that now, in dis-covering there was an error implanted, I realized that I had continuallyworked, not intentionally, but non-intentionally. I felt now that I had toaccept the error in the chance operations as part of the “stance of accept-
ingness” that was at the basis of what I was doing. That it was at the ba-
sis, more than the speciﬁc chance operations [that had an error in them].That allowed me to continue with ease, rather than guilt.
38CAGE’S WRITINGS UP TO THE LATE 1980s
225
38. Musicage: Cage Muses on Words, Art, Music, ed. Joan Retallack (Hanover, N.H.: Wesleyan
University Press, University Press of New England, 1995), 140. Cage and Retallack carried on an
intermittent series of conversations from September 6, 1990, through July 30, 1992, thirteendays before his death on August 12.
JACKSON MAC LOW
226 Cage made clear to Retallack that though the result of the error “can
be seen as very beautiful, ” it only altered his frame of mind about repe-
tition “temporarily”: “It was like a disease. ” But more important, I think,
if he had not accepted it in this case, he “would have had to redo every-
thing. ” It seems to me that after a work is published in a book, one is
confronted with a similar situation when ﬁnding a substantial error inthe work itself, that is, not a printer ’s error, even if it is “one’ s own ” and
not an error in a generative computer program.
What writing-through (or reading-through) methods have in com-
mon with chance operations is that both involve a large degree of non-intentionality, “diminish[ing] the value-judg[ing] activity of the ego
and . . . increas[ing] the activity that accepts the rest of creation, ” as
Cage put it.
39Note that he speaks of diminishing the ego ’s value-judging
activity, not doing away with it entirely. What he meant by “the ego”would make the latter impossible.
I think that Cage assumed the Zen Buddhist psychology that consid-
ers all parts of the psyche, including the psychoanalytic “Unconscious, ”
to be “parts” of the individual ego. (Those who write about Zen in En-glish, such as Dr. D. T. Suzuki, use the term “unconscious” as a synonym
for the “no-mind, ” which is not individual but universal.)
40From this
point of view, writers and other artists exercise value judgment whenanycomponents of their minds make choices, even in the course of 
“automatic writing, ” “action painting, ” or other activities supposedly
proceeding in whole or part from the psychoanalytic Unconscious. Proce-
dures operating from any level of the ego, in the Zen sense, I call “in-
tentional”; “nonintentional” refers only to those procedures or com-
ponents of procedures that do not do so. Thus that part of a mesosticwriting-through method that consists in ﬁnding each successive name-
letter word is nonintentional, since the poet does not consciously or“unconsciously ” select the word, but as accurately as possible, ﬁnds it.
Whereas the activity of selecting the wing words in mesostics and theanalogous words between name-letter words in the later version of theCantos poem —deciding which ones to bring into the poems and which
to leave out (with the proviso that each “kept” word is contiguous to, or
part of a string contiguous to, a name-letter word) —is intentional.
41
Thus, when making mesostic poems, Cage had to make valuations for
39. Womack interview, in Zero3: 70.
40. D. T. Suzuki: The Zen Doctrine of No-Mind (London: Rider and Co., 1949), 60, 140 –43; see
also 56 –63, 101, 115.
41. These are not Cage’ s terms or formulations but my own. The exception is “wing words, ”
his term (or if someone else’ s originally, the term he adopted) for the words and strings to the
right and left of name-letter words in mesostics.
CAGE’S WRITINGS UP TO THE LATE 1980s
227 every line. This shows us that, at least in producing these kinds of po-
ems, he was intent upon diminishing, not eradicating, valuation.
As we have seen, Cage often described his way of working as asking
questions and abiding by the answers given to the questions, usually byI Ching chance operations. However, it is clear that a certain degree of
intentionality —perhaps a large one —is involved willy-nilly in the de-
vising of procedures and in the choosing and framing of both the ques-tions and the gamuts of possible answers, as well as in the selection ofsource texts. The point is not whether he ever entirely evaded his indi-vidual ego and its predilections, but that he diminished to some extentthe value-judging activity of the ego that excludes possibilities, and thathe thereby let in, to the same extent, “the rest of creation. ”
I cannot attempt in this short essay to describe all of Cage’ s writ-
ings from the 1950s to the late 1980s, or all the methods used in com-posing them. Instead I shall focus on two works of the early 1980s:“James Joyce, Marcel Duchamp, Erik Satie: An Alphabet” and Themes &Variations.
42
The title of the former work alludes to the fact “that the artists whose
work we live with constitute . . . an alphabet by means of which we spellour lives, ” but it is really “not an alphabet but a fantasy. ” The three art-
ists of the title, now ghosts, made works that “in different ways have re-
sisted the march of understanding and so are as fresh now as when theywere ﬁrst made. ” They made the two kinds of art that Cage liked best:
“art that is incomprehensible (Joyce and Duchamp) and . . . art that istoo nose on your face (Satie). Such artists remain forever useful . . . ineach moment of our daily lives. ”
43
Though Cage in his introduction ﬁrst characterizes the “ Alphabet” as
a “lecture, ” it is actually a play, divided into thirty-seven scenes, involv-
ing, in addition to the three of the title, other “actors . . . mostly people
with whose work [he had] become involved. ” It was produced as a Hör-
spiel at Westdeutscher Rundfunk (WDR, the West German Radio Net-
work) in Cologne, and on stage at the end of WDR ’s second Acustica 
International sound art festival at the Equitable Branch of the WhitneyMuseum of American Art in New York, on April 29, 1990 —a perfor-
mance in which I took part.
44
During the scenes, each ghost is either alone, “in which case he reads
42.“James Joyce, Marcel Duchamp, Erik Satie: An Alphabet, ” X,53–101, and Themes & Vari-
ations (Barrytown, N.Y.: Station Hill Press, 1982).
43. These quotations concerning “An Alphabet” come from its introduction ( X,53–55).
44. The term Hörspiel, “radio play, ” has acquired an extended meaning, “sound-art work, ”
mainly because of the so-called Neue Hörspiel developed and encouraged at Westdeutscher
Rundfunk Köln by the producer and director Klaus Sch öning.
from his own writings, ” or “together with another sentient being or 
beings, ghosts or living, or with a nonsentient being or beings. ” This
schema yields twenty-six possibilities: “the three ghosts alone, each in
combination with one to four different beings, the ghosts in pairs withone to three different beings, [and] all three with one or two. ”Cage “used
the twenty-six letters of the alphabet and [I Ching] chance operations to
locate facing pages of an unabridged dictionary upon which [he] foundthe nonsentient beings that are the stage properties of the variousscenes. ” These scenes constitute a kind of narrative in “Minkian ” mesos-
tics on the names or initials of the three ghosts, among which are inter-spersed ten prose paragraphs, each drawn from the writings of one ofthe ghosts. The mesostic “narrative” gives the “stage directions, ” intro-
ductions of the actors (read in radio and stage productions by a narra-tor), and together with the prose paragraphs, the speeches of the ghostsand other personae.
Themes & Variations is “one text in an ongoing series; to ﬁnd a way of
writing which though coming from ideas is not about them; or is notabout ideas but produces them. ” It is “a chance-determined renga-like
[and ‘asyntactical’] mix” drawn from “ﬁfteen themes” and sixty “varia-
tions” constituting a “library of mesostics on one hundred and ten dif-
ferent subjects and ﬁfteen different names. ”
45The subjects are “one
hundred and ten different ideas which [Cage] listed in the course of acursory examination of [his] books” written before 1979. The ﬁrst andlast ideas on his list are “[n]onintention (the acceptance of silence) lead-ing to nature; renunciation of control; let sounds be sounds ” and “[g]oal
is not to have a goal. ”
The names are those of ﬁfteen men important to Cage in his life and
work, ranging from Norman O. Brown and Marshall McLuhan to Ar-nold Schoenberg and Suzuki Daisetz (Dr. D. T. Suzuki). Each “theme”
and each “variation” (there are four on each name) is a mesostic on oneof the names, derived from three, four, or ﬁve mesostics of equal lengthwritten on the same name and on any of the hundred and ten ideas.
This complexly composed “asyntactical ” text “was written to be spo-
ken aloud. It consists of ﬁve sections, each to take twelve minutes. Thefourth is the fastest and the last one is the slowest. ” The tempo of deliv-
ery is regulated by numbers in the right-hand margins denoting min-utes and fractions of minutes up to 60.00, each carried out to as manyas four decimal places (e.g., 0.244, 10.344, 33.4786, 41.5636), whichindicate how long the reader should take to read the lines betweenJACKSON MAC LOW
228
45. A renga is an extended Japanese poem traditionally written by a group of poets, suc-
cessive lines being written by different poets. These and the following quotations concerning
Themes & Variations come from its twelve-page introduction. (The book is unpaginated.)
them, and thus also how quickly or slowly. “The lines that are to be read
in a single breath are printed singly or together as a stanza [strophe].
These divisions or liaisons were not chance-determined, but were arrivedat by improvisational means. ”At the end of the introduction, Cage offers
as an example “the ﬁrst part of all ﬁve [source mesostics on] 
DA VID TU -
DOR DA VID . . . which were material for the renga but . . . not themselves
the renga, ” followed by “the corresponding parts [i.e., the theme and
variations, some truncated, derived from them] of the ﬁnished mixednonsyntactical [‘asyntactical’] text. ” The ﬁrst part of the ﬁrst Tudor
source mesostic appears below:
we D on ’t know
wh At
we’ll ha Ve
when we f I nish
D oing
wha T we’ re doing
bUt
we know every D etail
Of
p Rocess
we’re involve D in
Aw a y
to lea Ve no traces
noth I ng in between
her D ed ox
The ﬁrst page of the renga itself reads as follows:
it was a J uncture
to go th At way or this
Mo s t
no long E r
doe S n ’t
it is J ust
hOw
of the man Y beneﬁts
C oming to us
n E rvous system
Notice that in the renga, the beginnings and ends of mesostics do not co-incide with those of the renga’ s strophes.CAGE’S WRITINGS UP TO THE LATE 1980s
229
JACKSON MAC LOW
230 What these two remarkable texts, “James Joyce, Marcel Duchamp,
Erik Satie: An Alphabet” and Themes & Variations, have in common —de-
spite the fact that one is, for the most part, normatively syntactical and
even narrative, and the other “asyntactical” (except for its source mes-ostics) and very much fragmented —is their “speakability. ” Compared 
to performers of such typographically and performatively dif ﬁcult po-
ems as “Mureau” and “Empty Words, ” not to mention the Cunningham
mesostics, the actors who perform the “ Alphabet” and the soloist who
speaks Themes aloud are given very clear and easily spoken word strings
to enunciate.
Not that these texts are “easy” to perform! Making the transitions
from character to character and projecting each persona believably is notrivial task for performers of the “ Alphabet. ” And accurately delivering
the exactly timed segments of Themes, while sensitively conveying the
meanings of the words, demands plenty of practice despite such helpfuldirections as “slower ” and “faster” at the beginning of each twelve-
minute segment after the ﬁrst. Nevertheless, Cage’ s relation to the read-
ers, performers, and hearers of these works can credibly be character-ized as “genial. ” As a Zen teacher might put it, they clearly evince the
“grandmotherly kindness” that, often less apparently, underlay and mo-tivated all of Cage’ s work as an artist.
In conclusion, I want to examine certain terms and ideas crucial 
not only to Cage’ s writings but to his work after 1950 in all the arts:
“nonintentionality ” (or “nonintention, ” as he often preferred to term
it), “chance, ” and “indeterminacy. ” Intentions are states of mind that in-
volve commitments to action. They cannot be con ﬂated with desires and
beliefs, even though they may be closely connected with them. Whensomeone intends to do something, they plan to do an action or series of actions conceived of as being within their powers to do. Conversely,the elements of plans are intentions. It may seem paradoxical, then, thatCage, who was uniquely devoted to “nonintention, ” made, at certain
levels of generality, very elaborate plans for each of his works. Theseplans usually were based on minute analyses of the possibilities offeredby the materials works were conceived of as using or comprising, andnot seldom by the speciﬁc persons who would realize the works in per-formances. Even “nonintention ” itself, “opening to the world, ” and “di-
minishing the ego’ s [value-judging] activity” can be seen as intended
goals aimed at by Cage’ s ways of making artworks ( “Goal is not to have
a goal”). Nonintentionality at certain levels was severely constrained byclear intentions at higher (more general) levels.
Similarly, what Cage meant by “chance” and “chance operations” was
not by any means “just anything that came along. ” It was only when he
had clearly delineated (probably in very general terms) what was to en-
ter a work (and what was not to do so) that he employed chance opera-
tions, and those usually of a speciﬁc type: ones wherein (as he believed)the possibilities did not have equal chances of occurring. (It is irrelevantthat he may have been wrong here: that the possibilities of particularoutcomes may actually be equal when I Ching chance operations are
used.) It was only at the levels on which there was a “multiplicity of [ac-ceptable] answers” that he employed chance operations or analogousmeans. Chance was always constrained, to a greater or lesser extent, byhis intentions. (This matter is highly complicated by the fact that it is im-possible to determine exactly at what level(s) he began to ask the ques-tions whose multiplicities of answers were acceptable.)
Even Cage’ s beliefs and desires were not irrelevant to his compo-
sitional intentions. This can most clearly be perceived in his “Lecture on
the Weather” and in very late poems that I have not discussed, which by design are relevant to political ideas that he grouped under the term“anarchism. ” It was at the level where it was a matter of indifference
which statements and ideas about anarchism (among those he found ac-
ceptable) emerged in the poetry that nonintentional means were usedto select among them.
Cage’ s taste also operated in his compositional actions (musical, ver-
bal, and visual) despite his diminishing its effects by using noninten-tional and mixed procedures. (By “mixed procedures” I mean noninten-
tional actions completed by choice, as in the making of mesostics.) Hischoices of source texts, especially the works of Joyce and Thoreau, aresigniﬁcant illustrative cases. In contrast with practices such as mine in1960 and after, when I often drew upon anything I happened to bereading, Cage always carefully selected his sources. It is notable thatwhen he drew upon Pound’ s Cantos, a source that must have been much
less congenial to him than others he worked with, he produced a poemthat, as we have seen, did not ﬁnally satisfy him.
Careful analyses of his working methods in all the arts may eventu-
ally show at what points his taste was determinative before or during hisuse of nonintentional procedures. Nevertheless, his methods and his patient perseverance in carrying them through assured that his tastewould be effectively reined in by those procedures.
Finally, “indeterminacy”: compositions “indeterminate as to perfor-
mance, ” or even as to proximate score, are never completely indetermi-
nate, but have a “constrained indeterminateness. ”
46They do not allowCAGE’S WRITINGS UP TO THE LATE 1980s
231
46. I have borrowed this phrase from Stephen K. White’ s discussion of Jürgen Habermas’ s
principles of justice in The Recent Work of J ürgen Habermas: Reason, Justice, and Modernity (Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988), 74.
JACKSON MAC LOW
232 “just anything” to happen in a performance or to be placed in a proxi-
mate score, but only those actions and notations that are prescribed bythe general account or plan given by the composer as being within thework’ s gamut of possibilities. When Cage’ s prescriptions were violated
by performers or audiences, as happened more times than one cares torecall, he often became quite upset. He frequently ascribed such viola-tions to lack of goodwill or to “silliness. ”
These concluding paragraphs are not meant in any way to depreciate
the importance of Cage’ s decision to use chance operations and other
nonintentional procedures. I think he clearly realized the extent towhich his taste and beliefs and even his desires were determinative atcrucial points. (Certainly a person who uttered the words “beautiful”and “beautifully” as often as Cage did understood the extent to which
valuation is inescapable.)
47He knew very well that if he did anything at
all, it would be done by or through his ego. His development of meth-ods that at least diminished the ego’ s dominance did indeed conduce to
“letting in the rest of creation ” and to certain hearers’, viewers’, and per-
formers’ giving “bare attention ” to the audible, visible, and intelligible
elements his works comprise.
What is most remarkable is that his works and the ways in which he
produced them helped him to change his own ego: often he came to see
as beautiful what he had not seen in that way previously. He mentionsthis more than once during his conversations with Joan Retallack, no-tably in an October 1991 conversation:
[When you work with chance operations,] you can then number [the
possibilities] and ask which one you’ re to use. Get the answer, again,
through chance operations, so that if you work with chance operations,you’re basically shifting —from the responsibility to choose, you’ re basi-
cally shifting to the responsibility to ask. (pause) People frequently ask 
me if I’m faithful to the answers, or if I change them because I want to. Idon’t change them because I want to. When I ﬁnd myself at that point,
in the position of someone who would change something —at that point
I don ’t change it. I change myself. It ’s for that reason that I have said that
instead of self-expression, I’m involved in self-alteration.
48
It is now well known that Cage’ s works and ways of working have,
even when misunderstood, inﬂuenced artists in all media. I think he 
felt badly about some unintended side effects of his work and of his ex-planations of his methods and reasons for using them. I ’m sure, how-
47. See Musicage, passim.
48. Ibid, 139.
ever, that at times he appreciated the positive results of some “fruitful
misunderstandings. ”
Eventually he looked with equanimity upon some unintended con-
sequences of his inﬂuence that seemed to him less fruitful or even de-plorable. For instance, he remarked to me that he forgave the putativefounder of an art movement who, along with some (but by no means all)of its adherents, had been, in his estimation, negatively inﬂuenced bymisunderstandings of his practice —“now that the poor man [was] dead. ”
It was at least as true of Cage, who never boasted of it, as of Whitman,
who did, that he “contained multitudes. ” Unlike Whitman, however, 
he endeavored to be consistent rather than contradicting himself, and toprovide a rationale and a theorized transition for each of the manychanges that over time inevitably occurred in his ways of working andin his works.
For many years to come, John Cage and his works, despite innumer-
able misunderstandings of them and reactions against them, will con-tinue to help artists in every ﬁeld to ﬁnd their own ways to make new,
enlivening kinds of art and to bring about the interpenetration of artand life.CAGE’S WRITINGS UP TO THE LATE 1980s
233
234ELEVEN
Constance Lewallen
Cage and the 
Structure of Chance
Remarkably, John Cage was regarded by
many as the enfant terrible of the avant-garde right up to his death in 1992 at the age of seventy-nine. This view was espe-cially unjustiﬁed since, no matter how dis-concerted audiences may have been by hisunconventional lecture-demonstrations ormusical works arrived at by chance opera-tions, he never set out to shock; rather, hespent the last ﬁfty years of his life approach-ing calmness.
Cage’ s most innovative and provocative
musical concept was that music cannot beseparated from all other sounds. In otherwords, he agreed with Thoreau, whose in-ﬂuence on him was long-standing and pro-found, in believing that music is a continu-ous presence in the environment, that onlylistening is intermittent. Extending this ideato visual art, Cage said, “art is everywhere;it’s only seeing which stops now and then. ”
1
From 1978 until his death in 1992, Cage
devoted a good deal of time to the creationof visual artworks, especially in the medium
1.“John Cage: An Interview by Robin White, ” View 1,
no. 1 (April 1978): 6.
of intaglio printing. Since Cage, of course, was known as a composer
and thinker, not as a visual artist, Kathan Brown took a leap of faith ininviting him to make prints at her etching studio Crown Point Press in1978. But Brown ’s faith was grounded in her knowledge both of Cage’ s
considerable inﬂuence on many visual artists, including Jasper Johnsand Robert Rauschenberg, and of his receptivity to the ideas gener-ated by artists from Marcel Duchamp to Mark Tobey. (It should be notedhere that as a very young man Cage was equally attracted by music andpainting, only giving up the latter at the insistence of his teacher ArnoldSchoenberg.) Cage had also participated in the activities of Fluxus, a dis-parate group of unconventional, international artists, poets, composers,and performers who shared a desire to widen the boundaries of art. Sev-eral future Fluxus members (George Brecht, Al Hansen, Dick Higgins,Toshi Ichiyanagi, and Allan Kaprow) had been Cage’ s students at the
New School in New York, where Cage taught a dialectical class in thecomposition of experimental music in the late 1950s.
Cage accepted Brown ’s invitation, later confessing that he had re-
solved not to refuse such intriguing offers, since, after once having de-clined an invitation to trek in the Himalayas, he did not get a secondchance. He returned to Crown Point Press nearly every year until hisdeath, and from 1988 he also tried his hand at watercolor painting andpaper making.
Not surprisingly, Cage’ s ﬁrst project in etching, Score without Parts 
(40 Drawings by Thoreau): Twelve Haiku, was based on the score of one 
of his musical compositions (plate 1). In Score without Parts, he replaced
conventional music notes with graphic notations in the form of pho-tographic reproductions of sketches from Thoreau’ s journal, showing
leaves, insects, and other observations from nature. In these and all hissubsequent prints and watercolors, as in his musical compositions, Cagearrived at decisions by chance operations derived from the I Ching. Tra-
ditionally one receives answers from the I Ching by tossing coins to ob-
tain combinations that refer to one of the sixty-four possible symbols orhexagrams the oracle contains. In 1969 Cage began using a computerprogram simulation of the I Ching, which facilitated the procedure of
translating the hexagrams into their numerical equivalents. He was lessinterested in the I Ching as a book of wisdom than as a mechanism of
chance operation that produces random numbers from 1 to 64.
Cage’ s complete ﬁdelity to chance operations is both the most widely
known and the most misunderstood aspect of his methods —misunder-
stood because it is often mistakenly believed that Cage used chance toavoid making choices. But, as he said, “[M]y choices consist in choosing
what questions to ask. ” (From the time he ﬁrst used the I Ching in theCAGE AND THE STRUCTURE OF CHANCE
235
1950s, the creation of his works in all media began by way of questions
rather than answers.)2In starting a project, Cage set certain parameters.
These might be the size and type of the paper, the palette from whichthe colors would be derived, and so on. The technical and proceduraldecisions were then made with the aid of the computer charts, and theimages that resulted were a record of the answers given by chance operations. Cage used chance as a discipline (in the sense of “giving
yourself rather than expecting things to give themselves to you ”) to cir-
cumvent personal taste and memory so that he would be more open tooutside experiences. As he so modestly put it to me once when I askedhim why he used chance in creating his prints, “It enables me to draw a
line without embarrassment. ”
3
Several of Cage’ s prints and watercolor paintings relate directly to the
ﬁfteenth-century Zen-style garden Ryoan-ji in Kyoto, Japan. His engage-ment with Zen Buddhism began in the late 1940s, included his atten-dance at Daisetz Suzuki’ s lectures at Columbia University, and remained
central to his endeavors from that time on. The ultimate development ofthe dry landscape garden as abstract representation of nature, Ryoan-jiis a 360-yard rectangular plane of gravel raked, to resemble water, withﬁfteen rough stones placed upon it. The garden inspired Cage ’s 1985 se-
ries of thirteen drypoint prints titled Ryoku, a conﬂation of Ryoan-ji and
haiku.
4(Drypoint is a form of intaglio printing in which the artist makes
a line by scratching into a copper plate with a needle. As the artist in-cises the line into the copper, a burr is raised on either side. The line andthe burrs hold the ink during printing, producing a soft, variable line.)
Cage began each of his print projects with an intricate “score” based
on the I Ching, using the same methodology he would in composing mu-
sic. Just as in musical composition the score guides the musicians, tellsthem what notes to play, and when, how loud, and how long to playthem, the score for a Cage etching project similarly provided the guide-lines for the printers.
Cage used ﬁfteen stones (to correspond to the ﬁfteen rocks in Ryoan-
ji) and seventy-ﬁve small copper plates, ﬁve for each stone. The printers
cut the plates, in the shape of triangles and tetrahedrons, from discardedend pieces of copper. Cage determined where the cuts would be madeby chance operations. Next Cage arranged the plates into ﬁfteen sets(ﬁve plates, numbered 1 to 5, for each of the ﬁfteen stones). Addition-CONSTANCE LEWALLEN
236
2. Ibid., 5; see also Joan Retallack, “Poetics of a Complex Realism, ” in John Cage: Composed 
in America, ed. Marjorie Perloff and Charles Junkerman (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1994), 268.
3. David Revill, The Roaring Silence: John Cage, a Life (New York: Arcade, 1992), 117; Cage in
conversation with the author, January 1991.
4. Printed by Marcia Bartholme with the assistance of Peter Pettengill, Crown Point Press.
ally, each plate was assigned a number from 1 to 15 to denote the stone
that was traced on it. For each of the thirteen planned prints, the platesto be used, ﬁfteen in all, were drawn from the entire pool of seventy-ﬁve, so that a particular tracing might appear more than once in thesame image. Some of the plates were used more times than others, andtwo were never printed at all.
Cage had gathered the stones from all over the world and had used
several in an earlier print project. For Ryoku he determined by chance
that each stone would be traced ﬁve times using the drypoint technique,
that there would be a single tracing of a stone on a piece of copper, and that the stone had to ﬁt entirely on each plate. After the plates werecut, Cage paired the plates with stones as he wished —as long as the
stone ﬁt entirely onto the plate. Each stone had a front side and back
and was always drawn in the same orientation.
Before printing, Cage outlined the plates with graphite on transpar-
ent sheets of paper in the order in which they were to be printed. Eachsheet in the map set corresponded to a run through the etching press.The outlined shapes bear a large number in the middle with superscriptnumber and another encircled number to the right. The large numberfrom 1 to 15 refers to which stone in the set of ﬁfteen was used; the su-perscript number from 1 to 5 refers to which plate of that stone; the en-circled number from 1 to 10 identiﬁes the color.
Cage conﬁned the placement of the plates during printing to an imag-
inary rectangle (proportioned like Ryoan-ji) situated in the lower half ofthe sheet of paper. Cage determined by chance operations that the im-age would be placed inside an imaginary rectangle 5
3⁄4by 18 inches sit-
uated 33⁄8inches from the bottom and sides of the paper and that the
rectangle would sit on the lower half of a 24-by-18-inch sheet of hand-made Farnsworth paper. Although each tracing had to fall within therectangle, the end or edges of the plates could fall outside its borders.This explains the impressions one can see extending above the imagi-nary horizon line. The printers positioned all the plates within the gridto see which ones would extend beyond the edges of the paper. SinceCage did not want this extension to occur, he instructed the printers tocut these according to chance operations but within sets of marks whichwere about the width of the 3
3⁄8-inch margin area.
Cage again consulted the I Ching to determine how to combine seven-
teen (for the seventeen syllables in a haiku) earth and mineral pigmentsthat made ten colors —yellows, greens, browns, and violets —and to se-
lect which of those colors he would use for each stone. The pigmentswere mixed to make ten colors (the number was chance-determined).Each color is the combination of two pigments; one color, cobalt greendeep, came up mixed with itself, so it was the only pure pigment used.CAGE AND THE STRUCTURE OF CHANCE
237
Not all the colors appear on all the prints. Because some of the earth col-
ors are gritty, they left small scratches on the copper plate as the print-ers wiped it. These scratches held some ink and, when printed, createda light tone on the print over the whole plate area. This is especially trueof the cobalt green and some of the browns.
On the second day of working, Cage was still trying to resolve the ﬁ-
nal composition. He considered doing combinations of images printedone on top of the other and asked the printers to print a combination of Ryoku No. 1 and Ryoku No. 2 —a total of thirty impressions. When he
compared the proof to No. 2 printed alone (with ﬁfteen impressions), he
felt that individual sets of ﬁfteen tracings were more “lyrical, ” the trac-
ings more apparent, and the repetition of tracings, when it occurred,was “very pleasing and easier to notice” than in the combination work-
ing proof. So he decided to continue with single sets of ﬁfteen rock trac-
ings and a total of thirteen prints as he had originally determined. Thisis only one of many examples of how Cage remained ﬂexible rather than
shackled by his self-devised systems.
The thirteen Ryoku drypoints are abstract works that combine em-
bossed straight lines and sharp angles of the plates with ﬁne, delicate,sometimes tentative, irregular earth-colored lines. The earth colors, theorganic forms and their placement below an imaginary horizon line, theplate impressions that extend into the space above the invisible horizonline like craggy mountain peaks —all suggest but do not represent land-
scape. As Cage said repeatedly, he wished his art to be in the spirit of 
nature. Each of the thirteen prints has a different but always nonhier-archical arrangement of elements. For instance, in some of the printsthe forms are more clustered, in others they are more evenly spreadacross the page; in all, the drawn lines and plate marks link together andoverlap harmoniously in what are among Cage’ s most elegant and deli-
cate works.
Cage subsequently used Ryoan-ji as a musical compositional device,
and in 1988 and 1990 he continued his involvement with the Japanesegarden at the Mountain Lake Workshop of the Virginia Tech Foundationin Blacksburg, Virginia, where he accepted the invitation of the direc-tor, Ray Kass, to make watercolors. Cage again used stones as templates,this time painting around them with feathers and then with brushesdipped in watercolor paint. He had always resisted using a brush before,believing the results would be too re ﬂective of his personal touch. When
asked if he was now allowing gesture into his work, he said he was, withthe following caveat: “On the other hand, this is a very circumscribedgesture, because it has the support of the stone. ”
5CONSTANCE LEWALLEN
238
5. Interview by Vincent Katz, Printcollectors Newsletter 20 (January/February 1990): 109.
When he returned to Crown Point Press in 1989, Cage built on his
experience with watercolor painting and employed brushes to paint
around stones, creating his two largest (54 by 41 inches) and most color-ful prints, 75 Stones and The Missing Stone.
6Two plates of slightly differ-
ent dimensions were printed at once to create these large works, whichtherefore contain diptych plate marks; in The Missing Stone the larger
panel is on bottom and the smaller on top; this is reversed for 75 Stones.
As in the Ryoku series, Cage used ﬁfteen stones in the creation of these
two prints. To correspond with the larger format, however, he used sev-eral much larger stones he had brought from Telluride, Colorado, alongwith the smaller stones used in the Ryoku series. The stones were always
placed on the plate in the same orientation, which makes their repeti-tion easy to recognize.
As at the Mountain Lake Workshop, Cage derived the color palette of
transparent and opaque greens, browns, oranges, grays, and blues fromthe colors in the stones themselves, not, as he had always done in thepast, from chance operations. He cited Ludwig Wittgenstein ’s “Remarks
on Colour” as having suggested to him the idea of communicating colorthrough matching. Cage painted with brushes directly onto the metalplates and used the etching techniques of sugarlift, aquatint, and spitbite. In sugarlift, the artist blocks out a gestural mark on the plate witha sugar and water solution. When an aquatint is laid in the area, it yieldsan even, hard-edged tone (ﬁg. 11.1). In spit bite, the artist paints withacid directly on the plate and the resulting swaths of color are modulatedand soft-edged.
In 75 Stones, Cage layered ﬁve different arrangements of ﬁfteen stone
tracings (plate 2). In comparison, The Missing Stone, which contains a sin-
gle layer of fourteen tracings, is spare and contains few overlapping con-tours (ﬁg. 11.2). Whereas in the Ryoku drypoints the drawing is linear
and ﬁne, in the two etchings the tracing simulates a brush stroke, which
at times is thick and gestural. Before printing, the printers “smoked” thepaper. Cage and the Crown Point Press printers had developed the tech-nique of smoking in 1985 for the purpose of creating atmospheric ef-fects. The printers ignited a wad of newspapers and suffocated the ﬂames
with the dampened printing paper, which then bore the traces of thesmoke. When this technique is used, no two prints within an edition areidentical as each has its unique pattern of smoke residue.
Both 75 Stones and The Missing Stone are characterized by colorful,
broad, irregularly shaped silhouettes, at times overlapping, dancingacross the lightly smoked page. In 75 Stones, Cage decided beforehand toCAGE AND THE STRUCTURE OF CHANCE
239
6. Printed by Pamla Paulson with the assistance of Lawrence Hamlin and Renée Bott, Crown
Point Press.
FIGURE 11.1
Seven Day Diary (Not Knowing), 1978, Day 6 from a portfolio of seven hard- and soft-ground etchings with drypoint, sugarlift
aquatint, and photoetching, 12 /H1100317 in., Edition 25. Published by Crown Point Press, printed by Stephen Thomas.

repeat the process of placing and tracing ﬁfteen stones until he achieved
a satisfying density of forms, which occurred after ﬁve rounds. In thisinstance Cage allowed himself to make a subjective judgment during theprocess. He said that all his life he had eschewed gesture and aestheticdecision-making, but as time went on he found he could change ideasCAGE AND THE STRUCTURE OF CHANCE
241
FIGURE 11.2
The Missing Stone, 1989, color spit bite and sugarlift aquatints on smoked paper, 54 /H1100341 in.,
Edition 25. Published by Crown Point Press, printed by Pamela Paulson.

he thought were ﬁxed. He liked to quote Margaret Mead, who said,
“Since we live longer, we can change what we do. We can stop what-ever it was we promised we’d always do and do something else. ”
7For
The Missing Stone, Cage limited himself to one set of tracings. He had in-
tended to use ﬁfteen stones as always but discovered after prooﬁng theprint that he had inadvertently omitted one. Since he liked the spare,elegant etching as it was, he decided not to add the missing stone. Hetook pleasure in the relationship between this “mistake” and the fact
that the garden of Ryoan-ji is designed so that one can never see morethan fourteen rocks from any single vantage point.
New River Rocks and Smoke, Cage’ s last painting, was made during his
third visit to Mountain Lake Workshop. During this session he decidedto use the smoking technique in combination with watercolor for theﬁrst time. Before Cage set to work, assistants smoked the paper in suc-cessive six- to eight-foot sections. Cage used large stones that had beencollected from the New River in Virginia. The ﬂattest surface of eachstone was designated as the bottom, and their vertical orientation wasﬁxed. Cage used brushes two- to eight-inches wide selected by chancefrom a group of twelve. The thirty-two-foot-long horizontal scroll com-bines ﬁfteen watercolor brush tracings around large rocks situated along
the lower portion of the paper, as if in a riverbed, with smoke stainsabove.
8The yellowish smoky areas in New River Rocks and Smoke act as
ethereal counterpoints to the more deliberate, though hardly emphatic,calligraphic brush strokes below. The combination of elements —ﬁre and
water —is underscored by the visual suggestion of ﬂow.
With his predominantly modest works on paper, Cage managed to
challenge just about all of Western culture’ s received ideas about what
art is. If, from the Renaissance on, art has been regarded as a means ofcommunication, Cage instead deﬁned art as self-alteration, a means to“sober the mind. ”
9If art has served to give form to the chaos of life’ s 
experiences, he created an art that as nearly as possible combines with,rather than gives shape to, life. If art has been regarded as a giver oftruth through the “self-expressed individuality of the artist, ”
10Cage sawCONSTANCE LEWALLEN
242
7.“How to Improve the World (You Will Only Make Matters Worse) Continued 1969
(Part V), ” in M: Writings ’67 –’72 (Middletown, Conn.: Wesleyan University Press, 1969), 69.
8. Just before creating New River Rocks and Smoke, Cage made another scroll painting almost
identical in size, New River Rocks and Washes, in which he did not smoke the paper. Instead, after
tracing around the rocks, he painted transparent watercolor washes over the entire surface with
large, custom-made brushes. New River Rocks and Smoke has the same constellation of rocks and
colors, although the colors are considerably lightened to correspond to the smoke.
9.“45/H11032 for a Speaker, ” in Silence: Lectures and Writings (Middletown, Conn.: Wesleyan Uni-
versity Press, 1961), 158.
10. Calvin Tomkins, The Bride and the Bachelors (New York: Viking Compass Books, 1966), 69.
CAGE AND THE STRUCTURE OF CHANCE
243 it rather as an exploration of how nature itself functions as a means to
open the mind and spirit to the beauty of life with a minimum of artis-tic expression or interpretation. Finally, if art has traditionally expressedmeaning through symbol or metaphor, he preferred that viewers pro-vide their own meaning according to their individual personality andexperience. (“I don ’t want to spend my life being pushed around by a
bunch of artists, ” he said once, explaining his objection to expression-
ist art.)
11
Given that nonintentionality was Cage’ s guiding principle, it may
come as a surprise that there is a consistency throughout all his visualwork. This can be attributed in part to the types of basic elements andprocedures Cage established as he began a work. Though he varied theforms, the colors, and the techniques from project to project, Cage’ s
open-ended strategies resulted in the sense of a moment snatched fromthe constant ﬂux of nature, as if whatever is occurring on the page iscontinuing outside its physical borders. This is particularly true of NewRiver Rocks and Smoke because of its exaggerated horizontality. Most of
the time the overall look of a Cage work is light and gentle —one could
say dramatically understated —but even when exuberant, it is never
strident. If a stylistic development can be discerned, it is that there wasa loosening that culminated in the radiant lyricism of Cage’ s last works.
That there is an overriding harmony in everything he created accordswith Cage’ s belief in the essential, if unknowable, order in nature, as re-
vealed by his chance operations.
11. Richard Kostelanetz, Conversing with Cage (New York: Limelight, 1988), 177.
244TWELVE
Ray Kass
Diary: Cage’ s Mountain Lake 
Workshop, April 8 –15, 1990
If there were a theory of
colour harmony, perhaps itwould begin by dividing thecolours into groups and for-bidding certain mixtures orcombinations and allowingothers. And, as in harmony, its rules would be given no justiﬁcation.
—Ludwig Wittgenstein, 
“Remarks on Colour,” I-74In conjunction with John Cage ’s ﬁrst visit to
Mountain Lake in 1983, an exhibition of his
musical scores and other works on paper washeld at the Student Union Gallery at nearbyVirginia Tech, which introduced his work asa visual artist to many people who knewhim only as a composer. Since 1978, the de-velopment of his visual work had been en-hanced by Crown Point Press, where he hadfrequently investigated printmaking tech-niques, especially etching, in the open andexploratory spirit that characterized his com-posing and writing. His later printmaking series had evolved to some extent towardthe execution of unique or individualizedimpressions, with attention to speci ﬁc pro-
cesses and random effects that surpassed thetypical printmaking goal of creating multipleimages in an edition.
In the graphic works of the 1983 exhi-
bition, Cage had employed random gesturesthrough chance operations to achieve ab-stract patterns in which ﬁfteen small stones
had been used as stencils to create circularlinear contours. These conﬁgurations rep-resented the automatic reﬂexes or sponta-neous gestures that revealed the softness or
hardness of the actual pencils, intuiting the Zen sensibility of Chinese or
Japanese “zenga” paintings of solitary and spontaneous calligraphs that
reﬂected both inner and outer nature.
Such a strategy could be applied to the watercolor medium and its
brushes. Cage admired the collection of smooth stones from the remotesite of Ripplemead on the New River in southwest Virginia, and afterconsideration, he agreed to make three experimental pieces using NewRiver stones. These were painted in my studio in 1983 to demonstratehow such a workshop might proceed. The result was John Cage’ s 1988
Mountain Lake Workshop, in which ﬁfty-two paintings of four series
entitled New River Watercolors were executed (see plate 3).
In the spring of 1990, Cage conducted his second workshop. The
paintings from 1990 represent his further investigation of the water-color medium and of the relationships between his printmaking activityand his experience with painting. His most recent etchings from CrownPoint Press had utilized the “rock” imagery printed on papers that hadpreviously been impressed with the amorphous burn patterns of ﬁre and
smoke. These indeterminate naturalistic effects were analogous to a wa-tercolor wash contrasted with wet brushwork for the stones: a provoca-tive Heraclitean image of ﬁre and water.
We consulted with Crown Point about their procedure for smok-
ing paper: newsprint had been placed over the dampened paper and ignited. Then a wool blanket was thrown over the ﬂame and the entireensemble quickly run through the press, leaving the gray essence of thesmoke impressed on the paper, along with a few ghostly traces of news-print. We wanted to achieve “smoke” impressions without the use of a
press, which would limit the paper sizes for the paintings. A simplermethod utilized a large piece of dampened blotter paper (6 by 8 feet)laid ﬂat on concrete; on it we ignited pieces of newspaper sprinkled with
mineral spirits. We quickly covered the ﬂames with dampened water-color paper, overlaid with a 4-by-8-foot panel of quarter-inch masonite.Larger papers were hosed with water, damp-dried, and smoked by thismethod. They were then rewashed to remove carbon particles.
To eliminate the local, sooty effect of the newsprint, we burned straw.
If spread tangled on wet blotter paper, burned straw created a greaterrange of color from the smoke, and the shafts often left silhouettes im-printed on the paper. We associated these delicate shapes with the frag-ments of newsprint transferred in the etchings, and called this process“straw writing” on smoke. We settled on straw for smoking all of the pa-per for the workshop. Twenty-eight sheets were smoked during threeseparate sessions in the weeks before the workshop began.
Upon his arrival, Cage met many of the twenty volunteer assistantsDIARY: CAGE’S MOUNTAIN LAKE WORKSHOP
245
and was shown the layout of all painting materials, grouped and num-
bered for convenient access for chance operations. On the ﬂoor at therear of the studio lay thirteen different papers, including six types of ragon rolls, a diverse group of mold-made hot- and cold-press single sheets,and three types of Japanese mulberry (or “rice ”) papers. Tables held
boxes of ﬁfty-seven different watercolor pigments and dozens of cups,pans, and other containers in which to mix paint. Two plastic bucketscontained forty of the rigid glide-feathers he had used in three of thefour series of paintings made during the 1988 workshop.
Eighty brushes of different types and sizes were organized in groups
from small to large. Eight of these were oversized wash brushes madeby combining either 5- or 7-inch Hake brushes in customized arma-tures. These had been constructed with “handle frames, ” which allowed
as many as twelve large brushes (each between 10
1⁄4and 84 inches long)
to be assembled as one brush. All of the wide brushes were designed sothat Cage could walk upright while holding the brush to paint. The mostextraordinary was the “body frame” constructed for the 84-inch brush,
used by gripping two laminated wooden handles fastened at midpointto the weight-balanced space frame. The painter “stepped into” the cen-ter of the frame to lift the brush and then could adjust the rear handleweights to modify the pressure with which the tilted brush was appliedto the paper. This elegant brush evoked images of early pioneering daysof aviation. Wooden troughs of various lengths were built to contain thepaint mixtures for speciﬁc brushes. The brushes and their pine troughsrecalled ancient tools, or perhaps modern sculpture.
Finally, 129 of the 1,312 New River stones used in the l988 work-
shop were combined with 33 additional rocks from the Ripplemead siteto comprise a group of 162. We also assembled an additional group of59 stones, somewhat ﬂat and angular, gathered from Sinking Creek atnearby Eggleston Springs. Each group of stones was divided by size cate-gories of small, medium, and large.
Monday, April 9, 1990
On Monday morning at 8:00 
A.M., the work began. The week had been
scheduled so that ﬁve assistants, Peter Lau (an architecture graduatestudent and the workshop coordinator), and myself would assist Cage asthe work proceeded. One of the assistants, Dan Yates, a literature stu-dent, was asked to be a scribe to record each day’ s activities.
1
One of Cage’ s most important new decisions at the 1990 workshopRAY KASS
246
1. Dan Yates’ s diary of the workshop is the basis of the following exchanges with John Cage.
In some cases, I amended or paraphrased and/or clariﬁed his entries through further discussion
with Cage.
was to create divisions in the plane of each painting, which suggested
that he might attempt to relate the new paintings to the general char-acteristics of modern musical composition. He began by working on theeight largest sheets, both smoked and white examples, and decided thattheir longest dimensions would be the vertical heights of these paint-ings. The I Ching would be asked to determine as many as six internal
vertical divisions, or “panels, ” along the horizontal width of each paint-
ing. The number 6 was based on the six size-categories of the two groupsof stones. He considered that each panel would contain the image of asingle stone (ﬁg. 12.1).
The I Ching determined that the forty-eight-inch widths of the ﬁrst
paintings would be divided into ﬁve panels (out of a possible six), com-
mencing from left to right, and according to the process of elimination.The ﬁrst division referred to the printed page 640 of random numbers
from 1 to 48, from which the next available number, 20, was assignedas the width of the ﬁrst panel. The next was determined by the corre-spondence of 28 (the remaining number of inches of the paper’ s width)
with page I-28 of random numbers, from which the number 15 was as-signed as the second panel’ s width. The remaining thirteen inches of the
paper’ s width, handled in the same way, established a third ten-inch
panel. The ﬁnal three inches of the original forty-eight would contain afurther one-inch division, leaving only two inches of width for the ﬁfth
and ﬁnal panel. The dimensions of the remaining paintings were estab-
lished in the same way.
His method by which to determine the vertical placement of the
stones on the panels, including provision for the possibility that the im-ages of the stones would be “invisible, ” was a variant on the theme of
continuity and division. For vertical placement, he “chose” to align the“base” positions of all of the conﬁgurations of the stones on a parallelborder four inches from the bottom of the painting. The horizontal ad-justment of the stone within each panel would be limited by a furthervertical division based on each panel’ s width as determined by chance
operations. He added one inch to the width of each panel, and consultedthe corresponding page number (equal to width in inches plus oneinch), to select the horizontal parameters of the stone’ s appearance in
that panel. Each stone entered the panel from the right moving left, un-til its right edge met the termination point established by the I Ching(also measured from right to left). By this method, it was possible thatthe numbers selected to determine the extent of the stone’ s appearance
could be “one inch” greater than the actual width of the panel, thereby“pushing” the stone beyond the predetermined ﬁeld of vision.
The I Ching determined that as many as four washes could be used DIARY: CAGE’S MOUNTAIN LAKE WORKSHOP
247
248
FIGURE 12.1
John Cage painting at the Mountain Lake Workshop, 1988. Photograph by Rick Grifﬁths, Virginia
Tech Media Services, courtesy of the Mountain Lake Workshop.

in each panel of each painting, and Cage determined that the heights
and widths of the washes would be the same as that of the panels. Thewash colors would be decided by “choice, ” that is, by mixing paints that
represented our interpretations of the natural colors of the stones.
At ﬁrst Cage thought that the pigments mixed to conﬁgure the rocks
should be determined by each rock’ s intrinsic coloring: this was sug-
gested to him by Ludwig Wittgenstein ’s text, “Remarks on Colour, ”
which led Cage to muse that “when we say blue, we don ’t know what
that is. ” He changed his mind, however, when he eliminated, according
to his view of their functions, the “colors” white, black, and gray for use
for stones: “White shows what a color is . . . [and] allows for the pres-ence of all colors. Black is their absence. ” At last, chance operations 
selected the colors for the stones; each color would consist of two huesmixed together in varying proportions graduated by measurements of10 percent.
The ﬁve rocks selected for the ﬁrst paintings were examined for the
positions they should take on the paper. At ﬁrst Cage wanted to usechance operations to decide their orientations. But when he realizedthat some stones might be perceived as having several sides (betweenthree and six), and that uncommonly round stones might be thought tohave “no” sides at all, he concluded that the ﬂattest surface should be
the bottom, and that an assistant should select their vertical orientationsby writing their numbers on masking tape applied to the stones to beread in the “up” position.
He elected to work with brushes rather than with feathers (as he
most often did during the 1988 workshop), and a group of sixty-ﬁvesmall to medium brushes were selected and numbered. The I Ching was
asked to make the ﬁnal selection of brushes, the mixes of colors, andnumber of washes speciﬁc to each panel of the ﬁrst painting. After theseﬁnal considerations, we decided together that two versions of the ﬁrsttwo paintings should be executed simultaneously. Thus Cage repeatedthe same conﬁgurations and procedures on both presmoked and whitesheets of the same sized paper.
After the two versions of the ﬁrst paintings were completed, a pro-
gram was organized for the next set of paintings. These were to be doneon two 25-by-72-inch papers, one smoked and one white. Cage decidedthat the two narrower versions should be divided into three or fewerpanels, rather than ﬁve, but otherwise the procedure was identical tothat for the ﬁrst paintings. Chance operations determined that these
paintings would have only two panels, and that the image of the rockwould appear, in each case, as a limited fragment hugging the left sideof the panel.DIARY: CAGE’S MOUNTAIN LAKE WORKSHOP
249
Our critical impressions of the four paintings of Series I determined
the direction of the rest of the workshop, and led to later modiﬁcations.
The Series I paintings lacked unity. The I Ching had determined that a
middle panel ten inches wide would be the only division not to receivea wash color, which visually divided each painting in half. To reestab-lish unity, we applied a ﬁnal gray wash or neutral tint over each. The I Ching’ s selection of the rock contour for the ﬁrst painting had been 
rendered “invisible”; the panel, however, was well de ﬁned by its four
vertical washes, which suggested the various hues of the rock, as if theabsent stone had left its color behind. In fact, the nearly complete im-age of a rock contour appeared in only one panel, and the other rockimages were represented only by unrecognizably fragmented strokes of paint.
During the course of the painting, Cage had “chosen ” to modify the
procedure for locating the stones in the two narrowest panels (of one andtwo inches, respectively). Thereafter he arbitrarily changed the one-inchscale of graduation for panels narrower than two inches to divisions byfour, six, eight, or more and asked the I Ching to determine minute parts
of the lateral placement of a stone. Apparently he was somewhat uncom-fortable with these paintings: the dramatic “striped” effect of the panel
washes seemed incompatible with the poetic spirit of the “invisible”rock. Moreover, the washes combined to obscure the smoke effect andto fracture the illusion of depth.
Next he began a new series, painted on two additional sheets of the
larger 48-by-72-inch smoked paper. No washes would be used. Rockplacements and imagery would be determined by the system of area di-visions as previously described, but the panels themselves would now be“invisible, ” that is, undeﬁned by the vertical stripes of washes.
The I Ching determined that these paintings would contain three and
six panels, respectively. Each displayed the entire painted contour of astone and also fragmentary outlines. The effect of the smoke seemed toexpand to hold the weightless perimeters of the rocks in an ambiguousspace. These were the ﬁrst two paintings of Series II; it was late after-noon and we decided to continue the work the next day.
Tuesday, April 10
Cage continued the Series II paintings without the use of washes, andbegan with the four remaining large sheets of presmoked paper. Wewould need to smoke an additional roll of number 844 Bee paper, whichwould be cut into fourteen 48-by-72-inch sheets. Two narrower sheets,25 by 35 inches (which would be used later in the workshop) came fromthe end rolls.RAY KASS
250
Our scribe, Dan Yates, had begun to include workshop commentary
in his daily record of the activities:
[Tuesday A.M.] Conditions have changed. Mr. Cage likes the two paint-
ings without the washes that he did last on Monday. He wasn ’t happy
with the effect that the washes had on the panels. This is what brought
about the notion of change. Change the rules. . . . There was talk of ghostimages. We spent the ﬁrst part of the morning smoking paper and pre-
paring the sheets for the next four paintings.
[Tuesday 
P.M.] This afternoon a series of fourteen additional paintings
were completed, similar in concept to the four completed this morning.
Eight are 8 /H11003 72 inches, and the other two are 25 /H11003 72 inches. These last
two pieces accentuated the vertical greatly, and by chance there appearedonly one stone in each. Mr. Cage likes this con ﬁguration and has said
that he would like to do a series like that.
Wednesday, April 11
Dan Yates’ s commentary continues:
[Wednesday A.M.] A [variant] on the Golden Rectangle was considered
for the next series of paintings. [Mr. Cage and Ray] stood over a piece of
smoked Whatman paper, 27 /H11003 42 inches (England, 1949). Mr. Cage said
that the “. . . idea is to use ﬁfteen rocks in a horizontal band across the42-inch length of the paper. Maybe only the small and medium sizedrocks should be used?” Rather than decide to limit the sizes of the rocks,he suggested that [we restrict] the categories of rocks to be subjected tochance. All six categories are eligible for use.
For the Series III paintings, the I Ching selected ﬁfteen rocks from the 
six categories, to be used in all nineteen works, which further utilized
two different types of paper. The ﬁrst seven were painted on 1949 What-
man (hot-press, 210 lb., 271⁄2by 421⁄4inches); the next twelve used re-
cent Waterford (cold-press, 260 lb., 26 by 40 inches). As in Series I andII, Cage decided the positions of the rocks, two inches from the bottomedge of the paper. This change nevertheless preserved the use of invis-ible divisions across the paper, but eliminated the correlations betweenthe positions of the ﬁfteen stones and the (possible) ﬁfteen panels thatmight occur in each painting. The positions of all the stones that mightappear in a single painting were established simply by referring to thecomputer pages corresponding to the entire width of the paper “plus 1”
(random numbers 1 –42 for Whatman; 1 –40 for Waterford). Chance de-
termined the number of panels —from one to ﬁfteen —in each painting.
The stones would enter and traverse the paper from right to left as before,DIARY: CAGE’S MOUNTAIN LAKE WORKSHOP
251
a n dw o u l db e“right justiﬁed” as they were in relation to former panel di-
visions. Wherever a division vertically crossed a stone placed on the pa-
per, only that aspect of the stone as it appeared on the right side wouldbe rendered. On the left side the stone would be “invisible. ” In this way,
the panels continued to function as barrier zones. Yates explains:
[Wednesday A.M.] This [procedure] allows for rocks to overlap one an-
other. This is exciting. Ray asked, “What do you think of this color?”
Mr. Cage answered, “I like it. The trouble is that I like all of them. ”
When it was possible for overlapping images of stones to smear the
paint, we placed several small pieces of wood, 1⁄2inch thick, at strate-
gic contact points to elevate a new stone above the previously paintedstone’ s conﬁguration.
Five paintings on Whatman paper had been completed in the morning
session. Viewing these paintings inspired a discussion of their similaritiesto traditional Zen painting, which seemed, to us at least, so remarkablefor their lack of stylistic development. Dissatisﬁed with his own brush-work, which seemed to him insuf ﬁcient to convey the character of the
brush, Cage decided to practice with the feathers before painting again.
The irregularities of the feather strokes were very different from
brushwork, which allowed him to concentrate more objectively on ef-fect. Soon he asked, “These are better, don ’t you think? And I learned
to do it from a feather!” He returned to the brush and began the nextpainting of Series III.
He now applied each brush and color to a practice sheet before using
it on the painting. I suggested that he begin each practice stroke with a paint-saturated brush, continuing the stroke until the brush was dry.He was particularly interested in the paler effects of the dry brush, andasked for colors to be mixed in progressively lighter hues and values. He most preferred the brushstrokes that appeared to emerge from thesmoke-colored paper rather than “ﬂoat” on its surface.
Three of the least satisfactory paintings from the morning session
were treated with all-over washes. He agreed to my suggestion that Inow use my own judgment to mix warm or cool washes to comple-ment the colors in each painting; in this way, smoke effects and brush-work might be better uniﬁed. We widened an adjustable wash-brush tocover the paper with a single pass and, standing over the paper, he de-livered the wash. We concurred that a wash softened the stronger col-ors of some of the rock contours. Cage asked, “Do you still feel the
smoke?” The smoke was not as strong as before, but it was still present.The wash helped to unify the painting. Two more were treated in a sim-ilar manner. He then resolved to continue to work with even lighterRAY KASS
252
colors to unify the paintings by preventing one color from dominating
another.
Thursday, April 12
The eighth painting of Series III was on cold-press Waterford paper thesame size as Whatman, but slightly heavier and more softly textured.This paper was also used in the 1988 workshop; the smoking processmade it less “wavy ” than the Whatman.
We reviewed the larger paintings done on Tuesday. Of particular 
interest were the last two, which were narrow because they were madefrom the end rolls of the sheets for Series II. They measured 72 by 25and 72 by 35 inches, respectively, and each contained the image of asingle stone.
They inspired Cage to begin a similar series. The I Ching selected a roll
of Arches cold-press paper, 52
1⁄2inches wide by 10 yards long. By chance
operations, each sheet was made 15 inches wide, whereas Cage himselfdecided that the entire roll would be cut into pieces of that size andsmoked.
As Dan Yates describes, Cage used increasingly lighter colors for the
paintings of Series III:
[Thursday A.M.] Mr. Cage said, “Two years ago I couldn ’t see anything.
Then when I saw [those paintings] in the traveling exhibit, I thought
they looked better every time. At ﬁrst I didn ’t care for [the nearly invis-
ible strokes] at all, but I like them quite a bit now. Yes. We ’re trying to go
very light. The whole situation seems to me to suggest that. ”
[Thursday P.M.] Mr. Cage thinks that painting twelve [of Series III]
achieves a consistency of light color nearly aligned with the atmosphereof the smoke, and remarked, “Yes, it’ s working, but we could go further. ”
We increased the number of brushes to include additional very smallones, because he liked their effects. In the ﬁfteenth painting the strokeshad virtually disappeared.
Mr. Cage said, “It’ s almost like Morty, ” and asked whether we had
heard the music of Morton Feldman. “Nobody plays his music as softlyas he meant it to be played. He collected rugs, and used the patterns, therepetitions, in his music. If he were making these [paintings], he wouldmake ﬁve or six of each. ”
J.C.: “Do you see it? “ (meaning the stroke around the stone).
R.K.: “Oh, let me see. It’ s this right here, right?”
J.C.: “Yes, it goes around. ”
R.K.: “Yes, it’ s quite visible. ”DIARY: CAGE’S MOUNTAIN LAKE WORKSHOP
253
J.C. (laughing): “Oh, it’ s a little gaudy, don ’t you think?”
The next to the last painting of Series IV has only one panel division,
which virtually encompasses the width of the paper.
J.C.: “In this one, Ray, the colors should be especially light. I’ll tell you
why. In this one there are only small rocks, they’ re all small rocks, and
I’ll be painting around all of them. ”
R.K.: “Very light, especially light . . . ”
J.C.: “Yes. ”
R.K.: “Lighter than anything so far. Lighter than the colors that we ’re not
sure we can see . . . ”
J.C.: “Lighter than most everything. ”
Friday, April 13
Cage wanted to work on the twenty narrow sheets of paper cut andsmoked the previous day, as Yates describes.
[Friday A.M.] Mr. Cage contends that “There are ways to approach the
smoke, either through color [hue] or through intensity [value]. For these
next [paintings] I am thinking of the rock as a person, a small person ina gigantic world. ” Ray has suggested that to create a more subtle relation-
ship between the smoke and paint hues, they might mix the color cho-sen by the I Ching with a 20 percent component of its complimentary
color. This would soften the intensity of the hue. On the other hand,Mr. Cage suggested that they might mix the hues with an “earth color, ”
such as sepia, raw umber, neutral tint or charcoal gray. Each way to graythe color was tested, and Mr. Cage’ s idea prevailed. Sepia was selected 
by chance operations from among the brown or gray pigments on hand.After sampling the effect of the sepia on a few test colors, he decided that Ray should add a small amount of black to the colors. They [exper-imented] with the darker values, and Mr. Cage accepted the increasedvalue and stronger hue, and decided that they would approach the paint-ings [of Series IV] in this direction. [He then] changed his mind concern-ing the mixing of the paint, and decided to ask the I Ching to choose the
color and also select from among all of the earth colors [including] sepia.The mix of the two was still ﬁxed, however, with 80 percent color, and(approximately) 20 percent earth tone, and a small amount of black todarken the value. Ray suggested including black in the group of earthtones in addition to its use in every mixture. [This would] create the pos-sibility that some of the prepared colors would be very dark or black.Mr. Cage agreed.RAY KASS
254
In seeing the stones as people, perhaps Mr. Cage ’s idea for using 
vivid dark colors [serves] to describe the nature of our individual 
existence in the shared moment, [and that] in attempting to see our-selves as a part of the nature of all things, we must ﬁrst acknowl-edge our own contrasting value, or difference, and that our movementtoward harmony with the rest of nature takes place “alone” for each of us.
In this new series [IV] some of the other rules have also changed. The
rock will be positioned along the bottom of the 15-inch width of thepainting by using chance operations to determine an additional orient-ing feature. After the horizontal placement is ﬁxed by referring to the I-15 page of random numbers, the I Ching is asked on which side of the
line of demarcation the rock should be placed (i.e., by citing the I-2 com-puter page, a “1” puts it on the left side of the line, and a “2” puts it onthe right).
Cage decided that all the bases of the stones would be placed four inches
from the bottoms of the paintings. He commented, “Well, we’ re ready
for anything. ” The twenty paintings of Series IV were completed by
10:00 A.M. (see plate 4).
Immediately after completing Series IV, the workshop set out in a
new direction. He had decided to use the big brushes on a very largepainting. We examined a roll (102 inches wide) of heavy rag paper andused half of its 20-yard length. From this, a 30-foot length was stapledto the ﬂoor. Yates continues:
[Friday A.M.] Mr. Cage remarked, “I think for the long skinny one, I’d
like to do a parade by chance, a parade of stones . . . ” To establish the hor-
izontal positions of the rocks, he graduated each foot of the paper length-
wise into sixths, or 168 total divisions. In keeping with the subject of theRyoan-ji garden, which had earlier inspired his series of etchings anddrawings called Where R /H11005Ryoanji (some of which had been exhibited
at Virginia Tech in 1983), Cage decided that the painting would includeﬁfteen rocks, all large, and they would be centered on their respectivehorizontal positions in a row which he arbitrarily place 1 foot from thebottom of the paper. The colors were a mixture (80 percent/20 percent),determined by chance. These were chosen from the list of all colors anda selected group of neutral colors (larger than the previously-mentionedgroup of earth tones), the latter of which included white, ﬂesh tint andraw sienna. He painted with brushes selected by chance from a group oftwelve large brushes ranging from 2 to 8 inches in width. The entire lengthof the painting was to be washed in an admixture of all of the leftovercolors from the workshop.DIARY: CAGE’S MOUNTAIN LAKE WORKSHOP
255
[Friday P.M.] Finally we all gathered attentively around a wet drop of
paint beside the last rock image to be painted, and waited for it to dry be-
fore applying the washes. Peter has prepared the 84-inch wide brushwith the help of Mike Sonnichsen, who fabricated most of its armature.
M.S.: “The paper is 8
1⁄2feet wide, and the brush is 7 feet wide. Do you
want to start at the top [of the paper] or in the center? ”
J.C.: “More or less centered. ”
M.S.: “And so you’ll let it go up and down as you want? ”
J.C.: “I’ll let it go up and down as it happens. ”
The brush was carefully “loaded” with paint. Pete and Ray lifted it
over Mr. Cage’ s head and into waist-high position, and he was guided to
his starting point at the long end of the paper. The wash went just over
the tops of the rocks. Mr. Cage seemed somewhat pleased by the effect,and repeated the application three times, commencing each new washabout 3 feet farther down the length of the paper.
We decided that the remaining lower portion of the paper, containing the
rock images, should also be “washed. ” This was done with a 28-inch-
wide brush, which covered the margin. Cage seemed less happy withthis last wash, but when the completed painting was trimmed for view-ing, he seemed more pleased. The washes had absorbed the colors of theRAY KASS
256

rocks without obscuring them too much.
We titled this piece New River Rocks and
Washes, and noted its resemblance to a huge
scroll (ﬁg. 12.2). I suggested that he mightbe able to apply smoke to a similar hugepiece of paper.
[Friday P.M.] Mr. Cage would like to paint
another version of the giant “scroll” paint-
ing, this time using smoke instead ofwashes. It doesn ’t seem possible [to smoke
such a huge paper]! Charles Layman andJoe Kelley, the volunteers who had mostoften led the “smoking brigade, ” wanted to
try. Another assistant, Bob Camicia, pro-posed that it be smoked in successive 6- to8-foot sections. Then we rehearsed it.
We threw the paper onto the ﬁre,
worked intensely, and spoke very little. Bythe time Mr. Cage saw it, we had reached acrucial moment. Then the wind picked up,and ripped the wet paper so badly that itDIARY: CAGE’S MOUNTAIN LAKE WORKSHOP
257
FIGURE 12.2
New River Rocks and Washes,
1990, 101 /H11003 354 in. the Menil
Collection, Houston Texas.Photograph by Virginia TechMedia Services, courtesy of the Mountain Lake Workshop.
couldn ’t be salvaged. Smiling, Mr. Cage said, “[This is] like an Irish trag-
edy.” One of the assistants, Bruce McClure, asked Mr. Cage how he be-
gan to use smoke in his work. He said, “It came from trying to under-
stand a work that I love by Mark Tobey, and how he achieved the effect
that’s in it. Maybe it’ s a monoprint. There is almost nothing in it . . . red-
dish gray. I wanted to achieve a sense of opposites —ﬁre and water. [At
Crown Point] I did the ﬁrst pieces with a hot iron tea kettle. ” Then Ray
proposed that we try again with a new paper. Everyone rushed into ac-tion, and this time we succeeded. The paper was placed on the studioﬂoor, and we all sat quietly with Mr. Cage and listened to the sound ofthe paper as it stretched and dried. I ’ve never heard anything like it.
Sunday, April 15
Cage painted the last scroll by repeating the same painting operationswith the identical rocks used for New River Rocks and Washes, but he asked
for much lighter versions of the colors so that they would correspondwith the smoke. The rock images against the background were extraor-dinary. He admired all the rips on the edges of this scroll, so we delayedthe trimming of the completed work. This one was titled New River Rocks and Smoke (ﬁg. 12.3). The completion of this painting concluded
the workshop.RAY KASS
258
DIARY: CAGE’S MOUNTAIN LAKE WORKSHOP
259
FIGURE 12.3
New River Rocks and Smoke,
1990, 102 /H11003 384 in. The Menil
Collection, Houston, Texas.Photograph by Virginia TechMedia Services, courtesy of the Mountain Lake Workshop.
260THIRTEEN
Henning Lohner
The Making of Cage’ s One11
One11is a ﬁlm without subject.
—John CageThis essay documents some moments in the
making of the ﬁlm One11.Of course this work
of art, which John Cage and I created, speaksfor itself. Any information I can now retrieveabout the process of its making is limited bythe mechanical means and coincidental na-ture through which the evidence was re-corded.
1It is my view that the greater part 
of the compositional process falls within therealm of the irreconstructible: the myth andimmediate reality of feeling ﬂoating around,people interacting while something is hap-
pening. This process is within, and pertainsonly to, the individuals who are in actu esseand are therefore outside the observation ofothers and even outside their own observa-tion. As Cage frequently said, “My memoryof what happened is not what happened. ”
Cage resisted the idea of making this ﬁlm
for at least two years; the whole thing didnot get off the ground until, as a result of my persistence, he gave me an opportunity
1. Throughout the period I was with Cage, I informally
recorded our conversations from time to time. I also col-
lected our correspondence and other documents, whichnow reside in my personal archive. Presently, there existplans to make these materials available through the JohnCage Trust.
to explain my idea. Years went by before he expressed any of his own
ideas in this matter. During that time I was deeply insecure, anxiousabout the world and myself, impatient yet constantly drifting, vague,and evasive. Yet Cage must have sensed in me something that he recog-nized as sincere and to which he took a liking. Today I can say thatCage’ s particular conﬁdence in a part of me I had no clue existed paved
the way for the completion of his last full-feature work, the work I con-sider to be his credo: One
11.
When I asked Richard Serra about Cage, he said:
As a moral, ethical, courageous person —although you don ’t think of
Cage as being heroic in the John Wayne sense —Cage probably fulﬁlled
for a lot of artists what we lack, because American artists, in particular,
and German artists among others tend to have a heavy-handed angst, a
defensive orientation in relation to the world. Cage seemed free of that.He seemed enlightened in a way that you hope that people as they getolder become enlightened. He was one of the few people I ’ve met in my
lifetime who I thought had an awareness of a bigger construct. (Amongthe others were Huxley, Margaret Mead, and Bucky Fuller.) Cage hadthat same overview of a universal situation, particularly the language ofsound. And I think that anyone who seems to have a language to explainthe potential for opening up any other language is undeniably a teacher.In my opinion, Cage was a teacher without trying to be.
May 10, 1982, Frankfurt
John Cage was sitting at a café table after a concert of his Etudes Australesat the TAT in Frankfurt, Germany. For the ﬁrst time, I saw John Cage“live” in front of me. I got myself together and went over to him, thanked
him for the concert, and asked him whether he would teach me compo-sition. As I would ﬁnd out later, his response was typical: “I don ’t ‘teach, ’
but we can have a talk. ”
April 2, 1985, CologneJohn Cage had just ﬁnished a reading of his mesostics in St. Georg, aRomanesque church in Cologne. I asked him for an autograph. He said,“What would you like me to write?” I said, “The ﬁrst thing that comes
to your mind. ” On the cover of the program booklet he wrote, “a cloud. ”
December 18, 1987, FrankfurtJ
OHN CAGE: The advantage of the use of chance operations in ﬁlm-
making is that you can then use all the material which you make, ratherthan being confronted with the conventional problem, which is thatTHE MAKING OF CAGE’S ONE11
261
you have to edit. You remove the editing in the sense of making judg-
ments because with the chance operations you don ’t make judgments!
(laughs) That way you don ’t waste any ﬁlm, you can use it all.
HENNING LOHNER : What are your plans and visions in ﬁlm so far?
JOHN CAGE: Well, there’ s a ﬁve-minute one we made on 35 mm, I think,
and in color. It was a game of chess, not a game, but it was the playingof chess, myself together with the widow of Marcel Duchamp. You don ’t
see her face or mine, and very rarely do you even see our hands; youjust see the board. The camera is up above and all the parameters ofchanging the camera, focuses, and so forth, were controlled by chance.It was taken, if I remember, in ten-second strips, and they were put to-gether with chance operations —very beautiful.
H
ENNING LOHNER : So if you wanted to make a “larger” project . . .
JOHN CAGE: Then I’d think on from that point.
HENNING LOHNER : What would you think of?
JOHN CAGE: I’m not thinking in terms of preparation. (laughs)
HENNING LOHNER : But this would be an extension, I imagine, of your
having gone into opera (for the ﬁrst time) and into the visual ﬁeld.
JOHN CAGE: No, it would be an extension to ﬁlm! Of the possibility of
setting material into ﬂux.
December 19, 1988, New York
To whom it may concern:
In the course of an interview in Frankfurt with Henning Lohner, I devel-
oped the idea in which I am interested to make a 90-minute ﬁlm, a com-
posed ﬁlm by means of chance operations applied to all the variables; I
now give him exclusively the right to do whatever is necessary to bringthis project to realization. He likes it; so do I. I think (he is a composeralso interested in ﬁlm and ﬁlm-experienced) we could make somethinginteresting.John Cage, New York, Dec. 19, 1988
June 27, 1989, Mainz-Lerchenberg
The administration and broadcasting center of the ZDF, the Second Na-tional Broadcasting Channel of German public television, is located ona hill in the midst of vast farmlands on the left bank of the Rhine. Fromthe top stories of the building, you can see for hundreds of miles into thedistance. My friend Harro Eisele, an editorial producer there, listened to my proposal: I wanted to make and ﬁnance a ﬁlm about “nothing, ” 
a ﬁlm that had no apparent content and that nobody knew anythingHENNING LOHNER
262
about, and the one person who did (Cage) wasn ’t going to say any-
thing about it except that magic word “chance. ” Harro introduced me to
Maria Kasten, the editorial producer of music programs for “3sat, ”
which is a cultural satellite for German, Austrian, and Swiss public TV.
Meeting her, I realized that, years before, we had studied musicology to-gether in Frankfurt. From here on, it took two years of typically dif ﬁcult
in-house negotiations before we were able to secure a studio and theﬁrst funds toward producing the ﬁlm. During this time my brother andI had tried in vain to obtain funds or grants from ﬁlm institutes or ﬁlm
commissions so that television actually became, as a last resort, thehome of the ﬁlm.
December 23, 1989, New York
J
OHN CAGE: What I propose to do is leave the TV studio empty, but keep
the light present that is ordinarily in a TV studio —at the ceiling, but also
have lights available on the ﬂoor and in other parts. Therefore the ﬁlm
will actually be about the effects of light on an empty room —but no
room is actually empty, and light will actually render —show —what
there is in it. Also, the light is in interaction. And it is of course very pro-ductive of shadows. All of that space and light will be directed by meansof chance operations, in terms of direction of numbers of lights as wellas the changes of light.
We haven ’t come up to Buckminster Fuller yet, so the room will look
like a box instead of a sphere. There’ s a beautiful Buckminster Fuller
dome in Montreal —the one that burned, but the structure is still ex-
tant, and it is absolutely beautiful. In our ﬁlm there is nothing inside the
picture, except the shadows. But of course, there are things: in everyempty thing there are things. The place is full of lights! On the ceiling,now on the ﬂoor, and in between, so that the lights themselves will make
the shadows, or also the corners of the room, etc. It’ s very curious!
The room will not be a constructed room; it will be an empty room.
I don ’t want anything made [speciﬁcally for this ﬁlm]. It should be the
studio room as is available without being arti ﬁcialized as they do in TV.
This studio could be any size with any number of lights and lightingavailable; however, I will need to know the exact size of the studio weare to work with as well as the exact number of lights available, so as toset up the composition. Also, there ’s a good possibility of changing the
nature of the walls of the room from what they are to some other ma-terial, so as to accommodate the reﬂecting or absorbing qualities of dif-ferent lights.
Of course, there should be a variety of different camera angles and
also a parallelity of cameras, bearing in mind that the editing will be THE MAKING OF CAGE’S ONE11
263
sequential as well as superimpositional. I’d be glad to make music to it,
though in many cases the ﬁlm will look very well without sound, but
since it will be a long ﬁlm (ninety minutes), it should have some kind ofsound in some instances and that will be very interesting. Likewise, onewill move from color to black and white. The music would be music for acoustic instruments, since my ear is in that ﬁeld at the moment. Itwould be in the same vein as Four, my latest piece for the Arditti String
Quartet. The sound of the ﬁlm would furthermore be a composition ofthe actual sounds made during the shooting of the ﬁlm, including anyverbal or other utterances that are made by the people involved in theshooting.
Because the making of the ﬁlm is all written out beforehand in the
composition, there will not be the conventional form of shooting andediting in which you make your judgments, and so forth. It will simplybe the continuation of the work, and the material that is taken won ’t be
wasted, but will all be used. Mostly, with photography and ﬁlm, people
waste material, but I don ’t approve of that!
I think in the course of doing the work, the effect of the chance op-
erations will be to make a kind of scenario of its own. And the scenario,instead of being known in advance, will develop organically out of thework. Almost no one, to my knowledge, has become interested in lightin itself. Paying attention to light is generally paying attention to howlight affects something else, but this ﬁlm will be light in itself. It is very
easy to describe, and I think it will be a pleasure to see.
July 28, 1990, Darmstadt
Cage had received a check that he wanted to cash. The German bank wewent to was different from most others I had seen in that it had a bigblack leather sofa in the middle of the room. He and I sat down in it, andwe asked our turn to be called while dozens of people all around uswere waiting in lines.
A question entered my mind that I had always wanted to ask Cage:
“How do you stay so well-balanced, cheerful, and friendly towards every-one?” Earlier in the day I had witnessed a horde people wanting all sortsof things from him, strangers with requests: a shopping excursion, awalk in the woods, mushrooms, a lecture, signing a hundred records fora poor publisher before two con ﬂicting luncheons (neither of which he
managed to attend because someone was busy asking him about themeaning of the universe). And so I was thinking: “How do you do it?”
I imagined an answer of great depth and intensity, a statement allud-
ing to Buddhist philosophy or some insight only a wise old man couldhave, someone with the natural talent of equilibrium, a spirit beyond theHENNING LOHNER
264
constraints of emotional imbalance. His answer: “Well, I’ve been prac-
ticing all my life. ”
July 31, 1990, BerlinH
ENNING LOHNER : We spoke about the unknown objects in different 
locations. Let’ s say when you come to Berlin there are certain build-
ings that I would assume that you know of, that you’ve seen before inpictures or that you ’ve seen before when you were here, and when we
discussed taking a trip around the city, you said it would have to be bychance to a place that we might know of.
J
OHN CAGE: I prefer to go to a place, yes, that was anyplace rather than
a well-known tourist place.H
ENNING LOHNER : Why is that?
JOHN CAGE: Oh, I’ve spent my life on the side of the underdog. So, I ’m
more interested really in uninteresting things than in especially special
places.
HENNING LOHNER : When do you think uninteresting things become
interesting?J
OHN CAGE: When and if you pay attention to them.
HENNING LOHNER : So that’ s on the side of the viewer or the listener.
JOHN CAGE: I think so.
HENNING LOHNER : And what is your function as a creator or a com-
poser, is it to make people listen?J
OHN CAGE: No, I don ’t want to make anyone do anything. I make 
music so that people can, if they wish, hear it, and I write books and 
so forth. The various things I do are available, but I don ’t want to force
them upon anyone.
HENNING LOHNER : You’ve always said that there ’s a difference between
the composition and the listener who ﬁnishes the composition. Where
does that start?
JOHN CAGE: This starts with the listener.
HENNING LOHNER : And are you responsible for anything? As a
composer?J
OHN CAGE: I try to do my best work.
HENNING LOHNER : How do chance operations ﬁt into this idea?
JOHN CAGE: It’s to keep me from doing always the same thing. That is,
to save falling into my own habits, my likes and my dislikes. Chance op-
erations are a little bit like sitting cross-legged. They keep you from do-ing only what you like.THE MAKING OF CAGE’S ONE11
265
HENNING LOHNER : But you’ve said many times that there are profound
chance operations and less profound.
JOHN CAGE: It’s not the chance operations that are profound or less pro-
found, it’ s the questions that are asked. If the questions are not good, the
chance operations are not good either.H
ENNING LOHNER : Can you give an example?
JOHN CAGE: Yes. I have never liked —I’m now speaking of former
times —now I like harmony, but formerly I thought I didn ’t. And what
I thought I didn ’t like about it was the fact that it has always four voices:
soprano, alto, tenor, and bass. So I thought if we leave one of those out,
or two or three of them out, that that would be a way of refreshing har-mony, and when I did that I got an interesting result from an interest-ing piece, and I got an uninteresting result from an uninteresting piece.So it was not a profound question. If the questions had been profound,the result of the use of chance operations would have been to make un-interesting pieces interesting and of course interesting pieces interest-ing, too.
H
ENNING LOHNER : What did you do then to change that?
JOHN CAGE: I separated the voices, the bass from the tenor and from the
alto and the soprano, and I counted the number of notes in each line,
and I found where the active points were by chance operations, andthen I would have a sound start from the beginning and go to the ﬁrstactive point, and then a silence would begin and go to the next activepoint. The result was a series of sounds that had four voices, but whichhad single notes preceded and found by silence. The result was you hadan image of centers of activity moving in all directions. And that’ s a
powerful image which is, so to speak, the Buddhistic notion of creation.This actually refers to a piece called Quartets.
H
ENNING LOHNER : When you ﬁnd out that a certain question is not 
as profound as you thought it might be, who asks the new questions?
Do you?
JOHN CAGE: Of course.
HENNING LOHNER : So, in the beginning it ’s you who asks the questions
and then . . .J
OHN CAGE: I continue to ask them. And I keep going until I ﬁnd a radi-
cal question.H
ENNING LOHNER : Is your idea or your vision of what musical anarchy
is related to this radical question?J
OHN CAGE: I guess it must be related because they’ re ideas that came
into my head, but I don ’t know what the relation is.HENNING LOHNER
266
HENNING LOHNER : The reason I’m asking is that when I hear the word
“anarchy” I think of something being ungoverned. Isn ’t that true?
JOHN CAGE: True. Yes.
HENNING LOHNER : When you compose a piece which goes in this direc-
tion, aren ’t you still provoking an ungoverned situation or making an
ungoverned situation, and isn ’t that a contradiction? Do you know what
I’m trying to say?
JOHN CAGE: I don ’t know, Henning. When I’m making an ungoverned
situation, I don ’t do any thinking like that. So I don ’t know what I’m 
doing. I literally don ’t know. As I said in Darmstadt, I don ’t have any
ideas, I don ’t have any tastes, I don ’t have any feelings, I’m just doing
my work, so to speak, stupidly. And it turns out to be beautiful. It ’s very
hard to explain. I don ’t know how else to explain it.
HENNING LOHNER : What is tradition to you?
JOHN CAGE: When you say the word, I think of society rather than an
individual, and I think of the past and the acceptance of the past.H
ENNING LOHNER : Can you deﬁne past in respect to future, let’ s say?
JOHN CAGE: Well, it’ s things which took place.
HENNING LOHNER : And how do you become aware of them?
JOHN CAGE: I guess we’ re being told that they’ve happened. I don ’t cul-
tivate my memory. So I have to be told. The reason I don ’t cultivate my
memory is [that] Marcel Duchamp, who I admire so much, stated, as an
ideal, attaining the impossibility of transferring from one like-image toanother, the memory imprint. So, you see, if we can ’t remember one
Coca-Cola bottle and we see the second one, then we can look at thesecond one as though we were seeing something new. And that helpsvery much in this day and age. It helps you to remain a tourist in a stateof great duplication. And it’ s true because each Coca-Cola bottle is at a
different point in space and a different point in time. The result is lightfalls on it in special ways. So no two Coca-Cola bottles look the same.
H
ENNING LOHNER : Now with digital tape and computers you can repro-
duce something exactly as it was before.J
OHN CAGE: I guess so.
HENNING LOHNER : And yet it’ s...
JOHN CAGE: It’s different.
HENNING LOHNER : So are we actually getting back, closer to nature?
JOHN CAGE: Maybe.
HENNING LOHNER : You haven ’t thought about that yet?
JOHN CAGE: Well, I’ve thought that the proper future of technologyTHE MAKING OF CAGE’S ONE11
267
would be to disappear, without really disappearing, to give us the im-
pression that we were without technology. I ’ve noticed that technology,
when it improves, gets smaller. And carrying that through logically, itwould be at its highest point when it disappeared entirely. Don ’t you
think? (laughing)
H
ENNING LOHNER : But if technology can go to nowhere, where do you
think that human beings and living beings are going?J
OHN CAGE: Well, our present technology, according to [Marshall] Mc-
Luhan, is the extension of the central nervous system, so we’ re in a sit-
uation of a greater number of ideas and interconnection of ideas. McLu-
han says our proper work now is simply rubbing ideas against ideas.
HENNING LOHNER : Do you have any idea where this is going to lead?
JOHN CAGE: That’ s the future! We have yet to see what’ s going to hap-
pen. That’ s why I’m trying to remain, if I can, alive. So that I ﬁnd out
what’ s going to happen to us. I’m not sure that I’ll succeed, but I’ll try. I
hope that we get to a point where everybody has what he needs to live
as he wishes. I ﬁnd very stupid and painful the division of the world intothose who have what they need and those who don ’t.
H
ENNING LOHNER : How do you think it can change?
JOHN CAGE: So that everyone has what he needs to live as he wishes.
The last time when I came back from a trip from London, as I was ap-proaching the door to the house where I live, there was a young man inthe middle of the day lying on the street as though he were on a cross,cruciﬁed. And he was bleeding somewhere. No one paying any atten-tion. We, in New York, we see day after day sights that . . . it ’s a wonder
we can experience them with the maintenance of conscience.
H
ENNING LOHNER : Did you help this man? Or what did you do?
JOHN CAGE: I didn ’t do anything. Nor did the other people.
HENNING LOHNER : And why?
JOHN CAGE: Well, he was asleep, for one thing. It didn ’t occur to me to
wake him up. He was, so to speak, at home in his homelessness. He hadn ’t
put out a sign saying, “Do not disturb, ” but he might have. He was act-
ing as though he were at home.H
ENNING LOHNER : You feel in all of this that each individual is still his
own individual self?J
OHN CAGE: What else! I was at one time homeless.
HENNING LOHNER : When was that?
JOHN CAGE: When I was very young, I was homeless in New York, and
before I got to New York, sometimes when I left it. I didn ’t have any
money and I didn ’t have any place to live and I would lie down on the
street to sleep.HENNING LOHNER
268
HENNING LOHNER : Was that during the Depression?
JOHN CAGE: Yes.
HENNING LOHNER : You mentioned recently that that’ s when your inter-
est in mushrooms came about, isn ’t that right?
JOHN CAGE: Yes, not on the East coast, but on the West.
HENNING LOHNER : That was out of necessity —that there was noth-
ing to eat?
JOHN CAGE: I didn ’t have anything to eat, and I knew, as you say, from
“tradition ” that mushrooms were edible and that some of them are
deadly. So I picked one of the mushrooms and went in the public library
and satisﬁed myself that it was not deadly, that it was edible. And I ateit and nothing else for a week. And after a week, I was living in Carmel;I was invited to lunch. I had met someone, and I was invited to lunchand it was down at the other end of town. And I set out for the lunch,but found I didn ’t have the strength to get there. Mushrooms don ’t give
you much strength.
H
ENNING LOHNER : What happened then?
JOHN CAGE: I decided that I had to have some food. So I got a job of
washing dishes in the Bluebird Tearoom, and they gave me —at that
time I was young and I wasn ’t macrobiotic —they gave me steak. Three
times a day. And I had to wash all the dishes and wash the ﬂoor and so
forth, but I had some strength to do all those things.H
ENNING LOHNER : And so you became a mushroom expert, didn ’t you?
JOHN CAGE: But much later.
HENNING LOHNER : So that interest in mushrooms certainly persisted.
JOHN CAGE: I’m still a kind of a —I’m what you would call an amateur
mushroom hunter, and so far I haven ’t killed myself or killed any other
person. (laughs)H
ENNING LOHNER : Like us the other day.
JOHN CAGE: We had mushrooms together, didn ’t we?
HENNING LOHNER : Yes.
JOHN CAGE: And no one got sick.
HENNING LOHNER : No, we survived.
JOHN CAGE: But there was no pain or anything?
HENNING LOHNER : Neither. We were quite happy the next day.
JOHN CAGE: So, we didn ’t really “survive, ” we just had a good dinner!
HENNING LOHNER : Oh yes! Many people think that because of the views
you have on general issues in the world, that your music has a political
connotation. Is that true?THE MAKING OF CAGE’S ONE11
269
JOHN CAGE: Well, I think of myself in terms of politics as being apoliti-
cal or anarchistic.
HENNING LOHNER : And music has nothing to do with politics?
JOHN CAGE: Well, it can serve as an example of society, yes. You can
make a social situation that is an image of government as an orchestral
work with a conductor is, or you can give an example of an orchestralwork without a conductor as an anarchistic situation. I think painting isnot as social as music. Music, when it’ s played by a number of people,
can follow a model of society or be a model for society. I often think ofit that way. That’ s why I speak of anarchy so much.
H
ENNING LOHNER : Do you feel that you have been inﬂuenced by cer-
tain people in your work?
JOHN CAGE: I think everyone inﬂuences me. If I were at any moment
asked to write down who inﬂuences me, I would write as many names
as I could on a piece of paper in front of me. And then if I didn ’t have
any more time and looked at the list later, my ﬁrst thought would be,“Oh, I failed to mention so and so. ”
H
ENNING LOHNER : When you write music, do you have any preferred
sounds? Anything that you personally like —I mean, outside of compo-
sition —just sounds that you like.
JOHN CAGE: I try not to think that way.
HENNING LOHNER : But you ﬁnd yourself thinking that way sometimes?
JOHN CAGE: No. I just make the habit of not thinking that way.
HENNING LOHNER : What is music?
JOHN CAGE: (sighs) It’s one of the arts. It’ s a way of paying attention, and
I think attention is paid to sounds.
HENNING LOHNER : And what is art?
JOHN CAGE: The same thing. But if you ’re referring to visual art, then I
would say it’ s paying attention to looking or seeing.
HENNING LOHNER : And what is love?
JOHN CAGE: We don ’t know. We think it’ s loving someone, but we sus-
pect that it may be loving ourselves. We just don ’t know.
October 18, 1990, New York
JOHN CAGE: I believe that the purpose of music is to sober and quiet the
mind, thus making it susceptible to divine in ﬂuences. The responsibility
of the artist is to imitate nature in its manner of operation. Our view ofwhat that manner of operation is changes with our scienti ﬁc awareness.
Our scientiﬁc awareness in recent years includes chaos. We call it thebutterﬂy effect or ecology. There is nothing that is free of the networkHENNING LOHNER
270
of cause and effect. Everything causes everything else; everything else
results from everything else.
I’m not sure that I remember correctly, but today knowing that 
you were going to ask me questions about chaos, I took down a book of Kwang-tse which has a passage in it about Hyung Mung, which is aname for chaos, and he was one of the winds. He was wandering aboutslapping his buttocks and hopping like a bird. Someone else asked himwhat he was doing, and he said he was enjoying himself.
And then the other person said that everything in the world was in a
mess, you know, and he wanted to correct things and make everythingbetter, and Hyung Mung didn ’t say anything. He just went on hopping
and slapping his buttocks. But the third time —as in such stories —he
answered and said, “Oh, you just want to improve matters, and you endby simply making them worse. ” That’ s where I got the title for my diary,
“How to improve the world, you will only make matters worse. ” And it
was Hyung Mung’ s “chaos” idea that we should let things be as they are,
and it’ s our desire to improve them that ruins everything.
Each day provides an example of chaos. Either in the form of tele-
phone calls or in the mail coming. (laughing) We never know what’ s go-
ing to happen. The kind of trouble that people have with the weather,we now have with every aspect of our lives. (laughing) I think the thing
that I like about the butter ﬂy is that it’ s like a grain of sand or that little
bit of dust. It doesn ’t seem important. And yet for a scientist to say that
it is important and that it’ s part of the network of cause and effect is
pleasing. In other words, it takes our minds away from a hierarchical at-titude towards nature which would, for instance, prefer a mountain toa bit of dust.
What I like in music, as you know, is silence, which is to say, all of the
sounds that take place when we ourselves don ’t make them, so that ex-
perience through our hearing is constantly changing. Sometimes it hassounds that many people don ’t like or that they think interrupt what-
ever else is going on. But I ’ve changed my mind to the fact that I enjoy
all the things that I hear, whether they act as a truck does when it passesdown the street blocking something or not. Everything as a result is in-teresting. And we’ re living now more and more not only in a world full
of noise, but in one full of all kinds of things that we can perceivethrough our senses and also a world of more people than ever before.
It was in the late 1940s that I heard for the ﬁrst time the expression
“population explosion ” and at that time the number of people living on
the planet was higher than the number of people who had lived before,all added up together, and since that time it has doubled. And our edu-cation, our schools, our laws, and everything have to do with a world ofTHE MAKING OF CAGE’S ONE11
271
not such great population, but just a few philanthropic rich people and
everybody else more or less well-to-do. But now we have the homeless.We have in fact everybody. And a lot of the people we don ’t take care
of. Well, I don ’t want to give a talk, but I think we tend to worry about
some people and forget others.
I started out in my music trying to give noise as much value as so-
called musical sound. And I think that we should do that socially, givingjust as much regard to the poor as to the rich. In other words, make ourlives so that the poorest elements or the worst elements in it would re-ceive some kind of honor.
My use of chance operations brings me into friendship with chaos.
The ﬁrst piece of that kind was the Music of Changes. And the title of the
piece comes from the “book of changes”: the I Ching, which is the oldest
book on the planet. It comes from China. It deals with the number 64and its mechanism is used as an oracle. It uses binary mathematics, andit turns out that our DNA and RNA do the same thing, so that when ourparents conceive us, they do so by means of a chance operation: in otherwords, we are born as a result of chaos.
That’ s why two parents reproducing more than once don ’t pro-
duce the same child; even when they produce two at the same time(laughing), they’ re frequently very different. They are so amusing, those
twins. They are like puns brought to life. There’ s one in particular —she
and her sister both live in Paris; they look absolutely the same. So ifyou’re with either one, you think you’ re with the other or vice versa.
The same is true with Philip Corner, who has a twin very much thesame as he is, though I think he has got a bit fat and the other may nothave. (laughing)
What has interested me very much in both sound and sight, graphic
arts and music and so forth is to experience each sound and/or eachthing we see as itself rather than as representative of something else. Sothat when we look even as we do at things that we think are identical,if we actually look at them, we see that they are not. The reason thatthey are not is that each thing is itself at its own center and that centeris a center with respect to everything else. So a light for instance falls oneach Coca-Cola bottle differently so that if you looked at each Coca-Colabottle with light in mind, you ’ll see that they’ re entirely different. That
idea of being at one’ s own center is a Buddhist idea. It goes that every
time a baby is born, its cry means, “I’m the world-honored one. I am at
the center of the universe. ” And creation is seen as an interpenetration
of centers. Whereas our Western idea has been often that the centerdoesn ’t exist in anything, but often [in] some world of ideas that no one
has access to. (laughs) When you have an idea off in the distance whereHENNING LOHNER
272
nobody has access to it, then you have the possibility of a separation be-
tween God and man, for instance, and tragedy like Prometheus or anytragic ﬁgure such as Hamlet and so forth.
But if you have chaos and if you enjoy it rather than not, then you
have Hyung Mung hopping around like an idiot slapping his buttocksand enjoying himself. (laughs) There’ s no possibility of tragedy in such 
a world of multiplicity of centers. There is good in the sense of comedy.Joyce preferred comedy to tragedy. I ﬁnd him more or less essential tothe twentieth century and “Here Comes Everybody” is the overpopula-
tion that we’ re living in. And one of the meanings of “ Anna Livia Plura-
belle”— Alp—is in German, “nightmare”; isn ’t that the word for night-
mare? If we take a tragic point of view, which Joyce didn ’t, then we could
laugh it off, for instance, by saying: “Well, it’ s just a nightmare. ” (laughs)
It’s true, the ﬁrst things you have to get free of, if you take the atti-
tude of a sober and quiet mind, are your feelings and your ideas. Whenyou see how many things there are and you make more connections be-tween things, I think that is the result of the acceptance of all the things.If you stick to your feelings and your ideas, you may be impoverishedthen and have just the same ideas you’ve always had plus 2 /H110012 /H110054 and
that will be the end of it. But if you let chaos come in, you have no ideahow far you will go. My motive is to have a sober and quiet mind andthus become susceptible to divine in ﬂuences, which is another way of
saying: and thus enjoy what happens.
H
ENNING LOHNER : What is a divine in ﬂuence?
JOHN CAGE: Everything that happens.
HENNING LOHNER : So it’ s chaos?
JOHN CAGE: Of course!
July 4, 1991, Fernsehstudios München
Cage was in Munich on the occasion of a retrospective of his artwork,prints, monotypes, watercolors, drawings. My brother, Peter, had joinedthe ﬁlm as producer, and we took Cage over to the ﬁlm studio that had
been designated for us. Cage said it would work out ﬁne, which meantthat the studio met the demands of the composition he had in mind, andhe felt capable of tailoring the composition to meet the “demands” of
the studio (see ﬁgs. 13.1 –13.3).
July 30, 1991, New YorkFrank Zappa was another great American composer with a big heart. Iremember him dearly and miss him. So does Van Carlson, the wonder-ful photographer I met through Frank in 1989. Van hadn ’t met Cage yet.
When Cage asked Van where he thought we should begin discussionsTHE MAKING OF CAGE’S ONE11
273
FIGURE 13.1
Studio dimensions for One11,sheet 2. © John Cage and Henning Lohner.
FIGURE 13.2
Lighting rig setup for One11,sheet 3. © John Cage and Henning Lohner.
FIGURE 13.3
Camera crane setup for One11,sheet 4. © John Cage and Henning Lohner.
about the ﬁlm images, Van replied: “I am interested in anything that ﬁts
in a frame. ” Cage laughed.
In order for the TV studio to become an empty stage, it would be
draped on all sides by one continuous huge screen called a “horizon. ”
The lights would perform their movements in this space, and the per-former would also be there, performing on his instrument, the camera.Before writing the screenplay-score of One
11,Cage wanted to be famil-
iar with all the variables of what the camera was capable of doing, themodes of operation it had to offer. His process of discovering this ﬁlm instrument was similar to the way he would have approached a musicalinstrument he wasn ’t familiar with.
February 25, 1992, New YorkCage, Van, and I sat eagerly in front of the computer monitor that An-drew Culver, Cage’ s assistant and computer programmer, had set up in
a corner of Cage’ s loft. He pressed a button and within the wink of an
eye the ﬁrst scene of the ﬁlm appeared on screen, in graphic form (seeﬁg. 13.4), depicting the placement and rotation of the lights.
Each light was now in a position to perform its “duty as an instru-
mentalist” and to play “light” notes or tones. Figure 13.4 illustrates themovement of ﬁve ﬁctitious lights (A, B, C, D, E) over a time change de-
ﬁned by ﬁve value increments, in this case all beginning with value zero.The curve drawn for each light movement indicates a so-called ADSR(attack-decay-sustain-release). This is the type of movement that, inmusical terms, describes a moving “light ﬁeld” similar to the “sound
ﬁeld” an orchestra produces (and in our ﬁlm the amount of light usedis comparable to the size of an orchestra).
Each ADSR movement of a light is like a musical note: there are the
attack and delay phases by which the initiated light wave reaches its dy-namic peak, and then there are the sustain and release phases, wherethe light wave is held, and ﬁnally recedes back to zero value. In the score
these values would be written out numerically. All in all, in ninety min-utes of ﬁlm there were going to be about twenty-four thousand of theselight changes, divided into seventeen scenes, equaling approximatelytwelve hundred cues, with an average of twenty light changes per cue.
April 9, 1992, New York
[From] John Cage and Andrew Culver [to] Van Carlson, Peter and Hen-
ning Lohner
One11Takes:
Instructions for each take are given in drawing and table form. The
table shows the time bracket for each take —a time within which a takeTHE MAKING OF CAGE’S ONE11
277
FIGURE 13.4
Plot sequence from the shooting manual for One11,item 10. © John Cage and Henning Lohner.
must begin together with a time bracket in which the take must end. In
most cases, successive takes overlap (by 10, 15 or 20 seconds) (ﬁg. 13.5).Some takes, however, have ﬁxed beginnings and endings (these are veryshort), and the different scenes abut at ﬁxed times. The lens for each takeis also given in the table.
Finally, the table gives the use of a crane or not (on “foot”), and 
the “from” and “to” grid positions. If no “to” position is given the take 
is without movement. Crane “from” positions are that of the base of the machine. The crane “to” position may be used to indicate the direc-tion that the crane arm takes. Further details of crane direction, rotation,movement, etc., will be determined on the spot by chance operationswith respect to practicality. On the drawing, “foot” “from” positions are
circles, those for the crane are squares. The dotted line shows the trajec-tory to the “to” position (ﬁgs. 13.6 and 13.7).
[From] John Cage and Andrew Culver [to] Van Carlson, Peter and Hen-ning Lohner
One
11Lights:
The lighting setup is described in twenty-four drawings, at least one
for each of the seventeen scenes (either Deckenlicht or Bodenlicht ), some
of the scenes having both (2, 5, 6, 10, 11, 13, 16). Each drawing has a
table in the upper right corner, giving, for each circuit, the numericalvalue of the horizontal rotation, the distance above the ﬂoor on the scrim
of the lamp’ s hot-spot, and the gel (Rosco #114 or Lee #228), if any. The
rest of the drawing is self-explanatory. Not indicated [are] the shape,edge and size characteristics of the light beams. These will be determinedon the spot using chance operations with respect to practicality.
The light cues are given in a separate 138-page document ( ﬁg. 13.8).
Each of the seventeen scenes begin[s] again at cue 0, a special cue withno duration that describes the intensities of all lights at the beginning ofthe scene. Cues from 1 on up have a duration and a “Perftime” which is
the accumulated time of all durations up until that cue. Circuit and in-tensity numbers are joined by either a “/H11021” (crescendo —intensity in-
creasing during the cue) or a “/H11022” (intensity decreasing). After everytwenty cues a “State Current” is given, which is the actual intensity of allcircuits at that point; this is given as a means of proo ﬁng the entry of in-
tensities. During shooting, the lighting operator will have to be able tostop and start the cues in sync with the time-code used for ﬁlming.THE MAKING OF CAGE’S ONE11
279
280
FIGURE 13.5
Time bracket list for One11,marked by Van Carlson during shooting. © John Cage and Henning
Lohner.
FIGURE 13.6
Camera graph for One11,marked by Van Carlson during shooting. © John Cage and Henning Lohner.
282
FIGURE 13.7
Scene grids for One11.© John Cage and Henning Lohner.
283

284
FIGURE 13.8
Lighting cues for One11.© John Cage and Henning Lohner.
285

April 14, 1992, Munich
[To] John Cage and Andrew Culver
Greetings from Germany,
We have arrived safely thanking always the wings that lift. After
closely studying the camera positions, I have some notes on what the
camera will and won ’t see through the lens.
Scene 1 take 4: a crane shot with the 100 mm lens could be shaky
Scene 1 take 12: a crane shot with the 85 mm lens could be shakyScene 2 take 3: 32 mm lens ﬁeld of view may see lights at O-1 & K-4Scene 3 take 1: 100 mm lens and crane move /H11005 vibrations
Scene 4 take 1: camera position & lens will see light standsScene 4 take 3: camera position & lens will see light standsScene 4 take 5: camera OK until I-10 position then light standsScene 4 take 6: camera can only move between G-1 & J-1 in that
position
Scene 4 take 8: camera OK only at H-5, no other movement possibleScene 4 take 9: camera moves possible only from J-10 to N-10Scene 4 take 10: camera moves only towards G-1 to J-1Scene 4 take 12: camera moves only towards N-10 to J-10Scene 6 take 3: movement only A-4 to A-6 or D-1 to G-1Scene 7 take 3: 100 mm lens on foot will be shakyScene 9 take 3: movement to E-9 may be too farScene 9 take 5: 85 mm lens on foot may be shakyScene 9 take 6; 100 mm lens on foot may be shakyScene 10 take 1: no movement —only L-10 possible
Scene 10 take 3: may see light stands at L-1 to N-2Scene 10 take 4: camera moves only from A-10 to C-10 or A-8 to A-9Scene 11 take 4: camera moves only from K-10 to O-10 or A-6 to A-10
or O-1 to K-1
Scene 11 take 5: camera moves only from O-10 to I-10Scene 11 take 6: camera moves only from O-1 to K-1Scene 12 take 1: 100 mm lens on foot shakes a lotScene 12 take 2: distance to cover in time allowed is very greatScene 13 take 1; 100 mm lens and distance covered may be a problemScene 14 take 1: distance in time allowed is tightScene 14 take 4: 20 mm lens may see top of lighting grid at J-6Scene 15 take 3: end point at N-5 may be too far & light stand appearsScene 16 take 1: 100 mm lens traveling from F-2 to O-2 may be too farHENNING LOHNER
286
Now is it clear? Perhaps I am jet-lagged and need to adjust to this Bavar-
ian atmosphere. All I can say is it’ s not the takes that take time, but the
time between the takes that takes time.Van CarlsonMünchen Kammeraman
April 22, 1992, Fernsehstudios München
First day of shooting: In order to complete the full ninety minutes ofﬁlm within the seven given days, we had calculated that we could spendno more than ﬁfteen minutes per take, regardless of the dif ﬁculty of any
particular take. In completing each shot on schedule, we had to accom-modate a variety of decisions and operations.
Changes in lighting. Changes in lighting were made scene by scene.
Since there were seventeen scenes total, most days we set up one light-ing rig in the morning and a second in the afternoon; on some days threelighting rig changes were necessary. The schedule was divided up so thaton those days when we were shooting three scenes, comparativelyfewer changes would be shot. As it turned out, a certain number oflights needed adjusting with every take: spurious reﬂections (the angleby which light falls between cyc-screen and camera) were the great-est problem, but also spurious shadows (where one light produces ashadow because another light has interrupted it).
Camera setup, positioning, and motion. There were three different possi-
bilities for setting up the camera: (1) “ﬂying” the camera on the crane,
(2) using a hand-held camera, and (3) keeping the camera stationary ona tripod. This decision had to be coordinated with what the cameracould actually see, that is, the lens choice and focal range, along withthe “in” or “out” of focus options included in the compositional scheme.
There were instances where the choice of lens would expose too muchor too little of the area needed for the shot, and we would have to makead hoc changes. Frequently Cage would consult his briefcase ﬁlled with
chance operations, but not always: sometimes sheer practicality madethe selection evident (or “commonsensical”).
Film stock controls and magazine changes. We’d change the magazine
with every eleven minutes of shot ﬁlm. After each take and with eachchange of lens, the machine would also be checked, since there was thedanger of the camera jamming or dust getting into it, thereby ruiningthe image. We actually had problems here during shooting only once ortwice, so we were lucky.
Ad hoc decisions by John Cage. Early on during shooting, Cage decided
to give Van ’s motion with the camera more “freedom” in order to follow
the light motion more closely. Such decisions were often made during therehearsal for each take. Also, decisions on the exact range and height ofTHE MAKING OF CAGE’S ONE11
287
the crane were left until the crane had been moved into its base position
for any given take.
Coordination of video playback and rehearsal of all motions. Once all the
individual “characters” of the play were in place, the time code clock for
the particular take was started. It was slated to the camera, then spreadacross several monitors for everyone else to see, not just in the studio,but up in the two control rooms located under the ceiling for video play-back and lighting cues. In addition, I would launch a simultaneous re-verse countdown so that lighting and camera motion were in sync, andcall the magic word: “ Action. ”
Troubleshooting. Peter Lohner balanced the shooting inside the studio
with the demands of the “outside world. ” He kept everything on sched-
ule, solving any and all problems, usually before they could occur, fromsecuring all the lights before the morning shooting to making sure thattheﬁlm negatives were delivered and developed properly in the evening.
In effect, all of these processes leading to that long-anticipated mo-
ment “action ” had to happen simultaneously. The lighting cues were
programmed and triggered in a separate studio control room located ina corner under the ceiling of the studio, and while we were recordingone take, the lighting cues for the next takes would be programmed.The video playback room (both the time code reference monitor trackand the monitor of what we had just shot) was located in another partof the building, above the actual studio, and “wired” down to the stagemonitors; their coordination was done by intercom.
April 24, 1992, Fernsehstudios München
Cage came to the shooting stage and said: “I dreamt color. ” He had left
the day before worried about the ﬁlm becoming too dark, literally, thatit had not enough light in it. We had found that the movements of thecamera sometimes did not correspond well enough to the area in whichthe lights were moving. Although Cage later discarded the idea of color,the problem of “lightness” was solved by Van ’s suggestion that we do
one rehearsal for each take and pay attention to the movements, andthen move the camera towards the light action.
April 26, 1992, Fernsehstudios München
C
AGE: Van, it’ s very nice to have some of those greasy, those dif ﬁcult-to-
see lights.
VAN: Over here?
CAGE: These are very beautiful over on this side.
VAN: Yeah, we were going to start here and just swing this way.
CAGE: Good!HENNING LOHNER
288
April 26, 1992, Fernsehstudios München
Van and I discuss the video-replay of a shot in which documentary cam-eraman Henry von Barnekow’ s shadow coincidentally wound up in the
ﬁlmed picture: Cage likes it and wants to keep it in the ﬁlm. (Henry was
shooting video for a documentary about the making of One
11.)
April 27, 1992H
ENNING LOHNER : Can you describe the compositional process to
achieve such a ﬁlm? In general steps?
JOHN CAGE: Well, I’ve worked with Andrew Culver for several years —
I think it’ s around ten years now —and the ﬁrst work we did together
was the Europeras 1 & 2, and since then we’ve had installations of a work
called Essay, which is writing mesostics through the “Essay on Civil Dis-
obedience” by Henry David Thoreau. It was conceived as a present to
give to Satie in another work called The First Meeting of the Satie Society.So, in all those cases, Andrew Culver has made different lighting instal-lations, that is to say, a multiplicity of lights facing in different directions.In the case of the Europeras, it was in the Opera at Frankfurt before it
burned. And in the case of the Essay, it was in a darkened room, and 
we gave the light its own life. That is to say, it didn ’t light the action 
or the scene or the decors, it simply existed as light independent of what it lit, which is the way the sun exists during the day, wherever itshines: it doesn ’t know what it’ s doing. And frequently the most “impor-
tant” things, like presidents and kings and so forth are in the dark.(laughs) OK?
H
ENNING LOHNER : Can you describe the surroundings we are currently
working in?
JOHN CAGE: This is, so to speak, an empty room in which the light is not
in relation to anything but itself. And it reminds me of what Immanuel
Kant in his Critique —I think in his Critique of Pure Reason —said about
music and about laughter: that without meaning anything both musicand laughter —and I think we can now add light, too —give pleasure
without having any meaning whatsoever.
And it’ s true: there are changes, changes that take place with sounds
and the changes that take place in the sound of laughter and the changesthat take place in intensity and differences between light and dark; no-ticing such things, one is free of the problems of politics and economics,I think. Even, perhaps, free of oneself.
H
ENNING LOHNER : Other, perhaps, than my asking you to do it, is there
any reason that you would like to make a ﬁlm?
JOHN CAGE: Well, I’m getting rather old, so if I have the opportunity toTHE MAKING OF CAGE’S ONE11
289
do something, then I jump at it, instead of hesitating, because there isn ’t
much time left! (laughs)
HENNING LOHNER : Can you describe the process of chance operations as
it relates to this project? In other words, we have spontaneously been
deciding certain things . . . can you explain?
JOHN CAGE: Well, the program speciﬁes the number of lights to be used
in a particular scene and for this composition we have, if I recall cor-
rectly, we have seventeen scenes. It’ s about the number of chapters in
Finnegans Wake or Ulysses. When you have a large work, it’ s better to di-
vide into parts like of that number rather than, say, three, because threeparts would produce very long sections. In this case, dividing ninetyminutes into seventeen sections, we have the experience of both whatseems to be long and what seems to be short. And we ’re carried through
the ninety minutes with differences of light, differences of numbers oflights. I look forward to the pleasure of seeing a ﬁlm that isn ’t—doesn ’t
have a plot, doesn ’t have characters, which has, so to speak, nothing. And
that gives us, I think, in this day of violence and overpopulation, war,and economic collapse, I think it gives us something to enjoy. (smiles)
H
ENNING LOHNER : The computer program is based on the I Ching? Is
that correct?J
OHN CAGE: No. It’ s not based on the I Ching; it uses the I Ching in or-
der to make choices or [to show] how to make selections, if you wish,
among the plurality of possibilities.
HENNING LOHNER : Now, I noticed you have in your briefcase pages with
long lists of numbers; you use them to help us make decisions when we
have a problem. Can you explain those numbers to us?
JOHN CAGE: Oh, I carry around I Ching numbers with respect to a large
number of numbers —particularly those below 64, from 2 to 64, and
only a few above 64. The higher numbers are for special circumstances,
but the lower numbers are frequently useful. Particularly in this situa-tion, the number 2 has been extraordinarily useful. So it ’s a page full of
numbers between 1 and 2. They ’re either 1s or 2s. If we want to know
whether a light should be focused or not focused, we use the sheet for2. If we want to know whether there is the possibility of one thing orthe other, then we use 2. We use 5 on other occasions, I imagine, wherethere’ s a sweep of possibilities. So that it goes from 1 to 2 to 3 to 4 to 5.
(makes gesture with arm)
P
ETER LOHNER : So, Van, tell us whether you think the director is giving
you enough creative freedom or not?V
ANCARLSON : Oh, well, that’ s a thing: there’ s too much freedom!
JOHN CAGE: Too much freedom?HENNING LOHNER
290
VANCARLSON : Yes.
JOHN CAGE: Well, when you want some —some constraint? We know
where we can get it! (laughs)
VANCARLSON : Yes, I think we’ve done a good job. We’ re done with the
choices. (Cage laughs)J
OHN CAGE: Yes, if you want more constraints, you simply ask for it.
VANCARLSON : Yes, good.
JOHN CAGE: I think one of the problems in making this ﬁlm was that the
constraints we gave originally about your position and so forth were dif-
ﬁcult, some of them, to handle, or didn ’t result in much visuality be-
cause we didn ’t know what the speciﬁc directions of the lights would be
when we did the chance operations. So I think you who are so experi-enced with the camera and know what the camera can do with respectto the light, you, I think, can use freedom or constraint more ef ﬁciently
on the spot, so to speak.
V
ANCARLSON : Yes, I think we ’ve gotten to that. And, really, the whole
piece is a performance for the camera.J
OHN CAGE: Right.
VANCARLSON : Within the . . .
JOHN CAGE: Within the lighting situation.
VANCARLSON : Which is maybe like a dream come true!
JOHN CAGE: I think light gives me the pleasure that sound gives!
VANCARLSON : Well, and always, of course, I think because of your ref-
erences to Joyce about the ineluctable modality.J
OHN CAGE: What! Now, isn ’t that marvelous! I was trying to think of
what those words are! I don ’t have my copy of Ulysses with me, but “the
ineluctable modality of . . . ”
VANCARLSON : “The ineluctable modality of the visible. ”
JOHN CAGE: “. . . of the visible. ” Isn’t that marvelous! And then in the
next paragraph: “. . . of the audible. ” And that’ s how we live together,
I would say, in society: We live with light and we live with sound. We
live with what we see and we live with what we hear.
VANCARLSON : Good.
HENNING LOHNER : All right, you can . . .
JOHN CAGE: . . . I can be quiet now? (all laugh)
(Cage gets off the crane and walks back toward his table at the studio entrance.)THE MAKING OF CAGE’S ONE11
291
June 12, 1992, New York
One11and 103
One11is a ﬁlm without subject. There is light but no persons, no things,
no ideas about repetition and variation. It is meaningless activity which
is nonetheless communicative, like light itself, escaping our attention ascommunication because it has no content. Light is, as McLuhan said,pure information, without any content to restrict its transforming andinforming power. Chance operations were used with respect to the shots,black and white, taken in the FSM television studio in Munich by VanCarlson, Los Angeles cameraman. The producer and director was Hen-ning Lohner. The executive producer was Peter Lohner. The light en-vironment was designed and programmed by John Cage and Andrew Culver, as was the editing of the ﬁlm, done in video format at Laser Edit
East in NYC, with the help of Gary Sharﬁn and Bernadine Colish. Thisedit was then transferred to the original 35 mm ﬁlm negative at ARRI,
Munich.
103is an orchestral work. Like the ﬁlm, it is ninety minutes long. It is
divided into seventeen parts. The lengths of the seventeen parts are thesame for all the strings and the percussion. The woodwinds and the brassfollow another plan. The shots of the cameraman still another. Follow-ing chance operations, the number of wind instruments changes for eachof the seventeen parts. Thus the density of 103varies from the solo trom-
bone of Section Eleven, the trumpet and horn duo of Section Ten, thewoodwind trio of Section Six, to the tutti of Section Five and the neartuttis of Sections One, Eight, Thirteen, Fourteen, and Sixteen.
—John Cage
2
September 19, 1992, Cologne
The ﬁlm and music were premiered in Cologne on September 19, 1992,
with the Radio and Symphony Orchestra of the WDR. I remember going on stage after the concert with Van, Peter, and Andrew, to takeour bow for Cage, and as I looked out to the ﬁfteen hundred spectatorsI somehow located my mentor, Gerhard Richter, raising his thumb upin the air.
I found out that night that Cage had dedicated the music to Wolfgang
Becker-Carsten and me. I met Dr. Becker in 1990 on a wonderful sunnyafternoon in Zurich. I had come there to see Cage ’s exhibit at the Kunst-
haus; a great show of his artwork, smoke paintings, etchings, etc. Cagewas there, too, and after we had our usual game of chess (a ritualisticoccasion by which Cage would make me the present of a book for everyHENNING LOHNER
292
2. Preface to the screenplay/lighting score from One11.
time that he lost), he hooked me up with Dr. Becker, who is a unique
ﬁgure in contemporary European music. Through his enthusiasm andhis position at the WDR radio in Cologne he has been able to sponsorand commission countless pieces of contemporary music. Dr. Beckermade the music of 103, as well as its use with One
11,possible.
Sometime during the process of making the ﬁlm, Cage’ s ideas about
sound for it changed. He completed the score to 103 early in 1991, and
he called me in Germany speci ﬁcally to tell me the good news. 103was
meant to go with One11,and vice versa. So, whereas both One11and 103
can anytime be performed separately, they were not to be premieredseparately; in terms of their composition, they are closely related. I con-sider them to be twins.
[From] Heinz-Klaus Metzger:
There is no precedence in ﬁlm history to One11,not even a single piece
of work referentially precursory; the avant-gardists of “abstract ﬁlm” re-
ferred at least to platonic ideas or products of human imagination such
as geometrical ﬁgures or ﬁgurations. One11introduces ex abrupto a new
era. At a time when television has fully substituted reality with its merelikeness so that any former hope of a better world has been transmutatedinto the wish for better TV programming, One
11surfaces as the ﬁrst ﬁlm
that applies without compromise an achievement of civilization, that, al-though it is thousands of years old, has very rarely been realized, whichis the biblical Second Commandment:
Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness ofany thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, orthat is in the water under the earth. (2 Moses [Exodus] 20, verse 4)
For One
11the camera recorded nothing but light impressions unto
themselves, emitted by lamps that do not illuminate anything, but sim-
ply expose the ﬁlm material. . . . It may surprise that this work of art re-quired a whole team to produce it, . . . while it functions under the title-numeral One.What “counts” with [Cage’ s] number pieces is the personnel
necessary for the performance: here, one projectionist suf ﬁces.
For many years Cage ’s compositions had necessitated the revolution-
ary postulate of the fall of the art empire 
(Kunstprivileg), thereby admit-
ting ordinary and everyday noise into them, so as to soften the bordersbetween art and its surrounding reality, and this was furthered evenmore by incorporating the enemy art industry into the compositions,such as converting radios and record-players into musical instruments.However, Cage’ s late works —like Etudes Australes for piano, the Free-
man Etudes for violin, or all the “number pieces”— announce in blindingTHE MAKING OF CAGE’S ONE11
293
purity and solemnity their critical difference from the real world and the
ideas that rule it, both literally and ﬁguratively. Given the rigor withwhich Cage declined that like-image of, to, or from the real world, thecompletely singular quality of One
11very possibly make it Cage ’s most
radical work of all, a play of light that neither belongs to nor has any tradition in any aesthetic discipline, the least of which in ﬁlm art: One
11
cannot be integrated, it is outside of everything else, and very possiblyCage’ s most founded archimedic center of enlightenment.
3
October 10, 1992, Wiesbaden
In order to make the broadcast copies of the ﬁlm, the 35-mm positivewas transferred to Betacam-Sp videotape, where the standard contrastratio of 0 to 100 is further narrowed by about 30 percent because of thenature of electromagnetic waves: whether you overexpose or under-expose the video, you run the risk of frequencies “crossing out” whichin turn can lead to the broadcast signal’ s “caving in. ” Also, the resolu-
tion of television is less than a third of a 35-mm ﬁlm.
Cage asked that the 35-mm theatrical copies not be cleaned of the
dust that naturally collects on them the more often they get shown; this idea he took from a ﬁlm Nam June Paik once made, where the ﬁlmchanges through every theatrical performance. The video copy, how-ever, will never collect dust. So the television version of the ﬁlm has its
own “look” to it.
Initially, I had proposed a length of ninety minutes for One
11because
that is the average length of a feature ﬁlm, and we had set out to makea feature ﬁlm. Having done so, the logical consequence was for us toshow it in its entirety. However, it is not necessary for the audience towatch it all at once; rather, they can take it any way they like. Cage men-tioned that he could conceive of the ﬁlm being viewed for only moment
just as well as in an in ﬁnitely repeated “loop”— for even the shortest
moment would suf ﬁce, if that’ s what one chose to pay attention to. Also,
the ﬁlm can be shown anywhere, not just in a movie house, and the au-
dience can do whatever they like while viewing it.
I saw those fading images, dying out, white and black light born
again, coming in and out, that ﬂickering craziness we call One
11on 
my television screen —this was television alive (ﬁgs. 13.9 and 13.10)!
And I knew from “documentation ” that we achieved something unprec-
edented in television. After the broadcast, response from public televi-sion of ﬁcials was unanimous. One of the directors of broadcasting came
up to me: “Great ﬁlm —just don ’t do it again. ”HENNING LOHNER
294
3. This text, which I have translated, appears in the program booklet for the premiere of 103
and One11: John Cage: 103 f ür Orchestra und One11, ein Film ohne Thema (Cologne: Westdeutscher
Rundfunk, 1992), 15 –16.
Cage asked that there be no “end” credits, since he didn ’t like the no-
tion of something being at the “end” as opposed to anywhere. Since we
didn’t want to leave the credits out altogether and because for a variety
of reasons ﬁlm credits are mandatory, we decided to put them all beforethe actual ﬁlm started. It was Peter’ s idea to use the ﬁlm leftovers from
the editing room’ s garbage can as visual background to the credits. Cage
liked it; we did it.THE MAKING OF CAGE’S ONE11
295
FIGURE 13.9
Frame from One11.Photograph by Henning Lohner.
However, Cage did have a personal suggestion for a title to “end” the
ﬁlm. One afternoon during the editing in New York, we were sitting
around his writing table, and he told us this story: Many years ago,much before the war, when he was traveling like a hobo through Eu-rope, he came to an Italian mountain village. On a poster he saw the an-nouncement that a movie would be screened in the marketplace in aHENNING LOHNER
296
FIGURE 13.10
Frame from One11.Photograph by Henning Lohner.
few days’ time. Back then, there were not many cinemas, and it was
common that on a given day in a week a truck would come to town witha projector and screen, and the townspeople could gather to see a ﬁlm.
Cage returned to the town the evening of the screening and took hisplace in a café; sure enough, there a huge white screen had been set upin the square. Waiting for the ﬁlm to start, Cage took in the atmosphereof sounds and images around him, the chatting of the people, the clack-ing of plates, the sounds of the wind and weather. Lost in his observa-tions and his imagination, Cage suddenly realized that it had becomefairly late and the ﬁlm had not even begun showing yet. He went to theowner of the café and asked what was happening. The café owner an-swered that the ﬁlm couldn ’t be shown this evening because the ﬁlm
hadn ’t arrived in town.
So, ﬁfty years later, when Cage had completed his own black-and-
white ﬁlm, he thought it would be pleasant to announce “The End” in
fancy script, just as the black-and-white ﬁlms of his youth used to do.In a way, this was a sentimental joke, an elegant little twist, typical ofCage’ s gentle and eloquent humor. It was a way of saying, You don ’t
have to take all this too seriously.
And I ﬁnd this interesting when we consider One
11as Cage’ s artis-
tic credo. I remember at the world premiere in Cologne, the organiz-ers tried stopping the ﬁlm before it could end with “The End, ” which
seemed to them “silly, ” an obvious error of production. However, they
didn’t know where the end was before the end title came up, so they
couldn ’t stop the ﬁlm in time for “The End” not to occur.
To date One
11has had nearly a hundred public performances in ten
countries. It’ s been broadcast in Germany, Switzerland, and Austria and
was part of Rolywholyover —a circus exhibit curated by Julie Lazar in
1994 –95 that traveled the United States and Japan. There have been a
total of ﬁve performances with live orchestra: the Cologne premiere, inPrague, at Chatelet for the Festival d’Automne in Paris, at the Venice Bi-ennale, and at the Spoleto festival in Charleston, South Carolina.
One
11was Cage’ s last completed work of a larger scale. As for myself,
I am grateful that his ﬁnal work would turn out to be my ﬁrst.THE MAKING OF CAGE’S ONE11
297
CONTRIBUTORS
MARY ANNE AMACHER ,a composer and
installation artist, is a pioneer in the explo-
ration of forms of sounds in space. Since1973, Amacher’ s work has been mounted in
museums, galleries, and concerts in Europe,Asia, and the United States. In 1975, she wasinvited by John Cage to compose the stormenvironment for his Lecture on the Weather,and in 1978, to compose Close Up, the sonic
environment that accompanied his ten-hoursolo voice composition Empty Words. They
presented the latter work together in perfor-mances in Canada, Germany, and the UnitedStates (1976 –84).
D
A VID W. B ERNSTEIN is an associate pro-
fessor of music at Mills College. He has pub-lished articles on Schoenberg’ s tonal theo-
ries, the history of music theory, John Cage,and the avant-garde. He edited, with Chris-topher Hatch, the collection Music Theory and
the Exploration of the Past (University of Chi-
cago Press, 1993). In 1995, Bernstein orga-nized the conference/festival “Here ComesEverybody: The Music, Poetry, and Art ofJohn Cage. ”
299
DEBORAH CAMPANA serves as conservatory librarian at the Oberlin
College Conservatory Library. Prior to this, she was a librarian at the
Northwestern University Music Library, where she oversaw work on the John Cage Archive and, in 1992, coordinated the weeklong festival“John Cage NOW. ” Since her dissertation, “Form and Structure in the
Music of John Cage, ” her research has focused on Cage’ s life and work,
on which she has written many articles and given lectures. She was aperforming member of the Chicago ensemble Kapture and a foundingmember of New Music Chicago.
A
USTIN CLARKSON is professor emeritus at York University. His criti-
cal editions of the music of Stefan Wolpe appear under the imprint 
of Peer Classical (New York and Hamburg), and he is editor of On the 
Music of Stefan Wolpe: Essays and Recollections (forthcoming). Clarkson co-
authored Reginald Godden Plays with the Canadian pianist, who shared
Cage’ s enthusiasm for mushrooms and who developed the fungus spore
imprint as an art form.
ANDREW CULVER ,a composer whose interests include the musical ap-
plication of R. Buckminster Fuller’ s tensegrity principle, worked closely
with John Cage from 1981 to 1992. He developed computer programs
for Cage’ s music and poetry and directed his theatrical and installa-
tion pieces. Culver also designed the software for Cage ’s Rolywholyover:
A Circus (1993). With Frank Scheffer, he made a group of four award-
winning ﬁlms entitled From Zero, based on materials from Cage’ s life.
Culver is the composer of Ocean 1-95, the orchestral component of Ocean,
conceived by John Cage and Merce Cunningham, with choreographyby Cunningham, electronic music by David Tudor, and design and light-ing by Marsha Skinner.
A
LVIN CURRAN ,the Darius Milhaud Professor of Music at Mills Col-
lege, began his career with the renowned group Musica Elettronica Viva
(MEV), which he founded with Frederic Rzewski and Richard Teitel-baum. Since 1965, his music —embracing the sounds of the world —has
been featured in major new music venues and festivals. He collaboratedon several occasions with John Cage.
J
OHN HOLZAEPFEL received a Ph.D. in musicology from the City Uni-
versity of New York, where he wrote his dissertation, “David Tudor and
the Performance of American Experimental Music, 1950 –1959. ” He is
currently preparing a biography of David Tudor.A
LLAN KAPROW ,professor emeritus of visual arts at the University of
California at San Diego, is among the most in ﬂuential ﬁgures in con-CONTRIBUTORS
300
temporary American art. Famous for creating the “Happenings” of the
1950s, Kaprow is also widely known as an author, having published aseries of essays and other writings, from his ﬁrst major work “The Leg-acy of Jackson Pollock” (1958) to “The Meaning of Life” (1990).
R
AYKASS is the founder and director of the Mountain Lake Work-
shop, an art project that draws on the practices of resource use of the
New River Valley and the Appalachian region. In 1983, 1988, 1989, and1990, Kass welcomed John Cage to this workshop to experiment withwatercolors. Kass, a painter and professor of studio art at Virginia Poly-technic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia, has writtenMorris Graves: Vision of the Inner Eye (1983) and John Cage: New River Water-
colors (1988).
J
ONATHAN D. K ATZ is chair of the Department of Gay/Lesbian/Bi-
sexual Studies at City College of San Francisco and the ﬁrst tenured fac-ulty in Gay and Lesbian Studies in the United States. He has publishedwidely on queer contributions to American art and culture, especially of the cold war era. He recently coauthored a book with Moira Roth entitled Difference/Indifference: Musings on Postmodernism, Marcel Duchamp,
and John Cage, and has written extensively on Andy Warhol, Jasper
Johns, and Robert Rauschenberg as well. A long-time political activist,he founded the Harvey Milk Institute and the Queer Caucus of the Col-lege Art Association, the professional body of artists and art historians.
C
ONSTANCE LEW ALLEN is senior curator at the University of Califor-
nia Art Museum, Berkeley. She received her education at Mount Hol-
yoke College, Columbia University, and California State University, SanDiego. As well as teaching at the San Francisco Art Institute, the Univer-sity of California, Santa Barbara, and other California colleges and uni-versities, she has lectured and written widely on contemporary art andserved as associate director at Crown Point Press, San Francisco.
H
ENNING LOHNER began working as musical advisor as well as appren-
tice director for Louis Malle (1989-90, on the ﬁlm May Fools ) and has
since focused both on sound and visual media. His ﬁlms include Peefee-
yatko (1991, in collaboration with Frank Zappa), One11and 103 (1992,
by John Cage), The Revenge of the Dead Indians (1993), and In a Metal Mood
(1996, starring Pat Boone). Lohner’ s audiovisual installation raw ma-
terial: vols. 1 –11(1995, on tour in Europe) has been followed by scores
for The Polar Bear (1998, by Til Schweiger), The Great Bagarozy (1999, by
Bernd Eichinger), and the restored silent classic Orlac’ s Hands (1925/
2000, directed by Robert Wiene). He is currently living and working inLos Angeles as member of the Media Ventures group of composers.CONTRIBUTORS
301
JACKSON MACLOWis a poet, composer, and writer of performance
pieces, essays, plays, and radio works. He has read, performed, and lec-
tured throughout North America, Europe, and New Zealand and hastaught at universities and writing schools in the United States and Eu-rope. Of his twenty-seven books, the most recent are 42 Merzgedichte in Memoriam Kurt Schwitters (1994), Barnesbook (1996), and 20 Forties
(1999). The compact disc Open Secrets (1993) features ten of his musi-
cal and verbal performance works, realized by Anne Tardos, seven in-strumentalists, and the composer.
G
ORDON MUMMA is professor emeritus of music at the University of
California, Santa Cruz. He worked as composer and performer with the
Merce Cunningham Dance Company; he was a cofounder of the ONCEFestivals of Contemporary Music in Ann Arbor, Michigan, and a mem-ber of the Sonic Arts Union. Mumma’ s compositions and recordings 
include Music for the Venezia Space Theater (1963), Megaton for William Bur-
roughs (1964), Hornpipe (1967), Some Voltage Drop (1974), and Than Par-
ticle(1985).
J
AMES PRITCHETT is a writer and pianist specializing in contemporary
music. His publications include The Music of John Cage (Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1993) and a series of essays to accompany recordings ofCage’ s music released by Mode Records. Pritchett has performed works
by Cage and Frances White. His recording of White’ s Still Life with Piano
(written for him) appears on the Cultures Electroniques 5 disc put out by
Le Chant du Monde.
J
AMES TENNEY ’s teachers and mentors have included Carl Ruggles,
Edgard Varèse, Harry Partch, and John Cage. He is a performer as well
as a composer and was a pioneer in the ﬁeld of electronic and computermusic. He has written works for a variety of media, both instrumentaland electronic, many of them using alternative tuning systems. He is theauthor of books and articles on musical acoustics, computer music, andmusical form and perception, and is now on the composition faculty ofthe California Institute of the Arts.
P
AUL VAN EMMERIK received his Ph.D. in 1996 at the University of
Amsterdam, where he studied musicology, library science, and Ameri-
can studies. He is a faculty member at Utrecht University, where he cur-rently teaches music history, with an emphasis on twentieth-century artmusic.
F
RANCES WHITE is a composer working primarily in computer music.
Her teachers were Lawrence Moss, Charles Dodge, and Paul Lansky. InCONTRIBUTORS
302
1985, White assisted John Cage in the technical realization of his Essay
pieces for computer-generated tape. Her music has been performed inthe United States and in Europe and appears on several compact discs.In 1993 she composed Winter Aconites for six instruments and tape, com-
missioned by the ASCAP Foundation in memory of John Cage.
C
HRISTIAN WOLFF holds a professorship in classics and music at Dart-
mouth College. In the early 1950s he was an associate of John Cage,
Morton Feldman, Earle Brown, and other members of the New Yorkschool. Wolff later studied classics at Harvard University, where he alsotaught until 1970. The American Academy of Letters has honored himwith an award, and among his many compositions are works commis-sioned by West German Radio, the Wesleyan Singers, and pianist UrsulaOppens. In 1996, he received the John Cage Award for Music, and in1999, became a member of the Akademie der Künste in Berlin.CONTRIBUTORS
303
INDEX
Locators in boldface refer to ﬁgures and musical examples.
Ajemian, Maro, 114
Amacher, Maryanne, Living Sound, Patent
Pending (Traveling Musicians BeingPrepared), 189
André, Michael, 222Arieti, Silvano, 94Arp, Jean (or Hans), anticipates Cage, 12,
96–98, 171
Austin, Larry, 156avant-garde: origins of term, 9 –10; in
twentieth century, 10 –16. See also
dadaism; futurism
Ball, Hugo, 11Barnekow, Henry von, 289Barron, David, 177Baynes, Cary, 85 –86
Becker-Carsten, Wolfgang, 292 –93
Behrman, David, For Nearly an Hour, 116
Bell Labs, 194, 199, 200Bernstein, Charles, 224Beyer, Johanna, 17Bobrowski, Chris, 176Boulez, Pierre, 114, 200; “ Alea, ” 33–34;
relations with Cage, 30 –31, 33 –34;
Second Piano Sonata, 30; Structure Ia
for Two Pianos, 31, 35. See also under
Cage, John
Brakhage, Stan, 200Brecht, George, 14, 169, 235Brown, Earle, 213Brown, Kathan, 196, 235Brown, Norman O., 211, 213, 219, 220,
228
Bryant, Alan, 177Buddhism. See Zen Buddhism and under
Cage, John: ideas and opinions
Buhlig, Richard, 114
Cage, John
anecdotes and reminiscences about:
168–71, 177, 200 –202, 207 –9, 261,
264; on computer use, 193 –99, 205;
on performance, 75 –76, 116, 118 –
19
anecdotes and reminiscences told by,
80, 119, 268 –69, 271, 296 –97
and avant-garde, 12, 13 –14, 16, 97 –98
bibliography, 2 –3, 157 –60, 212
and Boulez: correspondence with, 22 –
23, 30, 84, 88n.48, 94; relations
with, 30 –31, 33 –34, 84
career and personal circumstances:
arthritis, 115, 116 –17, 197, 201,
206–7; collaborations with Cun-
ningham, 114 –15, 117, 197, 207,
213; early poverty, 268 –69; homo-
sexual relationships, 41 –44; mar-
riage and divorce, 42 –44; psycho-
analysis, 44 –45; at schools or labs,
14, 17n.32, 42, 121, 169 –70, 177,
200; as “silent” homosexual, 49 –61
chance and indeterminacy: condition-
ality of, 164 –65, 226, 230 –32, 235 –
36; disagreement over, 33 –34, 84;
effects of, 29 –30, 86, 94, 97, 133,
211, 261 –62, 265 –66; operations,
195. See also I Ching, below in this
entry
engagement in different media or ac-
305
Cage, John (continued)
tivities: as ﬁlmmaker, 262 –64, 
273–97; as mesostic maker, 193,
196–97, 206, 219 –31; as painter,
246–47, 248, 249–58; as performer,
113–19, 132, 180; as poet, 214 –31;
printmaking, 196, 236 –42; read-
ings, 114, 117 –18, 207, 230, 261; 
as teacher, 14, 43, 169 –72, 261
friends’ ﬁrst impressions of, 168 –69,
176, 177, 194 –95, 200 –201, 261
I Ching, use of: basic purpose, 86 –87,
213, 227, 231, 235, 272, 290; and
the computer, 202 –4, 235; for mu-
sical composition and performance,31, 72, 76, 165, 192; for poetry andlectures, 214 –15, 217 –18, 220, 228;
for the visual arts, 236 –37, 247,
249–51, 253 –55
ideas and opinions: art and life con-
ﬂated, 46 –48, 52 –53, 68, 97, 293 –
94; depersonalization of art, 29, 46,50–51, 57, 173 –74, 232, 236, 242 –
43, 267; future envisioned by, 183 –
84, 267 –68; Jung ’s inﬂuence on,
80–84, 86 –88; nonintentionality,
225–27, 230 –32, 243; on perfor-
mance, 72 –78, 94 –95, 101, 218 –
19; political attitudes, 15 –16, 40, 
46, 52, 54, 60 –61, 219, 231, 269 –
70; pragmatism as source of, 62 –66,
93; spirituality, 62, 78 –81, 97, 101,
273; Suzuki’ s inﬂuence on, 45 –46,
59, 63, 87 –88, 172, 211, 228, 236;
Taoism and, 29, 81, 82, 86; ZenBuddhism and, 14n.23, 29, 44 –47,
50, 56, 81, 87, 88, 91, 133, 165,172, 211, 226, 236, 272
modernism in music of, 17 –40,
98n.72, 164 –65, 178 –79
mushrooms, interest in, 55, 269music: early compositional techniques,
17–26, 121 –22; inﬂuence of
Schoenberg’ s procedures on, 17, 19,
26, 28, 38, 163, 166; noise as com-positional component, 18 –19, 22,
183, 185, 272; notational methods,121–22, 125 –36, 138 –41, 144 –45,
148–49, 152 –53, 156, 160 –62,
194; shaping of musical time, 120 –
36; sketches and other manuscripts, 4, 18n.35, 20, 20 –21, 24 –25,31,
32–34,36–37,37,158–59, 161 –
62, 166; views on harmony, 174 –
76, 266musical works, analyses of: First Con-
struction (in Metal), 22–29, 23 –25,
27–28;Imaginary Landscape No. 1,
121–25, 122 –23;Music of Changes,
31–39, 32 –34, 37, 39; 108,132–33,
135–36; Roaratorio, 129, 132; Score
and 23 Parts: Twelve Haiku, 121, 129,
134, 135–36;Solo for Piano, 127–31,
130–31,135, 138 –56,139, 142,
145, 146 –48, 150 –52, 154 –55;So-
natas and Interludes, 121, 124 –25,
126; Three, 158–64, 162, 163, 166;
Two Pieces for Piano, 18–21, 19 –20,
38
musical works, mentioned or com-
mented on: Amores, 42–43; Aria,
127; Branches, 116; Cartridge Music,
11, 116, 176, 214; Cheap Imitation,73, 115; Child of Tree, 116; Concert for
Piano and Orchestra, 15, 73, 74, 121,
127, 137 –38; Concerto for Prepared Pi-
ano and Chamber Orchestra, 50, 59;
Credo in Us, 42–43; Double Music
(with Lou Harrison), 116; Essaypieces, 190, 197, 199, 205; EtudesAustrales, 161, 261, 289, 293; Europ-
eras, 14, 73, 74, 98, 174, 179, 195,
197, 205, 207, 289; Experiences No. 1,114; 59
1⁄2, 125; Five Songs for Con-
tralto, 42; Fontana Mix, 127, 141;
Four, 264; 4/H1103233 /H11033,14, 54, 56, 66, 69 –
72, 74, 103, 125, 127, 135; FreemanEtudes, 293; HPSCHD (with Lejaren
Hiller), 14, 115, 191; ImaginaryLandscapes, 40, 116, 133, 176; Music
for,117; Music for Piano, 114, 115,
127, 204; Music for Wind Instruments,42; Music of Changes, 15, 16, 31, 40,
137, 173, 174, 272; Mysterious Ad-venture, 42; number pieces, 197,
293; One
2,75–76; 108, 121, 136;
103,292, 293; Perilous Night, 42–
44, 50, 114; Quartet for Percussion,19; Quartets 1 –8,266; Roaratorio,
14, 121, 135; Root of an Unfocus,42; Sculptures Musicales, 176; Six-
teen Dances, 38; Sonata for Clarinet,
17n.33, 42; Sonata for Two Voices, 42;
Sonatas and Interludes, 30, 114, 127,
200–201; Song Books, 216–17; String
Quartet in Four Parts, 38; 30 Pieces for5 Orchestras, 193, 194; 31/H1103257.9864 /H11033,
125; 34/H1103246.776 /H11033,114, 121, 125, 214,
128; time-bracket pieces, 98, 121,125, 128, 162; Tossed as It Is Untrou-INDEX
306
bled, 42; 27/H1103210.554 /H11033,125, 127;
26/H110321.1499 /H11033,125; A Valentine Out 
of Season, 42; Variations, 137, 176;
Williams Mix, 14, 200; Winter Music,
127, 179; 0/H1103200 /H11033,207
visual works: ﬁlm with Mme Du-
champ, 262; The Missing Stone, 239,
241, 242; New River Rocks and Smoke,
242–43, 258 –59;New River Rocks
and Washes, 256–57;“New River
Watercolors, ” 245; One11,260–64,
273–97; Rolywholyover, 201, 297;
Ryoku drypoints, 236 –38, 239; 
Score without Parts: Twelve Haiku,235; Seven Day Diary (Not Knowing),Day 6, 240; 75 Stones, 239
writings, mesostics: I–VI,180; “62
Mesostics re Merce Cunningham, ”
215, 220; Themes & Variations, 175,
228–30; “36 Mesostics Re and Not
Re Marcel Duchamp, ” 215, 219;
“Writing for a Fourth Time throughFinnegans Wake, ” 221; “Writing for
a Second Time through FinnegansWake, ”220–21;“Writing for a Third
Time through Finnegans Wake, ”
221; “Writing through the Cantos, ”
215, 222 –24; writings through
Finnegans Wake, 196, 215 –16, 221
writings, various other: “Empty
Words, ” 180, 205, 217 –18, 225, 230;
“Experimental Music: Doctrine ” 66,
68; “Forerunners of Modern Mu-sic,” 82–84; “45/H11032 for a Speaker, ” 
3, 214, 242; “The Future of Music ”
(1974), 15 –16; “The Future of Mu-
sic: Credo, ” 183, 185, 186, 212 –13;
“History of Experimental Music inthe United States, ” 7–8; “How to
Improve the World (You Will OnlyMake Matters Worse), ” 55, 73, 271;
“Indeterminacy, ” 84, 117; “James
Joyce, Marcel Duchamp, Erik Satie:An Alphabet, ” 179, 227 –28, 230;
“Lecture on Nothing, ” 14, 50, 
51–52, 53, 77; “Lecture on the
Weather, ” 218; “Muoyce (Writing
for the Fifth Time through Finne-gans Wake), ” 221 –22; “Mureau, ”
217, 222; Notations, 117, 194;
“Other People Think, ” 51, 182; post-
face to A Year from Monday, 173;
texts in Song Books, 216 –17; “Where
Are We Going? and What Are WeDoing?” 214 –15Cage, Xenia (Andreevna Kashevaroff),
42–44, 47, 116
Calder, Alexander, 84Camicia, Bob, 257Campana, Deborah, 160Campbell, Joseph, 81Cardew, Cornelius, 179Carlson, Van, 273, 277, 279, 287, 288,
290–92
Carter, Elliott, 117, 177Carus, Paul, 87Chadabe, Joel, 177chance in art, 12. See also under Cage,
John: chance and indeterminacy
Chou Wen-chung, 165Colish, Bernadine, 292constructivists, Russian, 13Cope, David, 69Copland, Aaron, 117Corner, Philip, 272Cornish School (Seattle), 29n.42, 42, 121Coulter, Richard, 218Cowell, Henry, 17, 37, 56, 116, 213Crawford, Ruth, 17Crown Point Press, 196, 235, 239, 244,
245, 258
Crnkovic ´, Gordana P., 52
Csikszentmihalyi, Mihalyi, 92Cudworth, Ralph, 79Culver, Andrew, 277 –79, 286, 289, 292
Cunningham, Merce, 41 –45, 48, 55, 114 –
15, 117, 197, 207, 213; Changes:Notes on Choreography, 215, 220
Curran, Alvin: For Cornelius, 179; Mari-
time Rites, 179
dadaism, dadaists, 10 –13; anticipated
Cage, 19, 92, 97 –98
Davies, Dennis Russell and Molly, 189de Kooning, Willem, 176Denby, Edwin, 219Dennison, Doris, 116Dewey, John, 63, 67 –68, 70, 71, 93
Dillon, Fanny Charles, 114Dodge, Charles, 205Duchamp, Marcel, 63, 169, 175, 213,
235, 267
Duncan, Robert, 224Dunn, Robert, 122Durkheim, Emile, 103
Eckhart, Meister, 3, 71, 82 –84, 90
Eisele, Harro, 262 –63
Erdmann, Martin, 159 –60
Ernst, Max, 96 –97INDEX
307
experimental music, performing of, 66,
68–69, 72 –78, 92 –94, 98. See also
presentational states
Feldman, Morton, 15, 19, 49, 176, 213,
253; Ixion, 115
Fischinger, Oskar (von), 19, 78
Fluxus, 14 –15, 235
Foucault, Michel, 59 –60
Freeman, Betty, 117Freud, Sigmund, and Freudians, 44 –45,
78, 81, 84, 93, 95
Fuller, Buckminster, 16, 201, 213, 261,
263
futurism, 10 –13, 19
Geddert, Geesche, 160Ginsberg, Allen, 224Godfrey, David, 70Graves, Morris, 213Gurney, Edmund, 67n.10
Habermas, Jürgen, 9
Hamm, Charles, 9, 174Hansen, Al, 172, 235Harrison, Lou, 78, 116Hay, Harry, 43 –44
Heidegger, Martin, 102Helmholtz, Hermann, 180, 182Hennings, Emmy, 12Henck, Herbert, 158, 159“Here Comes Everbody” conference, 1, 3Herwitz, Daniel, 52Higgins, Dick, 15, 172, 235Hiller, Lejaren, 190, 200; HPSCHD, com-
posed with Cage, 14, 115, 191; IlliacSuite, composed with Leonard Isaac-
son, 199
Hohn, Herbert, 208 –9
homophobia, 49, 53 –54, 55 –56, 58
Hovhaness, Alan, 78Hunt, Harry T.: on William James, 65; on
presentational states, 66 –67, 91 –92,
102–3
Huxley, Aldous, 261
I Ching, the, 82, 84 –87, 176, 192 –93,
202–4, 213. See also under Cage,
John
Ichiyanagi, Toshi, 15, 118, 235
indeterminacy. See chance in art; Cage,
John: chance and indeterminacy
Ives, Charles, 69, 213
James, Phoebe, 114
James, William, 63, 81, 102; Pragma-tism, 81, 93, 103 –4; The Varieties 
of Religious Experience, 63–64, 87, 88,
93, 97
Jansen, Margaret, 116Jencks, Charles, 8Johns, Jasper, 49, 213, 235Johnson, Mimi, 208Johnson, Philip, 44Johnson, Tom, 177Joyce, James, 231, 273, 290, 291;
Finnegans Wake, 1, 81, 129, 132,
196, 220 –22 (see also under Cage,
John: writings, mesostics and writ-
ings, various other)
Jung, C. G., 63, 80, 90, 91, 93 –97, 102.
See also under Cage, John: ideas and
opinions
Kandinsky, Wassily, 97Kant, Immanuel, 289Kaprow, Allan, 15, 235Kass, Ray, 238Kasten, Maria, 263Kelley, Joe, 257Kivy, Peter, 67n.10koan, 89–91
Kostelanetz, Richard, 69Kramer, Jonathan, 70Kuhn, Laura, 159 –60
Lacey, Steve, 177Langer, Suzanne, 67n.10Lau, Peter, 246, 256Layman, Charles, 257Lazar, Julie, 297Lohner, Peter, 273, 277, 279, 280, 290,
292
Lucier, Alvin, Vespers, 116
Luening, Otto, 199
Mace, Thomas, Musick’ s Monument, 79–80
Mac Low, Jackson, 15, 171; Words nd Ends
from Ez, 223–24
Mac Low, Mordecai-Mark, 225
Mallarmé, Stéphane, 219Mangolte, Babette, 217Marinetti, Filippo Tommaso, 10 –12, 14
Maslow, Abraham, 92Masselos, William, 114Mathews, Max, 191, 192, 199, 200Maxﬁeld, Richard, 15, 170 –71
McClure, Bruce, 258McLuhan, Marshall, 16, 213, 228, 268,
292
Mead, G. H., 63Mead, Margaret, 242, 261INDEX
308
Mercenier, Marcel, 114
Messiaen, Olivier, 78; Modes de valeurs et
d’intensités, 31, 35
Metzger, Heinz-Klaus, 70, 293 –94
Mink, Louis, 132, 221Minsky, Marvin, 181Miró, Joan, 213More, Henry, 79Motherwell, Robert, 49Mouffe, Chantal, 52n.33Mountain Lake Workshop, 238, 239,
242, 244, 245
Mumma, Gordon, Swarm, performed
with Cage, 118 –19
Musica Elettronica Viva (MEV), 177 –79
Nattiez, Jean-Jacques, 69Negroponte, Nicholas, 188New School for Social Research (New
York), 14, 169, 235
nonintentionality. See under Cage, John:
ideas and opinions
Nyman, Michael, 66, 69
Oliveros, Pauline, 118
Olsen, Charles, 224
Paik, Nam June, 213, 294
Parch, Harry, 199Peirce, C. S., 63, 87Phetteplace, John, 177Phillips, Paul Schuyler, 163Pierce, John, 200Plantamura, Carol, 177Pollock, Jackson, 49postmodermism, 46; relation to modern-
ism, 8 –9, 98n.72
Pound, Ezra, 215, 223 –24
pragmatism, pragmatists, 63 –66, 70. See
alsoJames, William
presentational states, 67, 76 –78, 91; re-
search into, 93 –102. See also Cage,
John: ideas and opinions
Pritchett, James, 51, 71, 159 –60
psychoacoustics, 187Pythagoras, 79
Ramakrishna, Sri, 7, 80
Rauschenberg, Robert, 49, 53, 213, 235;
White Paintings, 56
Reed, Henry, 100 –101
Reich, Steve, 179Retallack, Joan, conversations with Cage,
62–63, 79, 103, 226, 232
Revill, David, 71Richards, M. C., 214Richter, Gerhard, 292Richter, Hans, 12, 97Roldán, Amadeo, 116Rosenberg, Jim, 193, 196Ruggles, Carl, 17, 78Russolo, Antonio and Luigi, 11Ryoan-ji (Kyoto), 236 –38, 255
Rzewski, Frederic, 177, 179
Sadowsky, Paul, 193, 195
Saint-Simon, Henri Comte de, 10Salzman, Eric, 69 –70
Sample, Don (or Alan), 43Sarabhai, Gita, 80Satie, Erik, 80, 176, 179, 213, 289;
Socrate, 115; Three Noctures, 115
satori, 87, 89 –92, 103
Schoenberg, Arnold, 17, 22, 26, 28, 38,
119, 163, 164, 166, 173, 228, 235.See also under Cage, John: music
Schwartz, Elliott, 70Schwartz-Salant, Nathan, 94, 95Seeger, Charles, 17Serner, Walter, Letze Lockerung, 11
Serra, Richard, 261Sharﬁn, Gary, 292Shklovskii, Viktor, 212Sonnichsen, Mike, 256Steinecke, Wolfgang, 7Stockhausen, Karlheinz, 31, 114, 213Stratos, Demetrios, 220Stravinsky, Igor, 163 –64, 173; L ’Histoire
du soldat, 117–18
Subotnik, Rose Rosengard, 166Sultan, Grete, 114surrealism, surrealists, 92, 98, 103Suzuki, Daisetz T., 45, 46, 59, 63, 87 –91,
213, 226, 228, 236. See also underCage, John: ideas and opinions
Swed, Mark, 164
Tan, Magaret Leng, 75 –77, 98, 101
Taoism, 81, 82, 84, 96
Taruskin, Richard, 164Tauber, Sophie, 96technologies, emergent, 185 –89
Teitelbaum, Richard, 177, 179Tenney, James, 29, 213; Blue Suede,
199; Ergodos 1 & 2, 192; Noise Study,
191
tertiary process. See presentational states
Tézenna, Suzanne, 30Thomas, Lewis, 181Thomson, Virgil, 44, 47, 78Thoreau, Henry David, 129, 176, 213,
215, 217, 223, 234, 235, 289INDEX
309
Tobey, Mark, 213, 235, 258
Tudor, David, 70, 72, 74, 114 –16, 137,
197, 207; realizations of Cage’ s Solo
for Piano, 137 –56, 150, 152, 154 –
55;Untitled, 117
Twombly, Cy, 49Tzara, Tristan, 11, 14; chance method 
of, 12
Vandor, Ivan, 177Varèse, Edgard, 19, 78, 116, 182, 213
Visscher, Eric de, 70 –71
Wagner, Richard, 94Watts, Bob, 168 –69
Weber, Ben, 114Whitman, Walt, 233Wilheim, András, 158 –60Wilhelm, Hellmut, 86Wilhelm, Richard, 85, 96Williams, Raymond, 16Winant, William, 26n.40Winnicott, D. W., 76, 94, 102Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 63, 182; “Remarks
on Colour, ” 239, 244, 249
Wolff, Christian, 29, 84, 86, 114, 213Wolpe, Stefan, 114
Xenakis, Iannis, 192Yates, Dan, diary, 246 –47, 249 –58
Zappa, Frank, 273
Zen Buddhism, 82, 84, 88 –91, 252. See
also under Cage, John: ideas and
opinionsINDEX
310
