Fourth printing, 1996
First MIT Press paperback edition, 1994
© 1993 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
All rights reserved. N o part of this book may be reproduced in any form by any electronic 
or mechanical means (including photocopying, recording, or information storage and 
retrieval) without permission in writing from the publisher.
This book was set in Sabon by DEKR Corporation and was printed and bound in the 
United States of America.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Krauss, Rosalind E.
The optical unconscious / Rosalind E. Krauss. 
p. cm
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-262-11173-X (HB), 0-262-61105-8 (PB)
1. Visual perception. 2. Optical illusions. 3. Artists 
Psychology. I. Title.
N 7430.5.K73 1993 
701—dc20 92-28978
CIP

For Denis Hollier

Acknowledgments ix O flC '
t w o
t A r e &

f i 9Bibliography
List o f Illustrations
Index
I Q
(9 7331
339
345

The logical extension of work begun over a decade ago, on Giacometti’s 
connection to “primitivism” as that was being rethought by the group 
around Documents  and on surrealist photography, this book owes much 
to the two instigators of those early projects: William Rubin, who invited 
me to contribute to the catalogue of his “Primitivism” and Twentieth-  
Century Art,  and Jane Livingston, who had the vision and the persistence 
to transform research on surrealist photography into an exhibition and 
thus to collaborate with me on our joint L ’Amour Fou: Photography and  
Surrealism.  The issues generated by those two projects seemed to demand 
further investigation and I therefore embarked on the present work.
In this I have been aided by the many people, most particularly my students 
at The Graduate Center, City University of New York, who listened to 
this material as I tried it out in lecture form. I am also grateful to the 
University of Southern California’s Getty Lectureship, which gave me the 
opportunity to present the early chapters of the book to a perceptive and 
questioning audience. Help in the writing of the book was further provided 
by a CUNY Research Fellowship. The encouragement and advice offered 
by friends and colleagues who read the manuscript have been extraordi­
narily important to me. I want to thank them here, although many of them 
will see how often I have stubbornly held out against their counsel: Leo 
Bersani, Yve-Alain Bois, Anne Boyman, Benjamin Buchloh, Robert Corn­
field, Hubert Damisch, Teri Wehn-Damisch, Georges Didi-Huberman, 
Ulysse Dutoit, Hal Foster, Anne Hollander, Denis Hollier, Martin Jay, 
Molly Nesbit, John Rajchman, Margit Rowell, Julia Strand, Mark Strand, 
Holly Wright. And to Roger Conover, my editor at the MIT Press, my 
thanks here are only a token of what I owe to his support of my work.

The optical arts spring from the eye and solely from the eye.
—Jules Laforgue, “ Impressionism”

And what about little John Ruskin, with his blond curls and his blue sash 
and shoes to match, but above all else his obedient silence and his fixed 
stare? Deprived of toys he fondles the light glinting off a bunch of keys, is 
fascinated by the burl of the floorboards, counts the bricks in the houses 
opposite. He becomes the infant fetishist of patchwork. “ The carpet,” he 
confesses about his playthings, “ and what patterns I could find in bed 
covers, dresses, or wall-papers to be examined, were my chief resources.” 
This, his childish solace, soon becomes his talent, his great talent: that 
capacity for attention so pure and so disinterested that Mazzini calls Rus- 
kin’s “the most analytic mind in Europe.” This is reported to Ruskin. He 
is modest. He says, “An opinion in which, so far as I am acquainted with 
Europe, I am myself entirely disposed to concur.”
Of course, it’s easy enough to laugh at Ruskin. The most analytic mind in 
Europe did not even know how to frame a coherent argument. The most 
analytic mind in Europe produced Modern Painters,  a work soon to be

known as one of the worst-organized books ever to earn the name of 
literature. Prolix, endlessly digressive, a mass of description, theories that 
trail off into inconclusiveness, volume after volume, a flood of internal 
contradiction.
Yet there’s still the image of the child, with his physical passivity and his 
consuming, visual fire. I think of him squatting on the garden path, knees 
and arms akimbo, staring at the ants swarming along the cracks between 
the paving stones, fixating all that miniaturized activity into purest, linear 
ornament. It’s the stare’s relation to pattern, and its withdrawal from 
purpose. His boyish connection to the sea is just one more example of 
what we could only call the modernist vocation of this stare.
Listen to him saying, “But before everything, at this time, came my pleasure 
in merely watching the sea. I was not allowed to row, far less to sail, nor 
to walk near the harbor alone; so that I learned nothing of shipping or 
anything else worth learning, but spent four or five hours every day in 
simply staring and wondering at the sea,—an occupation which never failed 
me till I was forty. Whenever I could get to a beach it was enough for me 
to have the waves to look at, and hear, and pursue and fly from.” And of 
course he does not forget to assure us that there’s nothing useful, nothing 
instrumental in this look; for right away he adds, “ I never took to natural 
history of shells, or shrimps, or weeds, or jelly fish.”
Is it possible, I imagine someone asking, to think of Ruskin—who could 
never produce a thought about art that was not at the same time a ser­
mon—in the same universe as modernism? Ruskin, who held that High 
Renaissance painting was bad because its makers could not have been very 
moral; who could never stop badgering and preaching and thinking about 
instruction.
Yet for all that, Ruskin cannot take his eyes from the sea. And it functions 
for him in the same way it does for Monet in Impression: Sunrise  or 
Conrad in Lord Jim.  The sea is a special kind of medium for modernism, 
because of its perfect isolation, its detachment from the social, its sense of 
self-enclosure, and, above all, its opening onto a visual plenitude that is 
somehow heightened and pure, both a limitless expanse and a sameness, 
flattening it into nothing, into the no-space of sensory deprivation. The 
optical and its limits. Watch John watching the sea.
And then there’s the moment when Ruskin is four and sitting for his 
portrait. “Having,” he says, “been steadily whipped if I was troublesome, 
my formed habit of serenity was greatly pleasing to the old painter; for I

“So be hits the ball right out of the park. That’s why Frank thinks ht’s a  
genius  ...”  (p. 7)

On the site of the rationalization of painting around the laws of color  
theory . . .  (p. 11)

sat contentedly motionless, counting the holes in his carpet, or watching 
him squeeze his paint out of its bladders,—a beautiful operation, indeed, 
to my way of thinking;—but I do not remember taking any interest in Mr. 
Northcote’s application of the pigments to the canvas.” The obligatory 
comment about the stare’s detachment from the field of purpose is there, 
of course; but added to it is the final, perfect touch, where the whole thing 
comes full circle and the motionless, silent, disembodied subject of the 
stare becomes its equally disincarnated object, becomes, that is, himself an 
image: “My quietude was so pleasing to the old man that he begged my 
father and mother to let me sit to him for the face of a child which he was 
painting in a classical subject; where I was accordingly represented as 
reclining on a leopard skin, and having a thorn taken out of my foot by a 
wild man of the woods.”
So here is this little boy, no toys, beaten if he cries or is “ troublesome,” 
no sweets of any kind, not even soft white bread—though his father is in 
the sherry trade and is quite exacting about matters of table—his every 
movement restricted lest he happen to hurt himself, his days an untiring 
cycle of reading scripture from one end to the other and of memorizing 
the verses set for him by his mother. And his one release: the family 
pleasure, the exquisite luxury of travel. Mamma and Papa in the beautifully 
fitted coach, with little John in the dickey, and Salvador riding courier. 
Paris, Brussels, the Black Forest, the Bay of Uri, the Bernardine Pass, Lake 
Como, Milan. It’s the courier of course who books rooms in the inns, 
arranges for the fresh teams of horses, orders the meals, and bargains over 
the fees. For beyond a smattering of French, the Ruskins are strictly limited 
to English.
Travel is thus not a release from but a luxuriating into the same rapt stare 
that is the medium of John Ruskin’s daily life. And he glories in it, calling 
their style of passing through foreign lands a mode of “ contemplative 
abstraction from the world.” Naturally he has nothing but praise for the 
advantage of this abstraction. “There is something peculiarly delightful— 
nay delightful inconceivably by the modern German-plated and French- 
polished tourist, in passing through the streets of a foreign city without 
understanding a word that anybody says! One’s ear for all sound of voices 
then becomes entirely impartial; one is not diverted by the meaning of 
syllables from recognizing the absolute guttural, liquid, or honeyed quality 
of them: while the gesture of the body and the expression of the face have 
the same value for you that they have in a pantomime; every scene becomes 
a melodious opera to you, or a picturesquely inarticulate Punch.”

I think of the Bergman film The Silence,  the one where they are traveling 
through a foreign city where there seems to be a revolution going on but 
they don’t understand a word of the language. It’s like Ruskin’s using the 
old, shopworn, novelistic image of the theater—with the unfolding of the 
drama before him a metaphor of the unity of the world’s great stage— 
except that he’s a deaf-mute and can only see the scene as patterns and 
colors and lines. The theatrical continuum gets splintered and the senses 
go off each in its own direction. And for each sense there’s an image. And 
each image is independent, freestanding: autonomy in practice.
Here’s how the passage ends, then. “ I don’t say that our isolation was 
meritorious, or that people in general should know no language but their 
own. Yet the meek ignorance has these advantages. We did not travel for 
adventures, nor for company, but to see with our eyes . . . and even in my 
own land, the things in which I have been least deceived are those which 
I have learned as their Spectator.”
Even now I can hear the objection, not only “theirs” but my own. All of 
this is well and good; Ruskin’s view-hunting is a means of transforming 
the whole of nature into a machine for producing images, establishing in 
this way an autonomous field of the visual—characterized, indeed, by those 
two qualities onto which the optical sense opens uniquely: the infinitely 
multiple on the one hand, and the simultaneously unified on the other. A 
field that is both continuously divisible, into smaller and smaller parts, 
more and more detail—the impossible limit of every single leaf on the 
Fontainebleau aspens—and at the same time structured into pattern. Mod­
ern Painters  sets out to prove the superiority of landscape painting over 
all other art because its field is precisely this domain of the purely visual. 
But the sticking point—is it not?—is that it’s not just form that enters the 
field of contemplation through this grasping of aesthetic coherence as 
lawlike. It’s God that enters the abstracted, contemplative field. For Ruskin 
insists that the coherence is the manifestation of His law, and that therefore 
what is to be derived from the field of the visual is grace.
I remember reading Michael’s last sentence— “Presentness is grace”—with  
a dizzying sense o f disbelief. It seemed to shake everything I thought I ’d  
understood. The healthy, Enlightenment-like contempt for piety, the faith  
instead in the intellect’s coming into an ever purer self-possession, the oath  
that modernism had sworn with rationalism. And to show that that final  
sentence was no accident, Michael Fried had prepared for it from the first,  
with the passage about Jonathan Edwards’s faith that each moment places  
us before the world as though in the very presence o f God in the act o f

creating it. It didn’t seem to me that anything about this could be squared  
with the robustness o f most o f Michael’s earlier talk about modernism.  
Like the time we were speaking about Frank Stella and Michael asked me,  
“Do you know who Frank thinks is the greatest living American? ” O f  
course I didn’t. “Ted 'Williams.” And Michael covered my silence with his  
own glee. “Ted Williams sees faster than any other living human. He sees  
so fast that when the ball comes over the plate —90 miles an hour—he can  
see the stitches. So he hits the ball right out o f the park. That’s why Frank  
thinks he’s a genius. ” This was by way, o f course, o f inducting me onto  
the team, Michael’s team, Frank’s team, Greenberg’s team, major players  
in the ’60s formulation o f modernism.
To see so fast that the blur o f that white smudge could be exploded into  
pure contact, pure simultaneity, pure optical pattern: vision in touch with  
its own resources. And fast, so fast. In that speed was gathered the idea  
o f an abstracted and heightened visuality, one in which the eye and its  
object made contact with such amazing rapidity that neither one seemed  
any longer to be attached to its merely carnal support—neither to the body  
o f the hitter nor to the spherical substrate o f the ball. Vision had, as it  
were, been pared away into a dazzle o f pure instantaneity, into an abstract  
condition with no before and no after. But in that very motionless explosion  
o f pure presentness was contained as well vision’s connection to its objects,  
also represented here in its abstract form—as a moment o f pure release,  
o f pure transparency, o f pure self-knowledge. In Michael’s hilarity was all  
his admiration for Frank. For the dazzling aptness o f Frank’s metaphor.  
Because o f course the image o f Williams’s heightened vision conjured those  
very aspirations toward what Clement Greenberg had, at just about the  
same time, outlined as modernist painting’s self-critical dimension: its  
participation in a modernist culture’s ambition that each o f its disciplines  
be rationalized by being grounded in its unique and separate domain of  
experience, this to be achieved by using the characteristic method o f that  
discipline both to narrow and “to entrench it more firmly in its area of  
competence.” For painting, this meant uncovering and displaying the con­
ditions o f vision itself, as these were understood, abstractly. “The height­
ened sensitivity o f the picture plane may no longer permit sculptural  
illusion, or trompe-l’oeil, ” he wrote, “but it does and must permit optical  
illusion. The first mark made on a surface destroys its virtual flatness, and  
the configurations o f a Mondrian still suggest a kind o f illusion o f a kind  
o f third dimension. Only now it is a strictly pictorial, strictly optical third  
dimension . . . one into which one can look, can travel through, only with  
the eye. ”

Georg Lukacs, deploring this technologizing o f the body, this need to  
abstract and reify each o f the senses in a submission o f human subjectivity  
to the model o f positivist science, would have found nothing to argue with  
in such an analysis. He would only have objected to its tone, to its as­
sumption, which Greenberg shared with Adorno, that in this withdrawal  
o f each discipline into that sphere o f sensory experience unique to it there  
was something positive, something utopian. For a utopian modernism  
was insisting that this sensory stratum newly understood as discrete, as  
self-sufficient, as autonomous—this very stratification—permitted an ex­
perience o f rescue and retreat, a high ground uncontaminated by the  
instrumentality o f the world o f labor and o f science, a preserve o f play  
and thus a model o f freedom. Perhaps the pleasure for both o f us at that  
moment in the ’60s in the idea o f a high-cultural ambition’s being allego­
rized through a baseball player was just this insistence on the seriousness  
o f this very sense o f play.
But from the secularity o f the baseball player to the metaphysics o f grace  
is a leap indeed, a leap that performs the peculiar feat o f folding all o f  
utopian modernism into the arms o f the writer o f  Sesame and Lilies, 
showing that the visual speed that produces the disincarnated look is not  
an athlete’s but an evangelical Christian’s, or G od’s. It produced a shudder,  
like a lining ripping open so that the ideological seams showed through.
So there’s the sea, Conrad’s sea, the sea, for example, in Typhoon  where 
the storm is gathering:
At its setting the sun had a diminished diameter and an 
expiring brown, rayless glow, as if millions of centuries 
elapsing since the morning had brought it near its end. A 
dense bank of cloud became visible to the northward; it 
had a sinister dark olive tint, and lay lower and motionless 
upon the sea, resembling a solid obstacle in the path of the 
ship. She went foundering towards it like an exhausted 
creature driven to its death.. . .  The far-off blackness ahead 
of the ship was like another night seen through the starry 
night of the earth—the starless night of the immensities 
beyond the created universe, revealed in its appalling still­
ness through a low fissure in the glittering sphere of which 
the earth is the kernel.

11 bid I Id
f e r m . t t f
—I  I
Piet Mondrian, Pier and Ocean , 1914.
Two immense horizontal fields broken only by the projection of a small

Piet Mondrian, Pier and Ocean (Composition No. 10),  1915.
Translated into the plus and minus of a moment not of sensation but of  
cognition . . . (p. 12)

When he’s describing the impressionism of Conrad’s style, of Conrad’s 
peeling sense data away from the world and refashioning them into pure 
image, Fredric Jameson is led to quote that passage. “ At its most intense,” 
he says, “what we will call Conrad’s sensorium virtually remakes its ob­
jects, refracting them through the totalized medium of a single sense, and 
more than that, of a single ‘lighting’ or coloration of that sense. The 
possibility of this kind of sensory abstraction is, to be sure, at first given 
in the object—the unearthliness of the sea—but then returns upon that 
object to remake it anew as something never dreamed on heaven or earth.”
But would be dreamed anew—I want to interject— by Mondrian. That 
other, limitless space, beyond even the waves and the stars, the total stillness 
of that space, and its stunning transparency, would be the lining of nature 
turning inside out in the Plus and Minus  pictures in Holland. And the rage 
for abstraction that would appear there would be a passion to remake the 
object, shaping everything about it in the lens of the optical continuum, 
all of experience condensed into a single, luminous ray.
Or. Rather. A single, colorless ray.
If Mondrian began with divisionism, with that positivist notion of making 
the picture a mosaic of color sensations—each dot the marker of a point 
of light reflected off the field of objects—so that the painting became a 
recreation of the surface of the world only because it was first and foremost 
the reconstruction of the surface of the eye, he started off from late nine­
teenth-century optical theory. His entry into modernism took place on the 
site of the rationalization of painting around the laws of color theory and 
physiological optics, at the point where composition and pictorial harmony 
were at last to be demystified by science and to find their grounding in a 
set of abstract theorems—theorems that bore the names of great physiol­
ogists and physicists like Fechner, Young, Helmholtz, Hering. Simultaneous 
contrast, nerve tissue response-time. The two planes—that of the retinal 
field and that of the picture—were understood now to be isomorphic with 
one another, the laws of the first generating both the logic and the harmonic 
of the order of the second; and both of these fields—the retinal and the 
pictorial—unquestionably organized as flat.
But the Plus and Minus  paintings would take the pared-down surface of 
the color mosaic and abstract it one step further. The color mosaic, after 
all, still presupposes the empirical field “ out there” as its sensory stimulus; 
if the mosaic abstracts the world into the “pure” relationships of optics,

/s
(meit is nonetheless empirically founded in the naturalism of color and—no 
matter how finely grained its text—the point-by-point stimulation of a 
perceiving eye. Like Seurat at Honfleur, Mondrian would start his Plus 
and Minus  from an expanse of sea and sky, two immense horizontal fields 
broken only by the projection of a small jetty. But he would not transcode 
the optical moments of this vastness into points of color. He would imagine 
optical law as something that is itself submitted to a code, digitalized by 
the higher orders of the intellect, translated into the plus and minus of a 
moment not of sensation but of cognition, the moment, that is, of pure 
relationship. His field would thus be structured by these signals—black on 
white—these signs for plus and minus, these fragments of an abstract grid 
that would intend to throw its net over the whole of the external world in 
order to enter it into consciousness. To think it.
The whole of the external world. That, I can imagine the social historians 
saying, is a bit of an exaggeration. It’s sea and sky, or dunes, sea, and sky, 
that have been segmented off from the rest of the world, from everything 
political, or economic, or historic, and themselves made into an abstraction 
of that world. In 1916, after all, the Great War was being fought not too 
far away from that very sea and sky.
And they would be right, of course. The sea and sky are a way of packaging 
“ the world” as a totalized image, as a picture of completeness, as a field 
constituted by the logic of its own frame. But its frame is a frame of 
exclusions and its field is the work of ideological construction.
Your modernism, they would continue, not only walls off art from every­
thing else in the historical field, but even within its closure it involves the 
most arbitrary of selections. It chooses to include this and this but not that 
and that. And those very things it deals with are themselves submitted to 
the test of its concepts. Your modernism, they would say. Yet, saying that, 
what would they be saying? They would be saying that “ modernism” 
names an ideology, a discursive field whose occupants believed that art 
could stand alone—autonomous, self-justifying. Occupants consisting not 
only of artists but of ideologues as well: theorists, critics, writers, histori­
ans. Historians not just contemporary with the artists in the field, but those 
historians who, even today, continue to talk of modernism’s “ autonomy,” 
thinking they can bracket it off from the world, from its context, from 
the real.
And I am saying nothing different. “M y” modernism is, of course, another 
name for a discursive field that, like any other such field, is structured. The

set of concepts that grids its surface not only organizes the facts within it 
but determines what, by their lights, will even count as facts. Thus in being 
the name of a historical period it not only points to the series of events 
that will figure within that period— “modernist” artists, “ modernist” 
works of art—but to the self-understanding of the practitioners as they 
participated in those events, as they made their choices in relation to those 
concepts and not others. It is only because a field is so structured that, for 
example, it can be attacked by its fellow opponents. As when dada can 
say: “ No more cubism. It is nothing but commercial speculation!”
And how do we understand that attack? Is it coming from outside the 
field? Or from within?
It struck me one day that it was more interesting to think o f modernism  
as a graph or table than as a history (the history that goes from impres­
sionism to neoimpressionism to fauvism to cubism to abstraction . . . ;  the  
history o f an ever more abstract and abstracting opticality), that there was  
something to be gained from exploring its logic as a topography rather  
than following the threads o f it as a narrative. Without speaking here o f  
what later occurred to me as all the advantages o f this graph, I will simply  
sketch it now.
I start with a square. In its upper right corner I write  figure and in its  
upper left I write  ground. I want this square to represent a universe, a  
system o f thinking in its entirety, a system that will be both bracketed by  
and generated from a fundamental pair o f oppositions. This o f course is  
the universe o f visual perception, the one that is mapped by a distinction  
between figure and ground so basic that it is unimaginable, we could say,  
without the possibility o f this distinction. The Gestalt psychologists have  
told us that: if no figure-detached-from-ground, then no vision.
But the universe I am mapping is not just a binary opposition, or axis; it  
is a fourfold field, a square. And its logic is that the generating opposition  
can be held steady over the whole surface o f the graph, extending into its  
other two corners. To do this, I need only exercise the logic o f the double  
negative. The symmetry o f the square will then be maintained, as the  
product o f a four-part mirror inversion. I could write the narrative o f these  
double negatives—o f how not-not- figure can (in this universe where not-  
figure is the same as  ground] be just as easily written as  not-ground; and 
how not-not- ground can be (following the same logic) expressed as  not- 
figure— but it’s both less tiresome and clearer just to show it:

/ 4
OSI&And what we then see is the completeness o f the symmetry.  Figure versus  
ground. And  not-figure versus  not-ground. But also,  figure versus  not- 
figure and ground versus  not-ground. So that every side o f the graph  
maintains the same opposition—only rewritten. All around the square we  
find the same thing stated over and over —figure versus  ground— except  
not stated exactly the same way. It’s in the not-exactly-the-same-way that  
the square’s beauty lies.
The graph is, o f course, a Klein Group. For Levi-Strauss, for Greimas, for  
the structuralists generally, the interest o f the Klein Group was precisely  
in this quality o f rewriting, so that what might seem the random details o f  
cultural practice—as in the wildly varied aggregates o f episodes that make  
different versions o f the same myth into barely recognizable tangles — 
emerge as a set o f ordered transformations, the logical restatements o f a  
single, generating pair o f oppositions. What the rewriting made clear to  
them is that for every social absolute —marriage, yes; incest, no—there is  
its more flexible, shadow correlate: the kind o f maybe, maybe o f the  not- 
not axis; o f the way in the traffic system the absolutes o f red for  stop and 
green for  go are rendered into  maybe by the possibility opened by yellow.  
The structuralists call the top axis o f  yes/no the “complex axis,” using the  
term “neutral axis” for the  maybes.
Figure versus  ground, then. The fundamentals o f perception. The opposi­
tion without which no vision at all: vision occurring precisely in the  
dimension o f difference, o f separation, o f bounded objects emerging as  
apart from, in contrast to, the ambiance or ground within which they  
appear. The modernist logic is a visual logic, and so it must be contained  
by the terms o f visual perception. But it must also contain them.
Thus  not-figure versus  not-ground as the statement o f this containment.  
The not-figure/not-ground o f the “neutral axis ” is that peculiar conversion  
o f empirical vision’s  figure/ground distinction that can be seen to have  
generated one modernist icon after another: the grid, the monochrome,  
the all-over painting, the color-field, the mise-en-abyme o f classical collage,

the nests o f concentric squares or circles. And while each is its own version  
o f the neutralizing o f the original distinction, none is an erasure o f the  
terms o f that distinction. Quite to the contrary. The terms are both pre­
served and canceled. Preserved all the more surely in that they are canceled.
Empirical vision must be canceled, in favor o f something understood as  
the precondition for the very emergence o f the perceptual object to vision.  
To a higher, more formal order o f vision, something we could call the  
structure o f the visual field as such. For the structure o f the visual field is  
not, cannot be, the same as the order o f the perceptual one. The perceptual  
field is, after all, forever  behind its objects; it is their background, their  
support, their ambiance. The modality o f the visual field—vision as struc­
ture, vision “as such ”—has nothing, however, o f this behind, this after­
ward, this successiveness. For, as the matrix o f an absolute simultaneity,  
its structure must mark it with the perfect synchrony that conditions vision  
as a form o f cognition. Beyond the successiveness o f empirical space’s  
figure/ground there must be this all-at-onceness that restructures succes­
siveness as  vision.
Vision as a form o f cognition. As a form, then, it reworks the very notion  
o f ground. The ground is not behind; the ground is what it, vision, is. And  
the figure, too, is reworked. Perception marks this figure that the eye singles  
out by labeling it “pure exteriority”: set off from the field on which it  
appears, it is even more surely set off from me, the beholder. But cogni­
tion—in vision—grasps the figure otherwise, capturing it in a condition of  
pure immediacy, yielding an experience that knows in a flash that if these  
perceptions are seen as  there, it is because they are seen by  me; that it is  
my presence to my own representations that secures them, reflexively, as  
present to myself.
No figure, then, either; but a limit case o f self-imbrication.
The perceptual terms are rejected thus, and marked by this rejection as  
not-figure and not-ground. But in being canceled they are also preserved.  
And the logic o f that preservation is made transparent by the graph.  
The graph’s circumference holds all its terms in mutual opposition:  figure 
versus  ground; ground versus  not-ground; not-ground versus  not-figure; 
not-figure versus  figure. Its diagonal axes yield, however, to mirror rela­
tions, or rather to mirror restatements (the structuralists’ inverse-of-the-  
opposite, their double negatives), with  figure in this case being the “same”  
as not-ground.

/ f
on&And this is how the graph’s logical unfolding captures the form o f the  
modernist logic. For at the moment when the background o f perceptual  
space—with its former status as reserve or secondariness—is rejected by  
modernism, in favor o f the simultaneity that is understood as a precondi­
tion o f vision, the logic o f this inversion into  not-ground already determines  
that new condition according to its mirror—or to use the structuralist  
term, deixic—relation to the diagonally opposite pole:  figure. Which is to  
say the  not-ground does not become available to the modernist painter in  
a whole range o f random ways, but in a logically conditioned, single way:  
as the new order o f “figure.” The modernist  not-ground is a field or  
background that has risen to the surface o f the work to become exactly  
coincident with its foreground, a field that is thus ingested by the work  
as figure.
In 1919 the Plus and Minus  paintings would give rise to the lozenge pictures 
which Mondrian would now organize by means of complete and regular 
grids. The scatter and gaps of the natural field would finally be closed by 
the seamless regularity of the arithmetic order. Now for the first time he 
would encounter vision as fully abstract. And the grid would succeed in 
drawing successiveness off this space like water evaporated from a dry 
lake. Leaving behind only the marks of the infrastructure of the field, 
scoring and crossing its surface like so many restatements of its geometrical 
givens. Its simultaneity would be figured forth in this brilliant, obsessional 
hatching. It would be his first truly systematic reinvention of the ground 
as figure.
And were we to project the other term—where determination to resist the 
alienating “ figure” of empirical, realist vision generates the not-figure,  itself 
however logically invested with its mirror condition, as “ ground”—we 
have only to think of Matisse’s Windows,  or any other structure en abyme:  
some of Picasso’s collages, say, where the front face of the guitar or the 
piece of sheet music becomes the figure for the whole of the sheet onto 
which it is pasted, or Stella’s nested squares as in Jasper’s Dilemma  or 
Hyena Stomp.  The frame-within-a-frame is a way of entering the figure 
into the pictorial field and simultaneously negating it, since it is inside the 
space only as an image of its outside, its limits, its frame. The figure loses 
its logical status as that object in a continuous field which perception 
happens to pick out and thereby to frame; and the frame is no longer 
conceived as something like the boundary of the natural or empirical limits 
of the perceptual field. As figures of one another, outside and inside take 
on a deductive relation to each other, the figure of the frame turning the

I1  ”  I ■■ —  » T  •  | _ a
I .  1 ■ "  « ■  1 + 4  . »
■ ■,  rirf i ' r ‘ i .  ,+ V i.j'ji, if I . i . lT I . i ^ " i  1  I "  1  *  a ^  1 *  ■ ■■■» . I
.  i - , - , i . - ' J ' ,
' • •  4 - 4 - i  ■ -
h1 .H i- 'i u .L' .- 7 fc!r - "
-  ■  ’i ■  — | ■  r  i- -  i -I,
.  . i - i  T - '  - 'i I '
■  m m _ i _ *  ■
I  I  ■ — ■ ’ hi ■ I  , 1
*  *  ■  ■  T  _ P l »
Piet Mondrian, Composition in Lines (Black and White),  1916-1917.
To throw its net over the whole o f the external world in order to enter it  
into consciousness. To think i t . . . (p. 12)

Piet Mondrian, Composition 1916,  1916.
The modernist  not-ground is a field or background that has risen to the  
surface of the work to become exactly coincident with its foreground, a field  
that is thus ingested by the work as figure . . .  (p. 16)

painting into a map of the logic of relations and the topology of self­
containment. Whatever is in the field is there because it is already contained 
by the field, forecast, as it were, by its limits. It is thus the picture of pure 
immediacy and of complete self-enclosure.
And the graph itself is also a picture of pure immediacy, of complete self­
enclosure.
First advantage o f the graph. It dispenses with narrative. It captures the  
inner logic o f modernist art on its own grounds—that o f the terms o f  
vision. It gives one the logic in the form o f transparency, simultaneity, and  
the containment o f a frame.  As a logic o f operations it already accounts  
for its closure; has always already enframed it.
That totalizing aspect o f the frame comes from how the relations between  
all four o f the terms are conceptually accounted for. But it is generated as  
well from that pole on the lower axis o f the graph where the  not-figure 
forms itself as the “figure” o f the deduction o f the frame. Thus the second  
advantage o f the graph. It puts the dynamic o f the logic on display. It  
shows the difference between the two axes—upper and lower—as two  
different forms o f vision. The upper axis is the simple form o f the oppo­
sition:  figure versus  ground. For the Klein Group it was the complex axis;  
I have been calling it, here, perception. The lower axis—the  not-figure 
versus the  not-ground, or structuralism’s neutral axis —functions in this,  
modernism’s visualist universe, as the demonstration o f vision in its reflex­
ive form: the terms not just o f seeing but o f consciousness accounting for  
the fact o f its seeing. It is the axis o f a redoubled vision: o f a seeing and  
a knowing that one sees, a kind o f  cogito o f vision.
The two poles o f this axis are, however, distinct. On the one hand, the  
pole o f the  not-ground will be the place o f this seeing, the place where the  
empirical viewer is entered into the schema, marked by the way the empty  
mirror o f the pictorial surface is set up as an analogue to the retinal surface  
o f the eye opened onto its world. On the other, the  not-figure is the  
totalizing viewpoint o f “knowing that . . .”. It marks the place o f the  
Viewer as a kind o f impersonal absolute, the point at which vision is  
entered into the schema both as a repertory o f laws and as a relationship  
to those laws which is that o f the transcendental ego. The  not/not o f the  
lower axis is not, then, a cancelation o f  figures and grounds but a sublation  
o f them. N ot an  informe but an accounting for form.

not ground 
field as “figure  ” 
retinal surface  
(inscription of empirical viewer)figure................ perception
not figure .......... reflection
frame
(inscription of transcendental ego)
The second advantage o f the graph was that it released for me something  
o f the triumphant, rational energy in operating the modernist logic—in the  
derivation o f those spare, nearly airless, self-abnegating reductions: the  
grid, the monochrome, the all-over painting, the concentric figures. For the  
excitement there—the sense o f breakthrough, o f discovery—was enough  
to support a lifetime o f reworking this logic. Several lifetimes. The elegance  
o f the model. The thrill o f its manipulation.
Third advantage o f the graph. It makes clear why the system is finite. The  
reflexive relations o f its terms can generate only so many solutions, only  
so many transcodings. More than one or two, o f course, but not a very  
:> (>  large number. Grid, monochrome, all-over, mise-en-abyme. . . . It is finite  
in the historical sense as well. For all its inner dynamism it is a graph in  
stasis. Its inner possibilities can be explored, filled out. But its system ad­
mits o f no evolution. You can simply come to its outer limit, and then stop.
The graph’s relation to time is nonhistorical. History appears only when  
you stand outside it and see how it maps a certain set o f real preoccupations  
and you say, “So that was what modernism w as.” But inside there is only  
repetition. The solution to the same puzzle taken up over and over again,  
worried, reworked, refigured.
Which brings up the fourth advantage o f the graph, the one that is personal,  
to me. By showing me the system whole, it showed me my own outsideness  
to it. But it also gave me a way o f picturing what it had been like to be  
inside, where its choices seemed to compose a whole universe: the universe  
o f “vision. ” It’s only from inside, after all, that I could have taken pleasure  
in understanding why Frank Stella thought Ted Williams a genius. And  
that I could have been deaf to the assumptions about virility in that  
metaphor. D eaf to the fact that inside the logic o f that metaphor everything  
material falls away, so that, just like the effect it proposes, the physicality  
o f bat and ball and o f the nature o f their contact had simply vaporized,

had become all the more dazzlingly rational in that they had been rendered  
ephemeral, the limit conditions o f vision.
The semiotic square, or the structuralists’ graph, is a way of picturing the 
whole of a cultural universe in the grip of two opposing choices, two 
incompatible possibilities. Cultural production is the creation of an imag­
inative space in which those two things can be related. The conflict will 
not go away. But it will be, as it were, suspended. Worked and reworked 
in the space, for example, of myth. The imaginary resolution, as Levi- 
Strauss projects it, of conflicts in the real. And Althusser follows him. And 
Jameson follows him. The structuralists’ graph becomes the self-contained 
space of ideology. And cultural production the impossible attempt to con­
struct an imaginary space within which to work out unbearable contradic­
tions produced within the real field of history. These contradictions, which 
are repressed, are the site of Jameson’s The Political Unconscious.
The fifth advantage o f the graph only came to me later. After I had begun  
to fill in the space o f an alternative history, one that had developed against  
the grain o f modernist opticality, one that had risen on the very site o f  
modernism only to defy its logic, to cross the wires o f its various categories,  
to flout all its notions about essences and purifications, to refuse its concern  
with foundations—above all a foundation in the presumed ontological  
ground o f  the visual. When does this other history begin, this refusal of  
the optical logic o f mainstream modernismf
It’s hard to set a date, to bring forth the monument, the event, the specific  
demonstration. Should we speak o f Duchamp, o f that moment in Buenos  
Aires in 1918 or 1919, when the whole mechanical metaphor  o f The Large 
Glass would suddenly lose its interest for him, and he would trade in the  
bachelor machine for an optical contraption, a lesson in optics that he  
would chase for the next fifteen years? “Precision Optics” he would call  
it parodically, a counter to modernist, rationalized vision. Or perhaps Max  
Ernst’s overpaintings, his dada collages that would so stun Breton, made  
around the same time?
Whatever the beginning might be, the terrain of this counterhistory soon  
became guideposted with various conceptual markers, ones that did not  
map it—for this would be impossible—but only pointed to the way the  
foundations o f modernism were mined by a thousand pockets o f darkness,  
the blind, irrational space o f the labyrinth. Concepts like  informe, mimicry,  
the uncanny,  bassesse, mirror stage,  Wiederholungszwang; figures like the  
acephale, the minotaur, the praying mantis. The terrain broadened into the  
1920s and ’30s, with players like Giacometti, and Dali, and Man Ray,

and Belltner. The theorists o f this refusal were Bataille and Breton, Cail-  
lois, and Leiris, with, in the background, Freud. And in the foreground,  
D ali linked through one arm and Caillois through the other, there was  
Jacques Lacan.
Lacan, it struck me, provided a key to this refusal, a way o f giving it a  
name.
Then it’s language, one might say, it’s text that’s the refusal of vision. It’s 
the symbolic, the social, the law. But that makes no sense, one would have 
to add, because modernist visuality wants nothing more than to be the 
display of reason, of the rationalized, the coded, the abstracted, the law. 
The opposition that pits language against vision poses no challenge to the 
modernist logic. For modernism, staking everything on form, is obedient 
to the terms of the symbolic. No problem, it would say.
I started calling the hare I was chasing over this historical terrain  antivision. 
But that  anti sounded too much like the opposite o f a  pro the all too  
obvious choice for which would be  pro-text. Which was not at all the case  
o f what I was tracking. The name that gradually took over was the  optical 
unconscious. Which begins to suggest the fifth advantage o f the graph.
Structuralism’s graph, the graph I adopted, is written:
X - X
When Lacan constructs his L Schema, his graph o f the subject as an effect  
o f the unconscious, he writes:
(Es) S a' other

Lacan’s L Schema, a meditation on the structuralists’ graph, is a manifes­
tation o f his delight in sowing the psychoanalytic subject over a field  
organized by a set o f terms o f which the subject can be no more than the  
effect, the outcome o f the structure’s own dynamic o f internal contradic­
tion. So the L Schema, rhyming with the Klein Group, is isomorphic with  
the graph I had made to display the logic o f modernism.
It contains, for example, the complex axis:  S on the left,  objet a on the  
right: the subject on the one hand and its objects on the other. And on the  
neutral axis, below the subject comes the  moi, and below the  objet a comes  
the Autre. Another version o f inside/outside, this axis plots the ego’s sub­
mission to the social, the Law. Further, the Schema displays the diagonal,  
mirroring relationships —structuralism’s deixic axes—that map the way  
the ego identifies with its objects:  a as the “same” as  a', the ego reflecting  
and reflected by  objet a. There’s no mistaking it, for it is spelled out in the  
L Schema as the “relation imaginaire”—the mirror connection.
With this mirror connection, however, Lacan performs what we have to  
see as a peculiar slippage between two rather different structuralist terms:  
the deixic and the  deictic. The first he takes from its move in logic to  
express “sameness ” as the inversion o f the opposite, the double negative.  
The ego is the “sam e” as its objects. But the second implies the beginning  
o f an explanation o f how this “sameness ” is constituted, how  deixic is, 
for the formation o f the subject, derived from  deictic. Taken from the  
linguistic (rather than the logical) part o f structuralism,  deictic refers to a  
form o f verbal pointing: to the fixing o f meaning through a set o f existential  
coordinates —I, here, now. . . . These terms, sometimes called  shifters, are 
designated “empty signs, ” since they function as place-holders within lan­
guage, vacant seats that await being filled by a subject who steps forward  
to speak them —“I ,” “here,” “now.” So language can be imagined as a  
kind of card game, all o f whose rules are fixed and unchanging, but for  
which places are prepared at the table for a succession o f players. In  
stepping up to that table and becoming a player, the speaker becomes a  
subject: what structural linguistics calls a “subject o f enunciation,” the one  
who gives “I ” its (existential) meaning in the act o f speaking it. Now,  
Lacan takes this “subject o f enunciation” and understands it as a subject  
tout court. He sees that identity in all its power and resonance comes from  
being able to break into this circuit o f impersonal rules and to join it by  
saying, and meaning, “I. ” But he also believes—and here is the slippage  
between  deictic and deixic — that the pointing gesture, the “this, ” which  
initially singled out the subject as unique and instituted it as the one who

2 4
onecan identify itself as “I, ” this gesture comes from outside the subject. It is  
a primary pointing to the infant by someone or something else, a pointing  
constituted for example by the look o f the mother, a look that names the  
child to itself, for itself. The child’s identity is to be found in that look,  
just as its terror o f identity’s loss is prefigured in its withdrawal.
In this slippage between  deictic and deixic there is built, then, both the  
logical relation o f the double negative and the causal one o f the history of  
the subject. And so this is where the isomorphism between the L Schema  
and the Klein Group begins to dislocate.
For the L Schema is not conceived as a static picture, but instead as a  
cycle: first the subject, then his objects, then his ego, then . . . The rela­
tionships are in permanent circulation, continuous flow. Their dynamic is  
productive, producing repetition. And the circuit interrupts the perfect  
symmetry o f the graph. For the imaginary relation, transecting the square  
by crossing it diagonally with a channel o f visibility, reflecting the subject  
back to himself in the smooth surface o f its mirror, plunges the other half  
o f the graph into darkness. The ego’s traffic with the unconscious goes on  
out o f sight. Something dams up the transparency o f the graph, cuts  
through its center, obscuring its relations one to the other. Ruskin sees the  
pattern in the carpet, in the sea, in the aspens. Sees their form, their  
“picture.” What he does not see, cannot see, is how he has been made a  
captive o f their picture.
The optical unconscious will claim for itself this dimension of opacity, of 
repetition, of time. It will map onto the modernist logic only to cut across 
its grain, to undo it, to figure it otherwise. Like the relation between the 
L Schema and the Klein Group, which is not one of rejection, but one of 
dialectics. Lacan pictures the unconscious relation to reason, to the con­
scious mind, not as something different from consciousness, something 
outside it. He pictures it as inside consciousness, undermining it from 
within, fouling its logic, eroding its structure, even while appearing to leave 
the terms of that logic and that structure in place.
The advantage o f the graph as a picture o f modernism and its visualist  
logic is that it is perfect. Both a perfect descriptor and a perfect patsy. Its  
frame which is a frame o f exclusions is oh so easy to read as an ideological  
closure. Nothing enters from the outside, there where the political, the  
economic, the social, foregather. But neither does anything rise up into the  
graph from below. Its transparency, the logic o f its relations, creates a  
pellucid field, all surface and no depths. The problem o f this book will be

And the grid would succeed in drawing successiveness off this space  
water evaporated from, a dry lake  . . .  (p. 16)

Frank Stella, Hyena Stomp,  1962.
The figure of the frame turns the painting into a map of the logic of  
relations and the topology of self-containment. . .  (p. 16)

to show that the depths are there, to show that the graph’s transparency  
is only seeming: that it masks what is beneath it, or to use a stronger term,  
represses it.
The relation between the L Schema and the Klein Group could configure  
this repression. N ot because the L Schema shows an elsewhere, an “out­
side” o f the system. But because it shows the repressive logic o f the system,  
its genius at repression. It can, that is, figure forth the “beneath” o f the  
system; although the figure o f that beneath is peculiar o f course. It can’t  
simply take the form o f a figure because it is a form under attack, a form  
qualified by the logical illogic o f that beneath, an impossible quality that  
jean-Franqois Lyotard wants to track when he names the unconscious’s  
relation to the visual image through the chiasmatic term he invents: “fis-  
cours/digure.” In so doing this relation can account for two things at once:  
both the structure o f operations o f the repressed material and the reasons  
within the historical period o f modernism for its repression. It therefore  
helps to map the objects —The Master’s Bedroom, the Rotoreliefs, Sus­
pended Ball, and so forth—and to explain why a hegemonic modernism  
had to evacuate them from its field.
And so this book will be called The Optical Unconscious.  Does the title 
rhyme with The Political Unconscious?  It’s a rhyme that’s intended; it’s 
a rhyme set into place by a graph’s idiotic simplicity and its extrava­
gant cunning.

Bibliographical Note
The passages from John Ruskin’s autobiography, Praeterita,  1885— 1889 (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1979), are: Mazzini’s opinion, 49; Ruskin’s early deprivation 
of toys, 14; his sitting to Mr. Northcote, 16; his early thirst for looking, 60; his life­
long relation to the sea, 86; the advantages of traveling without knowing foreign lan­
guages, 138.
“ Presentness is grace” is the final sentence of Michael Fried’s essay “ Art and Object- 
hood,” published in 1967 in Artforum  (reprinted in Minimal Art,  ed. Gregory Battcock 
[New York: Dutton, 1968]). Clement Greenberg’s articulation of a “ strictly optical third 
dimension” is in his “ Modernist Painting,” 1965 (reprinted in The New Art,  ed. Gregory 
Battcock [New York: Dutton, 1966]).
Georg Lukacs analyzes the compartmentalization of the human sensorium in relation to 
rationalization and reification in “ Reification and the Consciousness of the Proletariat” 
( .History and Class Consciousness,  trans. Rodney Livingstone [Cambridge: MIT Press, 
1971], part I, section 3). For Adorno on art’s opening onto freedom, see “ Commitment,” 
in The Essential Frankfurt School Reader,  ed. Andrew Arato and Eike Gebhardt (New 
York: Urizen Books, 1978).
Fredric Jameson discusses the becoming autonomous of the various senses in relation to 
the rationalization of life and labor under capital in The Political Unconscious: Narrative  
as a Socially Symbolic Act  (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1981). With special regard 
to Conrad’s style, see pp. 225ff.; his quotation from Typhoon,  p. 230.
For a presentation of the Klein Group, see Marc Barbut, “ On the Meaning of the Word 
‘Structure’ in Mathematics,” in Introduction to Structuralism,  ed. Michael Lane (New 
York: Basic Books, 1970). Claude Levi-Strauss uses the Klein Group in his analysis of 
the relation between Kwakiutl and Salish masks in The Way o f the Masks,  trans. Sylvia 
Modelski (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1982), p. 125; and in relation to the 
Oedipus myth in “ The Structural Analysis of Myth,” Structural Anthropology,  trans. 
Claire Jackobson and Brooke Grundfest Schoepf (New York: Basic Books, 1963). In a 
transformation of the Klein Group, A. J. Greimas has developed the semiotic square, 
which he describes as giving “ a slightly different formulation to the same structure,” 
in “ The Interaction of Semiotic Constraints,” On Meaning  (Minneapolis: University 
of Minnesota Press, 1987), p. 50. Jameson uses the semiotic square in The Political  
Unconscious  (see pp. 167, 254, 256, 277), as does Louis Marin in “ Disneyland: A De­
generate Utopia,” Glyph,  no. 1 (1977), p. 64. Jameson further discusses Levi- 
Strauss’s concept of myth as the imaginary resolution of contradictions in the real ( The 
Political Unconscious,  p. 79) and Althusser’s notion of art as a presentation of ideology 
stripped of its internal contradictions (p. 56). For Althusser, see “Letter on Art,” in 
Lenin and Philosophy,  trans. Ben Brewster (New York: Monthly Review Press, 1971). 
For Levi-Strauss, see Tristes tropiques,  trans. John Russell (New York: Atheneum, 1971), 
pp. 176-180.
I have dealt with the grid as one of the modernist compositional paradigms that have 
been structured by repetition in “ Grids,” The Originality o f the Avant-Garde and Other  
Modernist Myths  (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1985). In my own work the background of 
an interest in the contestation of modernist opticality includes “ Anti-Vision,” October,  
no. 36 (Spring 1986); “ No More Play,” an essay on Giacometti’s surrealist sculpture

and its relation to primitivism, in The Originality o f the Avant-Garde  (originally written 
as a chapter of “ Primitivism ” and Twentieth-Century Art,  ed. William Rubin [New 
York: Museum of Modern Art, 1986]); and “ Corpus Delicti,” a study of surrealist 
photography, in L ’Amour Fou: Surrealism and Photography  (New York: Abbeville 
Press, 1986).
Lacan has published two versions of the L Schema, the one in the 1955 “ On the Possible 
Treatment of Psychosis” ( Ecrits: A Selection,  trans. Alan Sheridan [New York: Norton, 
1977], p. 193), in which the position of the ego is given as a' and the objects are given 
as a; and another set up for the 1966 “ Introduction” to the 1955 “ Seminar on ‘The 
Purloined Letter’” ( Ecrits  [Paris: Editions du Seuil, 1966], p. 53), in which the ego is 
designated a and the objet a  is represented as a'. The axis aa' he has characterized as 
an “ alternating doubling” (ibid., p. 55).

Just so does the purloined letter, like an immense female body, stretch out  
across the Minister’s office when Dupin enters. But just so does he already  
expect to find it, and has only . . .  to undress that huge body.
—Jacques Lacan

And how do we imagine Theodor Adorno as he “looks back at surrealism,” 
looking back in 1953, even though Andre Breton, very much alive, is still 
looking forward? For it’s true that very few people in 1953 are looking 
Breton’s way. Surrealism’s import lies, now, in the past. Even so, Adorno’s 
glance is somewhat jaundiced, we notice. He can’t quite share Walter 
Benjamin’s old enthusiasm for those “energies of intoxication” that Ben­
jamin saw surrealism placing in the service of freedom. Adorno finds much 
of surrealism’s claims, Breton’s claims, absurd. “No one dreams that way,” 
he snaps.
And yet. A dialectical image begins to form for him. Its ground is a series 
of white, geometrical planes, the stark, streamlined architecture of Bauhaus 
rationalism. Sachlicbkeit.  The new objectivity. Technology as form. “ Or­
nament,” Adorno remembers Loos having said, “is a crime.” And gleaming 
and new, this architecture will admit of no crime, no deviation. It will be

(m o ­di machine stripped down for work, a machine to live in. But there, sud­
denly, on the stretch of one of its concrete flanks, a protuberance begins 
to sprout. Something bulges outward, pushing against the house’s skin. 
Out it pops in all its nineteenth-century ugliness and absurdity, a bay 
window with its scrollwork cornices, its latticed windows. It is the house’s 
tumor, Adorno thinks. It is the underbelly of the prewar technorationalism, 
the unconscious of the modernist Sachlichkeit.  It is surrealism, connecting 
us, through the irrational, with the other side of progress, with its flotsam, 
its discards, its rejects. Progress as obsolescence.
Perhaps this is why Adorno looks back at surrealism with a copy of La 
femme 100 tetes  spread across his knees. He muses over these images 
collaged “ from illustrations of the later nineteenth century, with which the 
parents of M ax Ernst’s generation were familiar,” but which Ernst as a 
child must already have sensed as archaic, and strange, and wonderful. 
And if the child stirs in the images, if the memory of having been so little 
is nudged into being by them, then that is something potentially powerful 
working against the abstracted, flattened uniformity of a technologized 
world, a world from which time is all but erased. Adorno has no patience 
for the psychoanalytic conception of history—with its constant refrain of 
Oedipus. The history he is interested in is not that of the privatized indi­
vidual but instead the history of modernity, or the fact that it even had a 
history, that it too was young. History working against the grain of an 
abstracted, bureaucratized uniformity, of a technologically rationalized 
world, surrealism’s shock, Adorno muses, while he looks at these pictures, 
is to put us in touch with that history, as our own.
“ One must therefore trace the affinity of surrealistic technique for psycho­
analysis,” Adorno decides, “not to a symbolism of the unconscious, but 
to the attempt to uncover childhood experiences by blasting them out. 
What surrealism adds to the pictorial rendering of the world of things is 
what we lost after childhood: when we were children those illustrations, 
already archaic, must have jumped out at us, just as the surrealistic pictures 
do now. The giant egg out of which the monster of the last judgment can 
be hatched at any minute is so big because we were so small when we for 
the first time shuddered before an egg.”
Adorno is looking at the first plate of Femme 100 tetes,  or perhaps, since 
they are identical, the last. “ Crime or miracle,” the initial caption reads, 
“ a complete man.” In its second, final, appearance the image is titled simply 
“ End and continuation.” But in each of the two identical plates, Blake’s 
angel Gabriel, minus his trumpet, collaged against a stormy sky, is falling

from the center of the large, egglike form of something that could be an 
ascending balloon. Or is he, too, like the souls he is calling forth on the 
last judgment, rising? The tiny men huddled below, in the windswept space 
of the nineteenth-century wood engraving, resemble indeed the populations 
of awakened dead from medieval tympana. At least in the grip of Adorno’s 
associations, they do.
And in the grip o f the art-historical imagination? That imagination is  
determined to “read" Ernst’s novel, to narrativize it, to give it a shape, a  
story line. It has chapters, after all, does it not? It is a  Bildungsroman, 
goes one explanation. Conception, infancy, childhood, adolescence, adult­
hood, senescence. The life cycle patiently traced, elaborated, returned to  
its beginnings. Each o f Ernst’s novels is mined for its “compositional  
principle.”  Une semaine de bonte is seen as following Sade’s  120 Days of 
Sodom or Lautreamont’s  Les chants de Maldoror, all o f this itself woven  
on the loom o f the seven days o f creation. “It’s an alchemical novel, ” one  
o f them insists. To which another rejoins that the only alchemy in question  
is Rimbaud’s “Alchimie du verbe,” since the designation o f a different hue  
for each section o f the book recalls the poet’s imperious coloristic baptism  
o f the vowels — “A noir,  E blanc,  I rouge,  O bleu,  U vert.”
The art historian thinks with the mind o f a scholastic. Typologies. Recen­
sions. The world seen through old men’s eyes, looking with that fixedly  
backward stare that intends to find ladders o f precedent, ladders by means  
o f which to climb, slowly, painfully, into the experience o f the present.  
Into a present that will already have been stabilized by already having been  
predicted.
The child’s eyes through which Adorno is looking as he turns the pages of 
Ernst’s novel is not seeing John Ruskin’s pattern, his conjuring of form. 
This child, far from deprived, is peering into a variety of fabulous spaces. 
These are the spaces constructed through the nineteenth-century wood 
engravings used to illustrate magazines of popular science, like La Nature,  
or of commerce, like Magazine pittoresque,  or illustrated fables, like Amor  
und Psyche,  or dime novels, like Les damnes de Paris.  Their style is 
unquestionably archaic, passe, outmoded, as they configure these spaces 
of laboratories, pampas, pool halls, train cars, war-torn streets, storm- 
tossed seas, cargo-laden boats . . . ; spaces that are inhabited by a variety 
of personages too numerous to name. But as the dust settles around their 
flurry of activity, the child begins to sense a recurrence, both exciting and 
soothing. Presented to him but not to them  is an immense body, or more 
often a part of that body, that floats within the otherwise quotidian space.

They  are oblivious to it. But there it is, like a large, welcoming pillow, 
strangely soft and usually whiter than its surrounds. In the fourth plate it 
emerges from the laboratory apparatus two scientists are manipulating: 
two white legs voluptuously self-entwined, ten times life-size. Ravishing, 
ravishing part-object.
It is recumbent, languid. An arm, a leg, a torso. Nearly always nude, it is 
nearly always female. Since it is never noticed by the actors in this or that 
scene, its place seems to be at the very front of the stage, closest to the 
eyes of the viewer. But since this body, this part-object, this femme sans  
tete, is experienced as recurrence, it becomes the thread on which the 
scenes themselves are strung. And in this sense it is more like background, 
the single, grand surface on which everything else is supported. A fore­
ground, then, that is also a background, a top that is clearly a bottom.
His habit had been to show her picture . . .  to his intimates, but also to  
people he was meeting for the first time, people to whom he was beginning  
to take a liking. He would indicate this by extracting his wallet and lifting  
a photograph from its folds, which he would proffer between the index  
and middle finger o f his frail, aristocratically boned hands. But then his  
whole appearance, from the high, wide forehead and ardently sculpted  
nose to the elegant slouch with which he wore his clothes, was a monument  
to controlled languor. “This is G ala," he would say, “my wife.” And in  
his vibrant voice that emanated carelessness one could hear an undercurrent  
o f something else, something always, somehow, insinuating.
It would have been hard not to gasp, and wonder, even in that company  
priding itself on its license, on its contempt for propriety, for bourgeois  
manners and morals. “What is it about,” some o f them would ponder. “Is  
it simple pride? Just like that? Or is it some kind o f solicitation? And for  
her? Or for him self?"
And the photograph o f Gala Eluard, eloquently wanton in its display of  
her nakedness, with her high breasts, the dizzying length o f her torso, and  
the delicate articulations o f knees, ankles, and wrists, could tell them  
nothing. Except that she was beautiful. And carried her body like a per­
fectly understood weapon o f seduction.
Would he have shown the photograph to Ernst, I wonder? After all, that  
early November day in Cologne when they finally met, after what felt like  
so many months o f anticipation, so many postponements, so many near  
misses, Gala was there, along with Paul Eluard, both o f them having come,

Or is he, too, like the souls he is calling forth on the last judgment,  
rising? . . .  (p.  35J

M ax Ernst, La femme 100 tetes , 1929: “ Continuation.”
A recurrence, both exciting and soothing . (p. 35)

M ax Ernst, La femme 100 tetes,  1929: “ Continuation of morning, twilight, and night gam es.”
Presented to  him but not to  them . . .  (p. 35)

A part of that body that floats within the otherwise quotidian  
space . . .  (p. 35)

expressly for this meeting, from Vienna. No need to show the copy in the  
presence o f the original.
Given what happened next, I think he probably did show Ernst the pho­
tograph. And that the gesture carried with it all the motivations that could  
have been suspected: that it was pride  and solicitation; for himself  and for 
her. And that he showed him the photograph so that there would be no  
more near misses. But then he had always been extremely manipulative  
and here he could play with at least three lives, or four, or more.
The other reason to think he did was that the work Ernst made late in  
1921 to commemorate the beginning o f that relationship between the three  
o f them, the onset, as he would say— through its title—o f his puberty, was  
based on the photograph o f a naked woman. Not her, to be sure. But he  
inscribed the work “to Gala, ” a work which, from the point o f view o f  
its sexual axis, can o f course be read as extremely ambivalent.
Tzara had been in Paris since January 1920, spreading dada. Spreading it, 
among other places, in the review Litterature.  Breton, the magazine’s editor 
(along with Soupault and Aragon), both fascinated and repelled by dada, 
was biding his time. Tzara filled the year with various dada demonstrations. 
Readings from the newspaper accompanied by the clanging of bells. And 
all of that. Renting the Salle Gaveau in order to play fox-trots on the 
celebrated organ, performing his Vaseline symphonique  while the audience 
hurled veal cutlets. And all of that. Yet somehow behind the provocation, 
the constant mondainite.  There was for example the opening of Picabia’s 
exhibition. An affair whose elegance offended Breton’s sense of rigor. So, 
early the next year, Breton made his move, which was to write to Ernst. 
He had seen Ernst’s work in dada reviews and had read about it in various 
press reports of an exhibition in Cologne. If Breton hoped for something 
different from Ernst, something at an angle to dada, Ernst himself was 
nonetheless swearing his most devoted fealty to Tzara at just that time. 
His letter to Tzara dated December 28, 1920, containing a picture of his 
wife Louise (whom he had renamed the dada Rosa Bonheur) and his son 
Jimmy, and asking if Tzara could arrange a show of his graphic work, of 
which thirty to sixty items could be sent to Paris, ends with:
Who greets Tzara? The Rosa Bonheur of the dadas 
^  Who greets Tzara? Baargeld
Who greets Tzara? Job 
Who greets Tzara? Jimmy 
3 Who greets Tzara? M ax Ernst
the dada Maid of Orleans is missing

But it was from Breton that the invitation Ernst was seeking came, for 
indeed a show had been organized for May 1921 at the bookstore Au Sans 
Pareil. Whatever it was Breton had bargained for, he got it.
Fifty-six collages by Ernst had been shipped to Paris. It was at Picabia’s 
house that the unpacking of the works took place. Andre Breton describes 
the encounter with these objects as revelatory, a kind of originary moment, 
almost, one could say, surrealism’s primal scene. For here was a group of 
objects through which nascent surrealism would understand something of 
both its identity and its destiny. Breton explains:
In fact surrealism found what it had been looking for from 
the first in the 1920 collages [by Ernst], which introduced 
an entirely original scheme of visual structure yet at the 
same time corresponded exactly to the intentions of Lau- 
treamont and Rimbaud in poetry. I well remember the day 
when I first set eyes on them: Tzara, Aragon, Soupault and 
myself all happened to be at Picabia’s house at the very 
moment when these collages arrived from Cologne, and 
we were all filled immediately with unparalleled admira­
tion. The external object had broken with its normal en­
vironment, and its component parts had, so to speak, 
emancipated themselves from it in such a way that they 
were now able to maintain entirely new relationships with 
other elements, escaping from the principle of reality but 
retaining all their importance on that plane.
Was it because Ernst had served in the German army, or because, a 
notorious dada, he was labeled Bolshevik by the British authorities in 
charge in Cologne, that they denied him a passport? In any event he missed 
his own explosive vernissage at the Au Sans Pareil, held in the basement 
with the lights out, with Breton chewing matches and Aragon meowing 
continuously and someone shouting insults at the guests from inside a 
cupboard. But lights out or no, the effect of his work was palpable. Breton 
was stunned. So that in September on his way to Vienna to visit Freud he 
went first to the Tyrol to meet Ernst. To pay him homage or to reassert 
his, Breton’s, own authority? For bringing his volume of Lautreamont with 
him, Breton insisted on reading the Chants de Maldoror  for hours at a 
time at a disconcerted Ernst.
Eluard had not been at Picabia’s for the unpacking of the collages. He only 
saw them at the opening of Ernst’s exhibition. But his excitement reached 
a pitch that was even higher than the others’. “ Eluard was the most

A foreground, then, that is also a background . . .  (p. 36)

M ax Ernst, L a puberte proche . . .  , 1921.
But he inscribed the work “to Gala”. . . (p. 41)

affected,” his biographer tells us. “ He suddenly understood that a brother 
had just been given to him.” Indeed, so strong was Eluard’s experience 
that by summer’s end he did not wait to meet Breton in Vienna as planned, 
but hurried to the mountains to encounter Ernst. But Ernst had, along with 
the Rosa Bonheur of the dadas, already returned to Cologne.
Eluard launched a series of frantic postcards at the retreating artist. And 
he wrote to Tzara:
The 1st of next month we will leave for Munich where 
we’ll spend two or three days, and from there for Cologne. 
I want to be sure that Ernst will be there then. Would you 
ask him? . . . We’re only going to Cologne to see Ernst. 
Naturally. I haven’t any answer to my cards and I’m afraid 
he hasn’t received them. I have no reason to deny myself 
what gives me pleasure. Please give me his address again. 
I L E A V E  IN  9 D A Y S .
On November 4 Gala and Paul arrived in Cologne. They left the 13th. 
Ernst registered the fact to Tzara:
Cher Tzara (bis) Cher Tzara  (bis)
The two Eluards gone, the two Ernsts have regressed to 
childhood. Who now will wear for us the flamboyant flag  
in her hair, which will attract the idyllic deer etc. etc.  da 
capocaspar. With their departure they have left a growing  
sadness . . .
Could the Rosa Bonheur o f the dadas really have been sad to see them  
go ? Is it possible that, in the excitement o f their foursome’s frenetic gaiety,  
the frolicking at amusement parks, the gyrations through dance halls, the  
early morning poetry readings soaked in  eau de vie, she could have missed  
what was so palpably there for the other three, making the air in every  
room seem to rustle with the sharp static o f sexual excitement? Where was  
she when Gala, entering M ax’s studio late one night, placed herself squarely  
in the luminous beam o f both men’s most attenuated desire as, removing  
her clothes with the swift agility that marked all her movements, she took  
up once again the pose o f the photograph? Or did Gala never do that?
There are only imaginary documents to say she did. Ernst’s achingly beau­
tiful overpainting called  La puberte proche, dedicated to her and executed  
during the six weeks between the time she left and the turn o f the year, is  
a monument to her nakedness, real or fantasized. And Eluard’s poem “Max

>6
tw oErnst, ” written during the same period as the new work that would open  
his collection  Repetitions, ends by “describing” that scene: “In the glow  
o f youth / Lamps lighted very latel The first shows her breasts, killed by  
red insects. ” But was he remembering, or anticipatingf
To make La puberte proche  Ernst found himself turning to the medium 
he had invented two years earlier, the technique sometimes referred to by 
the term collage but which Ernst himself called Ubermahlung,  overpainting. 
Although a few of the works unpacked by Breton at Picabia’s house that 
day had been conventional collages, most of them in fact were overpaint­
ings. Which is to say that instead of collage’s additive process, in which 
disparate elements are glued to a waiting, neutral page, the overpaintings 
work subtractively. They delete; they take away. In order to make them, 
Ernst had selected a commercially printed sheet, and with the aid of ink 
and gouache, he had opaqued out various elements of the original to 
produce a new generation of image. As the matrix or substructure of what 
is subsequently seen in the work, this sheet underlay what was to fascinate 
both Breton and Aragon. It was this that directed what they had to say 
about the overpaintings at the time they first encountered them. Aragon’s 
report, written in 1923, notes that “ M ax Ernst borrows his elements above 
all from printed drawings, advertisements, dictionary images, popular im­
ages, newspaper images.” And in his 1927 essay “ Surrealism and Painting,” 
Breton agreed that Ernst proceeded “ from the inspiration that Apollinaire 
sought in catalogues.” But the term that Breton had originally used for 
this element is the far more suggestive word “readymade,” as, in his text 
for the 1921 exhibition at Au Sans Pareil, he notes that the collages are 
built on grounds constituted by “the readymade images of objects,” adding 
parenthetically, “ (as in catalogue figures).”
Now, late in 1921, for this monument to Gala, the page from an illustrated 
catalogue or some other kind of book did not seem to have satisfied Ernst. 
Instead his readymade ground had had to have been a photograph . . .  of 
a nude woman, lying stretched out upon a couch, her arched body sup­
ported by one elbow, the other arm reaching for her head.
It had floated into his view from out of the vast commercial production of 
turn-of-the-century erotica. He now remade it, in order to dedicate it anew. 
First he attacked it with a glutinous layer of cobalt blue gouache, severing 
the body from the entirety of its context, detaching it from the space in 
which it had originally appeared, from the accoutrements of the room, 
from the couch, from the supporting arm, and finally, from the body’s own 
face. Strangely headless and contextless, the naked form acquires a pecu­

liarly streamlined look, seems, to use an almost unimaginable term for this 
object, bald.
But then he had also turned it, the photograph and hence, by the same 
token, the body; so that, swiveled 90 degrees, it had been made newly 
pendent, a weightless vertical suspended in the strangely material, velvety 
ether of the gouache that covers the surface of the photograph like a 
hardened skin. Upright and headless, the nude now appears from within 
this thickened field as having been transmuted into the very image of the 
phallus—as having become, that is, the object and subject of that unmis­
takably Oedipal fantasy of both having and being the sex of the mother. 
And in the inscription with which Ernst frames this space, the froth of 
pleasure is invoked by the words “la grace tenue de nos pleiades” : as the 
idea of the Milky Way summons up the old iconography of the body’s 
secretions writing themselves over the page of the heavens.
If this suspended, weightless, phallic body-of-the-woman, both a part of 
her setting and at some kind of remove from it, was to anticipate that 
thread on which the images of the collage-novel Femme 100 tetes  would, 
at the end of the decade, be strung together, it also must be seen as looking 
backward. In fact its whole import and structure was about looking back­
ward. Which is to say that the temporal displacement of desire back to 
adolescence, effected through the notion of “ puberty,” is only one link in 
an implied series of temporal displacements, of an origin steadily receding 
under the artist’s gaze. For Gala entered Ernst’s imagination accompanied 
by the words “ perturbation, my sister,” the name of a collage he had made 
at the same time as Puberte proche.  This was the phrase that would more 
and more clearly emerge as evoking the adolescent fantasies that had arisen 
in relation to his very young sister Loni, and which he would inscribe 
many times in Femme 100 tetes.  But just as Gala is a screen for Loni, Loni 
is a screen for even earlier feelings. The woman-as-phallus clothes these 
feelings with a kind of excited radiance even as she locates them at the 
point of awakening to the fact of sexual difference.
And Eluard’s account o f this meeting. Did it also operate on the logic of  
regression, I wonder. For bis poem “Max Ernst” is structured, o f course,  
on the fourfold repetition o f the phrase “dans un coin. ” First he says “In  
a corner nimble incest moves round the virginity o f a little dress. ” Then  
it’s the sky that’s “dans un coin”; later it’s a car loaded with greenery;  
and once it’s himself, the focus o f everyone else’s gaze.  Dans un coin four  
times adds up, you might point out, to the game called, in French,  le jeu 
de quatre coins. Musical chairs o f course. Eluard’s evocation o f childhood.________ '(/
tuw -

tUHJ-Not by playing “doctor, ” for example. Rather, through a play o f exclu­
sions. Everyone moves in a circle; everyone changes places; someone is  
always left out. Eluard is in a corner, lighted up by the brightness o f being  
looked at. Eluard is in a corner, left out and looking.
This derivation of the sexual game of le jeu de quatre coins  from the 
fourfold repetition of “dans un coin” is offered by an extremely plausible, 
literary-critical reading of Eluard’s poem. To this analysis the critic adds 
another. In the poem’s four “ corners” there is, he says, Eluard’s acknowl­
edgment of Ernst’s artistic medium as something distinct from his own, 
something whose pictorial condition is supported by a page not given to 
reading but rather to vision, a page defined by its shape, its space, its 
condition as quadrilateral. Which puts the finishing, modernist touch on 
the interpretation, you might say.
This drive always to perform a relay back to the base of the artistic medium, 
back to the support, back to the objective conditions of the enterprise, is 
a modernist obsession. Vision must never overlook this task. It must con­
stantly reaffirm how even the physical givens of the picture support—the 
flatness of the sheet, the rectangularity of its frame—mirror the essential 
features of visuality itself: its simultaneity; its reflexiveness. There must be 
no giving way to transparent illusion. There must be no self-forgetting. 
The four corners of the sheet are more than a merely physical limit, they 
are a logical premise. They are the conditions of possibility. Like the four 
corners of the structuralists’ Klein Group from the logical relations of 
which a whole system can be derived, they construct a frame that both 
generates and contains a universe.
If Eluard plots his own conditions of looking, of watching and being 
watched watching, as shaped not by logic but by desire, would he, do we 
think, imagine Ernst’s vision otherwise? Would he assign it that disembod­
ied form of mastery we associate with modernism?
When the package of Ernst’s collages was unwrapped that day, early in 
1921, Picabia, Breton maliciously reported, was sick with envy. This seems 
hard at first to imagine. Most of these objects, with their somewhat frail 
whimsy, their rather fragile dada charm, seem hardly capable of provoking 
this intensity. And particularly not from Picabia. For the overpaintings, the 
majority of them cast on the pages of a catalogue of elementary and high 
school teaching aids, often deploy their added planes of color to project a 
shallow, stagelike space within which the images of beakers and retorts 
and cathode tubes could be shaped into the kind of mechanomorphic

“The readymade images o f objects,” adding parenthetically, “(as in  
catalogue figures)”. . . (p. 46)

M ax Ernst, The Horse, H e’s Sick,  1920.
Picabia, Breton maliciously reported, was sick with envy . . .  (p. 48)

Their somewhat frail whimsy, their rather fragile dada charm (p. 4S)

Kolner Lehrmittelanstalt catalogue, p. 756.
Cast on the pages o f a catalogue of elementary and high school teaching  
aids . . .  (p. 48)

personages that Picabia himself had for some years perfected. The com­
mercially produced (and thus self-evidently readymade) object abounds in 
Picabia’s work as the vehicle of portraiture, as in his lei, c’est id  Stieglitz  
of 1915, or as the medium of a dada-based derision, as in Infant Carbure­
tor (1919).
Yet certain of these images go far beyond Picabia’s notion of a mechanical 
being that dada liked to think of as the robotic result of modern techno­
culture. Instead, a few of Ernst’s overpaintings seem to compose the para­
digm for an idea of mechanical seeing —a notion, unprecedented in 1920, 
of an automatist motor turning over within the very field of the visual. 
This idea, which would come to operate at the center of surrealism’s 
critique of modernism, contests the optical model’s schema of visual self­
evidence and reflexive immediacy, substituting for this a model based 
instead on the conditions of the readymade, conditions that produce an 
altogether different kind of scene from that of modernism’s.
The model Ernst constructs is indeed structured as a scene—contained 
within a proscenium frame in a way that is like the cognitive image 
provided by the modernists’ Klein Group. But it is there that the compar­
ison with a modernist visual model stops. Found most clearly in an over­
painting called The Master’s Bedroom  (with an inscription in both French 
and German that adds, “ It’s worth spending a night there” ), this para­
digm generates a scene that is concerted to turn one’s very conception of 
space inside-out, thereby picturing automatism’s relation to the visual not 
as a strange conflation of objects, and thus the creation of new images, 
but as a function of the structure of vision and its ceaseless return to the 
already-known.
The Master’s Bedroom  is structured like the other overpaintings, with Ernst 
having summoned a cloudy film of gouache to mask out the parts of the 
underlying sheet that are to be suppressed and at the same time to project 
a new space in which the remaining objects—in this case animals and a 
few pieces of furniture—will take their places. As in the other cases also 
the gouache is somewhat skinlike, its film seeming to have congealed over 
the surface of the image. Unlike most of the others, however, the space 
projected by this film is insistently deep, organized indeed as a full-blown 
perspective. And the objects assembled are not the bizarre hybrids of the 
other collages but the unexceptional depictions of whale, bear, sheep, 
snake, bed, table, chest . . . , the elements left in reserve from a teaching- 
aid sheet on which row upon row of such animals and objects originally 
displayed themselves within the abstracted and gridlike circumstances of

what could be called the space of inventory. From the diagrammatic, 
wooden nature of the poses, from the juxtaposition of the elements in 
rows, from their obliviousness to the demands of perspective, which would 
require the distant animals to be smaller than the near ones, and from the 
occasional bleed of the underlying parts of the inventory through the 
gouache skin, the flattened grid of the supporting sheet remains apparent 
across the newly wrought terms of the perspective. And it is this appearance 
that was, I would guess, decisive for the surrealists’ original experience of 
the image as revelatory. Because what is projected here is a visual field that 
is not a latency, an ever renewed upsurge of the pure potentiality of the 
external, but instead a field that is already filled, already—to say the 
word—readymade.
Readymade. There is nothing readymade about the painter’s blank canvas 
or the draftsman’s white sheet, even if we could say that each of those 
surfaces is already organized, already structured by the lattice through 
which perspective will map the coordinates of external space. For the 
smooth white surface of each is nonetheless the index of a kind of empti­
ness, a fundamental blankness which is that of the visual field itself under­
stood as a field of projection. It stands, that is, for what is assumed to be 
the nature of vision’s spontaneous opening onto the external world as a 
limitless beyond, an ever retreating horizon, a reserve assumed from the 
outset but never filled in in advance. If in traditional perspective vanishing 
point and viewing point, horizon line and canvas surface, finally mirror 
one another in a complicitous reversibility, this is because they represent 
two funds of pure potentiality, two locations of the always-ever never-yet- 
filled: on the one hand, the horizon that vision probes, and on the other, 
the welling up of the glance.
That the ground of The Master’s Bedroom  is not a latency but a container 
already filled, so that the gaze is experienced as being saturated from the 
very start; that the perspective projection is not felt as a transparency 
opening onto a world but as a skin, fleshlike, dense, and strangely separable 
from the objects it fixates; these features present a visual model that is at 
one and the same time the complete reversal of traditional perspective and 
the total refusal of its modernist alternative.
How to characterize the visual model adumbrated here; how to picture 
something that is neither figure-against-ground nor their modernist subli­
mation? Would it help to think of the little apparatus that so fascinated 
Freud and about which he wrote his “Note on the Mystic Writing Pad” ?  
Not to enter into anything like a game of sources. Rather because the

The structure of vision and its ceaseless return to the already-known . . .  (p. S3)

Nr. 160. fy r a c b - imri ricHf.
Kolner Lehrmittelanstalf catalogue, p. 142, detail.
Within the abstracted and grid-like circumstances of what could be called  
the space of inventory . . .  (p. S3)

model of the Wunderblock helps to analyze the peculiar layering of expe­
rience that is here put in place.
The top sheet of the device—the one that registers the impressions etched 
upon it—is in Freud’s model analogous to the system he calls Pcpt.-Cs.,  
that is, the part of the mental apparatus that receives stimuli (either from 
the outside world or from within the organism itself) as a set of impressions 
that are not, however, permanent within this layer of the system. In the 
Wunderblock this top sheet holds the visible mark only as long as it is in 
contact with an underlying slab of wax to which it temporarily sticks under 
the pressure of the stylus; once the two surfaces are detached from one 
another, the marks vanish and the Wunderblock presents itself as a kind 
of slate wiped clean. But though they are no longer available to view, the 
lines that have been pressed onto it are in fact retained by the waxen 
support, where they form a permanent network of traces. And this Freud 
analogizes to the mental operations of memory and thus to that part of 
his topological model given over to the unconscious.
In The Master’s Bedroom  the Wunderblock’s waxen slab finds its analogue 
in the underlying sheet of the teaching-aid page, in its inventory-like con­
catenation of objects, the stored-up contents of unconscious memory; while 
the apparatus’s top sheet appears as the perspectival covering of the 
gouache overpainting, the skinlike thickness of which seems to be an index 
of the way this receptor surface is detachable from its ground. This impli­
cation of detachment and reattachment relates to a further point Freud 
makes about the structure of the Wunderblock and its capacity to model 
the very nature of sensory stimulation. This stimulation, he says, is periodic 
in nature. It is pulsatile, “the flickering up and passing away of conscious­
ness in the process of perception.” Such a flicker or pulse, such a connection 
and disconnection within the perceptual field, draws from neurophysiolo­
gy’s theory that, as Freud says, “ cathectic innervations are sent out and 
withdrawn in rapid periodic impulses from within into the completely 
pervious” perceptual system. “It is as though,” he goes on, “ the uncon­
scious stretches out feelers, through the medium of the system Pcpt.-Cs.,  
towards the external world and hastily withdraws them as soon as they 
have sampled the excitations coming from it.”
In The Master’s Bedroom  it is not that this pulsatile motion is illustrated. 
Indeed the scene’s peculiar stillness is a striking feature of the collage. 
Rather, what is rendered is the sense of the gap, the detachment, the split 
that results from the pulse.

tm o -But the pulse, the stillness, the visual apparatus projected within the spec­
tacle itself as a detachable covering, and the contents of vision figured 
forth as originating in optical space only because they are readymade, all 
of these elements are the structural features of the scene around which The 
Master’s Bedroom  is obviously organized. And it is just this through which 
the object was able to speak with the kind of power it did to Breton, 
Eluard, and Aragon in 1921. Ernst may have claimed this bedroom as his 
own, I find myself interjecting, but he could have done so only through a 
patent identification with Freud’s patient, the Wolf Man, and thus by 
evoking the famous dream of the wolves and behind them the Wolf M an’s 
primal scene. All of it is there, indeed: the immobility of the animals; the 
window opposite the bed; the raising of a curtain on the scene in the form 
of the window opening by itself which is the dream’s figure for the onset 
of vision in the opening of the child’s eyes; and underneath it all the 
element of repetition, the anxiety brought on by the uncanniness of the 
experience, by the fact of an already-there that is returning, returning in 
the form of an object that can only represent loss, an object whose identity 
resides precisely in the fact that it is lost. As a screen for the primal scene 
the dream allows that first uncanniness—the castration misperceived across 
the plane of the parents’ love-making—to reappear. And it does so in the 
upsurge of a new uncanniness, in which the lost object is summoned forth 
6# through the first of that long series of substitutions—wolf, butterfly, cut 
finger—that repeat the mark of the lost object, not as found again, but as 
recurring through the very condition of absence.
Yes, it was Karl Otten who bad shown him the books that day. It was in  
Bonn, in 1912, at the University. He could never have forgotten. He had  
read them voraciously, storing up the images, the examples, the analyses.  
Birds. Hats. Canes. Umbrellas. Stairs. Swimming pools. Flying. Falling.  
And always, always dreaming. Even now, he had to admit, he could recall  
large passages o f the  Interpretation almost verbatim. And the  Joke book.  
And  The Psychopathology of Everyday Life. It was clear to him, from that  
moment, that the great thing would be to be a  Freudian painter, to be able  
to make art out o f all o f that. But he also knew that he hadn’t the means  
to do more than to make feeble and inadequate illustrations. And the  
books, the ideas, were too precious for that. No matter. He knew even  
then that he would be able to wait.
What helped him wait had been seeing their drawings and paintings, the  
things they whittled or pieced together from scraps o f cloth and buttons,  
the images they confabulated in wild profusions o f miscellaneous detail,  
heads made up o f hundreds o f tiny heads put together, bodies composed

M ax Ernst, D ada in usum delphini,  1920.
Confronted by the priapic outrageousness o f the vacuum tube . . .  (p. 63)

His father simultaneously as all-powerful and in the guise of a  
w olf.  . . (p. 63)

M ax Ernst, The Virgin Chastising the Infant Jesus in Front o f Three Witnesses:
A. B., P. E., and the Artist,  1926.
Ernst’s projection of himself into the Leonardo story (p. 65)

The shadow of a bird cast onto the garments of the Virgin . (p. 65)

o f hundreds and hundreds o f spasmodically rendered curlicues. He thought  
he might write a book on this strange, delusionary production, the affluvia  
o f these mental wards, where his studies in psychology had taken him.
Later, after he had come to know de Chirico’s work and had seen that it  
would indeed be possible to build that kind o f affect into an image, he  
had begun to weave all the themes he’d thought about for  so long into his  
work. In 1920 he gave the collage o f the child seated at the little school­
room desk, confronted by the priapic outrageousness o f the vacuum tube,  
the title  Dada in usum delphini, remembering how Freud had announced  
in his  Introductory Lectures that he would not refer to the genitals in  usum 
delphini, as one would speak to children, but would call them instead by  
their names. In 1922 he based a collage for  Les malheurs des immortels, 
his book jointly written with Eluard, on the contraptions Judge Schreber’s  
father had devised for children’s exercises and published as  Kallipadie. The 
sheer extravagance o f Schreber’s madness excited him and so he went on  
to make  Of This Men Shall Know Nothing and Revolution by Night. But 
the Wolf M an’s case had pushed him even further. It was not just that he  
made  Souvenir de Dieu to show his father simultaneously as all-powerful  
and in the guise o f a wolf. The Wolf Man, he began to realize, would be  
the armature for his own surrealist text, the obligatory oneiric production  
that had to be submitted to the magazine for one to earn, so to speak,  
one’s stripes in the revolution.
In 1969 Robert Lebel interviewed Ernst about the appearance, so many 
years before, of what I am calling his Wolf Man text. Lebel wonders:
In October 1927, you published the “Trois visions de demi- 
sommeil” in nos. 9— 10 of La Revolution Surrealiste,  which 
carried your first explanation of the concept of automatism 
as well as of the mechanisms of collage and of frottage. 
How was this exceptionally interesting communication, 
where you affirmed your priorness and your supremacy in 
this area, received by the surrealist group and notably by 
Breton? Had you already spoken about it to Breton or was 
he reacting to a complete revelation?
M ax Ernst:  I never mentioned it to him before deciding 
on its publication but Andre Breton, with whom my rela­
tions were at that time quite cordial (with certain interrup­
tions), was spontaneously interested in it. He even helped 
me correct certain misusages of the French language.63
tU H )

f 4
( W itRobert Lebel:  Wasn’t it curious that, in a group so in­
tensely preoccupied with dreams, you had never made al­
lusion to these?
Max Ernst:  Yes, I agree, that could seem strange. . . .
How strange it might seem is, of course, a function of Ernst’s participation 
in that whole range of experiments—with drugs, with hypnosis, with 
automatic writing—that went on in 1923, as Breton, during the period 
known as the epoque des sommeils,  tried to invent this new system that 
he was to call surrealism. Jacques Baron remembers:
The first sessions took place at Breton’s, rue Fontaine. In 
as faithful a way as possible, the participants there were, 
Crevel—at the beginning as master of ceremonies—Breton 
and Simone, of course, Aragon, Eluard, Peret, Desnos, 
Morise, Vitrac (very seldom), Fraenkel probably, Limbour, 
once or twice. Pardon me if I forget some names. Jacques- 
Andre Boiffard must have been one . . . Soupault, I don’t 
remember . . . And Man Ray? And M ax Ernst? Certainly. 
Gala Eluard accompanied Paul. Janine not yet. Queneau 
was there and Denise soon Naville, and still others.
Question:  It’s Ernst who gives you his hand. Do you know him?
Desnos (in a hypnotic trance):  Who?
Question:  M ax Ernst.
Desnos:  Yes.
Question:  Will he live a long time?
Desnos:  Fifty-one years.
Question:  What will he do?
Desnos:  He will play with lunatics.
Question:  Will he be happy with lunatics?
Desnos:  Ask the blue lady.
His “Wolf Man dream, ” written for  La Revolution Surrealiste. He com­
posed it around his memory o f the headboard o f his little bed in Bruhl, a  
wooden panel, elaborately grained, into which before going to sleep as a  
child he would project imaginary rocks and far-off mountains, visualizing  
tiny horsemen making their way from one promontory to another. It was  
this panel that he remembered after he realized the immense possibilities  
o f frottage. And so it is in front o f this panel that he would place his father  
and have him make “obscene gestures” with a “fat crayon” he pulls out

o f his trousers before, according to the logic o f the dream work, turning  
his whole body into a vase, a top, a frantic whirling thing whose name  
could only be that absent presence o f fantasy, the phallus. The connection  
to the Wolf Man would be made through this reference to his father making  
love, overseen by “little M ax” and reexperienced via the screen o f the  
dream. The screen within the screen-memory. That would be it.
Yet the most specific and far-reaching example of Ernst’s identification 
with Freud’s case histories does not involve the Wolf Man per se. It is, 
rather, Ernst’s projection of himself into the Leonardo story. For example, 
in the 1926 picture The Virgin Chastising the Infant Jesus before Three  
Witnesses (A.B., P.E., and the Artist),  this connection is dropped in as a 
kind of private witticism, in the shadow of a bird cast onto the garments 
of the Virgin. Formed in the profile of the innumerable doves Ernst was 
to paint in the late 1920s, the appearance of this phantom mimes the 
Oskar Pfister diagram of the hidden vulture in The Virgin and Saint Anne,  
which accompanied the 1919 edition of Freud’s Leonardo essay. But Ernst’s 
identification with Leonardo was to be far more systemic than that. In his 
assumption of Loplop, “ Bird-Superior,” as his own alter ego, calling this 
creature, the subject of innumerable pictures, “my private phantom, at­
tached to my person,” it would achieve the resonance of a totem. At 
another, iconographic level, it would control Ernst’s relation to the realm 
of natural history, whether in the early collages or in the cycle of frottage 
drawings that assimilate themselves to the character of Leonardo’s sketch­
book projects in both facture and scope. But in this matter of The Master’s  
Bedroom  and the “ Three Dreams of Half-Sleep,” Ernst’s connection to the 
Leonardo case turns on the very function of screen memory as the central 
element of Freud’s analysis: screen memory, that is, not as a supplier of 
content but as a condition of how something is structured. For it is not 
the bird itself but the bird as fundamental absence that plays so important 
a role in the operation Freud will put in place.
Leonardo’s supposed recollection of a bird’s having visited him in his cradle 
and having beaten its tail between his lips is interpreted by Freud as a 
screen, a blind onto which the remembered remnants of infant arousal 
caused by an overaffectionate mother are projected in disguised form. Too 
young for these feelings to be understood, the infant retains this inchoate 
experience as a memory whose meaning lies dormant, awaiting the inter­
pretation that will only be given to it later, a meaning that is thus a function 
of what Freud calls deferred action. That what should finally be produced6s
ta w

two-as the perceptual content of this memory would be a bird Freud explains 
in a way that is parallel to the Wolf M an’s wolf, or indeed to the various 
objects presented in the screen memories of so many of his patients.
These elements are provided to the subject readymade, Freud states; they 
are what the child picks up from the scraps of overheard conversation, 
from images happened upon in books, from the behavior of animals both 
seen and recounted. They are the data uncovered in the research the child’s 
own sexual curiosity is constantly driving him or her to perform, the data 
that, once discovered, are retrojected onto the formless past in the guise 
of “ memory.” They are the completely factitious referents that come, after 
the fact, to attach themselves to the floating signifiers of what Freud had 
come to think of not even as the primal scene, but as the primal fantasy.
In Freud’s reconstruction of Leonardo’s case, the bird derives from an old 
wives’ tale, the mother’s repeated story of an omen of her child’s future 
greatness, and it is then reinforced as the specific memory object, Freud 
hypothesizes, by the information that vultures have no mates and are 
instead inseminated by the wind. The screen memory is, then, an apparatus 
by means of which vision is retrojected, projected after-the-fact onto the 
fully saturated ground of the readymade.
The Leonardo of the screen memory is different, we should notice, from 
the Leonardo of the projective screen, the famous spotted wall or burning 
embers within which he instructed young painters to let their imaginations 
wander. And it’s the second screen, the one conceived as the setting for a 
free play of imagery, a latency that permits the welling up of associations 
within the creative process, that has always been summoned in relation to 
Ernst. For it’s only the second, the art historian reasons, that is properly 
surrealist. Even Ernst seems to agree.
In his treatise Beyond Painting  Ernst obligingly quotes Breton’s explanation 
of “Leonardo’s lesson, setting his students to copy in their pictures that 
which they saw taking shape in the spots on an old wall (each according 
to his own lights).” And this Ernst juxtaposes with his own account of his 
discovery of frottage, which begins, “ On the 10th of August, 1925, an 
insupportable visual obsession caused me to discover the technical means 
which have brought a clear realization of this lesson of Leonardo,” a story 
that tells how a sudden fixation on the groves in the floorboards of his 
bedroom at a seaside inn led him to invent his own projective procedure. 
The reference to Leonardo’s projective screen is clearly intended here to 
give frottage a pedigree of unparalleled luster.

But in this account Ernst then goes on to make a claim that is inexplicable 
as long as the projective screen is thought of as a latency that, like the 
blank page of conventional painting, can be analogized to the ground of 
vision as traditionally conceived. That claim is that frottage and collage 
(or collage as Ernst practiced it, saying “ ce n’est pas la colie qui fait le 
collage” ) are indistinguishable as procedures, making it no surprise that 
the circumstances that suggested each of them to him should have been 
nearly identical. “The similarity of the two is such,” he writes, “ that I can, 
without changing many words, use the terms employed earlier for the one, 
to relate how I made the discovery of the other.” And then his account for 
collage begins: “ One rainy day in 1919, finding myself in a village on the 
Rhine, I was struck by the obsession which held under my gaze the pages 
of an illustrated catalogue showing objects designed for anthropologic, 
microscopic, psychologic, mineralogic, and paleontologic demonstration.”
For the twinning of these two inventions to be possible, Ernst must have 
conflated the two screens—Leonardo’s spotted wall and Freud’s account 
of the vulture memory—understanding the vision configured in the one as 
structured by the mnemonic retroactivity of the other. And in this confla­
tion it is the unconscious that is understood to be at work, with the two 
processes made to occupy the same perceptual stage due to what Freud 
describes as common to both dreams and hallucinations, namely a regres­
sion toward the visual. Thus the parent space for both collage and frottage, 
the single plane from which both were launched, is explained in Beyond  
Fainting  as the screen of Ernst’s own rather carefully fabricated screen 
memory, the burled mahogany panel of his bedstead which he casts in the 
drama of a twilight-state dream he claimed for himself in early childhood. 
This is the panel he imagines his father to be copulating with and on which 
is produced an inventory of images: “ menacing eye, long nose, great head 
of a bird with thick black hair, etc.”
When they moved—the four o f them, Paul, Gala, Max, and the six-year-  
old Cecile—from Saint-Brice to another suburban villa, this time in Eau-  
bonne, Max had the idea o f decorating the child’s room with wonderful,  
fanciful paintings. But somehow, as it always did, the focus got shifted to  
Gala. And it would now be the walls o f the entire apartment that he would  
cover with a profusion o f images. The very idea o f such a cycle reminded  
him o f Pompeian houses and from this he made a connection to Gradiva  
and Freud’s  Delusion and Dream, its analysis o f a story set after all among  
those ruins. The Pompeian girl o f antiquity —Gradiva—as a screen for the  
living girl Zoe, the delusional image in the present o f a live Gradiva through_________ 67
two-

which the adolescent sexual stirrings, lying dormant in memory, are finally  
given their interpretation. Gradiva as a screen.
The hand that would play “Gradiva" in this outsized mural was a found  
image. He had seen it in the magazine  La Nature as the illustration for a  
little essay on sensory illusions. It was a hand with its index and middle  
fingers crossed one over the other, the tips of each stroking either side of  
the little ball or pellet positioned between them. The hand, indescribably  
languid, was wholly suggestive, its crossed fingers turning the tender web  
o f flesh at the fingers’ base into a beautifully folded crotch, the feminized  
source o f what could now be read as two voluptuously dangling legs. But  
it wasn’t just the transformation o f hand into “woman” that caught his  
attention. The ball, you see, pushed things farther than that. The verticality  
o f the fingers with the ball at their tips rephallicized the image, causing a  
meaning to rise upward, to flood back over the lineaments o f the baffling  
genital secret; in it he could see the woman’s body beckoning with all the  
pleasure and terror o f the dawning excitement o f the experience o f sexual  
difference. And this made the hand, in its verticality, in its sense o f weight­
less suspension, in its Oedipal overtones, another avatar o f  La puberte 
proche.
But this time the hand, as it reaches from behind the depicted, Pompeian  
wall to perform its gesture o f seduction against the terra cotta surface,  
beckons to him, M ax Ernst, from in front o f a screen. Behind the screen  
is the fantasy o f Gala in  La puberte proche and behind that the photograph  
o f her in Eluard’s wallet. And behind that the long chain o f images that  
had lain dormant for so long, the siren images with “M ax” on their lips  
as they murmured to him the truth o f his childish desire.
In what Freud calls vision’s “other scene”—the one toward which the 
unconscious regresses in the conditions of dreaming, fantasizing, halluci­
nating, or screen memory—the operation of dormancy is at work. This 
deferred action or Nachtraglichkeit,  or apres-coup,  is importantly a func­
tion of the readymade, which, lying at hand, becomes the vehicle for a 
past experience—one that had made no sense at the time it occurred—to 
rise up on the horizon of the subject’s vision as an originary, unified 
perception. Freud describes this, for example, in relation to secondary 
revision, that process of the dream work that comes, apres-coup,  to con­
struct a facade for the dream—the one we seem to remember upon waking, 
the one that gathers the chaos of the dream representations together, 
creating the relative coherence of a narrative. This facade, Freud says, is a 
readymade—a narrative lying in wait to be affixed to the dream material,

M ax Ernst, At the First Clear Word,  1923.
The hand, as it reaches front behind the depicted, Pompeian wall to  
perform its gesture of seduction . . .  (p. 68)

“ Illusion of Touch,” La Nature  (1881), p. 584.
But it wasn’t just the transformation of hand into “woman” that caught his  
attention  . . . (p. 68)

its readymade condition making its attachment possible in the very split 
second of waking. Offering many examples of the way this works, Freud 
asks of one of them, “ Is it so highly improbable that [this] dream represents 
a phantasy which had been stored up ready-made in [the dreamer’s] mem­
ory for many years and which was aroused—or I would rather say ‘alluded 
to’—at the moment at which he became aware of the stimulus which woke 
him?” Secondary revision, however, is not the affixing of just any prefab­
ricated plot line to the surface of the dream. The relation between the 
narrative facade that secondary revision erects and the desire that functions 
at the dream’s core is that these two in fact mirror one another. And 
further, that inner kernel is itself readymade, a function of daydreams 
elaborated in infancy or puberty that “ form within the nexus of the dream 
thoughts.” And as we know, in that infinite regress in which the referent 
is constantly displaced from its supposed causal connection to the fantasy’s 
origin, those daydreams will also be described by Freud as readymade for 
the subject, lying in wait for him in the scraps he picks up from his parents 
and grandparents, the legends the family tells about itself and him, its 
favorite sayings, the myths about itself that it weaves out of the prefabri­
cated material of social chitchat and cultural aspirations, the romances in 
short that he takes from others and assumes as his own.
Now, if the daydreamer is able to produce these secondhand scraps of 
excitement as his own, if they appear to him on the screen of his memory 
as his personal experience, this is due to that particular structure of visual 
perception that Lacan has termed the “ belong to me  aspect of represen­
tations.” It is this phenomenological experience of something’s being both 
outside himself and his that turns this bric-a-brac into the deictic markers 
of the subject’s own being, the evidentiary signposts that appear to him 
the indices of his own history, his own identity, the touchstones of his most 
intimate connections to the real. Which is all the more astonishing in that 
the readymades he will come to identify as “his” are the markers erected 
after the fact to commemorate an event that never happened, an encounter 
whose traumatic effect on him arises from the very fact that he missed it. 
The sexuality of the child, Freud says, will always be traumatic, because 
it will always be a missed encounter, one for which he was always either 
too early or too late.
The traumatic event, the missed encounter, what Lacan comes to call the 
tuche,  produces not excitement but loss, or rather excitement as loss, as a 
self-mutilation, as something fallen from the body. The repetition auto­
matism set in motion by this trauma will work thereafter to restore that 
unknown and unknowable thing, attempting to find it, that is, on the other

side of the gap the trauma opened up in the field of the missed encounter. 
The structure of the trauma, then, is not just that it initiates a compulsion 
to repeat but that it institutes the gap of the trauma itself—the missed 
encounter—as the always-already occupied meaning of that opening onto 
a spatial beyond that we think of as the determining character of vision. 
For it is from the other side of the perceptual divide that the signifier 
will come, the object capable of standing for what the subject has lost. 
It is this object that the child sets out to find, supplying itself with an end­
less series of substitutes that present themselves to it, in the world beyond 
the gap.
To the reservoir or inventory of this series of stand-ins Lacan gives the 
name automaton to indicate the quality of uncanniness that surrounds the 
finding of each of these objects, the sense not only of anxiety the encounter 
produces but also its aura of happenstance, an encounter one was not 
prepared for, a meeting that always, one insists, takes place by chance. But 
the term automaton  also underscores the inexorability and order that rule 
this series, that create the logic of the substitutions that will take place 
within it. The automaton inaugurated on the site of that gap of the missed 
encounter will both mark that spot and attempt to fill it, to produce from 
its grab bag of readymades the stopgaps presumed by the subject to be 
made to the measure of his own desire.

tuw  mm/M on e
In the question period following Lacan’s session on “Tuche and Automa­
ton” he is asked why, in describing the formation of intelligence up to the 
age of three or four, he seems to have abandoned the notion of develop­
mental stages—first oral, then anal, then Oedipal—and to have organized 
everything around the fear of castration. Lacan’s answer is: “The fear of 
castration is like a thread that perforates all the stages of development. It 
orientates the relations that are anterior to its actual appearance—weaning, 
toilet training, etc. It crystallizes each of these moments in a dialectic that 
has as its center a bad encounter. If the stages are consistent, it is in 
accordance with their possible registration in terms of bad encounters.”
In another, earlier seminar on the notion of “ object relations” as viewed 
from within a Freudian structure, he had spoken of the castrative status 
of weaning. “What happens,” he asks, “ when the mother no longer re­
sponds to the solicitation of desire, when she responds according to her 
own will? She becomes real, she becomes powerful. All at once access to 
objects is modified: until then objects which were pure and simply objects 
of satisfaction, are now transformed into gifts coming from this source of 
power. We witness, in short, a reversal of position. From being symbolic 
the mother becomes real, and objects from being real, become symbolic.”
Suppose we were to try to graph this relation. We might start by charac­
terizing the primal appearance o f the object within the infant subject’s  
perceptual field as the advent o f something that separates itself out from  
a hitherto undifferentiated ground to become distinct as  figure. That object,  
which is the mother’s breast—and by extension the mother—becomes a  
figure, o f course, by dint o f its withdrawal from the contiguous field o f  
the infant, by virtue o f setting him up no longer as the amorphous and all-  
inclusive subject o f satisfaction but now as the subject o f frustration and  
longing, the subject that is, o f desire. The very moment that produces the  
visibility o f the object brackets it, then, as an object submitted to the terms  
o f absence.  As such, this “figure" is conditioned by its own contradiction,  
which is that o f  not-figure. But the figure, as image, is also mirrored back  
to the infant perceiver, who understands it as the representation o f not just  
any object but that object which is uniquely his, which was invented for  
his satisfaction and pleasure, which in being his marks him as a unique

______ 74
tw&being, and in this character o f “belonging to him" both points to him  
deictically —“this,” “here,” “you"—and reproduces itself deixically—one  
term mirroring another, implying another—as part o f his own identity.  As 
in the Klein Group’s diagonally opposing terms, as in the L Schema’s  a =  
a', so here the “figure” o f the image equals the “not-ground” o f his self­
differentiation as ego. Rewritten in this way:
in sid e
ground
" b elo n g to m e ” 
p a r t o b jectso u tsid e
figure... .separation
inventory  
(automaton)  
figures o f absence
the appearance o f the object as the psycho analytically construed function  
o f separation begins to suggest a schema with which we are familiar.
If modernism’s logic of vision can be constructed with the Klein Group as 
its basis, that same structuralist model is also the support for the L Schema. 
This schema, as we know, sets the subject of the unconscious in contrast 
to its objects, which Lacan comes to term objets a  (or objects of desire). 
From that initial contrast two derivations then occur, as the objets a  are 
first doubled along the mirroring relationship of the deixic axis to structure 
the field of the subject’s ego and then configured in terms of an absence 
that projects them into the unconscious field, also to be termed the Sym­
bolic and the locus of the Other.
Like the Klein Group, like the modernist visual graph, the L Schema is set 
up to acknowledge structuralism’s drive toward logical clarity. To this end 
it shares in the synchrony and cognitive immediacy that are the features 
of structure. But this the L Schema does only to challenge the very trans­
parency announced by the structuralist diagram itself. For the terms of 
logic that rule within the diagram—making possible the mirror relation of 
the axis of visuality—set up a reversibility between a and a' that is the 
basis not of lucidity but of what Lacan will label “misrecognition.” Per­
manent and opaque, this obstacle is installed within the very heart of a 
diagrammatic clarity that is now a model both of vision’s claims and of 
vision’s failure.

If transparency is one feature of structure, synchrony is the other. For it is 
the synchronous display of relations that, by gathering the elements of a 
system into the field of a single picture, allows for the thought of cognitive 
mastery. It is synchrony, therefore, that becomes the other term upon which 
the L Schema declares its own logical war. Constructed as a circuit rather 
than a diagram or table, the L Schema plots the effects set in motion by 
the trauma’s production of the compulsion to repeat. Mapping this circu­
larity onto the stability of the structure, the L Schema implies that it is 
only that sequentiality and time taken up into the heart of the system that 
give it its character as homeostatic and its appearance as atemporal.
Would it be possible to modify the L Schema as the basis for mapping a  
visuality that both subtends and subverts the field o f modernist vision in  
the same way that Lacan’s psychoanalytic circuitry erodes the structuralist  
relations from within? For if the mirror relation as it is graphed in the L  
Schema divides the subject from the unconscious, by driving a wedge o f  
opacity through the diagonal center o f the graph, it is nonetheless true that  
the subject is the effect o f the unconscious, or what needs now to be called  
a “subject-effect. ”
In a similar way the graph o f an automatist visuality would show how the  
vaunted cognitive transparency o f the “visual as such” is not an act of  
consciousness but the effect of what is repressed: the effect, that is, of  
seriality, repetition, the automaton. Which is to say, it is a function o f a  
caesura in vision, a gap:
g r o u n d  ____  ^  fig u r e
field o f  synchrony  x \ serial repetition
“ v isu alas su ch ”
v S  
/ '
n o t g r o u n d  m isse d  en co u n ter  a u to m a to n  
(part objects) (figures o f absence)
“ belong to m e ”
The figure, constituted by separation, is deixically redoubled as  not-ground: 
as those parts o f the subject’s own body that are identified with the external  
object. But since that external object is given through its very condition as  
retreating or separating, those part-objects belonging to the subject are  
similarly parts lost to the subject, and for that reason they are written  
along the axis o f castration. At the pole at the far end o f that axis, the/ < > "
taw

pole of the  not-figure, the inventory of all those substitutes for the lost  
object pile up in a potentially endless series. The appearance o f each of  
these figures, as it rises from behind the barrier o f the missed encounter,  
out o f the field o f the unconscious and into that o f perception, will strike  
the subject with surprise, will seem to him the result o f chance.

M ax Ernst, L a femme 100 tetes,  1929: 
‘Truth will remain simple, and gigantic wheels will ride the bitter waves.”
The stormy landscapes, the urban squares, the desk-lined  
schoolrooms . . .  (p. 81)

M ax Ernst, L a femme 100 tetes,  1929: “The might-have-been Immaculate Conception.”
Their obvious allusion to the part-object: the breast, the eye, the belly, the  
womb . . .  (p. 81)

M ax Ernst, L a femme 100 tetes,  1929: . . and the third time missed.”
In their posture, in their function, in their affect, the legs reconvene an  
image we recognize . . . (p. 82)

M ax Ernst, The Garden o f France,  1962.
Its final avatar, perhaps, the clutched knees and crossed ankles of the

For the gambler’s passion is nothing but that question asked of the signifier,  
figured by the  automaton of chance.
“What are you, figure o f the die I turn over in your encounter  (tyche) with  
my fortune? Nothing, if not that presence of death which makes of human  
life a reprieve obtained from morning to morning in the name of meanings  
whose sign is your crook.  ...”
—Lacan, Seminar on “The Purloined Letter”
In the summer of 1929 M ax Ernst was spending a long vacation on a farm 
in the Ardeche. There, as he claimed to one of his biographers, he was 
confined to bed for several weeks. Whether or not this bed had a headboard 
and if so whether of burled mahogany, or whether this confinement even 
occurred, is probably not important. Ernst was reconfiguring what can 
easily be spotted as his “ collage conditions” : that formula of the twilight- 
state dream, of the master’s bedroom, of the perspective space effortlessly 
unrolling toward its readymade horizon. The feverish production of those 
few weeks was the collage novel Femme 100 tetes.
The stormy landscapes, the urban squares, the desk-lined schoolrooms, the 
corridor of railroad dining car—in the world of the novel each prospect is 
transected by an apparition that both occupies a part of the space and 
blocks its backward recession. The apparition is most frequently a ghostly 
white profile, the classically drawn figure of a woman, sometimes nude, 
sometimes draped, inserted within the cross fire of light and shadow that 
tells of the banal solidity of the surrounding space. Sometimes the appar­
ition is accompanied, or even substituted for, by a wheel-like form sug­
gesting a turning disc, a circle that in the second plate of the novel resembles 
Duchamp’s optical machines, or his rotoreliefs, with their obvious allusion 
to the part-object: the breast, the eye, the belly, the womb. In the fourth 
plate of the book, the one that tells of the immaculate conception’s missing 
or failing for the third time, that uncanny gap we have come to expect 
opens within the visual continuum. Here it is manifested by the silhouette 
of two huge, white legs, knees pressed together, ankles crossed, emerging 
from the boxlike apparatus two scientists are manipulating from within 
the shadowy interior of their laboratory. These legs, truncated just above

tm othe thigh, end at the upper face of the box, a tiny observable ripple of 
cloth gesturing toward the joint between them. In their posture, in their 
function, in their affect, the legs reconvene an image we recognize. We’ve 
seen it before in La puberte proche;  we’ve seen it in the “ Gradiva” mural 
at Eaubonne; and, we might suspect, we will see it again: its final avatar, 
perhaps, the clutched knees and crossed ankles of the nude that Ernst will 
lift from Cabanal’s Birth o f Venus  and bury just below the screenlike 
surface of his own Garden o f France.
And as with the bird, whether Ernst’s or Leonardo’s, it is not the perceptual 
content of the figure that counts so much as it is the way it structures the 
field. Emerging from the box, just like the hand dangling through the 
opening in the wall at Eaubonne, the figure enters the field of vision as 
radically disembodied. This effect of a truncated body part—eyes, headless 
torso, most often hands—emerging into the field of vision is a leitmotif of 
Ernst’s production: the hand poking through the window in Oedipus Rex;  
the two hands suspending the eyeball between them for the cover of 
Repetitions;  the hands that would gesture toward the viewer in the many 
versions of Loplop Presents.  These hands, which seem to gesture, seem to 
point, seem to teach, always appear to beckon, thereby establishing an 
intimate, even personal order of connection between the space of the image 
and that of the viewer. It is therefore important to note that this gesture 
of showing, of pointing, of welcoming, is the gesture in Ernst’s work that 
is most demonstrably readymade. Over and over he lifts it from the pages 
of La Nature  where the hands that reach into the image from a point just 
beyond its frame are busily engaged in demonstrating simple principles of 
physics, or performing magic tricks, or showing the operations of scientific 
instruments. And this gesture with which Ernst seems to identify with all 
his might is a gesture that holds up a frame around an absence. For what 
the hand is proffering, toward its viewer, toward Ernst, is always a kind 
of hole in vision, since it is always made the space of substitution, is always 
a screen, a field within which there enters the automaton.
The hand is Ernst’s objet a;  as such it introduces the screen, the rupture, 
the blind spot.
The hand that gestures toward the infant establishes a bond that the child 
can only read as unique, a gesture meant utterly and undividedly for itself. 
This pointing gesture is deictic, it says “ you.” But far beyond that it says 
“you are,” or “you exist.” It is the dumb, preverbal, presymbolic pointing 
to which Barthes refers in the opening of his Camera Lucida,  a pointing 
that he likens to the Buddhist tathata  (the fact of being this) or to the

Hands—emerging into the field of vision . . .  (p. 82)

“ Electrical Experiment, Carried Out on a Walnut,” 
L a Nature  (1891), p. 272.
Over and over he lifts it from the pages of La Nature  ... ( p .  8 2 )

M ax Ernst, Repetitions  (cover collage), 1922.
This gesture of showing, of pointing, of welcoming . . .  (p. 82)

“ The Magic Ball,” La Nature  (1887), p. 144.
.  is the gesture in Ernst’s work that is most demonstrably readymade . . .  (p. 82)

child’s jubilant discovery: Ta, Da, Ca!  This deictic marker, this index of 
pure individuality, is a function, for the infant, of the part-object: the 
mother’s gaze, her breast, her hand.
But almost immediately it becomes a function of the tuche —“ the real as 
encounter—the encounter in so far as it may be missed, in so far as it is 
essentially the missed encounter.” In calling the encounter with the real 
“ the tychic . .  . from the word tuche,”  Lacan adds that since this is an 
encounter essentially missed the phenomenon one is dealing with here is 
“ dustuchia,”  or the split. It is the break in the field of vision or the break 
within the flow of language for which we could use the term distich, the 
split between the two lines of a poem that both divides them and couples 
them. Deictic and distich. They almost rhyme.
Lacan’s discussion of vision in The Four Fundamental Concepts o f Psycho-  
Analysis  is centered on a scopic drive structured by the distich, the rupture, 
the schiz. He calls the opening chapter “ The Split between the Eye and the 
Gaze.” But the whole of his account is called “The Gaze as objet a ,”  or 
the gaze as part-object, the object that, because it marks the subject with 
the individuation of his existence, is most fundamentally the object of 
desire. Lacan wants to show the dialectic between deictic and distich, 
between pointing and screen, between this! and absence.
The space of pointing, or of deixis, is the space that Lacan terms “ geo- 
metral,” namely the space of perspective, a space that as Diderot shows in 
his Letter on the Blind  is actually a tactile  space, a space mastered by the 
subject as though he were reaching out to grasp it, to palp it, running 
fingers over its front and sides, manipulating it.
In contrast to this tactile “visuality” is the space of light, which Lacan calls 
“ dazzling, pulsatile” : an atmospheric surround that illuminates the viewer 
from both back and front, so that from the start there is no question of 
mastery. And in the context of this space of the luminous, the viewer is 
not the surveyor—standing at a point just outside the pyramid of vision— 
but, caught within the onrush of light, he is what blocks the light, what 
interrupts its flow. In this interruption the “viewer” invisible to himself 
enters the “ picture” created by this light as a “ stain” or blind spot, as the 
shadow cast by the light, its trace, its deictic mark. And from this place 
the subject, in all his exposure to view, can neither see himself nor see the 
source of the light. His position is one of dependence on an illumination 
that both marks him (the deictic) and escapes his grasp (the distich). This 
illumination Lacan calls the “gaze.” It is a part-object operating within the________ # 7
tmo-

instinctual field of vision, forever unlocatable, out of focus, in metamor­
phosis, pulsing. “It is always that gleam of light,” Lacan declares, “which 
holds me, at each point, as a screen, and therefore makes the light appear 
as an iridescence that overflows it. In short, the point of gaze always 
participates in the ambiguity of the jewel.”
I enter the picture as a cast shadow, cast because, dumbly, I get in the way  
o f the light. And because I get in the way o f it, I cannot see it. The point  
where it would be, if I could see it, is held for me by a marker, a placeholder,  
a structural substitute. This is the automaton, the readymade, the thing  
the gap both produces and hides behind. This is what marks the point in  
the optical system where what is thought to be visible will never appear.

M ax Ernst, Magician,  1921.
The hand is Ertisfs  objet a . (p. 82)

A gesture that holds up a frame around an absence . . .  (p. 82)

Bibliographical Note
Adorno’s text is “ Looking Back at Surrealism” (in The Idea o f the Modern in Literature  
and the Arts,  ed. Irving Howe [New York: Horizon, 1967], p. 222).
Werner Spies, the leading Ernst scholar, discusses the collage novels at length in his 
M ax Ernst: Les collages, inventaire et contradictions  (Paris: Gallimard, 1984). Curiously 
Spies claims that Ernst’s collage novels were never addressed either by Benjamin or 
Adorno; this, even though Spies also quotes a letter from Benjamin to Adorno dating 
from after the publication of Une semaine de bonte:  “ I would like to meet M ax Ernst. 
If you could organize something, you could be certain of my willingness” (p. 177). 
Among the other wealth of material, Spies’s study contains an important documentary 
group of images displaying the various visual sources on which Ernst drew for his 
collages (pp. 415-455), as well as a group of unpublished letters from Ernst to Tristan 
Tzara (pp. 480-483) and a detailed description of the scene of unpacking the collages 
at Tzara’s house (p. 81).
Charlotte V. Stokes, in “ La Femme 100 tetes  by M ax Ernst” (Ph.D. dissertation, Uni­
versity of Washington, 1977), p. 3, reads Femme 100 tetes  as a Bildungsroman;  Gerd 
Bauer, in “M ax Ernsts Collagenroman ‘Une Semaine de Bonte,’ ” Wallraf Ricbartz Jabr-  
buch  39 (1977), patterns Une semaine de bonte  on earlier works of literature; M. E. 
Warlich (“ M ax Ernst’s Alchemical Novel: Une semaine de bonte,” Art Journal,  46 
[Spring 1987]) decodes it through alchemy; Werner Spies ( M ax Ernst: Les collages,  
p. 197) refers to Rimbaud. See also Evan Maurer, “ Images of Dream and Desire: The 
Prints and Collage Novels of M ax Ernst” (Max Ernst, Beyond Surrealism,  ed. Robert 
Rainwater [New York: New York Public Library and Oxford University Press, 1986]): 
“ Histoire naturelle  is essentially a surreal poetic vision describing the birth of the world 
and the evolution of life, and its theme and imagery reflect Ernst’s continuing interest in 
the illustrated books and magazines of natural science that he had begun to use as 
sources of illustrations for his collages in the early 1920s” (p. 59). Maurer relates the 
water chapter of Une semaine de bonte  to Freud’s Dora case history.
Andre Breton remembers unpacking the Ernst collages in his “Artistic Genesis and 
Perspective of Surrealism” (1941; reprinted in Surrealism and Painting  [New York: 
Harper and Row, 1972], p. 64); his reference to catalogue figures as “ readymades” is 
from his essay “ M ax Ernst,” 1920 (in M ax Ernst, Beyond Painting  [New York: Witten- 
born, Schultz], p. 177). Aragon’s reference to advertisements is from “ M ax Ernst, peintre 
des illusions,” 1923 (in Louis Aragon, Les collages  [Paris: Hermann, 1965], p. 29). The 
actual source for the overpaintings from 1920 was the 1914 Katalog der Kolner Lehr-  
mittelanstalt,  discussed by Dirk Teuber, “M ax Ernsts Lehrmittel,” Max Ernst in Koln  
(Cologne: Kolnischer Kunstverein, 1980), pp. 206-240.
Accounts of Eluard’s relation to Ernst are found in: Robert Jouanny, “ L’amitie magique 
de Paul Eluard et M ax Ernst,” Motifs et figures  (Paris: PUF, 1974); Charles Whiting, 
“ Eluard’s Poems for G ala,” The French Review  (February 1968); Luc Decaunes, Paul  
Eluard,  (Paris: Balland, 1982); Elaine Formentelli, “ M ax Ernst-Paul Eluard, ou l’im- 
patience du desir,” Revue des Sciences Humaines,  no. 164 (1976), pp. 487— 504. Andre 
Thirion, Revolutionnaires sans revolution  (Paris: Robert Laffont, 1972), describes 
Eluard’s showing G ala’s photograph: “ La photographie de Gala nue ne quittait pas son 
portefeuille et il la montrait volontiers: on y voyait un corps admirable qu’Eluard n’etait 
pas peu fier d’avoir mis dans son lit” (p. 200); Patrick Waldberg ( Max Ernst  [Paris: 
Jean-Jacques Pauvert, 1958]) speaks of Eluard’s sensing Ernst as his brother, of the

tioo-menage a trois in Saint-Brice and Eaubonne. It is Jean-Charles Gateau ( Paul Eluard et  
la peinture surrealiste  [Paris: Droz, 1982]) who sees Eluard’s poem “ M ax Ernst” as the 
memory of a real scene that occurred in the Cologne studio; his analysis of the poem 
connects the fourfold “ dans un coin” to the game of quatre coins  (p. 54). The first 
section of “M ax Ernst” reads:
Dans un coin l’inceste agile 
Tourne autour de la virginite d’une petite robe.
Dans un coin le del delivre 
Aux pointes des anges laisse des boules blanches.
Dans un coin plus clair de tous les yeux 
On attend les poissons d’angoisse.
Dans un coin la voiture de verdure de l’ete 
Immobile, glorieuse et pour toujours.
A la lueur de la jeunesse 
Des lampes allumees tres tard 
La premiere montre ses seins que tuent des insectes rouges.
When Gateau turns from the literary to the visual reading, however, and invokes a 
modernist notion of the four-cornered, flat page of Ernst’s medium as another way of 
interpreting Eluard’s use of “dans un coin,” this seems to operate against the grain of 
both Eluard’s and Ernst’s pictorial sensibilities at this time. Ernst’s own sense of the 
corners of an image are themselves indebted to de Chirico, to the revelation he received 
when he saw how the Italian painter could so warp the classical proscenium of central- 
point perspective’s stagelike cavity that looking into and entering the deep space of the 
picture continually led to one’s feeling of being thrown back to the surface again, as 
though trying to enter a centrifuge. De Chirico had not embraced the modernist solution 
of breaking down the opposition between figure and ground, of having the one—ground, 
say—rise up to become the canvas’s “ figure.” Rather, he had developed a certain kind 
of tension between the two; more like anamorphosis. Ernst’s Fiat Modes  capitalized on 
this perception, as did the overpaintings he sent to Breton for the exhibition at Au 
Sans Pareil.
Sigmund Freud, “A Note upon the ‘Mystic Writing-Pad’ ” (1924), in The Standard  
Edition o f the Complete Psychological Works,  ed. James Strachey (London: Hogarth 
Press and the Institute for Psycho-Analysis), vol. 19, p. 231.
For the background of Ernst’s connection to psychoanalysis, see Werner Spies, The 
Return o f La Belle Jardiniere, M ax Ernst 1950-1979  (New York: Abrams, 1971), p. 38; 
and Elisabeth Legge, M ax Ernst: The Psychoanalytic Sources  (Ann Arbor: UMI Research 
Press, 1989).
Ernst’s own texts, reprinted in Beyond Painting  (New York: Wittenborn, 1948), con­
struct a psychobiography: a “ primal scene” ; a paranoid attachment to his father; an 
erotic attachment to his sister, who comes consistently to be referred to in his work 
(Femmes 100 tetes,  and elsewhere) as “ perturbation my sister.” He himself connects the 
painting Souvenir de dieu  to the representation of his father as a wolf (p. 28), suggesting 
a direct relation to the Wolf Man, as in Freud’s case “ From the History of an Infantile 
Neurosis” (1918), Standard Edition.,  vol. 17, pp. 3-122. For an analysis of Ernst’s 
relation to the Schreber case, see Geoffrey Hinton, “M ax Ernst: ‘Les Hommes n’en 
Sauront Rien,’ ” Burlington Magazine,  117 (May 1975), pp. 292-297; and M al­
colm Gee, “ M ax Ernst, God, and the Revolution by Night,” Arts, 55  (March 1981), 
pp. 85-91.
Hal Foster has analyzed Ernst’s early work both in relation to primal fantasies and the 
social setting out of which Ernst’s preoccupation with this arose: “ Armor Fou,” October,  
no. 56 (Spring 1991), and “ Convulsive Identity,” October,  no. 57 (Summer 1991).

Ernst’s discussion of his “ Trois visions de demi-sommeil” is from “ M ax Ernst parle avec 
Robert Lebel,” L ’Oeil,  nos. 176-177 (August 1969); his appearance at the early “ epoque 
des sommeils” seances is recounted in Jacques Baron, L ’an 1 du surrealisme  (Paris: 
Denoel, 1969), p. 67; his participation is quoted from Robert Desnos, Ecrits sur les  
peintres  (Paris: Flammarion, 1984)— “ the blue lady” is generally understood to refer to 
Gala Eluard.
Werner Spies ( M ax Ernst, Loplop: The Artist in the Third Person  [New York: George 
Braziller, 1983], pp. 103ff.) makes the connection between the Oskar Pfister diagram 
and Ernst’s Infant Jesus Being Chastised;  he quotes Ernst from a 1934 text, writing of 
“ Leonardo’s celebrated vulture, coaxed out of hiding centuries later by a student of 
Freud” (p. 105). Spies also discusses Ernst’s identification with Leonardo in terms of his 
adoption of the bird as alter ego and his embrace of the crumbling wall as a projective 
screen. He does not, however, consider the other meaning of “ screen image” that emerges 
from Freud’s analysis of Leonardo (Sigmund Freud, “ Leonardo da Vinci and a Memory 
of His Childhood” [1910], Standard Edition,  vol. 11, pp. 59-137). The speculation that 
the bird fantasy was projected retrospectively onto a story, told to him by his mother, 
about a bird visiting him in his cradle was added in a footnote in 1919 (chap. 2). Freud 
presented the idea and function of the screen memory in 1899 (“ Screen Memories,” 
Standard Edition,  vol. 3, pp. 301— 322).
Ernst speaks of the bird as his totem in Beyond Painting,  pp. 9 -10; he quotes Breton 
on Leonardo’s lesson, p. 11; and relates this to the invention of frottage, p. 14.
Freud’s Delusion and Dream,  his analysis of Jenson’s “ Gradiva,” was written in 1906 
(Standard Edition,  vol. 9, pp. 3-93). Elisabeth Legge points out that the Gradiva story 
is already present in one of the poems in Les malheurs  (see Legge, Max Ernst,  p. 107). 
Werner Spies analyzes the relation between On the First Clear Word  and Delusion and  
Dream  in “ Une poetique du collage” (in Paul Eluard et ses amis peintres  [Paris: Centre 
Georges Pompidou, 1982], pp. 66— 67).
For the analysis of secondary revision, see Sigmund Freud, The Interpretation of  
Dreams,  trans. James Strachey (New York: Avon Library, 1965), chap. 6, where he speaks 
of the “ readymade fantasy” (pp. 533-534) and the readymade nexus of dream 
thoughts (p. 530).
Jean LaPlanche and J.-B. Pontalis, “ Fantasy and the Origins of Sexuality,” The Inter­
national Journal o f Psycho-Analysis,  49 (1968), pp. 10-11.
Jacques Lacan, The Four Fundamental Concepts o f Psycho-Analysis,  trans. Alan Sheridan 
(New York: Norton, 1977), where he points out the belong-to-me aspect of percep­
tion (p. 81); speaks of the early encounter with the sexual as a “ missed encounter,” 
either too early or too late (p. 69); refers to the objet a  as something fallen from the 
body (p. 62); stresses the chance nature of the encounter (p. 58); analyzes the automaton 
and its substitutions (p. 67); and answers questions about castration invading all the 
stages of development (p. 64). He again speaks of weaning and object relations in “ La 
relation d’objet et les structures freudiennes,” Bulletin de Psychologie  10, no. 7 (April 1, 
1957), 429.
John Russell, M ax Ernst: Life and Work  (New York: Abrams, 1967), p. 189, tells of 
the circumstances of making the collages for Femme 100 tetes.  Spies (“ Une poetique 
de collage” ) reproduces various examples of Ernst’s use of hands doing magic or 
science demonstrations, drawn from La Nature:  see, for example, Ernst’s Le magicien  
(1921) and the “ multiplication of eggs” demonstration from La Nature  (pp. 54-55). In 
Loplop: The Artist in the Third Person,  Spies relates the importance of hands for Ernst 
to the fact that Ernst’s father taught deaf and dumb children and was therefore ex­
pert in signage.

Vanessa sat silent and did something mysterious with her needle or her  
scissors. I  talked egotistically, excitedly, about my own affairs no doubt.  
Suddenly the door opened and the long and sinister figure of Mr. Lytton  
Strachey stood on the threshold. He pointed his finger at a stain on  
Vanessa’s white dress. “Semen?” he said.
Can one really say it? I thought and we burst out laughing.
—Virginia Woolf

Sometimes we tell each other Duchamp stories, which might surprise you 
since, you would reasonably point out, there is practically nothing about 
old Marcel that hasn’t been told, already, to death. Yet if God is in the 
details, the endlessly ironic touches in Duchamp’s narrative are also, even 
in their apparent irrelevance, the source of a strange exhilaration and 
brilliance.
Molly’s favorite touch was to be found in the childhood memorabilia that 
Teeny had shown her, among them his grade-school primers with their 
hideously banal exercises, to be carried out in a kind of deadpan mechanical 
drawing, meant to teach the depiction of a range of utterly ordinary objects. 
Suddenly there opened before her a vista of these forced elaborations of 
the obvious: snow shovels, coffee grinders, French windows. And if so, 
she thought, why not combs, bird cages, urinals?

The story I told Molly was of an older, more devious Marcel, one who 
had already given up painting and had, since the early ’20s, carried a 
business card identifying himself as “precision oculist.” Now, fifteen years 
into this new profession, he found himself manning a tiny booth at the 
Porte de Versailles where the Inventors’ Fair, called the Concours Lepine, 
was holding its annual, monthlong exhibition. His own invention, which 
he was trying to sell to that crowd streaming through the aisles of the hall, 
consisted of optical phonograph records. They came in sets of six, each 
cardboard disk printed with spiral designs on both sides, for a total of 
twelve different patterns. Mounted on a record player’s turntable, the disks 
revolved soundlessly, the product of their turning a series of optical illu­
sions, the most gripping of which was that rotation transformed their two- 
dimensionality into an illusory volumetric fullness that appeared to bur­
geon outward, toward the viewer.
A few of the disks had an anodyne, childlike quality. This was true of the 
one with the constantly rising Montgolfier balloon or the one with a 
goldfish set inside a series of eccentrically placed circles which, when 
turning, appeared to cup the little swimmer within an ephemeral, trans­
parent bowl.
Others, the “ Corolla” or the “ Chinese Lantern,” for example, had a more 
deceptive kind of jollity. Anyone who waited long enough to watch one of 
these whirl must have been somewhat startled. Because their turning pro­
duced an unstable kind of volume, appearing at certain moments to project 
forward but at others to recede, setting up the feeling of a thrusting motion. 
And further, the seemingly nonobjective pattern they bore, their quality of 
being a sort of decorative machine part—abstracted from gears or fly­
wheels—was constantly dissolving into the experience of animate objects, 
or more precisely, part-objects. For the “ Chinese Lantern” suggests a breast 
with slightly trembling nipple; the “ Corolla” an eye staring outward. And 
both, in their reverse condition as concave rather than convex, produce a 
fairly explicit sexual reading. This is not merely my own projection. Others, 
other scholars in fact, have concurred.
The effect of the turning through space, one of them says, is “ an oscillating 
action of systole and diastole, screwing and unscrewing itself in an obses­
sional pulsation that could be associated to copulatory movements.” And 
a second writer agrees that “the indication of the central cavity through 
the volutes of the spirals clearly evokes vaginal penetration. The fact that 
the eye by means of optical illusion perceives an in-and-out motion, estab­
lishes at an abstract level a literal allusion to the sexual act.” This trans­

formation from inanimate and mechanical to animate and sexual is 
provoked by the perception that an eye is staring back at one. It is an eye 
that yet a third reporter has said “is animated by a rotary movement, a 
sort of gigantesque cyclops whose pupil serves as the screen for suggestive 
metamorphoses. ”
It’s true, of course, that such comments raise the question of just what was 
on sale in this little booth, under the guise of optical pleasure. For the 
sexual promise of the illusions brings up the possibility that this “precision 
oculist” might have been pandering to the crowd. In fact, in the account 
of this episode given by his friend the novelist Henri-Pierre Roche, this 
issue of making a connection with the public had been one of the things 
on Duchamp’s mind. “Several years later, in Paris,” Roche remembers, “he 
wanted to attempt a ‘direct contact’ with the people. He had produced a 
dozen Rotoreliefs in a large edition. . . . He rented a tiny stand at the 
Inventions du Concours Lepine, and waited for the crowd. I went to see 
him there. The disks were all turning at the same time, some horizontally, 
others vertically, all around Duchamp, who looked like a smiling salesgirl.”
“ It was incredibly festive,” Roche goes on, “but one would have said that 
the little stand was shrouded in invisibility. Not a single one of those 
visitors chasing after practical inventions stopped. A quick glance was all 
they needed to see that, between the machine to compress and burn gar­
bage, on the left, and the instant vegetable cutter, on the right, this thing 
wasn’t practical. I approached. Duchamp smiled and said, ‘One hundred 
percent error. At least, it’s clear.’”
And Roche cannot resist this parting dig at the crowd: “Those disks are 
now in demand by collectors,” he says, “not by the people. But all the 
same the people can see them on Sundays if they go to the museum.”
She has been silent through all of this. So now I ask her, because for me 
the story has a moral—From where we stand, in the present, as we watch 
the ever deepening commodification of the work of art, can we in fact 
recite those lines without the sneer freezing on our faces? Don’t we have 
to focus on the impeccable Marcel Duchamp, standing there surrounded 
by his visual phonograph records and “smiling like a salesgirl,” enacting 
the complete commodification of both art and artist?
But surely creating for each of us—Molly says—the most explicit of dia­
lectical images. For how can we not be struck by both the sensuousness 
and strangeness of the spectacle, by the way that in the midst of the fair’s

automation of selling and buying there is one thing that redeems the 
machine by making it both a vehicle of pleasure and a medium of the look, 
one thing that offers to this unseeing crowd a moment of “ secular illumi­
nation” by being the one thing that, silently, returns one’s glance?
And were we to ask Clement Greenberg about his own description o f “the  
look, ” the look that art solicits, the look that is the medium o f the trans­
action between viewer and workf The time o f that look is important, he  
claims, because it must be time annihilated. “With many paintings and  
pieces o f sculpture, ” he has insisted, “it is as if you had to catch them by  
surprise in order to grasp them as wholes—their maximum being packed  
into the instantaneous shock o f sight. Whereas if you plant yourself too  
firmly before looking at a picture and then gaze at it too long you are  
likely to end by having it merely gaze blankly back at you. ”
To understand works o f art— “to grasp them as wholes”—is the function  
o f a revelation whose very essence is that its all-at-onceness simply suspends  
the temporal dimension. And when time has not been thus suspended,  
reconfigured in this way into its own negation, then the trajectory o f the  
gaze that runs between viewer and painting begins to track the dimensions  
o f real time and real space. The viewer discovers that he or she has a body  
that supports this gaze, a body with feet that hurt or a back that aches,  
and that the picture, also embodied, is poorly lit so that its frame casts a  
distracting shadow over its surface now perceived as glassy with too much  
varnish. What Clem refers to as “the ‘full meaning’ o f a picture —i.e., its  
aesthetic fact” drains out o f this situation, relocated as it is in the all too  
real. And the result is that instead o f generating an “aesthetic fact, ” the  
picture, now reified, simply returns the look, merely gazing “blankly” back  
at you.
It is this collapse into the dumbly physical that must be avoided. “The  
process o f looking at a picture, ” therefore, “cannot be analyzed into dis­
crete, sequential moments but only, if at all, into logical moments (though  
logic as such has very little to do with the experience o f art).”
And what does it look like, the work o f art’s reach toward the “logical  
moment” ?
Your suggestion, strange as it might seem, is drawn from the world of  
intellectual kitsch. You point to the pictorial diagram, to those weird  
attempts to chart the inner dynamic o f a work, as in that peculiar book  
by Earle Loran called  Cezanne’s Compositions.

A few of the disks had an anodyne, childlike quality . . .  (p. 96)

Marcel Duchamp, Rotorelief  (“ Goldfish” ), 1935.
When turning, appeared to cup the little swimmer within an ephemeral,  
transparent bow l. . .  (p. 96)

Marcel Duchamp, Rotorelief  (“ Chinese Lantern” ), 1935.
A breast with slightly trembling nipple . . .  (p. 96)

Marcel Duchamp, Rotorelief  (“ Corolles” ), 1935.
“A sort of gigantesque cyclops whose pupil serves as the screen for  
suggestive metamorphoses”. . . (p. 97)

Nothing would seem to be further from the intellectual tastes o f Clement  
Greenberg than the pedagogical simplifications o f the painter-turned-edu-  
cator who set out to capture the logic o f Cezanne’s art through a reductive  
set o f diagrams. We all remember them as something o f a joke, the ultimate  
send-up o f art appreciation at its most deadly earnest. The thesis of sig­
nificant form had spread into the art schools and whether it was Hoff­
mann’s “push and pull” or Berenson’s “tactile values,” painting was  
understood as having a problem to solve: how to produce the vibrancy  
and tension o f an illusioned three-dimensional volume without violating  
the two-dimensional integrity (the word was unfailingly used) o f the picture  
plane? For without that tension, so the problem ran, the painting would  
be nothing but linear arabesques, the flat patterns o f a lifeless and mean­
ingless decorative frieze. That tension, however, implied always running  
the danger o f rupturing the fragile membrane o f the picture surface, o f  
puncturing it with the holes produced by a too imperious flight into dis­
tance. By the time the formal questions posed by Bloomsbury had found  
their way to California, 1940s art education was busy rendering the an­
swers formulaic. And so there were Loran’s bizarre graphs o f Cezanne’s  
pictures, the bodies o f Madame Cezanne or o f the gardener sitting with  
folded arms, drained o f everything but a set o f their now brutishly definitive  
silhouettes, traced for them by Loran’s own hand, each element notched  
in turn into the overall diagram o f the picture plotted by means o f the  
same myopic contour. The whole o f this pictorial map was then vectored  
by a series o f lines and arrows intended to reveal the hidden secrets o f  
Cezanne’s  construction, the logic o f a drawing that could create the ex­
perience o f pyramid or cone while never dropping the ball in the smooth  
juggling act o f maintaining the continuity o f the surface planes.
The bluntness o f the demonstration, its presentation o f the work stripped  
bare, its bloodlessness: none o f this seemed, in 1945, to bother Greenberg,  
for whom, instead, these diagrams constituted simply a series o f images o f  
the logical moment, that instance o f coalescence—which happens in no  
time at all—o f a separate set of facts into a virtual unity.
So the logical moment is, then, a cognitive event, one within which this  
unity is produced. And although  we may find Loran’s diagrams arid,  
reductive, Greenberg seems to have found them satisfying. This love o f the  
diagrammatic, this pleasure taken in an image o f the general principle  
swooping down on the powerless, aimless, feckless particular and gathering  
it up into the stark clarity o f a demonstration o f the inner workings o f the  
law, this is the frisson that reflection on the cognitive event produced in  
the first half o f this century./os

And to each his own diagram. The structuralists were in love with the  
Klein Group. Are in love. Who can fail to be charmed by its little motor  
o f double negatives producing all the relations that—within its universe o f  
possibility —are? Saussure himself, however, took the game o f chess as his  
favorite model. It was his “image” o f language’s structure cut free from  
the real time o f its evolutionary history; it was his machine for producing  
the logical moment. “A game o f chess, ” he explains, “is like an artificial  
realization o f what language offers in a natural form. ”
There on the grid o f the chessboard each piece has a value that is not  
intrinsic (a knight or a rook can come in any form, any material, can be  
substituted for, even, by another piece if necessary). Instead its value derives  
from a system o f oppositions between its position and that o f all other  
pieces on the board. These values are further vested in the pieces by an  
absolutely invariable convention, “the set o f rules that exists before a game  
begins and persists after each move. ” Since each move changes the relations  
between all the pieces, creating a new utterance by producing a new set of  
oppositions, at any moment in the game a new synchrony reigns. But each  
synchronous state—displayed on the board as a distinct “picture”—is  
utterly dissociated from the game’s history, folded into the embrace of  
meaning only because the law resonates through its present set o f relations.  
Listen to Saussure:
In a game o f chess any particular position has the unique  
characteristic o f being freed from all antecedent positions;  
the route used in arriving there makes absolutely no dif­
ference; one who has followed the entire match has no  
advantage over the curious party who comes up at a critical  
moment to inspect the state o f the game; to describe this  
arrangement, it is perfectly useless to recall what had just  
happened ten seconds previously.
And to tie this back into the linguistic reality Saussure intends it to dem­
onstrate, he adds, “All this is equally applicable to language and sharpens  
the radical distinction between diachrony and synchrony. Speaking oper­
ates only on a language-state, and the changes that intervene between  
states have no place in either state. ”
The chessboard, the chess pieces, the pattern, all participate in a logic.  
They are, as it were, transparent to that logic, cognitively galvanized by it.  
They do not stare back at you “blankly, ” the inert, reified objects o f a  
merely physical gaze. They are wholly “for” the subject, a subject who is

Your suggestion, strange as it might seem, is drawn from the world of  
intellectual kitsch . . . (p. 98)

The overall diagram of the picture plotted by means of the same myopic  
contour. . .  (p. 103)

swept up into his relation to an intention to mean, who is the function o f  
a gaze that grasps this meaning in no time at all, a gaze that in this logical  
moment has completely transcended the subject’s body. For this gaze is  
“punctual, ” time and space reduced to the tiniest o f points.
Duchamp, too, was a fanatic o f chess. Yet can it be said o f him that he  
was, like Clem, a champion o f the disembodied look?
Fais dodo
’Colas mon petit frere;
Fais dodo  
T’auras du lolo;
Maman est en haut,
Qui fait du gateau;
Papa est en bas,
Qui fait du chocolat
— French lullaby
Mommy, as this little song from the nursery puts it, is upstairs, baking a 
cake; and Daddy is downstairs making some cocoa. It is a two-part ar­
rangement that would have amused Duchamp had he known it, mapping 
as it does the distribution of his own Large Glass:  Bride above and Bach­
elors—grinding their chocolate—below. And indeed, there is no reason he 
would not have known it, being, as it is, the most popular of children’s tA re e  
lullabies in France.
No one is invoking a source here, however, another key to add to that 
long succession of iconographic systems that are now invoked in order to 
unlock the meaning of the Glass.  Duchamp scholars are fond of images 
taken from alchemy or Neoplatonism, ones in which the Bride is also to 
be found upstairs and the Bachelors down. These images are drawn from 
systems of thought that will allow a higher order of meaning to come, as 
it were, to redeem the Glass,  to purge it of its merely carnal connections, 
to raise it to a loftier, more conceptual order. If the Bride is stripped by 
the Bachelors, it is in order to be ritually cleansed, transfigured, sublated.
It’s not, of course, that the lullaby, in displaying the program of that 
domestic machine laboring toward the baby’s happiness, portrays a world 
any less systematic than that of the various metaphysical orders so often 
brought to bear. It’s just that the signifiers through which the song operates 
to generate its particular meaning—doubled phonemes like dodo  for “ bed” 
and lolo for “milk”—are much closer to the object world of the body fromf07

which they sprang: like caca,  for example. Caca, of course, does not appear 
in the song, except by implication. And this is because the lullaby, in its 
very act of projecting this milk and cake and chocolate into the rhythms 
of sleep, seems to stumble over its own meter and, tripping, to perform a 
break in the tune’s order through which the body can reclaim and rescatter 
these objects. For its final line, by disturbing the five-syllable rhythm with 
the addition of a sixth, suggests—at the edge of consciousness—a substitute 
rendering that would restore the song’s metric evenness and thereby re­
constitute the slow regularity of the breath of sleep. “ Qui fait du chocolat” 
is too long and must be hurried past by singer as well as listener; “ qui fait 
du caca” is both rather more like it and rather more to the point.
More to the point for a Duchamp who, enamored of the body’s secretions, 
produced work after work in their honor. He imagined a transformer, for 
example, that would make use of little bits of wasted energy such as “the 
fall of urine and excrement,” or “ the spill of tears,” or again “ the ordinary 
spitting of mucus or blood.”
Of course it must be admitted that this Duchamp, the Duchamp of Foun­
tain,  and Objet d’ard,  and Priere de toucher,  has always been carefully 
segregated from the detachedly cerebral Duchamp, the one who “ gave up 
painting for chess,” the one who read seventeenth-century treatises on 
perspective at the Ste. Genevieve library and wrinkled his nose at abstract 
art because it appealed merely to the retina and not to the “ gray matter.” 
In interview after interview Duchamp made statements underscoring this 
opposition.
To Pierre Cabanne, for example, he characterized his attitude as “antiret- 
inal” and therefore opposed to a preoccupation with “visual language,” 
open instead to matters that are “ conceptual.” In talking to others this 
distinction between retinal and conceptual, or the world of material sen­
sation and the world of ideas, would again be described as an opposition 
between the retina and the gray matter. He compared himself in this respect 
to artists of the Renaissance, saying that along with them he felt that “ pure 
painting is not interesting in itself as an end. For me,” he said, “the goal 
is something else, it is a combination, or at least an expression that only 
the gray matter can succeed in rendering.”
The gray matter is what is most forcibly at stake in the game of chess, a 
purely conceptual interaction, shorn of visual “ incident.” And Duchamp’s 
passion for chess is therefore seen as all of a piece with his stated predi­
lection for the conceptual.

The theoretical identity between viewing point and vanishing point, an  
identity written into the geometrical underpinnings of the system . . .  (p. 113)

Marcel Duchamp, Etant donnes:  1° la chute d'eau , 2° le gaz d’eclairage,  1945-1966, exterior view
A kind of optical machine through which it is impossible  not to see  . . . (p. 112)

Gray matter is also behind the mathematical operations that undergird 
what the Renaissance referred to as the “legitimate construction” and we 
call perspective projection: that perfectly rationalized lattice of logarithm­
ically ever more closely spaced lines that spin the two-dimensional surface 
into a web of virtual three-dimensionality. Duchamp’s repeated references 
to gray matter have therefore ballasted a tradition of interpretation in 
which visuality on Duchamp’s terms is understood as a condition of intel­
lect, of the diagrammatic mastery of a reality disincarnated into what has 
been called the “purely ideal” status of the perspective image. And indeed 
perspective is thought to be at one and the same time the vehicle through 
which painting is remade into a cosa mentale  and the historical medium 
that links Duchamp to both past and future. It ties him, that is, to “ a 
family that extends from Leonardo to Seurat by way of Vermeer,” even 
while it opens him onto the future of that completely ideational space 
known as the fourth dimension.
Yet for all those viewers of Duchamp’s work who have ever focused on 
its courting of the conditions of obscenity, on its obvious connecting of 
the mental to the carnal—as in his notorious remark “ I want to grasp 
things with the mind the way the penis is grasped by the vagina”—on its 
constant recycling of the bodily fluids by means of an infantilized corporeal 
machinery, on its lodging the moment of visuality right at that fold between 
body and world where each seems to occlude the other—as when he 
describes the Bottlerack  as something that one doesn’t even look at, “that 
one looks at en tournant la fete ”—for this part of Duchamp’s audience 
the destiny of vision as idea seems peculiar indeed. For, one would have 
to object, doesn’t this interpretive notion of classical perspective or of the 
cosa mentale  act to short-circuit that connection—forged again and again 
in Duchamp’s world—by which vision is demonstrably hooked up to the 
mechanisms of desire?
And Duchamp put all of this extremely clearly in the specifications he left 
in 1966 for assembling Etant donnes,  his elaborate posthumous work. For 
throughout those pages of instructions for how to set up and light the little 
diorama on which he had worked from 1946 to the time of his death, he 
consistently refers to the beholder who will be positioned at the viewing 
point of the spectacle—the peepholes drilled into the assemblage’s rustic 
door—by a very explicit term. Voyeur, he says. Not viewer. Voyeur./ / /
tAre&
It is Sartre’s chapter on “The Look” that, inadvertently of course, tells us 
quite a lot about Duchamp’s “voyeur.” For here is the passage where

Sartre, arrested in front of a door just like Duchamp’s participant in the 
Etant donnes,  depicts himself poised at a keyhole that has become nothing 
but transparent vehicle for his gaze to penetrate, a keyhole that as he says 
“ is given as ‘to be looked through close by and a little to one side.’ ” And 
if, in this position, hunched and peering, Sartre is no longer “for” himself, 
it is because his consciousness leaps out beyond him toward the still unseen 
spectacle taking place behind the as yet unbreached opacity of the door. 
Yet in this scenario, as we know, what comes next is not the capture of 
the spectacle but the interruption of the act. For the sound of footsteps 
announces that the gaze of someone else has taken him both by surprise 
and from behind.
It is as this pinioned object, this body bent over the keyhole, this carnal 
being trapped in the searchlight of the Other’s gaze, that Sartre thickens 
into an object, and thus an outsider to his own eyes. For in this position 
he is no longer pure, transparent intentionality beamed at what is on the 
door’s far side, but rather, simply as body caught on this side, he has 
become a self that exists on the level of all other objects of the world, a 
self that has suddenly become opaque to his own consciousness, a self that 
he therefore cannot know  but only be, a self that for that reason is nothing 
but a pure reference to the Other. And it is a self that is defined by shame. 
“ It is shame,” Sartre writes, “which reveals to me the Other’s look and 
myself at the end of that look. It is the shame . . . which makes me live, 
not know  the situation of being looked at.”
To be discovered at the keyhole is, thus, to be discovered as a body; it is 
to thicken the situation given to consciousness to include the hither space 
of the door, and to make the viewing body an object for consciousness. 
As to what kind of object, Sartre defines this only in relation to the Other— 
the consciousness of the one who discovers him, and in whose look he 
ceases totally to master his world. As for himself, this thickened, carnal 
object produces as the content of his consciousness the carnation of shame.
The voyeur that Duchamp began, in 1946, to prepare for us is both the 
same and different. He (or she) too is positioned at the peephole, pene­
trating the door of the assemblage Etant donnes,  all attention focused 
through this funneling of the gaze toward the waiting display. But nothing, 
in this case, breaks the circuit of the gaze’s connection to its object or 
interrupts the satisfaction of its desire. Having sought the peephole of 
Etant donnes,  Duchamp’s viewer has in fact entered a kind of optical 
machine through which it is impossible not to see.

Examining that optical machine, Jean-Frangois Lyotard shows us how at 
one and the same time it is based on the system of classical perspective 
and is maliciously at work to lay bare that system’s hidden assumptions. 
For in the Etant donnes,  all the elements of perspective are in place, but 
in a strangely literal way. The role of the picture surface that slices through 
the visual pyramid of classical perspective is played, for example, by a 
brick wall, with the possibility of seeing-through that is normally a function 
of pictorial illusion now a matter of literally breaking down the barrier to 
produce a ragged opening. And the viewing and vanishing points whose 
normal status as antimatter derives from their condition as geometric limits, 
these points are similarly incarnated. For the vanishing point, or goal of 
vision, is manifested by the dark interior of a bodily orifice, the optically 
impenetrable cavity of the spread-eagled “ bride,” a physical rather than a 
geometrical limit to the reach of vision. And the viewing point is likewise 
a hole: thick, inelegant, material.
“ The dispositif  will be specular,” Lyotard writes, referring by this to the 
way perspective is constructed around the theoretical identity between 
viewing point and vanishing point, an identity written into the geometrical 
underpinnings of the system in order to secure the image on the retina as 
a mirror of the image propagated off the object by the rays of light. “The 
plane of the breach,” Lyotard continues, “will be that of a picture that 
will intersect the focal pyramids having for their summits the viewing- or 
peepholes. In this type of organization, the viewpoint and the vanishing 
point are symmetrical. Thus if it is true that the latter is the vulva, this is 
the specular image of the peeping eyes; such that: when these think they’re 
seeing the vulva, they see themselves. Con celui qui voit,”  Lyotard con­
cludes, “He who sees is a cunt.”
It could not be clearer how this viewer, caught up in a cat’s cradle of 
identification with what he sees, is specified by Duchamp as essentially 
carnal. But it should be obvious as well that Duchamp’s “voyeur” is also— 
like Sartre at his keyhole—a prey to the intervention of the Other. For 
Duchamp, leaving nothing up to his old buddy Chance, willed that the 
scene of Etant donnes  be set within a museum, which is to say, within an 
unavoidably public space. And this means that the scenario of the voyeur 
caught by another in the very midst of taking his pleasure is never far from 
consciousness as one plies the peepholes of Duchamp’s construction, dou­
bly become a body aware that its rearguard is down.
When Kant displaced the space of beauty from the empirical realm to the 
wholly subjective one, declaring taste a function of a judgment stripped of

concepts, he nonetheless preserved the public dimension of this subjectivity 
by decreeing that such judgments are necessarily, categorically universal. 
Their very logic is that they are communicable, sharable, a function of 
what could only be called the “ universal voice.” Aesthetic experience’s 
pleasure, diverted from the exercise of desire, is channeled precisely into a 
reflection on the possibility of universal communicability. It is only this, 
Kant says in the Second Moment of the Analytic of the Beautiful, “that is 
to be acknowledged in the judgment of taste about the representation of 
the object.” Doubly paradoxical, then, such experiences of the beautiful 
are conceived as pleasure disincarnated because without desire, and as pure 
individuality that can only act by assuming the assent of others.
This space of cognitive access to the universality of the language of art 
describes, of course, not just a theory of aesthetic judgment, but its insti­
tutional setting in the great museums that are part of the development of 
nineteenth- and twentieth-century culture. The museum as we know it was 
indeed constructed around the shared space of a sense of the visual 
grounded in the possibility of individual subjects forming a community. 
Yet it is this system of the museum that Etant donnes  enters only to disrupt 
by “ making it strange.” For, threatened by discovery on the part of a 
fellow viewer, the purely cognitive subject of Kant’s aesthetic experience 
is redefined in this setting as the subject of desire, and subjectivity itself is 
taken from the faculty of cognition and reinscribed in the carnal body.
Twice over, the vision of this viewer is hooked up to that glandular system 
that has nothing to do with the pineal connection, and everything to do 
with the secretions of sex and of fear. Descartes’s notion of the bridge 
between the physical and the mental carefully preserved the autonomy of 
the intellect. The optic chiasma that Duchamp suggests, however, is un­
thinkable apart from a vision that is carnal through and through. Con,  as 
they say, celui qui voit.
Why, she had sometimes wondered, were there so very many photographs  
o f him playing chess? There he would be, his extraordinary profile brack­
eted by the dark background o f the shrubbery, leaning over this or that  
garden table, his brow furrowed, facing off against an adversary who, like  
himself, could be seen looming over the little portable chess set. But then  
chess was part o f what one remembered about him, his insistence on talking  
about it so that at parties for example you suddenly found yourself standing  
next to the fireplace deep in a conversation with him, about chess. Here is  
Clive Bell recounting a typical day during a visit by him to Charleston, as  
he contemplates the rhythms o f Roger Fry’s seemingly inexhaustible en-

“The  dispositif will be specular”. . . (p. 113)

Marcel Duchamp, Etant donnes,  view through the door.
“Con celui qui voit”. . . (p. 113)

ergy: . . back in time for an early tea so that he can drag Vanessa and  
Duncan to Wilmington to paint landscape; after dinner just runs through  
a few o f Mallarme s poems, which he is translating word for word into  
what he is pleased to consider blank verse; bedtime— ‘Oh just time for a  
game o f chess, Julian.’ ”
And her Aunt Virginia had also made a considerable place for chess in her  
biography o f Fry, remembering how he had transmitted his notion o f the  
all-important Form to those young people o f her, Angelica’s, own gener­
ation by means o f Mallarme on the one hand and chess on the other. “He  
would make them help to translate Mallarme, ” she wrote, “he would argue  
for hours on end with ‘terrific Quaker scrupulosity and intellectual hon­
esty’; and he would play chess, and through playing chess bring them to  
understand his views on aesthetics.” The aesthetic views that were the very  
linchpin o f Bloomsbury.
Which is why the idea that he  cheated at chess, she thought, is so fantastic.  
Bunny had often spoken o f how the two o f them played, with Roger o f  
course much the stronger, so that “he usually beat me fairly easily. But if  
I made an unexpectedly good move which put him in difficulties Roger  
would always try to find a way o f altering the course o f the game. He  
would pick up one o f my pieces, start an exposition o f what I might have  
done, and put the piece back on the wrong square." And to underscore  
how bizarre it seemed, he would wonder, “I was never quite sure how far  
he was aware that he cheated at chess. ”
With me it was a bit different, she thought, but not much, as she remem­
bered those rare times when an inspired move o f hers would put the  
outcome momentarily in doubt. “ Oh, I don’t think it was wise to move  
your  bishop,” Fry would say. “Better go there with your knight.” And  
that, she smiled ruefully as she thought o f the disarray that inevitably  
followed, would do the trick.
That he cheated at chess was all the more peculiar in that it was through  
their sense o f the utter honesty o f his account o f his experience, his refusal  
to report on what he did not feel, that he held his huge audiences in the  
Queen’s Hall so completely rapt. No matter that the work on the screen  
might be apparently unengaging, or that the black-and-white slide was  
upside-down. They were watching the greatest art critic o f his or any age  
in the act o f reacting, o f allowing to well up within him in that very  
moment the wave o f aesthetic emotion. “He added on the spur o f the  
moment, ” says Virginia Woolf, “what he had just seen as if for the first/ / /

time. That, perhaps, was the secret o f his hold over his audience. They  
could see the sensation strike and form; he could lay bare the very moment  
o f perception. So with pauses and spurts the world o f spiritual reality  
emerged in slide after slide—in Poussin, in Chardin, in Rembrandt, in  
Cezanne—in its uplands and its lowlands, all connected, all somehow made  
whole and entire, upon the great screen in the Queen’s Hall. ”
But at some juncture the long pointer— “trembling like the antenna of  
some miraculously sensitive insect, ” as it settled in the painting before him  
on this or that “rhythmical phrase”—would become rigid, still. And he  
would, faced with a late Cezanne landscape, speak o f his bafflement,  
confessing that it went beyond any analysis he could make.  So suddenly  
the lecture would, simply, stop. And as the audience that had just spent  
two hours looking at pictures left the hall, the most vivid picture that  
would remain in many minds would be “one o f which the lecturer himself  
was unconscious—the outline o f the man against the screen, an ascetic  
figure in evening dress who paused and pondered, and then raised his stick  
and pointed. That was a picture, ” Virginia W oolf muses, “that would  
remain in memory together with the rest, a rough sketch that would serve  
many o f the audience in years to come as the portrait o f a great critic, a  
man o f profound sensibility but o f exacting honesty, who, when reason  
could penetrate no further, broke off; but was convinced, and convinced  
others, that what he saw was there. ”
And what he saw there was a pattern, he was to explain, a pattern forged  
by the creative “look ” that artists possess as they scan the chaotic rubble  
o f ordinary appearances and, through an extraordinary act o f selective  
seeing, manage to extract a series o f intervals, o f harmonic relationships  
between darks and lights, an intuition o f that organic intermeshing to  
which could be affixed the term  unity. What this look entails is, at one  
and the same time, utter detachment from the objects themselves—their  
meaning, their worth, their moral value (so much for Mr. Ruskin!)—and  
complete passion about the implications o f form. “Almost any turn o f the  
kaleidoscope o f nature may set up in the artist this detached and impas­
sioned vision,” Fry later wrote, “and, as he contemplates the particular  
field o f vision, the (aesthetically) chaotic and accidental conjunction o f  
forms and colors begins to crystallize into a harmony; and as this harmony  
becomes clear to the artist, his actual vision becomes distorted by the  
emphasis o f the rhythm which had been set up within him. Certain relations  
o f directions o f line become for him full o f meaning; he apprehends them  
no longer casually or merely curiously, but passionately, and these lines

begin to be so stressed and stand out so clearly from the rest that he sees  
them far more distinctly than he did at first. ”
This is what he wanted chess to model, she thought, the utterly disinter­
ested, disincarnated passion o f “the artist’s vision.”
When Lyotard speaks of the cuntishness of Duchamp’s model of vision, 
he is sticking it of course to all those idealists who want to turn Duchamp’s 
work into metaphysics. Among them the art historians, with their con­
ceptual schemas built on the ideogrammatic foundation of central-point 
perspective. They point to the transparency of the Large Glass:  as trans­
parent—they declare—as a thought to the consciousness that thinks it. 
And they point to the insistence of the classical perspective through which 
the Glass’s  objects are projected.
Balls, says Lyotard, quoting Duchamp.
The visuality Duchamp proposes, he says, is carnal, not conceptual. It 
views the body as a psychophysiological system. Using as proof Duchamp’s 
statement that the Glass  is intended to “isolate the sign of accordance 
between a state of rest” and a series of possible facts, Lyotard says, “Now, 
the Glass  is indeed this isolated sign, this immobile sensitive surface (the 
retina) onto which the diverse facts of the account come to be inscribed 
according to the possibilities scrupulously chosen by Duchamp and such 
that the viewer will literally have nothing to see if he disregards them.” 
And, going even further than this, Lyotard characterizes the Glass  as a 
display, not of the facts of the event but of the physiological surfaces onto 
which they are registered. Not only retina but also cortex. “What the 
viewer sees on the Glass,”  he concludes, “ is the eye and even the brain in 
the process of forming its objects; he sees the images of these imprinting 
the retina and the cortex according to the laws of (de)formation that are 
inherent to each and that organize the screen of glass.. .. The Large Glass,  
being the film, makes visible the conditions of impression that reign at the 
interior of the optical chamber.”
And, indeed, there is no want of evidence on the Glass  itself that it must 
be seen as a surface of impression. For many of the signs it bears are 
organized as traces, deposited there like footprints left in sand, or the rings 
that icy glasses leave on tables. They are imprints rather than images, 
striking a receptive surface—like that of nervous tissue: the Sieves with 
their residues of dust, the Oculist Witnesses with their ribbons of mirror, 
the Draft Pistons with their indexically deformed contours.

Lyotard would, in fact, be amused by all those features of the Glass  one 
could show him that allude to the neurophysiology of the optic track. The 
sieves, for example, through which the illuminating gas is processed are 
referred to in Duchamp’s writing as “ cones,” and he is explicit that it is 
in the labyrinthine passage through these cones that a transformation of 
the gas takes place. For what he calls the “ spangles of the illuminating 
gas”—which might be interpreted here as light in its form as a pulsion 
from the visible band of the electromagnetic spectrum hitting the retinal 
field—these spangles get “ straightened out” as they move through the 
sieves; and due to this straightening, “ they lose their sense of up and 
down.” It was this very fact—that the image on the retina is inverted with 
respect to reality, top and bottom, right and left—that stood for the larger 
problem facing late nineteenth-century optics, namely, how information 
gets from eye to brain. At the heart of this inquiry into vision was the 
problem of just how the (geometrical) optical display, focused by the lens 
of the eye onto the retina, is transformed to an entirely different order of 
signal. For it is not a “picture” that goes to the higher neurological centers. 
It is another form of information through which the body’s real orientation 
to the world is synthesized. Duchamp’s words place both illuminating 
gas and sieves (or what he calls the “labyrinth o f the 3 directions ”) within 
the field of this problem. “The spangles dazed by this progressive turning,” 
/20 he writes, “ imperceptibly lose . . . their designation  of left, right, up, 
tA/Ye  down, etc., lose their awareness of position.” But in relation to this loss,
Duchamp adds the qualification “ provisionally  ” for, as he reminds himself, 
“they will find it again later,” that later being suggestive of the level of 
cortical synthesis.
Other terms of the neuro-optical system can also be set in relation to the 
Glass.  Electricity, the form of the body’s nerve signals, is continually 
invoked by the notes describing the Bachelor Apparatus. But even more 
explicitly, in the late drawing Cols alites  where Duchamp returns to the 
Glass,  we are shown a telegraph pole on the right, hooked up to the 
apparatus itself, telegraphy having served as a useful analogy in nineteenth- 
century discussions of nerve transmission, as in Helmholtz’s remark: “The 
nerve fibers have been often compared with telegraphic wires traversing a 
country, and the comparison is well fitted to illustrate this striking and 
important peculiarity of their mode of action.”
Lyotard is clear, however, about the fruitlessness of using physiological 
optics as a “key” to unlock the mysteries of the Glass,  the work’s tran­
scendental signified uncovered at last. We could, he imagines, go on mul­
tiplying the symptoms through which the Large Glass  shares in

Marcel Duchamp, La Mariee mise a nu par ses celibataires, meme  
(Le grand verre),  1915-1923.
“The  Large Glass, being the film, makes visible the conditions o f impression  
that reign at the interior of the optical chamber”. . . (p. 119)

Marcel Duchamp, Cols alites,  1959.
“The nerve fibers have been often compared with telegraphic wires  
traversing a country”. . . (p. 120)

physiological optics’ understanding of embodied vision. But to substitute 
the laws of neurophysiology for any of those other master codes—such as 
the practices of alchemy, or the rituals of courtly love, or the incestuous 
secrets of a possible psychobiography, or the rules of w-dimensional ge­
ometry—codes that have been proposed as a hermeneutic for Duchamp’s 
work, is not his game. To the contrary. It’s the physics of vision he wants 
to stress, not its metaphysics. This is why the persistence of physiological 
optics at work within Duchamp’s thinking would not surprise him.
Lyotard is right, o f course. The whole o f Precision Optics that Duchamp  
went on to embrace—the  Rotoreliefs and the  Rotary Demisphere but also  
stereoscopy and anaglyphy as well as the pure exercise in simultaneous  
contrast o f  Coeur volant— all o f this reaches back into the experimental  
and theoretical situation o f the psychophysiology o f vision. But here is  
where the art historians will try to take their revenge.
Balls, indeed— they will answer, quoting Duchamp. Their man Duchamp  
has always vehemently rejected the “retinal, ” heaping invective on “retinal  
painting. ” And what could retinal painting be if not the specific turn that  
painting took in the 1870s in the grip o f the discoveries o f Helmholtz and  
Chevreul, the discoveries promulgated by Charles Blanc and Ogden Rood?
Indeed, Duchamp had always been clear that he had impressionism in  
mind as a premier example o f the retinal. “Since the advent o f impression- tAree  
ism, ” he explained, “visual productions stop at the retina. Impressionism,  
fauvism, cubism, abstraction, it’s always a matter o f retinal painting. Their  
physical preoccupations: the reactions o f colors, etc., put the reactions of  
the gray matter in the background. This doesn’t apply to all the protago­
nists o f these movements. Certain o f them have passed beyond the retina.
The great merit o f surrealism is to have tried to rid itself of retinal satis­
faction, o f the ‘arrest at the retina.’ I don’t want to imply that it is necessary  
to reintroduce anecdote into painting,” Duchamp then cautions. “Some  
men like Seurat or like Mondrian were not retinalists, even in wholly  
seeming to be so .”
Duchamp’s attack on the whole system o f the visual as that is put into  
place by mainstream modernism—the line that moves from impressionism  
to abstraction by way o f cubism—has its exceptions, then, “like Seurat or  
like Mondrian. ” For him they are “not retinalists, ” even though Seurat’s  
is the most flagrant case o f the application o f the principles o f modern  
optics to paintings. So Duchamp’s rejection was not simply a wholesale  
condemnation o f all those aspects o f science that modernism had thought/2S

to appropriate. Rather, what he objects to is the “arret a la retine, ” the  
stopping o f the analytic process at the retina, the making o f the interactions  
between the nerve endings—their coordinated stimulation and innerva­
tion—a kind o f self-sufficient or autonomous realm o f activity. Within the  
development o f modernist painting, the consequence o f this analysis was  
the reification o f the retinal surface and the conviction that by knowing  
the laws o f its interactive relationships, one possessed the algorithm of  
sight. The mapping o f the retinal field onto the modernist pictorial plane,  
with the positivist expectation that the laws o f the one would legislate and  
underwrite the autonomy o f the operations o f the other, is typical o f the  
form in which high modernism established and then fetishized an auton­
omous realm o f the visual.
This is the logic we hear, for example, in Delaunay’s assertions that the  
laws of simultaneous contrast within the eye and the laws o f painting are  
one and the same. “Color, ” he frequently declared, “colors with their laws,  
their contrasts, their slow vibrations in relation to the fast or extra-fast  
colors, their interval. All these relations form the foundation o f a painting  
that is no longer imitative, but creative through the technique itself.” What  
makes this possible, he would reiterate, is a scientifically wrought under­
standing o f “simultaneous contrast, [of the ] creation o f profundity by  
means o f complementary and dissonant colors, which give volume  
direction. . . .  To create, ” he insists, “is to produce new unities with the  
help of new laws. ”
It was the idea of the self-sufficiency and the closed logic o f this newly  
conceived retino-pictorial surface that gave a program to early abstract  
painting such as Delaunay’s and a coherence to much o f modernist theory.  
It is this logic that refuses to “go beyond” the retina to the gray matter,  
and it is to this refusal that Duchamp objects.
But the gray matter—and here Lyotard really has to insist—though it 
undoubtedly refers to the cerebral cortex, does not thereby invoke a disem­
bodied faculty of cognition or reflection, does not propose the transcen­
dental ego’s relation to its sensory field. The cerebral cortex is not above 
the body in an ideal or ideated remove; it is, instead, o f the body, such 
that the reflex arc of which it is part connects it to a whole field of stimuli 
between which it cannot distinguish. These stimuli may come from outside 
the body, as in the case of normal perception, but they may also erupt 
internally, giving rise, for example, to what Goethe celebrated as “physi­
ological colors,” or those sensations of vision that are generated entirely 
by the viewer’s body. The production of sensory stimulation from within 
the body’s own field, the optical system’s porousness to the operations of/2 4
( J i r t r .

its internal organs, this fact forever undermines the idea of vision’s trans­
parency to itself. Instead of that transparency there now arises the density 
and opacity of the viewing subject as the very precondition of his access 
to sight.
Duchamp’s view of the gray matter—that part that exists beyond the 
retina—cannot be separated from other kinds of organic activity within 
the physical body. For to do so would leave one, for example, with no 
way of interpreting the visual activity projected within the domain of the 
Bride in the upper half of the Large Glass.  Duchamp describes the Bride’s 
blossoming—which is to say the orgasmic event toward which the whole 
mechanism of the Glass  is laboring—as an ellipse with two foci, an ellipse 
through which the circuitry of the Bachelor Machine connects to that of 
the Bride. In so doing he seems to be describing what neurophysiology 
calls reflex arcs, by which the stimulation of sensory receptors is transferred 
to the brain. The first of the foci, which he designates as the stripping by 
the Bachelors, seems to relate to the perceptual part of the arc he is 
mapping: the Bride is what the Bachelors see. But the second focus, the 
Bride’s “voluntarily imagined blossoming,” as she fantasizes the Bachelors’ 
look, connects the reflex arc of this ellipse to a source of the impulse to 
be found in the organs of the Bride, an organ that Duchamp says “is 
activated by the love gasoline, a secretion of the Bride’s sexual glands and 
by the electric sparks of the stripping.”
If the mechanism of the Large Glass  obeys Duchamp’s dictum of “going 
beyond” the retina, it does so not to achieve the condition of vision’s 
transparency to itself—which is suggested by the model of classical per­
spective when applied to the Glass —but rather, quite obviously, to arrive 
at the threshold of desire-in-vision, which is to say to construct vision itself 
within the opacity of the organs and the invisibility of the unconscious.
I make it a point never to stay in a room with a Christian.
—Jam es Strachey
The lines in Bloomsbury were clearly drawn, Stephen Spender explained.  
“Not to regard the French Impressionist and Post-Impressionist painters  
as sacrosanct, not to be an agnostic and in politics a Liberal with Socialist  
leanings, was to put oneself outside Bloomsbury.”
But Keynes makes it clear, in his own accounts o f Bloomsbury, that ag­
nostic or not, what gripped them all with inexplicable intensity was none­
theless a kind o f religion. The religion was acknowledged as Moorism, by

t/lT € £those undergraduates at Cambridge for whom the appearance o f G. E.  
Moore’s  Principia Ethica in 1903 struck with the force o f revelation. Keynes  
gives its outlines:
Nothing mattered except states o f mind, our own and other  
people’s o f course, but chiefly our own. These states of  
mind were not associated with action or achievement or  
with consequences. They consisted in timeless, passionate  
states o f contemplation and communion, largely unat­
tached to ‘before’ and ‘after’. Their value depended, in  
accordance with the principle o f organic unity, on the state  
o f affairs as a whole which could not be usefully analyzed  
into parts.
And what sorts o f subjects were appropriate to this passionate contempla­
tion and communion? There were, he says, three: first, a beloved person;  
second, beauty; third, truth. “One’s prime objects in life, ” he writes, “were  
love, the creation and enjoyment o f aesthetic experience and the pursuit  
o f knowledge. ”
Roger Fry, the Bloomsburian who had not gone to Cambridge, was always  
vocal in attacking Moorism. But this, Leonard Woolf insists, only showed  
/s6' he was obsessed with it. Underneath it all, Fry too was a Moorist. And  
indeed, how could it be otherwise? The certainty about the aesthetic state  
as one o f man’s highest achievements. The insistence that it “is uncondi­
tioned by considerations o f space or time. ” The continually renewed visits  
to Europe’s great museums to insure that the experience would occur in a  
perpetual present, a communion with the work undimmed by the dead­
ening intervention o f memory.  As he writes to Virginia: “I spent the  
afternoon in the Louvre. I tried to forget all my ideas and theories and to  
look at everything as though I’d never seen it before. . . . It’s only so that  
one can make discoveries. . . . Each work must be a new and a nameless  
experience. ”
The fervor o f that “must, ” o f that search for purity. The insistence that  
nothing frivolous or irrelevant should intervene. Frances Partridge tells of  
her youthful adoration o f Roger Fry: “I remember how in the train he  
explained to u s”—she is traveling with Julia Strachey— “in his beautiful  
deep voice why it was wicked to like peacock blue. ”
But the idea that there was anything  religious about their ardor would  
have been furiously rejected by them at the time, by Fry as well as the  
other members o f Bloomsbury. They thought o f their contemplation as

entirely rational, scientific, the separation o f experience into logical mo­
ments. “Like any other branch o f science,  ” Keynes points out, “it was  
nothing more than the application o f logic and rational analysis to the  
material presented as sense-data. Our apprehension o f good was exactly  
the same as our apprehension o f green. ” But their method o f analyzing  
experience he calls “extravagantly scholastic. ” He gives a sample o f the  
discussions:
If A was in love with B and believed that B reciprocated  
his feelings, whereas in fact B did not, but was in love with  
C, the state o f affairs was certainly not so good as it would  
have been if A had been right, but was it worse or better  
than it would become if A discovered his mistake? If A  
was in love with B under a misapprehension as to B ’s  
qualities, was this better or worse than A ’s not being in  
love at all? I f A was in love with B because A’s spectacles  
were not strong enough to see B ’s complexion, did this  
altogether, or partly, destroy the value o f A’s state o f mind?
Keynes is continually struck by the gait o f Moore’s reflection, o f its utter  
obliviousness to the character o f the life o f action. “He was existing in a  
timeless ecstacy, ” Keynes says. “His way o f translating his own particular  
emotions o f the moment into the language of generalized abstraction is a  
charming and beautiful comedy. Do you remember the passage in which  
he discusses whether, granting that it is mental qualities which one should  
chiefly love, it is important that the beloved person should also be good-  
looking?— ‘It is, indeed, very difficult to imagine,’ ” Keynes quotes Moore,  
“ ‘what the cognition o f mental qualities  alone, unaccompanied by  any 
corporeal expression, would be like; and, in so far as we succeed in making  
this abstraction, the whole considered certainly appears to have less value.  
I therefore conclude that the importance o f an admiration o f admirable  
mental qualities lies chiefly in the immense superiority o f a whole, in which  
it forms a part, to one in which it is absent, and not in any high degree o f  
intrinsic value which it possesses by itself.’
“The New Testament, ” Keynes smiles, “is a handbook for politicians  
compared with the unworldliness o f Moore’s chapter on ‘The Ideal.’ ”
Combined with this unworldliness there was also a refusal o f pleasure, or  
rather, a denial—religious indeed—that pleasure could be  serious. “In our  
prime, pleasure was nowhere. It was the general view that pleasure had  
nothing to do with the case and, on the whole, a pleasant state o f mind  
lay under grave suspicion o f lacking intensity and passion. ”737

Intensity. Passion. Seriousness. It was all in the service o f these completely  
Puritanical emotions.
— O f these completely adolescent emotions.
And like every other form o f faith, “knowing that  ...”  in Bloomsbury  
came down to a matter o f direct inspection o f one’s own experience; it  
was a question o f unanalyzable intuition that would admit o f no argument.  
It could only be voiced with appropriate conviction. This alone would  
silence one’s interlocutor. Conviction rang out in tones o f complete absence  
o f doubt and total assumption o f infallibility. “Moore at this time was a  
master o f this method—greeting one’s remarks with a gasp o f incredulity — 
Do you really think  that, and expression o f face as if to hear such a thing  
said reduced him to a state o f wonder verging on imbecility. ”
The eye that surveys the inner space of experience, analyzing it into its 
rationally differentiated parts, is an eye born of seventeenth-century epis- 
temology and the particular apparatus that was frequently used as its 
model: the camera obscura. Beaming light through a pinhole into a dark­
ened room and focusing that light on the wall opposite, the camera obscura 
allowed the observer—whether it was Newton for his Optics  or Descartes 
for his Dioptrique —to view that plane as something independent of his 
own powers of synthesis, something that he, as a detached subject, could 
therefore observe. It was due to this structural disconnection between plane 
of focus and observing subject that the camera obscura came to function 
as a model for the “classical” subject of knowledge. Richard Rorty, for 
example, characterizes both Descartes’s and Locke’s use of this model in 
terms of “the conception of the human mind as an inner space in which 
both pains and clear and distinct ideas passed in review before an Inner 
Eye. . . . The novelty was the notion of a single inner space in which bodily 
and perceptual sensations . . . were objects of quasi-observation.”
Insofar as this epistemic subject is the observer of a projection that occurs 
within a field conceived as being exterior to “ himself,” he is a knowing 
subject independent of a body. The unified space of order he surveys is 
never thought of as something that could be affected by his own sensory 
apparatus, never seen as dependent on his bodily subjectivity. With the 
close of the eighteenth century, however, the camera obscura ceased to 
function as a pertinent model of vision. For if in his Farbenlehre  (1810) 
Goethe reassembles the elements of the darkened room, the ray of light, 
and the plane of focus, it is only to direct the subject immediately to close 
off the opening so that the phenomenon of the afterimage might appear.

As if this, perhaps the most widely disseminated manual on optical color,  
had already presented blueprints . . . (p. 135)

“The relation o f observer to image is no longer to an object quantified  
in relation to a position in space, but rather to two dissimilar images  
whose position simulates the anatomical structure of the observer's  
body”. . . (p. 134)

Marcel Duchamp, Handmade Stereopticon Slide,  1918— 1919.
The effect of viewing the figure through a stereoscope and the uncannily  
dramatic illusion of the result. . .  (p. 134)

N //N
The Miiller-Lyer illusion.
When it had to confront its own peculiar laboratory rat: the optical  
illusion . . .  (p. 137)

With this severing of the dark room’s relation to the perceptual field, 
Goethe initiates the study of a physiology—and no longer an optics—of 
vision, a physiology that now understands the body of the viewer as the 
active producer of optical experience. Color, which can simply be produced 
by electrical stimulation of the optic nerve, is henceforth disjoined from a 
specifically spatial referent. Color, the form of the body’s registration of 
light, is thus conceived as always potentially “ atopic” so that the natural 
sign’s necessary connection to the visual field can no longer be maintained. 
And now, fully embedded within the nervous weft of the body’s tissues, 
color comes to be understood as well as something subject to the tempor­
ality of the nervous system itself, to its access to fatigue, to its necessary 
rhythm of innervation, to that which causes color to ebb and flow within 
experience in an infinitely mutable evanescence.
In taking over from the camera obscura as conveyor of the image, the 
body, solid and dense, becomes instead producer of that image, a producer 
that must forge a perception of the real from a field of scattered signs. 
“None of our sensations,” Helmholtz explained in 1867, “ give us anything 
more than ‘signs’ for external objects and movements,” so that what we 
call seeing is really a matter of learning “how to interpret these signs by 
means of experience and practice.” With regard to the signs provided by 
retinal excitation, he added, “ It is not at all necessary to suppose any kind 
of correspondence between these local signs and the actual differences of 
locality [in the empirical field] which they signify.”
Typically, in this lecture presenting “The Recent Progress of the Theory of 
Vision,” Helmholtz would bring these facts home by the example of the 
stereoscope’s capacity to use two flat pictures to simulate, with uncanny 
convincingness, the depth perception of normal binocular vision. What the 
stereoscope demonstrates, Helmholtz says, is that “ two distinct sensations 
are transmitted from the two eyes, and reach the consciousness at the same 
time and without coalescing; that accordingly the combination of these 
two sensations into the single picture of the external world of which we 
are conscious in ordinary vision is not produced by any anatomical mech­
anism of sensation, but by a mental act.”
The specific stereoscopic instrument to which Helmholtz refers his audience 
could not make his point more graphically. For the Wheatstone stereo­
scope, a product of physiological research in the 1830s, was constructed 
to produce its experience of depth in a way that proved to be much more 
powerful than later devices such as the Holmes or Brewster stereoscopes, 
a way, indeed, that Duchamp would later capture by coining the term/ss

“ mirrorique.” In the Wheatstone apparatus the viewer would actually 
look—each with one eye— at two mirrors set at a 90-degree angle to one 
another onto which would be reflected the two slightly divergent images, 
these held in slots at the sides of the device such that they were actually 
parallel to his line of sight and totally out of his field of vision. In this way 
the powerful impression of the three-dimensional array opening up “ be­
fore” him would in fact be a function of two flat images that, like a strange 
pair of earmuffs, actually flanked his head.
Nothing could more effectively shatter the idea projected by the camera 
obscura model, in which the relationship between viewer and world is 
pictured as fundamentally scenic, than this literal dispersal of the stimulus 
field. “The stereoscopic spectator,” Jonathan Crary writes,
sees neither the identity of a copy nor the coherence guar­
anteed by the frame of a window. Rather, what appears is 
the technical reconstitution of an already reproduced world 
fragmented into two nonidentical models, models that pre­
cede any experience of their subsequent experience as uni­
fied or tangible. It is a radical repositioning of the 
observer’s relation to visual representation. . . . The ster­
eoscope signals an eradication of “ the point of view” 
around which, for several centuries, meanings had been 
assigned reciprocally to an observer and the object of his 
or her vision. There is no longer the possibility of perspec­
tive under such a technique of beholding. The relation of 
observer to image is no longer to an object quantified in 
relation to a position in space, but rather to two dissimilar 
images whose position simulates the anatomical structure 
of the observer’s body.
Lyotard picks up Duchamp’s Handmade Stereopticon Slide.  The art his­
torians who want to construct a conceptualist Duchamp, a Duchamp of 
the cosa mentale,  a Duchamp descended from Leonardo by way of Ver­
meer—from Renaissance perspective, that is, by way of the camera ob­
scura—fasten on the two prisms penciled in against the photographic 
background of sea and sky. They imagine the effect of viewing the figure 
through a stereoscope and the uncannily dramatic illusion of the result. 
The resulting sense of volume—they say—which will endow this rickety 
figure with the formal majesty of a Platonic solid, will not be a product of 
the painter’s art; it will happen in the viewer’s brain, a function of the 
gray matter. It will short-circuit the physical site of mere phenomena to

exfoliate within the domain of Mind. But Lyotard sees the Slide  as just 
one more symptom of Duchamp’s mounting concern with the physiology 
of seeing, a concern that would lead to the fifteen-year production of 
Precision Optics.
Indeed the devices Duchamp fashioned to pursue this interest look uncan­
nily like illustrations from a book on psychophysiological research. O. N. 
Rood’s Modern Chromatics  shows pedestals on which to mount the M ax­
well’s disks whose turning would produce the all-important optical mixing 
and subjective color. It is as if this, perhaps the most widely disseminated 
manual on optical color, had already presented blueprints for the Rotary  
Demisphere  or the Disks Bearing Spirals.  Duchamp himself underscores 
this. The illusion of three-dimensionality projected by his disks will be 
achieved, he says, “ not with a complicated machine and a complex tech­
nology, but in the eyes of the spectator, by a psychophysiological process.”
In the laboratory of the physiologist the spinning disks will not, however, 
flower into an erotics of three-dimensional illusion. The optical mixture 
that simulates the luminous impact of perceived color will not erupt into 
those disturbingly organlike figures of Duchamp’s Precision Optics, figures 
whose pulsing appearance and disappearance underscores the way in which 
they are the events of a false  perception. For unlike Maxwell’s turning 
disks, Duchamp’s are intent on addressing vision’s relation to desire. And 
thus illusion will be used by him as a lever on the operations of the 
unconscious in vision.
That the erotic theater of Duchamp’s Precision Optics in all its various 
forms is staged within the space of optical illusion places this enterprise at 
a kind of threshold or bridge moment between a nineteenth-century psy­
chophysiological theory of vision and a later, psychoanalytic one. For the 
phenomenon of the optical illusion was an important, because troubling, 
issue within the associationist explanatory model to which physiological 
optics had recourse. Helmholtz’s famous positing of “ unconscious infer­
ence” as the psychological ground of all perception—unconscious inference 
being a process of subconscious, inductive reasoning from the basis of past 
experience—was continually brought up short by the obvious exception 
of the optical illusions. “An objection to the Empirical Theory of Vision,” 
he admitted, “ might be found in the fact that illusions of the senses are 
possible; for if we have learnt the meaning of our sensations from expe­
rience, they ought always to agree with experience.” The possibility of 
false inductions rendered by these “unconscious judgments” urgently 
needed to be accounted for if the theory were to be viable.fSS

Attempts to provide purely physiological explanations having failed, Helm­
holtz had recourse to an associationist psychological one. “The explanation 
of the possibility of illusions,” he maintained, “lies in the fact that we 
transfer the notions of external objects, which would be correct under 
normal conditions, to cases in which unusual circumstances have altered 
the retinal pictures.” Specifically, in the case of those famous optical illu­
sions spawned by physiological research’s attempts to solve the perceptual 
puzzle—the Miiller-Lyer illusion, the Ponzo illusion, the Zollner or Hering 
illusions—unconscious inference reasons from the inappropriate applica­
tion of perspective cues. Memory is seen as three-dimensionally contex- 
tualizing these figures so that in the acute-arrow part of the Miiller-Lyer 
pair, for example, what is supplied through association is the past experi­
ence of retinal images obtained when the vertical line is the closest part of 
a three-dimensional figure, such as the edge of a building nearest the 
observer; while for the obtuse-arrow half, the context provided refers to 
images projected when the vertical line is the most distant part, such as 
the far corner of a room in which the viewer stands. The Ponzo figure, 
sometimes called the railroad track illusion, is similarly referred to the 
mistaken inference of perspective convergence and the resultant miscuing 
of the viewer with regard to relative size.
The fact that the physiologist Helmholtz breathed the word “ unconscious” 
into the discourse of empirical science raised a storm of protest that would 
dog him all his life. But for Sartre, later assessing the theoretical grounds 
of the associationist psychology Helmholtz was advocating, it was obvious 
that such an explanatory model would be utterly incoherent did it not 
posit (no matter how covertly) an unconscious. The memory image sitting 
in the brain below the threshold of consciousness, a sensory content waiting 
to be revived and newly animated by thought, was, Sartre maintained, not 
only the very picture of the unconscious, but as such it was theoretically 
untenable. Sartre’s famous rejection of the concept of the unconscious 
applied not only to the Freudian version but to the associationist one as 
well. Whereas, he held, there can be only two types of things: the in-itself 
of objects or the for-itself of consciousness; the idea of the unconscious 
posits the ontologically impossible condition of an in-and-for-itself. There 
can be nothing in consciousness that is unavailable to it, nothing, that is, 
that is not already in the form  of thought. Once thought is “hypostatized 
and hardened into the notion of an unconscious,” Sartre argued, “such 
thought is no longer accessible to itself.”
Although Sartre insisted that there was no distinction to be drawn between 
the unconscious of perceptual psychology and that of psychoanalysis (and

indeed the former’s “laws of association” had already put in place the 
relations of metaphor and metonymy, of condensation and displacement, 
long before Freud availed himself of these terms), associationism obviously 
veers off from psychoanalysis in that it posits no mechanism of repression. 
The unconscious on which Helmholtz’s theory of vision relies is, like that 
of associationism in general, a store of memory, and thus a reserve of 
consciousness. It was psychoanalysis that would view the unconscious as 
divisive, as the turbulent source of a conflict with consciousness. The only 
point of recognition within associationist theory that consciousness might 
be shot through by unconscious conflict, and this at the very heart of 
perception, was when it had to confront its own peculiar laboratory rat: 
the optical illusion. And there it found itself staring at something like an 
“optical unconscious.”
It is in that languidly unreeling pulsation, that hypnotically erotic, visual 
throb of Duchamp’s Precision Optics, that one encounters the body  of 
physiological optics’ seeing fully enmeshed in the temporal dimension of 
nervous life, as it is also fully awash in optical illusion’s “false induction.” 
But it is here, as well, that one connects to this body as the site of libidinal 
pressure on the visual organ, so that the pulse of desire is simultaneously 
felt as the beat of repression.
The rhythm of the turning disks is the rhythm of substitution as, at an 
iconic level, various organs replace one another in an utterly circular 
associative chain. First there is the disk as eye; then it appears as breast; 
this then gives way to the Active presence of a uterine cavity and the 
implication of sexual penetration. And within this pulse, as it carries one 
from part-object to part-object, advancing and receding through the illu­
sion of this three-dimensional space, there is also a hint of the persecutory 
threat that the object poses for the viewer, a threat carried by the very 
metamorphic rhythm itself, as its constant thrusting of the form into a 
state of dissolve brings on the experience of formlessness, seeming to 
overwhelm the once-bounded object with the condition of the informe.
There was a dish of spring onions on the table. Julia [Strachey] said  
suddenly: “What are those little long things some people have got?” [Dora]  
Carrington: “Those mean they are males, dear.”
—Frances Partridge, 1927
Angelica Garnett is remembering Roger Fry standing alone before the  
crowd that fills the Queen s Hall. It is a London winter and the great room

seems filled with a greenish mist. People snuffle and cough in the cold.  
And there is nothing to entertain them, as her Aunt Virginia says, “but a  
gentleman in evening dress with a long stick in his hand in front o f a  
cadaverous sheet. ”
This is not, as we know, a lecture in medicine. The sheet will not be  
removed to reveal a corpse into the hidden, formless depths o f which the  
demonstration will probe. The cadaverous sheet, white, amorphous, will  
serve instead as the background for a projected image. It is to this image,  
floating above the sheet, that the stick will point, as it releases the outlines  
o f figure against the formlessness o f ground. Probing the image with this  
vision that does not serve the body —indeed, “blasphemes ” against it—the  
eye o f which this stick is the prolongation is searching for the purest  
manifestation o f form. “He had only to point to a passage in a picture,”  
a friend tells o f these evenings, “and to murmur the word ‘plasticity’ and  
a magical atmosphere was created. ”
Or was it a religious atmosphere? Virginia Woolf understood Fry as “prais­
ing a new kind o f saint—the artist who leads his laborious life indifferent  
to the world’s praise or blame, ” a saint whose punishment for pride would  
be to find himself outcast, “cut off from the chief source o f his inspiration. ”  
Grace, indeed. No revelation without faith. Fry came from Quaker stock.  
A fact to which she refers when she remarks, “No Fry among all the  
generations o f Frys could have spoken with greater fervor o f the claims of  
the spirit, or invoked doom with more severity. But then, ‘Slide, please,’  
he said. And there was the picture  ...”
There was the picture. With Fry’s vision mastering it, releasing form from  
the ground o f the white sheet, revealing its outlines with his long stick.
And what had she said about the figure Fry himself made standing in front  
o f the sheet? She had said that for his audience this was perhaps the most  
impressive outline o f all, adding that it was, however, a figure o f which  
Fry himself was unconscious.
This eye placed in front o f the projected image is attached to a body.  
Indeed it is this body that blocks the light. But Fry, an absence in his own  
field o f vision, was oblivious o f his body. It was an obliviousness that was  
part o f his ethos, issuing in such symptomatic behavior as his mode of  
dress, described by a pained Clive Bell. The classically tailored suits worn  
with outlandish ties and hunting shoes. The peculiar hats. Virginia Woolf  
is struck by this void in the center o f Fry’s visual field. “Only one subject  
seemed to escape his insatiable curiosity, ” she says, “and that was himself.

Analysis seemed to stop short there.” The eye probes the background,  
finding form; but there persists “this lack o f interest in the central figure. ”
Fry places himself in front o f the projection screen as he places himself  
before the chessboard. An eye without a body. Pure giver o f form. Pure  
operation o f the law. Pure phallus.
Sartre places himself in front o f the door with the keyhole and understands  
himself as figure against ground, figure, that is, in the eyes o f the other  
who observes him, who catches him in the act. And in this moment, as  
Sartre fails to coalesce into figure  for himself, he watches in dismay as  
he becomes merely ground. Ground against ground. The amorphe. The  
non-form.
He reaches for the term that will capture this sense o f himself as embodied  
watcher, as voyeur who is now leaching away from this  for himself into a  
nonarticulated surround. The term he uses is “hemorrhaging. ” He is bleed­
ing away from “himself. ” And thus, quite inadvertently, he gives to this  
formlessness if not a shape, for that is impossible, at least a gender. In this  
surrender o f mastery he is celui qui voit qui est  con.
Writing about “psychogenic visual disturbance” in 1910, Freud speaks of 
the various bodily organs’ accessibility to both the sexual and the ego 
instincts: “ Sexual pleasure is not connected only with the function of the 
genitals; the mouth serves for kissing as well as for eating and speaking, 
the eyes perceive not only those modifications in the external world which 
are of import for the preservation of life, but also the attributes of objects 
by means of which these may be exalted as objects of erotic selection.” 
The problem for the organ can arise when there is a struggle between these 
two instincts and “ a repression is set up on the part of the ego against the 
sexual component-instinct in question.” Applying this to the eye and the 
faculty of vision, Freud continues, “ If the sexual component-instinct which 
makes use of sight—the sexual ‘lust of the eye’—has drawn down upon 
itself, through its exorbitant demands, some retaliatory measure from the 
side of the ego-instincts, so that the ideas which represent the content of 
its strivings are subject to repression and withheld from consciousness, the 
general relation of the eye and the faculty of vision to the ego and to 
consciousness is radically disturbed.” The result of repression is then, on 
the one hand, the creation of substitute formations at the level of the libido 
and, on the other, the onset of reaction formation within the operations 
of the ego.

The sequence of substitutions within Precision Optics and the sense of 
perceptual undecidability projected through the object’s condition as a 
state of perpetual disappearance, all this rehearses the Freudian scenario 
of the unavailability of what is repressed and the structural insatiability of 
desire. For desire-in-vision is formed not through the unified moment of 
visual simultaneity of the camera obscura’s optical display, but through 
the temporal arc of the body’s fibers. It is an effect of the two-step through 
which the object is eroticized. Freud’s theory of this erotic investment of 
the object (or anaclisis), as set forth by Jean Laplanche, accounts among 
other things for the scopophilic impulse. It is a theory of the two-step.
According to the anaclitic model, all sexual instincts lean on the self­
preservative or ego instincts, but they only come to do so at a second 
moment, always a beat after the self-preservative impulse. Thus the baby 
sucks out of a need for sustenance, and in the course of gratifying that 
need receives pleasure as well. And desire occurs at this second moment, 
as the longing to repeat the first one understood not as milk but as pleasure, 
understood, that is, as the satisfaction of desire. Thus it searches for an 
object of original satisfaction where there is none. There is only milk, 
which can satisfy the need, but cannot satisfy the desire, since it has become 
something that the little hiccup of substitution will always produce as 
insufficient. What this model clarifies is the way the need can be satisfied, 
while the desire cannot.
To relate this psychoanalytic model of desire’s longing for a lost origin 
and a structurally irretrievable object to the experience of Precision Optics 
is to try to capture the effect of this projection of desire into the field of 
vision. It is also to hold onto that field as something that is both carnally 
constituted and, through the activity of the unconscious, is the permanent 
domain of a kind of opacity, or of a visibility invisible to itself. That 
oscillation between the transparent and the opaque, an oscillation that 
seems to operate in Duchamp’s work at all the levels of his practice, is 
revealed here, I would say, as the very precondition of any visual activity 
at all.
There is no way to concentrate on the threshold of vision, to capture 
something en tournant la tete,  without siting vision in the body and posi­
tioning that body, in turn, within the grip of desire. Vision is then caught 
up within the meshes of projection and identification, within the specularity 
of substitution that is also a search for an origin lost. Con,  as they say, 
celui qui voit.

Fry’s vision was never, for one moment, stilled, she told them. He was  
always looking, in the secure knowledge that his look, exactly because it  
was so temporally detached, would redeem what it saw. “Everything was  
drawn in, assimilated, investigated," she said. The intelligence, the for­
malism o f his vision, Virginia Woolf explained, “reached out and laid hold  
o f every trifle—a new stitch, a zip-fastener, a shadow on the ceiling. Each  
must be investigated, each must be examined, as if by rescuing such trifles  
from mystery he could grasp life tighter and make it yield one more drop  
o f rational and civilized enjoyment. ”
—A new stitch, a zip-fastener, a shadow on the ceiling. Fry? But why not  
Duchamp ? Who more than he had reached out for the zip-fastener, the  
shadow on the ceiling, and declared them art?
The hierarchy o f Fry’s vision, o f Bloomsbury’s vision, o f Formalism’s  
vision, works this way. The body exerts its demands. For nurture; for  
comfort. The eye accommodates those demands by routinizing vision, by  
achieving a glance that can determine in an instant the purpose to which  
each object can be put. It’s not a look that “sees,” it’s a look that sorts.  
“In actual life, ” Fry says, “the normal person really only reads the labels  
as it were on the objects around him and troubles no further. ” In modern  
society the commodity is precisely what is the recipient o f this instrumental  
look. “The subtlest differences o f appearance that have a utility value” are  
what it scans, leaving out all matters o f form, or what Fry calls the  
“important visual characters. ” Nothing can fool this glance in its task o f  
categorizing the visual field according to the body’s needs: nothing will  
“prevent the ordinary eye from seizing on the minute visual characteristics  
that distinguish margarine from butter. Some o f use can tell Canadian  
cheddar at a glance, and no one was ever taken in by sham suede gloves. ”
Because art, a function o f Fry’s “creative vision, ” releases the gaze from  
this ceaseless functionalism, “biologically speaking, art is a blasphemy.”  
The creative gaze soars above the body, arrested by the gratuitous satis­
faction o f what Fry always referred to as “plastic form ” but we will  
translate into the pleasures released by the “logical moment. ” Indeed  
Virginia W oolf has supplied the transition when she pictures Fry wanting  
to “rescue such trifles”  so that he can make “life yield one more drop of  
rational and civilized enjoyment. ”
The commodity, then, even though it was for Fry a zero point in the field  
of form —nothing, visually speaking, but a cipher operating within a system  
o f exchange: more valuable/less valuable? reallfake?—the commodity

could be visually redeemed. It could be raised to the level o f form. Prized  
loose from the level o f the body, it could be sublimated.
What Clem detests in Duchamp’s art is its pressure toward desublimation.  
“Leveling” he calls it. The attempt to erase distinctions between art and  
not-art, between the absolute gratuitousness o f form and the commodity.  
The strategy, in short, o f the readymade.
Duchamp is not interested in redeeming the commodity for plastic values,  
for form, for “the artist’s vision,” for the logical moment. Because the  
commodity has always already been swept up into  form, has already, by  
its very condition as an item o f exchange, been rationalized. Its nature and  
the formalizing look that would “redeem ” it are nothing but two aspects  
o f the same thing.
The Rotoreliefs are spinning, vertically, horizontally, all around Duchamp.  
He is among them, smiling like a salesgirl. The gaily colored helixes —red, 
green, blue—are busily enacting the images o f industry: the flywheels, the  
turnscrews, the propellers. But the experience o f an archaic, infantilized  
desire irrupts inexorably in their midst, creating, if ever so fleetingly, a  
space o f resistance to rationalization. Temporal, carnal, it is the space of  
what I am projecting as Duchamp’s version o f the optical unconscious.

Bibliographical Note
I first developed the material on Duchamp’s Precision Optics for a conference paper, 
published as “ Where’s Poppa?” in The Definitively Unfinished Marcel Duchamp,  ed. 
Thierry De Duve (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1992), pp. 433-462.
Molly Nesbit, my interlocutor, has published her work on French nineteenth-century 
instruction in drawing and its relation to Marcel Duchamp in her “ Ready-Made Origi­
nals,” October,  no. 37 (Summer 1986); and “The Language of Industry,” in The Defin­
itively Unfinished Marcel Duchamp,  pp. 351— 384.
The French lullaby could be translated, approximately, as follows:
Go beddy-bye, my little brother Nick.
Go beddy-bye, you will have some milk.
Mommy is upstairs, baking a cake.
Daddy is downstairs, making some chocolate.
Duchamp’s writings have been anthologized in Duchamp du signe: Ecrits,  ed. Michel 
Sanouillet (Paris: Flammarion, 1975), hereafter referred to as D DS;  and Salt Seller: The  
Writings o f Marcel Duchamp (Marchand du Sel),  ed. Michel Sanouillet and Elmer 
Peterson (New York: Oxford University Press, 1973) hereafter referred to as SS. Du­
champ’s business card is reproduced in D DS  (p. 153) and SS (p. 105); Roche wrote two 
different accounts of Duchamp hawking the Rotoreliefs  at the Concours Lepine: the one 
“ MARCELDUCHAMPSOPTICALDISCS” ( Phases,  no. 1 [January 1954], and SS, 
p. 191), from which come the phrase “ smiling like a salesgirl” and the final statement 
about the crowd’s being able to see the Rotoreliefs  at the museum; the other “ Souvenirs 
de Marcel Duchamp” (in Robert Lebel, Sur Marcel Duchamp  [Paris: Editions Trianon, 
1959], p. 79), from which the major part of the description here is drawn. Duchamp’s 
note on the transformers that would operate on bodily waste is in DDS,  p. 272, and SS, 
p. 191; “ Balls”—written as “ PODE BAL” —was sent to Duchamp’s brother-in-law Jean 
Crotti, in answer to an invitation to participate in the 1921 Salon Dada (DDS,  p. 261, 
and SS, p. 180); on the illuminating gas, DDS,  pp. 73-74, and SS, p. 49; on the Bride’s 
imagination activated by “ the love gasoline, a secretion of the bride’s sexual glands,” 
DDS,  pp. 64-65, and SS, pp. 42-43.
Duchamp’s statement about grasping things by the mind “the way the penis is grasped 
by the vagina” is from Lawrence Steefel (“ The Position of La Mariee mise a nu par ses  
celibataires, meme  (1915-1923) in the Stylistic and Iconographic Development of the 
Art of Marcel Duchamp” [Ph.D. dissertation, Princeton University, 1960], p. 312; his 
saying that one looks “ in turning away” is from Alain Jouffroy, Une revolution du  
regard  (Paris: Gallimard, 1964), p. 119; his note on the Sieves as “ cones” is from a 
1914 sketch for the Bachelor Machine (in Arturo Schwarz, La Mariee mise a nu chez  
Marcel Duchamp, meme  [Paris: Editions Georges Fall, 1974], p. 160); his description 
of the illusion produced by his optical disks as a “ psychophysiological process” is from 
an account by Hans Richter (Dada: Art and Anti-Art  [London: Thames and Hudson, 
1965], p. 99).
Duchamp specifies the viewer as voyeur  in Manual o f Instructions for “Etant Donnes ”  
(Philadelphia: Philadelphia Museum of Art, 1987), in the note for the Sem e Op. (“ La 
Porte” ), n.p.

Duchamp’s “ anti-retinal” statements come from Pierre Cabanne, Dialogues with Marcel  
Duchamp,  trans. Ron Padgett (New York: Viking Press, 1971), p. 43, and Jouffroy, 
Une revolution du regard,  p. 115; his remarks against impressionism are from Jouf­
froy, p. 110.
The Rotoreliefs  have received very little attention in the mountainous literature on 
Duchamp. Lawrence Steefel (“ The Position of La Mariee mise a nu,”  p. 56) associates 
their “obsessional pulsation” to “ copulatory movements” ; Toby Mussman (“Anemic 
Cinema,” Art and Artists,  no. 1 [July 1966], p. 51) speaks of “ vaginal penetration” ; 
while the cyclops is spoken of by Robert Lebel, Sur Marcel Duchamp,  p. 52.
The ideas of the dialectical image and of the importance of returning the gaze are of 
course Walter Benjamin’s; see “ On Some Motifs in Baudelaire,” Illuminations,  trans. 
Harry Zohn (New York: Shocken Books, 1969), p. 188: “ Experience of the aura rests 
on the transposition of a response common in human relationships to the relationship 
between the inanimate or natural object and man. The person we look at, or who feels 
he is being looked at, looks at us in turn. To perceive the aura of an object we look at 
means to invest it with the ability to look at us in return” ; and “ Surrealism,” Reflections,  
trans. Edmund Jephcott (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1978), p. 190: “ We 
penetrate the mystery only to the degree that we recognize it in the everyday world, by 
virtue of a dialectical optic that perceives the everyday as impenetrable, the impenetrable 
as everyday.” His account of the dialectical image as set out in his Passagen-Werk  is 
discussed by Susan Buck-Morss in “ The Flaneur, the Sandwichman and the Whore,” 
New German Critique,  no. 39 (Fall 1986), pp. 99-141; and throughout her The D i­
alectics o f Seeing: Walter Beniamin and the Arcades Project  (Cambridge: MIT Press, 
1989). See also Miriam Hansen, “Benjamin, Cinema and Experience,” New German  
Critique,  no. 40 (Winter 1987), on Benjamin’s concept of returning the gaze, pp. 187—  
188 and 203; on dialectical optics, p. 199; and on Benjamin’s notion of the optical 
unconscious, pp. 207-211, 219-221. For a critique of Benjamin’s concept of “ secular 
illumination,” see Jurgen Habermas, “ Consciousness-Raising or Redemptive Criticism,” 
New German Critique,  no. 17 (Spring 1979), p. 47.
Greenberg’s discussion of the “ logical moment” is from “ On Looking at Pictures,” The 
Nation  (September 8, 1945), and his review of Cezanne’s Compositions  is from The 
Nation  (December 29, 1945), both anthologized in Clement Greenberg: The Collected  
Essays and Criticism,  vol. 2, ed. John O ’Brian (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1986), pp. 34 and 4 6 -4 9 . His attacks on Duchamp have been peppered throughout his 
writing of the late 1960s and after; see, for example, his “ Necessity of ‘Formalism’,” 
New Literary History,  vol. 3 (1971-1972), pp. 171-175.
Saussure’s references to chess are from his Course in General Linguistics,  trans. Wade 
Baskin (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1966), pp. 88— 89, 110. Hubert Damisch has discussed 
Duchamp’s work, and his chess game, in relation both to Saussure and to the history of 
chess, in “The Duchamp Defense,” October,  no. 10 (Fall 1979).
The alchemical reading of the Glass  has most elaborately been given by Arturo Schwarz, 
“The Alchemist Stripped Bare in the Bachelor, Even,” in Marcel Duchamp,  ed. Anne 
d’Harnoncourt and Kynaston McShine (New York: Museum of Modern Art; Philadel­
phia: Philadelphia Museum of Art, 1973), pp. 81-98; the Neoplatonic one by Octavio 
Paz, Marcel Duchamp: Appearance Stripped Bare  (New York: Viking, 1978). Claims 
for the centrality of Duchamp’s relation to perspective are in the work of Jean Clair, 
“Marcel Duchamp et la tradition des perspecteurs,” Marcel Duchamp: Abecedaire  (Paris: 
Musee National d’Art Moderne, 1977). The importance of the fourth dimension as a 
key to Duchamp’s work is argued both by Clair ( Marcel Duchamp ou le grand fictif  
[Paris: Galilee, 1975] and Duchamp et la photographie  [Paris: Chene, 1977]) and by 
Craig Adcock, Marcel Duchamp’s Notes from the “Large G lass”: An n-Dimensional  
Analysis  (Ann Arbor: UMI Research Press, 1981).

Sartre’s chapter on “The Look” is in Being and Nothingness,  trans. Hazel E. Barnes 
(New York: Washington Square Press, 1966). The citations here are from pp. 348, 352.
Jean-Frangois Lyotard’s analysis of Etant donnes  is Les TRANSformateurs DUchamp  
(Paris: Galilee, 1977), pp. 137-138. He connects the Large Glass  to the surface of the 
retina and to the cortex, pp. 133-134. For an analysis of the Glass  as an indexical field 
of impressions see my “ Notes on the Index,” The Originality o f the Avant-Garde and  
Other Modernist Myths  (Cambridge: M IT Press, 1986).
The accounts of Roger Fry come from: Virginia Woolf, Roger Fry: A Biography  (1940), 
as cited in The Bloomsbury Group,  ed. S. P. Rosenbaum (Toronto: University of Toronto 
Press, 1975), pp. 129-132, 136— 138; Angelica Garnett, Deceived with Kindness  (Lon­
don: Chatto & C Windus, 1984), pp. 81, 90-104; Frances Partridge, Love in Bloomsbury  
(Boston: Little, Brown, 1981), p. 37; David Garnett, on Fry cheating at chess, The 
Flowers o f the Forest  (London: Chatto &  Windus, 1955), p. 158; Clive Bell on Fry and 
chess, Rosenbaum, The Bloomsbury Group,  p. 154. Accounts of Bloomsbury and Moor- 
ism: John Maynard Keynes, Two Memoirs,  1949, as cited by Rosenbaum, pp. 52— 59; 
and Desmond MacCarthy, Portraits I,  1931, in Rosenbaum, p. 31.
Roger Fry discusses the difference between ordinary, utilitarian vision and aesthetic vision 
in “ The Artist’s Vision,” Vision and Design  (New York: Brentano’s, n.d.), pp. 31-33. 
See Molly Nesbit’s analysis of this essay in her Atget’s Seven Albums  (New Haven: Yale 
University Press, 1992).
/4 6
tAree
Jonathan Crary’s Techniques o f the Observer: On Vision and Modernity in the Nine­
teenth Century  (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1990) is a radical revision of art-historical 
understanding of the significance of physiological research and of the relationship be­
tween the camera obscura model of vision and that of later optical mechanisms such as 
the photographic camera and the stereographic apparatus. Crary cites Richard Rorty’s 
analysis of the camera obscura as an epistemic model (Rorty, Philosophy and the Mirror  
o f Nature  [Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1979]) and compares this with the 
model onto which Goethe’s Farbenlehre  opens (Crary, pp. 43 and 67-69, respectively).
Crary’s discussion of the stereoscope (pp. 116ff.) describes its attack on the “ scenic 
model” and the basis of that model in perspective (p. 128). For a discussion of Goethe’s 
relation to the notion of the transience of vision, see Elaine Escoubas, “ L ’oeil (du) 
teinturier,” Critique,  no. 37 (March 1982), pp. 233-234.
Helmholtz compares the nervous system to telegraph wires in Helmholtz on Perception,  
ed. Richard Warren and Roslyn Warren (New York: John Wiley &  Sons, 1968), p. 83; 
he speaks of our sensations as giving us nothing but signs (p. 110); he describes 
the problems that optical illusions pose for an empirical theory of vision (p. 129).
Helmholtz’s attempt to use associationist reasoning to explain optical illusions is ana­
lyzed by Richard Gregory (Eye and Brain  [New York: World University Library, 1978], 
pp. 142-143).
Sartre’s discussion of the issue of the unconscious in both associationist psychology and 
psychoanalytical theory is from his Imagination, a Psychological Critique,  trans. ForrestRobert Delaunay theorizes color in relation to optics in his The New Art o f Color,  ed. 
Arthur Cohen (New York: Viking Press, 1978), pp. 35, 41, 63. Thierry de Duve has 
situated Duchamp’s “nominalist” relation to color and his conception of the readymade 
within the history of abstract painting’s reception of nineteenth-century optical and color 
theory. His argument describes two separate theoretical traditions, Goethe’s Farbenlehre  
which fuels a symbolist/expressionist practice and Chevreul’s De la loi du contrast  
simultane  which founds a more objective and ultimately structuralist one; de Duve 
emphasizes the need on the part of modernist artists to legitimate abstraction, to defend 
it from the arbitrariness of “ mere” decoration. See Thierry de Duve, Nominalisme  
pictural  (Paris: Editions de Minuit, 1984), pp. 211-227.

Williams (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1962), p. 71. For an important 
discussion of Sartre’s relation to associationism and to Charcot, see Joan Copjec, “ Favit 
et Dissipati Sunt,” October,  no. 18 (Fall 1981), pp. 21-40.
Freud speaks of a scopic drive in “ Psychogenic Visual Disturbance According to Psy­
choanalytical Conceptions” (1910), Standard Edition,  vol. 11, pp. 211— 218; the passages 
cited in the text are from pp. 215-216. Jean Laplanche’s discussion of this drive and of 
anaclisis in from his Life and Death in Psychoanalysis,  trans. Jeffrey Mehlman (Balti­
more: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1976), chapters 1 and 5.
f46~
tA r e e

A dictionary begins when it no longer gives the meanings o f words, but  
their jobs.
— Georges Bataille

I Anamorph.  And how does Dali describe it, the thing that so captivates him, 
transfixing him with its glamour, its seemingly endless powers of seduction? 
He wants to place his listener in front of a “psycho-atmospheric-ana- 
morphic object,” although how, given the peculiar status of the thing, one 
can even occupy this place is far from clear. One is before it only by 
mistaking it for something else; it is seen in that sense through the modality 
of misrecognition. So he imagines a man staring at a tiny point of light 
that he takes to be a star but is in fact the glowing tip of a cigarette, the 
only visible part of the object in question.
One way to described the psycho-atmospheric-anamorphic object is that 
it is the avoidance of form.  Dali recalls to his listener how, in general, it 
is made. Everything goes on in total darkness: the selection of an object 
to be simulated; the dropping of this simulation from a great height; the

photographing of the resultant mass; the compacting of the photograph 
within a molten metal cube. The aspect of invisibility that marked the 
initial process is retained in the final product. But it is an invisibility deeper 
than a mere falling away of the illumination necessary to see the object. It 
is a new order of the unseeable. Dali characterizes it as informe.
We return to the tiny point of smoldering light and Dali tells us the history 
of the object it signals. He manages to persuade us that among the other 
elements buried within it are “ two authentic skulls—those of Richard 
Wagner and of Ludwig II of Bavaria” that, “softened up by a special 
process,” are now the fodder the cigarette is slowly consuming. “ The 
tip of this cigarette,” Dali exults, “ cannot but burn with a brilliance 
more lyrical in human eyes than the airy twinkle of the clearest and most 
distant star.”
The stars present us with infinity under the sign of concept, under the sign, 
that is, of form. The psycho-atmospheric-anamorphic object displays an 
altogether different version of infinity, that of deliquescence, of entropifac- 
tion, of a resistance to form.
2 Base Materialism, and Gnosticism.  Bataille tells the story of the hetero- 
morph, of the panmorph, of the acephalic god that burgeons into relief 
under the impress of the Gnostic seals. There is the god of the sun, a 
human figure whose body climaxes in a ruff of multiple necks that consti­
tute a kind of altar on which is placed the double head of an ass. The 
photograph that reproduces this image organizes the burgeoning convexi­
ties and etched contours of the figure into splendid sharpness. And yet 
however near the photograph draws to this tiny residue of a suppressed 
society, the image of the thing itself refuses to come into focus.
How can we think the heteromorph, we for whom the very notion of form 
is to shape matter into that which is single, unified, and identical to itself ?  
What would it mean to worship not that which is self-same but that which 
is self-different?
To our way of thought, derived as it is from a tradition of monism, matter 
cannot be conceived as distinct from form, because matter has already 
been caught up in a “ systematic abstraction.” It has been constructed 
within a relationship between two verbal entities; “abstract God (or, sim­
ply, Idea) and abstract matter, the prison keeper and the prison walls.” 
Matter, thought through this “metaphysical scaffolding,” is never base. 
Base materialism, says Bataille, begins with the heterological thought of 
nonidentity.

3 Caves.  In many of the caves, but particularly those at Gargas, the paleolithic 
paintings include palm prints that were made, twenty millennia ago, by 
placing an outstretched hand against the wall and blowing pigment onto 
the exposed surface to create the image in negative. The image as a residue 
of its maker. No matter how simply, I leave my trace. Kilroy was here.
Displaced from a Golden Age Greece to the dawn of humanity, the birth 
of art never seemed, therefore, to require a break with the myth of N ar­
cissus. If the mimetic urge led to the depiction of mammoth and horse and 
bison, it even more surely required the reflection of the artist himself.
At Gargas where these prints proliferate, many of the hands are curiously 
missing one or several finger joints, from one or several fingers. Abbe 
Breuil, the first great theoretician of the art of the caves, had a theory for 
this disfigurement as well. It was, he said, the result of initiation rites in 
which certain digits of the young hunter would be, as it were, circumcised. 
Nothing is changed in the theory of art-as-imitation. It is simply that certain 
of the models were “flawed.”
The structuralist in Leroi-Gourhan bridles at this theory that has stub­
bornly hung on from the late nineteenth century into the middle of the 
twentieth. That is repeated even now, if you go to Gargas. He knows that 
the caves are not a case of imitation but of representation and that they 
therefore work like Saussure’s chess game with each “piece” having a value 
relative only to every other. He knows that representation occurs within a 
combinatory universe. A universe like the one pictured by the Klein Group. 
A universe of male versus female. Of bison versus mammoth. Of arrow 
versus lattice. Of open hand versus truncated palm. Images are signs, he 
says. And the caves will use these to tell a story. A story of fecundation. 
By means of a mythogram. No hunter would mutilate the fingers of a 
young male initiate, he rolls his eyes. If the digits are “missing” at Gargas 
it is because what is represented there is, as always, the mythogram, the 
signification: male/female. And these very signs, enacted through the pure 
difference between the erectile finger and the squat, digitless palm, already 
existed as units in a code before their memorialization on the walls of 
Gargas. Hunters speak to each other through a language of signs. Two 
fingers raised, three fingers down. Thumb and little finger outstretched, 
index and middle fingers retracted. And so forth. A silent language. So as 
not to alert the animals.
If Bataille would have disagreed with Leroi-Gourhan and in fact found 
himself siding, here, with Abbe Breuil, it is not through any desire to

embrace the theory of imitation. It is the notion of mutilation that arrests 
him. For, writing in Documents  in 1930, he has quite a different theory of 
cave painting and the birth of art.
In the first place, he says, our own little primitives—our children—are not 
“ creative.” If they doodle it is not to make  something; it is, instead, to 
despoil a surface. Their instincts are purely sadistic. They like to drag their 
dirty fingers along the walls. Because they like to deface them. Kilroy was 
here. If the “primitive” is to be understood on the model of the child, the 
birth of art is, as well, an act of defacement, of self-mutilation, of the digit 
removed. Not to produce the forms of language: male/female; but to 
produce the absence of difference: informe.  This will toward self-deface- 
ment, this antinarcissism, is borne out by the hideousness of the represen­
tations of humanity within the caves. On the same wall as noble bison and 
mighty mammoth one finds humans only as grotesques. The will is not to 
representation, he says, but to alteration.
It is because of its wonderful ambivalence that Bataille likes the word 
alteration.  Its Latin root, alter,  opens equally onto a change of state and a 
change (or advancement) of time, therefore containing the divergent sig­
nifications of devolution  and evolution.  Bataille illustrates this by saying 
that alteration describes the decomposition of cadavers as well as “ the 
passage to a perfectly heterogeneous state corresponding to . . . the tout 
autre,  that is, the sacred, realized for example by a ghost.” Using alteration,  
the primal impulse of man’s self-representation is defined by Bataille as 
double-headed, leading simultaneously downward and upward. In this way 
the primordial, the originary, the source, is maintained as irresolvably 
diffuse—fractured by a doubleness at the root of things that was, in his 
closeness to Nietzsche’s thought, dear to Bataille.
4 Double.  “ Beauty,” said Breton, “will be convulsive, or will not be.” Was 
he thinking of those photographs from the Salpetriere to which Charcot 
had affixed the title “Passionate Attitudes” ? Those images of the famous 
hysterics—the lovely “Augustine” in their lead—convulsed in myriad ges­
tures of ecstasy. Pleading. Submitting. Writhing. A simulated ecstasy, it 
must be said. The body producing signs of a phantom exchange.
There are those who are sure this must have been the case. Breton thinks 
of nothing, they say, that does not have woman as its object. Woman, in 
fact, as object. The con in convulsive.
But in L ’amour fou  where this convulsive aesthetic is broached, the ex­
amples are from an altogether lower level of the natural order. Breton

Jacques-Andre Boiffard, Gnostic Seal,  photograph from 
Documents,  2, no. 1 (1930).
A ruff of multiple necks . . .  (p. ISO)

Women falling, falling from the vertical into the horizontal. . .  (p. 156)

speaks of a cave wall’s perfect modeling of the ripples and falls of satin 
drapery, or of the Great Barrier Reef’s production of the twists and turns 
of desert cacti. Breton’s interest in simulation is an interest in nature’s 
doubling over on itself to produce itself as always already in the grip of 
representation. As non-self-identical, because the double it generates within 
itself restructures it as sign. It is thus matter that is revealed as never wholly 
in-itself but always already signifying and thus always already shaped by 
the desires of its viewer. Unconscious desires that it, as sign, now makes 
manifest. The con in unconscious.
Bataille doesn’t believe a word of this. And certainly not the notion—for 
Breton—of the con in unconscious. Breton’s unconscious, riddled with 
signs, is busy producing form.  His materialism isn’t base  at all, Bataille 
says, as he classes Breton with the eagles, soaring in the imperium of an 
idealist aesthetic. “ Old M ole,” he muses, “ and the prefix sur as in Sur- 
homme  and Surrealism.”
It was up to the group that formed around Bataille and his magazine 
Documents  to conceive of a doubling that would not be the generator of 
form. For example, Roger Caillois on animal mimicry. The insect becomes 
the double of its background. The moth’s wings imitate shriveled leaves. 
The caterpillar’s body is indistinguishable from arching twigs. The praying 
mantis fashions itself as so many emerald blades of grass. Entomological 
wisdom calls this phenomenon protective coloration. The prey is in hiding, 
having acted in relation to its predator. If it has passed from figure against 
ground to ground on ground, it is in order, by outsmarting its tracker, to 
hold itself intact.
Caillois does not agree. The animal’s camouflage does not serve its life, he 
says, because it occurs in the realm of vision, whereas animal hunting takes 
place in the medium of smell. Mimicry is not adaptive behavior; instead, 
it is a peculiarly psychotic yielding to the call of “ space.” It is a failure to 
maintain the boundaries between inside and outside, between, that is, 
figure and ground. A slackening of the contours of its own integrity, of its 
self-possession, it is, as Denis Hollier calls it, a case of “ subjective detu­
mescence.” The body collapses, deliquesces, doubles the space around it 
in order to be possessed by its own surrounds. It is this possession that 
produces a double that is in effect an effacement of the figure. Ground 
on ground./So
'J m tr -
Caillois compares this to the experience of schizophrenics. “ Space seems 
for these dispossessed souls to be a devouring force,” he says. “ It ends by

replacing them. The body then desolidifies with his thoughts, the individual 
breaks the boundary of his skin and occupies the other side of his senses. 
He tries to look at himself from any point whatever of space. He feels 
himself becoming space. . . . He is alike, not like something but simply 
like. And he invents spaces of which he is ‘the convulsive possession.’ ”
There, Bataille might have said, there you really have the con in convulsive.
5 Ecstasy.  To represent ecstasy, Dali finds, it is enough to rotate the head 
180 degrees, to disorient the human axis from its vertical alignment—eyes, 
then nose, then mouth—to a horizontal in which, curiously, the mouth is 
now uppermost. His Phenomenon o f Ecstasy  is a photographic collection 
of such heads, which, like the Salpetriere hysterics, are for the most part 
women. They are women falling, falling from the vertical into the hori­
zontal. How is it that with that simple implication of falling, ecstasy is 
produced as image?
The scenario, as it were, for this collage had been published in 1930 by 
Georges Bataille in the “Dictionary” project ongoing in Documents.  It 
came as the “ definition” for “ Mouth.” For animals, Bataille writes, the 
mouth is a “ prow.” It is the foremost projection of that sleek horizontal 
that, like the ship’s silhouette on the sea, comprises the animal’s natural 
geometry. Mouth/anus. A straight line. The formal relations of the alimen­
tary drive. Which every other animal knows how to read. By standing up, 
the human being has abandoned that simple, direct geometry and assumed, 
in his verticality, a more confusing form. For the top of his head, his 
“prow,” is an inertly nonsignifying element of his body. We have to descend 
the facial facade to the level of the eyes to arrive at the evocative element 
in the human architecture. And the eyes have driven the mouth into 
obscurity.
Yet this architecture of the human will be transformed in moments of 
greatest pain or greatest pleasure. Then, the subject will grip his or her 
neck and, throwing the head fully back, will reassume that position in 
which it is the mouth that is at the end of the vertebral column. And from 
this newly projecting, newly expressive member there will issue the cry.
1 . Rotating the head to produce the mouth as the human “prow” is not an 
elevation of the mouth but a lowering of the human structure, which has, 
by assuming the animal “geometry,” fallen into the horizontal.
2. To attain the formal coherence of the animal’s structure is nonetheless 
to descend into a condition of informe.  For it is to blur the distinctions

between human and animal and thus to produce a formal rupture that 
goes deeper than any apparent form. Shapeless matter, like spittle or a 
crushed worm, says Bataille in his little “ Dictionary” piece on informe,  are 
instances of formlessness. But far more importantly, the informe  is a con­
ceptual matter, the shattering of signifying boundaries, the undoing of 
categories. In order to knock meaning off its pedestal, to bring it down in 
the world, to deliver to it a low blow.
So many falling bodies. So many mouths brought uppermost. Brassa'fs 
Nudes,  Man Ray’s Anatomy  or his Facile,  Ubac’s Affichez Vos Images.  
Surrealist photographers learned from this simplest of all formal notions. 
Rotate the image of body and you produce a different geography. A 
geography that undoes the form  of the human form.
6 Foundation.  The palm print gracing the cover of Amedee Ozenfant’s Foun­
dations o f Modern Art  has all its fingers intact. It is, for that matter, in 
Ozenfant’s mind, the very image of the intact, of the coming into being of 
the silhouette that will bound a shape, separating inside from outside, light 
from darkness, figure from ground. Though it is not a simple geometric 
figure, like a circle or triangle or square, it is nonetheless an instance of 
the first, primitive urge to shape the inchoate through the bounding of 
form. And it is in that sense the very emblem of the formal, its “ founda­
tion.” Ozenfant writes from Les Eysies de Tayac:
At Cabrerets a cave has just been discovered which some 
fall of earth has blocked for 15,000 years: deeply moving 
are the pictures that were found in it. Man in his entirety 
is revealed in them. Ah those HANDS! those silhouettes 
of hands, spread out and stencilled on an ocher ground! 
Go and see them. I promise you the most intense emotion 
you have ever experienced. Eternal M an awaits you.
If eternal man not only awaits you but is capable of moving you so, it is 
because visuality is a channel through which formal constants are able to 
act directly on sensory perception. No accessory information is needed. 
The address to the eye is immediate. “The fact that works from a prehis­
toric era grip us without any explanation being necessary as to their origins 
or the reasons that motivated them or even the subjects they represent” 
Ozenfant gives as proof of the absoluteness of vision. Of the fact, as 
he claims, that the eye responds to optical phenomena invariantly, so 
that nothing changes in this experience from the dawn of man to the 
present moment.

Vision, the foundational condition of the visual arts, is itself founded on 
a set of formal “ constants” that are on the one hand revealed to vision 
through light, but are just as actively sought out by vision as if in fulfillment 
of deep “psycho-biological” needs for form. The search for the good 
gestalt. Although Ozenfant doesn’t use this term.
In sketching these conditions of the visual in their full primordiality, Oz­
enfant constructs an image that is curiously like Caillois’s mimetic insect 
yielding to the seduction of space. “ I suggest that it is possible,” he writes, 
“that forms are the consequence of a sort of call from space! Matter, by 
which I mean the densest waves, would appear to infiltrate itself, as into 
a mould, into such space as offers the least resistance to it: it then becomes 
perceptible to us.” The difference, however, between the Purist parable 
and that of the mimeticist is that Ozenfant’s primal spatiality is itself always 
already formed. Its “ mould” is the grid of an abstract geometry such that 
when matter leaches into it, it flows into the meshes of form.  Thus the 
visual and the formal are the same, and it is the revelation of this similitude 
that is the genius of art: “When the artist succeeds in creating some such 
miracle, it may be he is unveiling the abscissa and coordinates of the 
perceptible universe: or alternatively, those of our deepest depths: which 
comes to the same  thing.”
When Ozenfant invokes the idea of foundations he is reaching toward a 
condition of possibility for vision itself. This he finds in the notion that 
even before the separation of figure from ground, the ground has always 
already been figure.
7 Game.  Without speaking of the vertigo of disgust in Breton when he first 
saw Dali’s Lugubrious Game  and noticed that the breeches of the one 
unambiguously recognizable figure in it were unmistakably besmirched 
with shit; without imagining the exaltation felt by Bataille as he prepared 
the analysis of the painting for Documents;  without mentioning his dismay 
when Breton struck against his old enemy by asking Dali to withhold 
permission to reproduce the work, or Dali’s motives for complying, or 
Bataille’s decision to strike back by publishing it in any case, this by means 
of a schematic drawing; let us consider Bataille’s reading of Dali’s game.
Like so many others, this game, he demonstrates, unfolds on a gridded 
field, here a quadrilateral in which the subject can be represented four 
times, in its character as a function of relations. It is an emasculated subject, 
Bataille says, the subject of castration. He plots this subject as/at (A). But 
as a subject it is the complex function of an interplay between its need to

For animals, Bataille writes, the mouth is a “prow”. . . (p. 156)

Diagram of Salvador D alfs Lugubrious Game  (1929), 
as published in Documents,  1, no. 7 (1929).
Or Bataille’s decision to strike back by publishing it in any  
case . . . (p. 1S8)

provoke punishment through the outrageousness of its fantasized desires 
(B); its regressive attempts to evade that punishment by soiling itself, an 
act that both imitates castration and outwits it in an ejaculatory extrava­
gance (C); and its voluptuous yielding to the very law of punishment by 
allying itself with its register, i.e., language (D).
The quadrilateral has two axes then, along which the subject can be both 
distributed and plotted. The subject, its objects, its ego, its unconscious. 
Long before Lacan had ever laid out his L Schema, Bataille is sketching 
what he calls the “ Psychoanalytic schema of the contradictory figurations 
of the subject” :
It is in the very geometry of the game, in its axis of relations, that the 
subject, in being played upon, does not succeed in becoming identical to 
himself. Spread out over the board of the game, he is a subject in alteration.
8 Geometry.  Le Corbusier and Ozenfant picture the city dweller’s excited 
response to that urban marketplace where “ geometry lends all its force of 
attraction to commerce.” Far from being cold or distancing, geometry 
tempts. Geometry seduces. Back in the countryside, they point out, the 
meat in the village butcher stalls lay in a heap, disgusting, redolent of the 
slaughterhouse. In the city’s markets, however, lambs and chickens are 
made into elegant friezes and fruit is mounded into precise pyramids. It is 
this order that whets our appetites, they remark, that “causes jubilation to 
stir in us.” But then modernity is a machine for the multiplication of the 
geometric. “ These constant incitements of the brain, provoked by specta­
cles resulting from geometry, are already determined,” they write, “ by the 
very presence of the city whose street plan—the houses in an almost 
uniform grid of windows, the neat stripes of the sidewalks, the alignment 
of trees with their identical circular grills, the regular punctuation of street 
lamps, the gleaming ribbons of tramway lines, the impeccable mosaic of 
paving stones—always and forever encloses us within geometry.” Not even 
the sky escapes the grip of geometry. For the sky is now organized by the

urban frame through which it is seen as mere interstice, as cutout. It is 
what throws the urban geometry itself into relief, giving us “in a pre­
cise contour the tracing of the urban geometry, counterproof imposed 
on nature.”
But if the machine has constructed a “modern optic,” it has done nothing 
more than connect modern man to his beginnings, his “ subsoil,” his primal 
need for the geometric, his cognitive apparatus:
Man is a geometrical animal 
M an’s mind is geometrical.
Man’s senses, his eyes, are drawn more than ever to 
geometrical clarities.
We are in possession now of a refined, alert, 
penetrating eye.
And of an exacting mind.
9 Hat.  The hats winging their way upward in Dali’s Lugubrious Game  
represent, says Bataille, female organs as fantasized by the desiring subject. 
No problem in that. The hat is gendered female in the standard lexicon 
on the sexual symbolism of dreams. But by the time Tristan Tzara publishes 
his “Automatism of Taste” this assertion of gender with regard to the hat 
has undergone a considerable complication.
Like Dali’s, Tzara’s hats are of felt, with their softly sloping crowns creased 
along their summits to produce the parallel lips of the fashionable fedora. 
A labial crease. A genital smile. But why is it, Tzara asks, that this vaginal 
image is used to place the finishing touches, as it were, on a quintessentially 
male garment? And then, even more curious, why in this year of 1933 is 
it the height of fashion for women  to don this most mannish of hats? And 
to underscore the transvestite nature of this mode-for-women by decorating 
the fedora with the symbols of strictly male apparel—garters, bow ties, 
etc.? Man Ray gives this spiral of cross-identifications yet one more spin 
in the photographs he makes to illustrate Tzara’s essay for its publication 
in Minotaure.  The fedora, pulled firmly down on the head of the model, 
is photographed from above, the mannequin’s face obscured by its brim. 
Firmly rounded, aggressive, the crown of the fiat rises up toward its viewer 
like the tip of the male organ, swelling with so much phallic presence.
A click of the shutter and Man Ray enacts the institution of the fetish: the 
“glance” that refuses what it sees and in this resistance turns black into 
white, or rather, insists that black is white. In the logic of the fetish the

M an Ray, Hat,  1933.
A labial crease. A genital smile . (p. 162)

Alberto Giacometti, Suspended Ball,  1930— 1931.
Every alternation produces an alteration (p. 166)

paradigm male/female collapses in an adamant refusal to admit distinction, 
to accept the facts of sexual difference. The fetish is not the replacement 
of the female genitals with a surrogate, coded /female/; it is a substitute 
that will allow a perverse continuation in a belief that they are male, that 
the woman (mother) is—beyond all apparent evidence—phallic.
The evidence in question is visual. In Freud’s scenario the fetish develops 
around a point of view within which the child sees but refuses what he 
sees, falls into a ritual of denial that his mother has been “ castrated.” 
Freud speaks of this point of view: “When the fetish comes to life, some 
process has been suddenly interrupted . . . what is possibly the last impres­
sion received before the uncanny traumatic one is preserved as a fetish . . . 
the last moment in which the woman could still be regarded as phallic.” 
The impressions into which the trauma falls are visual impressions, points 
of view within which the evidence arrives only to be denied through a 
sleight-of-vision that will produce the sexually indeterminate substitute of 
the fetish. Freud pulls an example from one of his case histories, a patient 
whose fetish object is a shine on the nose.  Lacan will later speak of such 
a “ shine” in relation to a tin can he once saw bobbing on the seas of 
Brittany. He calls it the “ jewel,” the “ screen,” the “gaze.” Freud had 
already marked this shine as the acknowledgment of a fissure that has 
opened within the field of vision: ein Glanz auf die Nase,  says the patient, 
naming his fetish. This patient’s first language, it seems, was not German, 
however, but English, the mother tongue of his nanny. So the “ shine” of 
Glanz  was really “glance” and the “last impression” before the fatal 
interruption was in fact “ a glance at the nose.” Perfectly bilingual, 
Glanz(ce)  now allows the fusion of looking at and looked at, subject and 
object, seer and seen, a fusion that reenacts the defense that the fetish itself 
will stage as the misperceived blurring of male and female organs.
Man Ray’s image captures the hat within a radically oblique point of view, 
one that hangs suspended over the top of the head, so that the split crown 
of the fedora seems to yield to the upsurge of the skull below it, both 
expressing and denying its aggressive contour: a shine on the nose.
10 Informe.  Leaving aside the fact that Giacometti’s first critical acclaim was 
registered in Documents,  which is to say, within that part of the avant- 
garde to which Andre Masson had introduced him, the part that was 
excoriated by Breton in his “Second Manifesto” of 1929, and that none­
theless the sight, in 1930, of Giacometti’s sculpture Suspended Ball  trig­
gered Breton’s most earnest enthusiasm, opening a place for the sculptor

within the official wing of surrealism, Suspended Ball  is a textbook case 
of the informe  as that was developed by Bataille. And this all the more so 
in that its elements are clearly formed.
We know what it looks like, this assemblage first elaborated in plaster, 
and then later in beautifully finished wood, of open cage, flat platform, 
and two opposing objects, the one reposing on the cage’s bottom, the other 
swinging from a wire affixed to a strut at its top. The gisant form is a 
wedge, prismatic, crescent-shaped. The pendular one is a sphere, perfectly 
convex except for the deep gash that threatens to cleave the underside of 
the ball into two half-moons. The mechanical relationship between the 
two is precise; the ball passes rhythmically over the ridge of the wedge. 
Swish forward. Swish back. But the erotic relationship between the two is 
a problem. For it is less precise. “ Everyone who saw this object function­
ing,” Maurice Nadeau reports, “ experienced a strong but indefinable sex­
ual emotion related to unconscious desires. This emotion was in no sense 
one of satisfaction, but one of disturbance, like that imparted by the 
irritating awareness of failure.”
Disturbance occurs here in the modality of alteration,  of ambivalence, of 
the splitting of every “identity” from itself into that which it is not. Of the 
dissolution, then, of form. For it is not clear, will never be clear, whether 
the gesture is a caress or a cut; it is not clear, will never be clear, whether 
the wedge is passively receiving stimulation from the sphere or, sadistic, 
aggressive, is violating the surface of the ball, like the razor slicing the eye 
in Dali’s Un chien andalou  or the bull’s horn in Bataille’s Histoire de I’oeil  
that kills the matador by tearing out his eye. As the instrument of pene­
tration the wedge is gendered male. And the wounded sphere is female. 
But as labial surface stroked by its active, possessing partner, the wedge 
reverses its sex, flipping into an unmistakable image of the genitality of 
the woman. Swish. Flip. Alter. Every alternation produces an alteration. 
And identities multiply. Lips. Testicles. Buttocks. Mouths. Eyes. Like clock­
work. A clock every second of which marks the inversion of all its elements. 
Hetero-erotic . . . homo-erotic . . . auto-erotic . . . hetero-erotic . . .
Like clockwork.
It is too easy to think of informe  as the opposite of form. To think of form 
versus matter. Because this “versus” always performs the duties of form, 
of creating binaries, of separating the world into neat pairs of oppositions 
by means, as Bataille liked to say, of “ mathematical frock coats.” Form 
versus matter. Male versus female. Life versus death. Inside versus outside.

Vertical versus horizontal. Etc. Chaos as the opposite of form is chaos that 
could always be formed, by the form that is always already there in wait 
for chaos.
Instead, let us think of informe  as what form itself creates, as logic acting 
logically to act against itself within itself, form producing a heterologic. 
Let us think it not as the opposite of form but as a possibility working at 
the heart of form, to erode it from within. Working, that is, structurally, 
precisely, geometrically, like clockwork. The word in French that captures 
this is dejouer.  The translation is given as something like “foil” or “ baffle.” 
But that suppresses the part of the action that has to do with games and 
rules and structure; with a structure destabilizing the game in the very act 
of following the rules. To create a kind of “ mis-play,” but one that, inside 
the system, is legal. The spring winding backward. Like clockwork.
Jouer/dejouer I.  Here’s the perfect example of a structure set up to generate 
“ mis-play.” In 1926 Bataille published Histoire de I’oeil.  A pornographic 
novel, it is also a structurally closed system through which a formal logic 
is at work against the geography of the body, its order, its form.
The story of the eye is not about the novel’s characters, but about an 
object—the eye—and what happens to it; and this “ happening to,” as 
Roland Barthes has shown, is a function of the rules of language, of 
metaphor and metonymy working to “ decline” the object through an 
orderly succession of verbal states. As a globular element the eye is trans­
formed through a series of metaphors by means of which, at any given 
point in the narrative, other globular objects are substituted for it: eggs, 
testicles, the sun. As an object containing fluid, the eye simultaneously 
gives rise to a secondary series related to the first: yolk, tears, urine, sperm. 
It is from the finite set of these two metaphoric series, as each crosses with 
the other, that a combinatoire  is set up through which the course of the 
erotic action of the narrative is generated. The eye is round; its contents 
are white: the first erotic encounter is between the narrator and Simone 
who is sitting in (the cat’s) plate of milk. The verbal fabric through which 
the story is told is also woven from the two metaphoric strands. The sun, 
metaphorized as eye and yolk, can, for example, be described as “ flaccid 
luminosity” and can give rise to the phrase “the urinary liquefaction of 
the sky.” What feels like a near infinity of images can be generated within 
the grid of these mutations. Jouer. -
Is this the surrealist game for producing the image: the chance  encounter 
of umbrella and sewing machine on a dissecting table? Nothing within a

combinatory, Barthes reminds us, takes place by chance. Bataille’s creation, 
he says, “is neither a wild image nor even a free image, for the coincidence 
of its terms is not aleatory.” The action of cross-inseminating the two series 
is to take, for example, commonplace expressions associated with the 
various elements—like “to break an egg” or “to poke out an eye”—and 
to transpose their terms systematically.  To produce “poke out an egg” or 
“break an eye” is at one and the same time to reorganize the terrain of 
the commonplace—of what is “proper” to a given linguistic term—and to 
reconstruct the body’s territory—what is possible for a given organ. And 
to eroticize these possibilities. Systematic transgression. Dejouer.
But are the chains, in fact, the efflorescence of a single, master term, which, 
lying at the heart of the action, is more privileged than the rest? Is it a 
sexual fantasy that is the secret that will act as the key to this profusion 
of elements, giving it a hierarchy that progresses, ultimately, toward a unity 
that will totalize the tale? But the circularity of the substitutions, in which 
each term is always made the signifier of another term, does not secure 
genitality as the basis of the story. Just as the book’s eroticism is never 
directly phallic (“It is a question,” Barthes says parenthetically, “ of a ‘round 
phallicism’ ” ), so it is never possible to decide whether it is the ocular or 
the genital theme that is originary. What this means is that Histoire de  
I’oeil  succeeds in never being a profound work; it contains no hierarchy, 
encodes no secret. “What we are dealing with is signification without a 
signified,” says Barthes, “ (or something in which everything is signified); 
and,” he adds, “ it is neither the least beauty nor the least novelty of this 
text to compose, by the technique we are attempting to describe, an open 
literature which is situated beyond any decipherment and which only a 
formal criticism can—at a great distance—accompany.”
Labyrinth.  If art began in the caves, its starting point was not the space of 
architecture, with light differentiating vertical pillar from horizontal slab, 
but that of the labyrinth, with no light, no differentiations, no up, no 
down. Its master image is the Minotaur, not Narcissus. As Bataille was to 
insist over and over again, its cause was not form but alteration.
If insistence was necessary this was because Paris of the ’20s had been 
swept up into a celebration of the origin of form as though it were set in 
these very caves. The Creation o f the World,  it was called for example, 
with music by Darius Milhaud and sets and costumes by Leger. Primitivism 
had become fashionable at the very same moment as the International

Alberto Giacometti, Project for a Passageway (Labyrinth),  1930-1931.
Felled by the action of the  informe to collapse the vertical onto the  
horizontal axis . . . (p. 171)

The praying mantis, totem animal of the ’30s . . . (p. 171)

Style and Art Deco. This meant a convergence in the public imaginaire  
between the geometries of the Fang mask or the Dan spoon and the cubes 
and cylinders of chrome ashtrays or buildings cast in the mold of “ steam­
boat modern.”
That, indeed, is where Giacometti, fresh from the Grand Chaumiere and 
an admiration for Laurens and Brancusi, had started. Black Deco had been 
his chic beginnings. But not for long. After 1928, when he had come in 
contact with Michel Leiris and Georges Bataille he began to rethink the 
meaning of the labyrinth as not simply another form but as a system for 
voiding form, for attacking it as declasse.  The vertical body—that staple 
of the sculptural imagination—now drops the ground, felled by the action 
of the informe  to collapse the vertical onto the horizontal axis. A series of 
horizontal sculptures follow, one called The Fall of a Head onto a Diagram,  
another more directly titled Labyrinth.  But these prone figures led to a 
further move into the terrain of undifferentiation and Giacometti imagined 
a sculpture that, instead of using the pedestal or base to lift the body off 
the surface of the space in which it stood, would be nothing but pedestal 
or base. It would be pure horizontal field, unlike any sculpture before it. 
Inassimilable to vision, inassimilable to form, it would inhabit the concep­
tual terrain of the labyrinth. It would go below the origins of form, below 
the gestalt.
Mantis.  In 1937 Hans Bellmer makes a sculpture called Machine Gunneress  
in a State o f Grace.  Insectoid, robotic, the work opens onto the fantasmatic 
field that had been mapped out for the praying mantis, totem animal of 
the ’30s. In it, automatism is rewritten by the insect, recast from the 
outpouring of libidinal energy into the unstoppable drive of the castrating 
machine, insentient and implacable. Caillois presents the creature in a 
chilling portrait of life’s mechanical double, the android simulation of the 
living being. One of the uncanny qualities of the mantis, he begins, is that 
its defense against its predators is to “play dead.” Rigid, immobile, wraith­
like, the mantis’s posture in life is to mime the inanimate. But its drive to 
imitate doesn’t stop with the defense of its organism, he says. For even 
decapitated the praying mantis continues to function and thus to perform 
a hideously robotic dance of life. “Which is to say,” Caillois writes, “ that 
in the absence of all centers of representation and of voluntary action, it 
can walk, regain its balance, have coitus, lay eggs, build a cocoon, and, 
what is most astonishing, in the face of danger can fall into a fake, 
cadaverous immobility. I am expressing in this indirect manner what lan­
guage can scarcely picture, or reason assimilate, namely, that dead, the 
mantis can simulate death.”

In this sense of the double that stands at the border between life and death 
not as a barrier, a marker of difference, but as the most porous of mem­
branes, allowing the one side to contaminate the other, the mantis, like 
the android, like the robot, like the epileptic in seizure, is a messenger of 
the uncanny, a harbinger of death. As, Freud says, is the doll.
And Bellmer, attending a performance of The Tales o f Hoffman  in the 
early 1930s, watching its hero maddened by his love for a doll who ends 
in dismemberment, found himself identifying with this story of identifica­
tion, saw himself endlessly returning to this fantasy, this theater of 
castration.
Throughout the ’30s Bellmer’s great project became his two series of 
Poupees,  each of which involved, like an eerily humanoid erector set, the 
assembling, dismantling, and reassembling of a demountable doll, each 
new assembly positioned and then photographed in a particular setting— 
kitchen, stairwell, bedroom, barn loft, woods—before being taken apart 
once more and reused. Staging, lighting, tinting the photographs to bracket 
their evidence within the space of fantasy, Bellmer casts the dolls again 
and again as phallic. The doll’s hair may be tied in a bow, its feet shod in 
Mary Janes, but, armless, its torso aggressively swelling with a kind of 
pneumatic dynamism, it summons up the very image of tumescence. Or
______ again, it is seen merely as two pairs of legs joined end to end, erectile, taut,
, / (>/u'  straddling the trunk of a tree. This doll’s body, coded /female/ but figuring
forth the male organ within a setting of dismemberment, carries with it 
the treat of castration. It is the doll as uncanny, the doll as informe.
14 Objective Chance.  Breton reads about the “ omnipotence” of desire, about 
“wish fulfillment.” He is electrified. There onto the black and white of 
psychoanalytic theory he is able to project a revolutionary program that 
will link the life of dreams to a radical change in the field of the real. By 
wishing. By wanting. By desiring. “ Objective chance” becomes his term 
for the way the subject’s unconscious thoughts will operate upon reality, 
recutting it to the measure of their desires. “ Objective chance” is also the 
name for the seemingly happenstance return of this now refashioned world 
in the form of a revelation that will, like the message in the bottle, announce 
to the subject the hitherto buried nature of these phantasms. Les vases  
communicantes  is the theorization of objective chance; Nadja  is its nov- 
elization. For Nadja is the great heroine of the power of the desiring will, 
of prescience, of thought’s omnipotence. She and Breton are sitting at a 
cafe table, the two of them looking across the square. “There will be a

Two pairs of legs joined end to end, erectile, tau t. (p. 172)

Hans Bellmer, L a Poupee,  1938.
It summons up the very image of tumescence . . .  (p. 172)

A messenger of the uncanny, a harbinger of death . . .  (p. 172)

The doll as uncanny, the doll

light in the window,” she says, staring at a blank facade. A second later 
the window lights up. Breton is stunned. Out of such acorns, he is con­
vinced, will the great oak of revolution grow.
Nadja,  of course, is a love story. Since it is a narrative powered by desire, 
he thinks, what else could it be?
For almost a decade, however, Freud had been telling a different tale about 
the omnipotence of thought, and clairvoyance, one with a decidedly un­
happy ending. Both the animism of primitive peoples and the narcissism 
of the infant, he notices, populate the world with extensions of themselves, 
with projections in the form of doubles or cast shadows (shades). The 
“ double,” Freud says, “was originally an insurance against destruction to 
the ego, an energetic denial of the power of death,” which, he continues, 
“ has its counterpart in the language of dreams, which is fond of repre­
senting castration by a doubling or multiplication of the genital symbol.” 
But as infantile grandiosity yields to the all-too-obvious facts of helpless­
ness, the subject’s own creation becomes a Frankenstein monster. So that 
the ideas that “ have sprung from the soil of unbounded self-love, from the 
primary narcissism which holds sway in the mind of the child as in that 
of primitive man,” form the basis for a turn of events: “when this stage 
has been left behind the double takes on a different aspect. From having 
been an assurance of immortality, he becomes the ghastly harbinger of 
death.” He becomes a ghost, a ghoul, a spook.
Freud is discussing this in the context of “The Uncanny” as he tries to 
grapple with the feeling, a function of adult life, of a sudden, uneasy 
“ recognition” that one is confronted by fate. Often, he observes, this arises 
out of a sense that a seemingly chance occurrence has in fact been prepared 
for one, that behind the apparent randomness of coincidence there lies a 
message waiting to be read. The uncanniness that seems to surround certain 
repetitions of names, or numbers, or concatenations of objects within one’s 
everyday life, “forces upon us,” Freud notes, “the idea of something fateful 
and unescapable where otherwise we should have spoken of ‘chance’ only.” 
The temptation to give a secret meaning to what seems like the obstinate 
recurrence of a number, for example, leads people frequently to read into 
these repetitions the language of destiny.
But Freud is speaking of the uncanny within a larger frame, the one he 
thinks of as a need to regress, a need to repeat what is prior, earlier, least 
developed within the self. Therefore this ascription of meaning to happen­
stance and this assumption of powers of clairvoyance (offhandedly referred*7 7

to by his patients as their ‘“ presentiments’ which ‘usually’ come true” ) he 
understands as the reassertion within adult life of more psychologically 
primitive states, namely those related to the omnipotence of thoughts and 
belief in animism. “ It would seem,” he writes, “ as though each one of us 
has been through a phase of individual development corresponding to that 
animistic stage in primitive man, that none of us has traversed it without 
preserving certain traces of it which can be re-activated, and that everything 
which now strikes us as ‘uncanny’ fulfills the condition of stirring those 
vestiges of animistic mental activity within us and bringing them to 
expression.”
The collapse of the distinction between imagination and reality—an effect 
Breton courted with all of surrealism’s resources, but one that Freud ana­
lyzes as the primitive belief in magic—animism, narcissistic omnipotence, 
all are potential triggers of that metaphysical shudder that is the uncanny. 
For they represent the breakthrough into consciousness of earlier states of 
being, and in this breakthrough, itself the evidence of a compulsion to 
repeat, the subject is engulfed by the idea of death.
Nadja,  Breton thinks, is a love story, driven by the rebellious power of the 
libido, the pleasure principle, the imperious wish. But from the very first 
line, in the grip of the effects of objective chance, he writes it in the key 
of the uncanny, with its overtones of a drive toward death. “Who am I?” 
he begins. “ If this once I were to rely on a proverb, then perhaps everything 
would amount to knowing whom I ‘haunt.’ ”
Photography.  It was in 1931, in his “ Small History of Photography,” that 
Walter Benjamin first used the term “ optical unconscious.” With the pho­
tographs of Muybridge or Marey undoubtedly in mind, he speaks of how 
the naked eye cannot penetrate movements of even the most ordinary kind. 
“We have no idea at all,” he says, “what happens during the fraction of a 
second when a person steps out.”  But photography, he exults, “with its 
devices of slow motion and enlargement, reveals the secret. It is through 
photography that we first discover the existence of this optical unconscious, 
just as we discover the instinctual unconscious through psychoanalysis.”
Reading this, of course, we are struck by the strangeness of the analogy. 
True, the camera with its more powerful and even dispassionate eye can 
stand for the psychoanalyst, and the hitherto unseen visual data can operate 
as a parallel to those slips of tongue or pen, those parapraxes through 
which the patient’s unconscious surfaces into view. But what can we speak 
of in the visual field that will be an analogue of the “ unconscious” itself,

a structure that presupposes first a sentient being within which it operates, 
and second a structure that only makes sense insofar as it is in conflict 
with that being’s consciousness? Can the optical field— the world of visual 
phenomena: clouds, sea, sky, forest —have  an unconscious?
Benjamin makes it clear both in this early essay and when he returns to 
the subject in the 1936 “Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Repro­
duction” that for him the camera is an instrument that enlarges vision, 
much the way Freud spoke of it in Civilization and Its Discontents,  where 
technological advances are viewed as a set of “prosthetic limbs” that 
expand the power of the individual. Benjamin likens the camera for ex­
ample to the surgeon’s knife that can operate dispassionately on the human 
body and by seeing it in fragments can enter more deeply into its reality. 
Freud, however, is clear that the world over which technical devices extend 
their power is not one that could, itself, have an unconscious. It may have 
a microstructure that lies beyond the range of the naked eye, but that 
structure is neither conscious/unconscious nor can it be in conflict with 
consciousness. This is why for Freud a sentence like Benjamin’s “ The 
camera introduces us to unconscious optics as does psychoanalysis to 
unconscious impulses,” from the “ Work of Art” essay, would simply be 
incomprehensible.
It is only at the end of the essay where Benjamin, speaking of fascism, 
writes that “ mass movements, including war, constitute a form of human 
behavior which particularly favors mechanical equipment . . . [for] mass 
movements are usually discerned more clearly by a camera than by the 
naked eye,” that we encounter some form of “unconscious” that the 
camera could intercept. If “gatherings of hundreds of thousands” are a 
fact that the human sensorium simply cannot register, such gatherings, 
which Freud also had in mind in his own essay on mass psychology, can 
indeed be thought to display a collective consciousness, leading to their 
analysis in terms of an unconscious. But the masses on the parade grounds 
at Nuremberg, though they may make patterns for the camera eye that 
can be organized within the optical field, are human masses, and if they 
have an unconscious, collective or not, it is a human unconscious, not an 
“optical” one.
My own use of optical unconscious,  as it has been invoked in the pages of 
this book, is thus at an angle to Benjamin’s. If it can be spoken of at all 
as externalized within the visual field, this is because a group of disparate 
artists have so constructed it there, constructing it as a projection of the

way that human vision can be thought to be less than a master of all it 
surveys, in conflict as it is with what is internal to the organism that 
houses it.
16 Rotten.  “ Picasso’s paintings are hideous,” says Bataille in “Le jeu lugubre.” 
Says it, you understand, admiringly. Indeed, it is from the fullness of this 
admiration that Documents  moves in 1930 to issue its “homage” to Pi­
casso. Bataille’s contribution to it is titled “ Rotten Sun.” The text is a 
celebration of Picasso’s decomposition of form. But as always, a notion of 
decomposition that works from within the very idea of formal achievement, 
of formal perfection. To shatter its unity. The very sun, says Bataille, that 
symbolizes loftiness, unity, productivity for an idealist culture, is the sun 
that is inherently double, violent, and wasteful. For the sun at its zenith, 
its most lofty, is precisely the sun at its most blinding, the sun our eyes 
approach only at their peril. The savagery that is there, materially, lodged 
at the very heart of the ideal, can be read in Icarus’s story. As it can be 
seen in contemporary art. But only, strictly speaking, in the work of Picasso.
What must the owner of Documents,  Georges Wildenstein, publisher and 
editor of the Gazette des Beaux-Arts  as well, have thought of using hideous  
and rotten  as terms of approbation? In the late 1920s in France it is clear, 
after all, what rotten  means. Ozenfant is writing in L ’Esprit Nouveau.  
About how modern society, fortified by its industrial base, has liberated 
vision from rot, from blur, from flou,  and, clearing away this bewildering 
fog, has allowed the geometric basis of form to shine forth anew. He’s 
been to the market where he’s seen geometry at work in the display of 
food, in the turning of the organic into the abstraction of the commodity, 
releasing, as Walter Benjamin would say, “ the sex appeal” of the inorganic. 
Ozenfant is nothing but ecstatic. “ These monumental urban still lifes,” he 
writes, “ seen in relation to the picturesque still lifes by artists, make us 
turn our backs on Rembrandt’s rotten beef.”
It’s right at the end of Documents’ s brief run that Bloomsbury makes a 
curious appearance in the magazine. Clive Bell is writing about Constable’s 
importance for French painting, for a romanticism that experiences itself 
as the release of color, the suppression of drawing, the transvaluation of 
form. But Bell, it seems, cannot warm to his task. He is only really thrilled 
by the emergence of structure from within the aesthetic object, which is to 
say, by the surfacing of form. “It would take an artist with far greater 
genius than Constable,” he writes, “ to know how to construct an absolute 
harmonic from the sole means of a direct transcription of nature.” And, 
after all, it’s only through this harmonic, this inner geometry, that land-

“Perhaps everything would amount to knowing whom I  
‘haunt’” . . . (p. 178)

Raoul Ubac, The Battle o f the Amazons (Group III),  1939.
Dispossessed and dispersed, we enter the picture ...(p. 184)

scape could lay claim to being modern, says Bell, his thoughts silently 
racing toward Cezanne. Poor Constable. “ All too frequently,” declares 
Bell, “ Constable is maladroit.”
Bell has got his values straight.  This is not a term of approbation. Bell’s is 
an article that could have appeared in the Gazette des Beaux-Arts.
17 Screen.  For Bataille the blur was categorical, heterological. For Caillois it 
was perceptual, or rather a function of the axis between perception and 
representation. The insect in the grip of a mimetic redoubling of its sur­
roundings, a mimicry that dispossesses it so that it loses itself in a blur 
between itself and its background, is the insect that has been derealized. 
No longer a “subject,” it is now a “picture.” To be a subject, Caillois 
explains, is to feel oneself as the origin of the coordinates of perception. 
It is to experience one’s toehold on the world as continually reconstructing 
one’s place at the intersection between the vertical of one’s body and the 
horizontal ground on which one stands. Through all the displacements of 
one’s moving body, this toehold remains firm, because one carries the 
perceptual coordinates around with one; they are the baggage of one’s 
subjective coherence, one’s fixity. I stand fast; therefore I am.
But this very same ground plan is intersected at another point, one at a 
distance from oneself, by another vertical being, another object. A function 
of this remoteness, the distant object is no longer perceived in the tactile 
immediacy of the “ toehold,” but now, hovering on the horizon of experi­
ence, it can only, Caillois insists, be grasped as representation. “It is with 
represented space,” Caillois then says, “that the drama becomes clear: for 
the living being, the organism, is no longer the origin of the coordinates, 
but is one point among others; it is dispossessed of its privilege and, in the 
strongest sense of the term, no longer knows where to put itself.  ”
It was Jacques Lacan who would never forget this macabre image of the 
perspective diagram turned back on itself in a terrifying reversal. He would 
remember the consequences of no longer occupying “the origin of the 
coordinates,” which is to say no longer being the eye positioned at the 
privileged viewing point of an optico-geometric mastery of space. The point 
that Caillois’s insects inhabited was instead, like one of the little dots of 
color in a pointilliste  painting, or one of the tiny tesserae in a Roman 
mosaic, an element in a picture seen by another, a picture into which the 
insect had no choice but to blend, camouflage-like, into a seamless invisi­
bility: “ one point among others.”zss

To enter the picture, Lacan reasoned, was to be projected there, a cast 
shadow thrown onto the manifold of the world’s image. And so instead 
of the perspective pyramid he imagined something more like a projector’s 
lamp, an intervening obstacle, and a shadow cast onto the distant wall. 
Light, which is everywhere, surrounds us, robbing us of our privileged 
position, since we can have no unified grasp of it. Omnipresent, it is a 
dazzle that we cannot locate, cannot fix. But it fixes us by casting us as 
a shadow. It is thus that, dispossessed and dispersed, we enter the pic­
ture. We are the obstacle—Lacan calls it the “screen”—that, blocking the 
light, produces the shadow. We are thus a function of an optics we will 
never master.
18 Third Term. Jouer/dejouer II.  Is Bataille’s story of “The Big Toe” an account 
of fetishism? It turns, after all, on the eroticization of the foot. But since 
it insists that this is not a displaced  erotics, a sexuality by proxy, it does 
not work along the logic of the fetish. It explicitly dismisses the play of 
substitutions. Of sublimations. Of foot =  phallus. The foot, he says, se­
ductive in and of itself, seduces us basely.
Bataille returns to this matter of the architecture of the human body, to 
the fact that, having raised himself onto only two of his feet, having 
assumed, that is, the vertical, man has no natural architecture (no “prow” ). 
What there is instead is a structure of values imposed by the human subject: 
noble versus ignoble; notions about elevation, loftiness, ideals, as opposed 
to a space of viciousness and evil. The body is thereby inscribed within the 
logic of the paradigm, given formal meaning: noble/ignoble.
But if the upright body has no natural architecture, it has, we could say, 
a natural hinge. The pivot on which its original elevation turned, the lever 
that still plays that functional role, is the big toe—no longer prehensile, 
for wrapping itself around branches, but now rigidified, for bracing itself 
against the earth. And that, precisely, is its problem. For the toe still belongs 
to nature. Indeed its ground is that of the earth, of matter, of mud. Dirty, 
deformed, debased, the foot fails to leave the lowness of its place, and so 
failing does not enter the paradigm. It is not that man does not try to force 
it into the paradigm, to ennoble the foot, to give it form. In China it is 
bound; in the West it is shod with the highest of heels. Anything to 
dissemble the foot, to shape it. The foot repays this effort, however, by 
developing bunions, and corns, and callouses. It becomes splayed, bulbous. 
It refuses to be ennobled or even to be ignoble. It is, simply, base.
When the foot enters the erotic arena, it does so within the condition of 
the taboo. The nude foot is not supposed to be touched or seen, in Turkey,

in China, in seventeenth-century Spain. The codes of modesty clothe the 
foot, withdrawing it from view. Is this enough to succeed in absorbing the 
foot within another paradigm of values, in this case the opposition mod­
esty/immodesty?
Roland Barthes is analyzing “The Big Toe.” One of his headings is “ De­
jouer.” He wants to show Bataille’s successful “ baffling/mis-playing” of 
the paradigm due to the addition of the third term: base.  In relation to the 
paradigm noble!ignoble, base  is neither the complex (noble  and ignoble ) 
nor the neutral term (neither noble  nor ignoble)-,  welling up from the world 
of matter, base  comes from outside the paradigm’s formal construction of 
values to lodge within it as an irritant, as a disequilibrator, as an eccentric. 
It is an irreducible term, says Barthes, “ the term of seduction outside the  
(structural) law."
But nonetheless, according to the system of “ dejouer,” it enters the para­
digm, it allows itself to be vectored by form. “It is caught up,” says Barthes, 
“in the paradigm highllow,  i.e., in the simulation of a meaning, of a form, 
and hence it baffles [dejoue]  the nature of matter in itself:  ‘. . . contem­
porary materialism, by which I mean a materialism not implying that 
matter is the thing in itself’  [Bataille]. In short, the true paradigm is one 
which confronts two positive values ( noblelbase)  in the very field of ma­
terialism; and it is the normally contrary term ( ignoble)  that becomes the 
neutral, the mediocre (the negative value, the negation of which is not 
contradiction, but deflation).”
When Bataille places the erotics of the foot within the world of modesty,  
we expect him to invoke the force of what a legal, psychiatric institution 
asserts as its opposite: exhibitionism.  But instead, Bataille invokes laughter:  
the untransformable ridiculousness of the toes, their grossness, their un­
gainly ugliness. This is the mark of a base  seduction; laughter is a third 
term “ that baffles Modesty, the meaning  of Modesty.” To introduce the 
third term is not, then, to destroy the paradigm as an apparatus of meaning, 
but to create within its very logic something eccentric, something scandal­
ous in the operations of sense.
Universal.  Here, then, is Le Corbusier describing the walks he took with 
his father, there in the Swiss Alps when, a child, he was still Edouard 
Jeanneret. “We were constantly on the summits,” he says, “the immense 
horizon was quite usual for us. When the sea of mist stretched away to 
infinity it was just like the real ocean—which I had never seen. It was the 
most magnificent sight.”

The sea of mist is below; the sky is above; one is, oneself, merely a point 
in an unarticulated immensity. A gravitationless field. A space that, defying 
the norms of the body, is verging on the almost purely abstract.
There is nothing of the void about this magnificence. Instead this space 
inside this cosmic envelope is everywhere vectored, scored by ordinate and 
abscissa, marking out the numberless sites of an always potential Prdgnanz.  
For form is possible everywhere.
In art school young Edouard encountered the God of John Ruskin, and 
thus the moral purpose of an art that learned to read the message of 
creation. He was trained, therefore, to see nature as merely the distracting 
surface of an underlying harmonic whose most perfect expression was 
geometry. And so he undertook to reinvent the Alpine rocks and trees and 
clouds as a rhythmic network of interlacing shape, triangles spreading 
across the surface interlocked with circles, the negative rhomboids of the 
spaces-between emerging with the force of positive form. The task was 
to speak the language of ornament. Which was not the same as decora­
tion. Ornament implied the possibility of chaining together a potentially 
endless lattice each unit of which (the motif) would imply the infinity 
of the extension. The ornamental unit would be a microcosm in which 
“everything” in the whole would be expressed. The triangle would be so 
charged that it would at one and the same time invoke the tree, the 
cone, the clouds, the solar rays, and the very dynamic of growth. Every­
thing, in short.
From projecting these geometric structures into the disarray of nature it 
seemed an obvious step for Jeanneret to assume their preexistence. Thus 
he and Ozenfant speak of universal constants, the formal units that are 
foundational for vision, that underlie everything that gives itself to be seen. 
He cast himself as well into this grid of geometric purposiveness, as he 
described the way he also was tailored to the universal design: “It was a 
matter of occupying a particular square on the chessboard: a family of 
musicians, a passion for drawing, a passion for the plastic arts . . .  a 
character that wanted to get to the heart of things.”
Value.  “Value,” Barthes writes, “regulates all discourse.” He is speaking 
of the system through which culture generates meaning not by naming 
things, but by opposing two values within a structure: S/S. In this, struc­
turalism’s logic is binary—yes/no. But with Bataille, and here once again 
Barthes is speaking of “The Big Toe,” value, or meaning, “rests on a 
peculiar, anomalous paradigm, since it is ternary.”

Jacques-Andre Boiffard, Untitled,  192 9.
It is not that man does not try to force it into the paradigm, to ennoble the  
foot, to give it form . . .  (p. 184)

jacques-Andre Boiffard, Untitled,  1929.
It is an irreducible term, says Barthes, “the term of seduction  outside the  
(structural)  law” . . . (p. 185)

Barthes does not explicitly graph the relations between the two terms of 
the paradigm (noble/ignoble) and the third term (low). But they could be 
so plotted, using, for example, Greimas’s semiotic square. This structuralist 
graph, which its author extrapolated from the Klein Group, is, like the 
latter, a quaternary field within which a value is set in opposition not only 
to its contrary but to the contradictory term it also implies. In other words, 
“ once any unit of meaning [SI] is conceived, we automatically conceive of 
the absence of that meaning [— SI], as well as an opposing system of 
meaning [S2] that correspondingly implies its own absence [— S2].” In 
distinguishing between the first binary, [SI] and [S2], and that of the 
implied second pair, Greimas’s square plots the contradictory [SI] as a 
complex term incorporating both  SI and S2; while S2 is designated the 
neutral term, the expression of neither  SI nor S2.
It is possible to clarify and heighten the relationships implied by this square 
by mapping them onto the phenomenon that linguists call neutralization. 
In its simplest form, neutralization operates in relation to a binary that 
opposes marked and unmarked terms, the marked term understood as 
conveying more information than the unmarked one. Thus in the pair old 
and young, young  is the marked term, since to say “John is as young as 
M ary” tells us more than does “John is as old as M ary,” the latter simply 
conveying age, the former indicating age plus youthfulness. The unmarked 
term can then be neutralized into the complex condition of conveying both 
youth and agedness in the generalized term old, as in “thirty years old.”
S ;!: o ld /agetl S 2-  y o u n g in o n ag ec lj
S : agedness 
“ five years old”
That neutralization, in producing this generalized category, privileges the 
unmarked term over the marked one becomes more obvious if the pair in 
question carries a potentially charged content. Thus in the opposition man / 
woman  the marked term, woman,  disappears within the neutralized com­
plex form that combines both sexes into the categorical term, indifferentS2: ageless 
“ older than the hills”

to gender: man.  The conventional version of the square would then write 
the neutral term (neither man nor woman) as humanity:
Sjt man S2: woman
S2: mankind S jcman/person
But the neutral term need not be written in this way. Insofar as it stands 
to the complex term in a relation of opposition, the neutral term can be 
construed so as to generate a far more radical negativity, one that ultimately 
undoes “neutralization” by negating it. To place she in the fourth position, 
such that a marked term now becomes the generalized category, is to resist 
and. disorganize the hierarchy coded into the purportedly neutralized term; 
it is to convey “the violence inscribed in the seemingly ‘natural’ and ‘self- 
evident’ use of he to mean ‘person,’ or man  to mean ‘humanity’.”
It is then possible to analyze this displacement and overturning of neu­
tralization as the very work we have come to call deconstruction. Speaking 
of the activity of the third term within Derrida’s thought, one Greimasian 
scholar explains, “ If the neutralizing term creates the order, then its denial 
deconstructs it, not with a new order, but an ‘explosive’ play and playing 
of forces. The ‘graft’ and ‘trace’ create this ‘explosion’: by using a marked 
term— ‘woman’, ‘writing’, ‘white’, ‘mark’ itself—deconstruction conveys 
more information than neutralization permits. In this way it ‘explodes’ 
neutralization in the enunciation of its own intervention.”
The enunciation that explodes neutralization in Bataille’s “ Big Toe” is, of 
course, the imposition of low as a third term:
noble ignoble
low human

“Eccentric, full, irreducible,” it is a form of this same radical negativity in 
which the low refuses that neutralization carried out by the paradigm 
through which the human  is sublated into a system of values ( noblel  
ignoble),  insisting instead that the material term low is itself extrapolated 
from human  as a function of Derrida’s “ remainder  irreducible to the 
dominant force.” It is by means of this eccentric term that Bataille can 
then unseat or foul the paradigm by exposing its repressed material vectors, 
as when he ends his essay by saying “that one is seduced basely, without 
transpositions and to the point of screaming, opening one’s eyes wide: 
opening them wide, then, before a big toe.”
21 Wind/unwind.  Winding the clock backward, Giacometti suspends a ball 
over the abyss of the informe,  mounting an attack on form that lies within 
form, not outside it. Modernism dreams of rationalizing form, of making 
manifest the principles that subtend its merely perceptual presence. The 
gestalt is one way of thinking about the ordering and coherence of percep­
tion, of an already cognitive coordination within the perceptual plenum of 
figure plus ground. But modernism reaches beyond the complex term into 
the universalizing one: the neither/nor; the place where one looks for the 
very foundations of formalization itself. It finds it in the grid’s generaliza­
tion of order, in its condition as infinitely extensible generatrix of formal 
possibility:
figure ground
Suspended Ball  reaches, however, for the third, the eccentric, the decon- 
structive term. Below the geometries of its elements—sphere/wedge—lies a 
body, a condition of carnality that refuses formalization. If the grid’s system 
of intersection works to produce the universalization of difference—in a 
pure, abstract network of oppositions—each imagined swing of the work’s 
pendulum resists the work of this work, fails to reinforce this difference, 
refuses the repeated production of the categorical relation (male/female). 
Instead the universal (difference) falls into the particular of this body,  a 
particular that, as Giacometti works to make explicit, is, in its irreducible

polymorphousness, radically nonsimple. Furthermore, if the grid’s system 
constructs “ form” within the general condition of synchrony, the decon- 
structive work of Suspended Ball  is to formalize its production of the 
informe  by placing diachrony at the heart of the system: the rhythmic beat 
the action of which is disruption, disarticulation, dysmorphia.
For modernism the neutral term—universalizing the general condition of 
form (gestalt)—comes increasingly to be understood as grid. Suspended  
Ball asks us to recognize an eccentric third term, one that refuses the 
assumption that ground  can be generalized as an abstract plenum—neither 
figure nor ground, but their structural precondition. Its “ third term” ma­
terializes ground  as carnal and temporal, locating the preconditions of the 
visual elsewhere than in the transparency of the grid. The term matrix  
might be used for this refusal, matrix  which means womb, or mold, or 
die, but also in Lyotard’s usage, the unconscious.
figure ground
'jo u r -
22 X  Marks the Spot.  Bataille’s article of this name in Documents  muses over 
a book on crime in Chicago and the forensic photographs of the victims 
of gangland murders. Benjamin would later agree that the photographic 
basis of aesthetic production in the new age of mechanical means would 
propel art into the role of documentation, so that all artists would echo 
Atget, who photographed Paris as though it were so many scenes of crime. 
But Brassa'f was also interested in photographing the “ scene of crime,” 
and one more specifically about X-marking the spot. His series of graffiti 
images could have been programmed by Bataille himself, meditating on the 
relation between the art of the caves and the human need to dirty walls 
by leaving a mark: see Caves,  above. See also chapter Six’s discussion of 
graffiti, below.
23 Zoology.  See Double.

Bibliographical Note
1 Anamorpb.  Salvador Dali, “ Objets psycho-atmospheriques-anamorphiques,” Le Surre-  
alisme au Service de la Revolution,  no. 5 (May 1933), pp. 45— 48.
2 Base Materialism, and Gnosticism.  Georges Bataille, “ Le bas materialisme et la gnose,” 
Documents,  2, no. \ (1930), pp. 1-8; reprinted in Georges Bataille, Visions of Excess:  
Selected Writings, 1927-1939,  ed. and trans. Allan Stoekl (Minneapolis: University of 
Minnesota Press, 1985).
3 Caves.  Andre Leroi-Gourhan, “The Religion of the Caves: Magic or Metaphysics?,” 
October,  no. 37 (Summer 1986), pp. 6-17, and “The Hands at Gargas: Toward a 
General Study,” October,  no. 37 (Summer 1986), pp. 18— 34. Georges Bataille, “ L’art 
primitif,” Documents,  2, no. 7 (1930), pp. 389-397, was a review of G. H. Luquet’s 
L ’art primitif  (Paris: G. Doin, 1930).
For Bataille’s relationship to primitive art, see Denis Hollier, “ The Use Value of the 
Impossible,” October,  no. 60 (Spring 1992).
4 Double.  The Salpetriere photographs were published by Breton and Eluard to accompany 
their article “ Le cinquantenaire de l’hysterie (1878-1928),” L a Revolution Surrealiste,  
no. 11 (March 1928), pp. 20— 22. The con in “ convulsive beauty” is discussed in David 
Macey, Lacan in Contexts  (London: Verso, 1988), pp. 66— 68, 195.
Bataille’s essay “ The Old Mole and the Prefix Sur in the Words Surbomme  and Surre-  
alisme,”  written sometime in 1930 in response to Breton’s “ Second Manifesto of Sur­
realism,” was never published. It is reprinted in Bataille, Oeuvres completes,  vol. 2 
(Paris: Gallimard, 1970), pp. 93-109, and in Bataille, Visions o f Excess,  pp. 32— 44.
Roger Caillois, “ Mimetisme et psychasthenie legendaire,” Minotaure,  no. 7 (June 1935); 
and “ Mimicry and Legendary Psychasthenia,” trans. John Shepley, October,  no. 31 
(Winter 1984). Denis Hollier’s phrase “ subjective detumescence” is from his “ Mimesis 
and Castration, 1937,” October,  no. 31 (Winter 1984).
5 Ecstasy.  Dali’s photocollage Le phenomene de Vextase  was published opposite a text of 
his by the same name in Minotaure,  no. 3 (December 1933), pp. 76— 77. Georges Bataille, 
“ Bouche,” Documents,  2, no. 5 (1930), p. 299 (and in Visions o f Excess)-,  “ Informe,” 
Documents,  1, no. 7 (1930), p. 382 (and in Visions o f Excess).  For a discussion of this 
projection of the informe  through the rotation of the body, see my “ Corpus Delicti,” 
L ’Amour Fou: Photography and Surrealism.
6 Foundation.  Amedee Ozenfant, Foundations o f Modern Art  (1928), trans. John Rodker 
(New York: Brewer, Warren and Putnam, 1931).
7 Game.  Georges Bataille, “ Le ‘Jeu lugubre,” ’ Documents,  1 (1929), pp. 369-372 (and in 
Visions o f Excess).
8 Geometry.  Ozenfant and Jeanneret, in La peinture moderne  (Paris: Editions G. Cres, 
n.d.), devote a chapter to “Formation de l’optique moderne” (pp. 63-69). See also 
Ozenfant, Foundations o f Modern Art,  pp. 284-286.

9 Hat.  Tristan Tzara, “ D ’un certain automatisme du gout,” in Minotaure,  no. 3 (1933), 
pp. 81-85.
Sigmund Freud, “ Fetishism,” Standard Edition,  vol. 21, pp. 152— 153.
10 Informe.  Maurice Nadeau, Histoire du surrealisme  (Paris: Seuil, 1945), p. 176. See the 
analysis of Suspended Ball in my “N o  More Play” ( The Originality o f the Avant-Garde  
and Other Modernist Myths  [Cambridge: MIT Press, 1985]).
11 Jouer/dejouer I.  Roland Barthes, “ La metaphore de l’oeil,” Critique,  nos. 195— 196 (1963), 
pp. 772-777; trans. Richard Howard, in Barthes, Critical Essays  (Evanston: North­
western University Press, 1972), pp. 239-248.
12 Labyrinth.  In “ No More Play” I discuss Giacometti’s work in relation to the labyrinth 
and the production of sculpture as “ bassesse.”
13 Mantis.  Roger Caillois, “ La mante religieuse,” Minotaure,  no. 5 (May 1934), 
pp. 23— 26.
14 Objective Chance.  Sigmund Freud, “ The Uncanny,” Standard Edition,  vol. 17, 
pp. 234-235.
Andre Breton, Nadja,  trans. Richard Howard (New York: Grove Press, 1960), p. 11.
15 Photography.  Walter Benjamin, “ A Small History of Photography” (1931), in One Way  
Street,  trans. Edmund Jephcott and Kingsley Shorter (London: New Left Books, 1979), 
pp. 240— 257; and “ The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction” (1936), 
in Illuminations,  trans. Harry Zohn (New York: Schocken Books, 1969), pp. 235— 237.
Miriam Hansen discusses Benjamin’s concept of the optical unconscious in her “Benja­
min, Cinema and Experience,” New German Critique,  no. 40 (Winter 1987), pp. 2 0 7 - 
211, 219-221.
16 Rotten.  Georges Bataille, “ Soleil pourri,” Documents,  2, no. 3 (1930), pp. 173— 174 (and 
in Visions o f Excess).  Ozenfant, “ Formation de l’optique moderne,” p. 65.
Clive Bell, “ Constable et la peinture fran^aise,” Documents,  2, no. 7 (1930), 
pp. 427-432.
17 Screen.  Roger Caillois, “ Mimicry and Legendary Psychasthenia.”
Jacques Lacan, “ What Is a Picture?,” The Four Fundamental Concepts o f Psycho-  
Analysis  (1973), trans. Alan Sheridan (New York: W. W. Norton, 1978), pp. 105-119.
18 Third Term. Jouer/dejouer II.  Georges Bataille, “ Le gros orteil,” Documents,  1, no. 6 
(1929), pp. 297-302 (and in Visions o f Excess).
Roland Barthes, “ Les sorties du texte,” in Bataille,  ed. Philippe Sollers (Paris: 10/18, 
1973), pp. 4 9 -6 2 ; trans. Richard Howard, in Barthes, The Rustle o f Language  (New 
York: Hill and Wang, 1986), pp. 238-249.
19 Universal.  Le Corbusier, as cited by William J. R. Curtis, Le Corbusier: Ideas and Forms  
(Oxford: Phaidon, 1986), pp. 17-18.
20 Value.  This discussion of neutralization depends on that of Ronald Schleifer, A. J.  
Greimas and the Nature o f Meaning  (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1987), 
pp. 27— 36, 50— 56; and on deconstruction, ibid., pp. 166— 182.

21 Wind/Unwind.  For a discussion of Jean-Fran<;ois Lyotard’s concept of “ m atrix,” see 
chapter Five, below.
22 X  Marks the Spot.  Georges Bataille, “ X  marks the spot,” Documents,  2, no. 8 (1930), 
p. 437.

Painting is stronger than I am. It makes me do what it wants.
—Picasso

And when we think about those ’60s intellectuals in Paris, their eyes drawn 
to their television sets, their faces caught by a smile at once avid and 
knowing, their minds at work on the legitimation of their pleasure as they 
recode this quivering mountain of a man—in his tiny tights and ugly nail- 
studded belt, viciously kicking the head of his downed adversary over the 
protests of the referee—into the Scapin of their day, the grand figure of 
Treachery straight out of a morality play as old as the Greeks, do we 
imagine Barthes as cause or as symptom? What permission did he give by 
saying, just like that, that there’s nothing vulgar about wrestling? “ It is no 
more ignoble to attend a wrestled performance of Suffering than a perfor­
mance of the sorrows of Arnolphe or Andromaque,” Barthes had written.
And what about Picasso? Did he need such permission?
Picasso, after all, was the great source of his own authority. That’s what 
they marveled at. The friends, the dealers, the photographers, the curators,

the journalists, the collectors, the hangers-on, whoever had been allowed 
to enter La Californie in the 1950s, and now the massive farmhouse at 
Mougins to which he had retreated in the ’60s, they watched enthralled as 
Picasso put on funny hats and fake mustaches and cavorted, bare-chested 
and in outrageously striped “ convict” pants, on the terrace; as Picasso 
carelessly rolled and folded little pieces of paper over dinner so that before 
their eyes emerged a succession of tiny roosters and goats and Spanish 
dancers; as Picasso, surrounded by a wild mulch of objects—piles of every 
imaginable kind of paper, scatters of books and letters, profusions of masks 
and of plants, mobiles of sheet metal objects hanging from the masts of 
lamps, stacks of canvases twenty deep against the wall, clutters of ceramic 
pots, Spanish shawls, zebra skins, corrida posters, photographs—seemed 
to surface from amongst it all like a triumphant Triton, wreathed in 
seaweed and scallop shells and foam; as Picasso, the focus of every gaze, 
the magnet of every particle of attention, played with his courtiers’ emo­
tions like an impulsive Prince, now favoring them with a shaft of wisdom, 
now punishing them by his obstinate silence. He had needed no one’s 
permission but his own after all to put a bicycle seat together with its 
handlebars and rename it a bull’s head, to deform the female body in a 
thousand ways, from the fractured planes of cubism to the grand pneumatic 
tumescence of a reinvented classicism.
This house, itself a chaotic museum of its master’s lifetime of inventions, 
was, it seemed to them, the perfect manifestation of Picasso’s self-contain­
ment, of the way he demonstrated the complete autogenesis of the creative 
act, of the way painting comes from Painting, of the way Midas never had 
to leave his palace to turn everything to gold. This huge stone house, 
surrounded by vineyards and ancient olive trees, hung with cloaks of 
bougainvillea, seemed like a fortress erected against the world. A canal 
running below fed the pool onto which the terrace opened. “My Seine,” 
Jacqueline liked to call it, reminding her listeners that she and Picasso had 
not left this stronghold for Paris for at least a decade.
So one would never imagine it there as well: the television set, riding the 
clutter of the main room on its unmistakable ’50s pedestal, the one stolid 
eye that never turned toward the master.
Jacqueline hated the television set, hated Picasso’s hours spent watching 
wrestling, his avidity for this thing that seemed to have no place within 
the carefully banked creative pyres of Notre Dame de Vie. Yet her obedi­
ence never flagged and, as her great friend Helene Parmelin reports, she

Roberto Otero, photograph of Picasso’s living room at Notre Dame de Vie,
Mougins, from Forever Picasso.
The one stolid eye that never turned toward the master...  (p. 198)

Pablo Picasso, Bather with Beach Ball,  Boisgeloup, August 30, 1932.
The sheer buoyancy of Picasso’s vision of the ripeness of her anatomy (p. 201)

spent hours scouring the program guides to find the wrestling matches. 
“Wressing,” Picasso pronounced it.
Helene Parmelin imagines Picasso’s enthusiasm for the spectacle: “ All these 
guys who weigh a ton and yet move lightly through the air as though they 
were flying. Who thrust their feet everywhere, who rebound like rubber. 
And four-man wrestling! These little men who crisscross space like balls 
and always land on their feet? With or without it being staged, who cares, 
what athletes. What a show! How marvelous!” Which is to say she imag­
ines Picasso reliving a part of his own aesthetic past: Marie-Therese at the 
beach, perhaps, floating above the sands on the sheer buoyancy of Picasso’s 
vision of the ripeness of her anatomy. Rising curves billowing against a 
flat ground. That must be it.
Yet the more one considers it, the more the possibilities multiply. There’s 
nothing in Barthes’s analysis that wouldn’t have appealed to Picasso. The 
notion of an exorbitant, but contemporary, commedia dell’arte,  each char­
acter always true to type, each type corporealized with the same exactitude 
as Harlequin or Colombine, this theater is understood as staging and 
restaging the most primitive of morality plays: the demand for retribution. 
First there is Thauvin, Barthes begins, “ a fifty-year-old with an obese and 
sagging body, whose type of asexual hideousness always inspires feminine 
nicknames,” a figure who “ displays in his flesh the characters of baseness, 
for his part is to represent what, in the classical concept of the salaud,  the 
‘bastard’ (the key-concept of any wrestling-match), appears as organically 
repugnant.” After this salaud,  there is the limp blond with disheveled hair 
radiating “ the moving image of passivity,” and the strutting queen who 
comes to the ring in a baby blue and pink dressing gown, the very picture 
of the “vindictive salope,  or bitch.” The spectacle these characters stage 
from one moment of exaggerated and carefully maintained “holds” to 
another is the great theater of Pain, Defeat, and Justice. “Wrestling presents 
man’s suffering with all the amplification of tragic masks,” Barthes says, 
adding, “But what wrestling is above all meant to portray is a purely moral 
concept: that of justice. The idea of ‘paying’ is essential to wrestling, and 
the crowd’s ‘Give it to him’ means above all else ‘Make him pay.’ ”
For the Picasso of the Saltimbanques  or the Three Musicians,  this tele­
scoping of the tragic and the popular, this sense of the crowd’s intimacy 
with the moral law as that is enacted in music halls and circus rings, in 
street theaters and sideshows, this display of popular justice so clearly 
captured by his beloved Chariot, none of this could be foreign.

Or, and equally plausibly, for the Picasso who enjoyed his own cruelty 
toward friends, lovers, business associates, what could be more appealing 
than this amazing exercise in inflicting pain, of pounding on the spine of 
one’s temporarily grounded opponent, of grabbing the face of one’s ad­
versary and rubbing it into the mat, of entering totally into this machine 
for producing the image of torture under the cover of its self-description 
as “ sport.”
Or, and why not, there is the television set itself, this impassive eye that 
nonetheless exudes a constant visual beat since its image is produced by 
an electric current scanning upward along the hundreds of lines that cross 
the screen, generating an “image” through the continual renewal of its 
pulse, becoming all the more apparent when the set goes out of calibration 
and the whole image is wiped upward again and again as though pushed 
by an insistently reappearing black, horizontal bar. Why could it not be 
said that the screen’s flicker, witness to its almost imperceptible mechanical 
pulse, provides the matrix, the formal support or “ ground” against which 
these pounding, kicking, scratching, gouging “ figures” of pain can be 
bodied forth to provide their full component of pleasure?
Yet it must be said that the collectors, the journalists, the friends, the 
curators would rally against this idea. What Picasso was happy to welcome 
at the manifest level of the content or “ figure,” they would point out, he 
was especially hostile to at the latent level of the formal support or 
“ground.” The iconography of the popular—the clowns, the drunks, the 
waifs, the jugglers—was the specialite  of his particular maison.  Its struc­
ture, on the other hand, the repetitive beat to which the bodies gyrate, the 
on/off binarism of the blinking signs, the mechanical spasms of the appa­
ratus of the spectacle—whirring, spinning, shuttling, rattling—he found 
inadmissible.
Helene Parmelin, ever willing, played the cat’s-paw to his mounting an­
noyance in the late ’50s and throughout the 1960s at what he could only 
regard as the inexplicable ascendance of Marcel Duchamp. There, through 
the narrow portal of Painting, was now pouring the whole detritus of the 
city—its neon signs, its hysterical sirens, its crawling metallic scrap heap, 
its entire mechanical ballet—as though someone had opened the floodgates 
and even then the dam had burst. The city, readymade, kitsch -ridden and 
monstrous, had breached the space of high culture. “They are ransacking 
Duchamp’s warehouse and changing the packaging,” Picasso fumed at the 
youngest generation. Art and Anti-Art  was Helene’s little tract in the service 
of this exasperation.

Pablo Picasso, Three Musicians,  Fontainebleau, summer 1921.
This sense of the crowd’s intimacy with the moral law . . .  (p. 201)

M ax Ernst, ^ 4  Little Girl Dream s o f Taking the Veil,  1930: “ Dans mon colombodrome.”
And, inevitably, her dream will be pulsatile . . . (p. 209)

Hoping to match dada’s cool with something of her own, the book is a 
shrug of the shoulders, a “ sure, OK, terrific, why not?” She describes one 
of the May Salons: “Flying balloons and the most complex of electrical 
geometric labyrinths. Environments meant for architectural settings or for 
nothing at all. Rubber dolls that flop around on their beds, transparent 
plastic cages where indeterminate things are in motion, panels on which 
everyone is summoned to write, bits of sugar hung on strings, and all the 
bizarrenesses of neon, noise, movement.”
“Sure,” she says, “terrific, why not?” As long as they don’t confuse this 
with Painting. As long as they drop their preposterous claim that because 
of this painting  is dead. Her targets, one after another, are Fontana, Arman, 
Oldenburg, Buren. And, of course, Tinguely.
She has read in the papers somewhere that Tinguely has come forward 
with the proposition for a “lunatrack.” This, according to the report, 
would be “ a building 28 meters wide and 100 high, wholly of glass like 
any Mies skyscraper. Cost: 1  billion old francs. Beneath will be a garage, 
above a restaurant. Toboggans, shooting galleries, merry-go-rounds, ferris 
wheels, waterworks, dodge-em cars, parachutes, silly snack stands; it’s the 
vertical concentration of the old Luna Park, enlarged with all kinds of 
technological gadgetry. The clever move is the facades . . . they will enliven 
20,000 square meters of surface thanks to a permanent firing of brilliant 
colors.” “ OK, fine,” Helene retorts. “So what’s holding things up? It’ll be 
terrific!”
She shares Picasso’s disdain for Duchamp. She labels all this stuff “the 
Concours Lepine of anti-art.” She is just as mystified by the Rotoreliefs  as 
she is by the slashed canvases of Fontana.
But on their face, of course, there is nothing “ anti-art” about the Rotore­
liefs.  They participate in an iconography of abstraction into which could 
be placed the Orphic tondos of Delaunay, the cosmic figures of suprema- 
tism, the Newtonian disks of Kupka. Their “ anti-art” comes at another 
level, the one where they make common cause with popular culture’s own 
embrace of the media, of all forms of reproduction, here, most obviously, 
with the industry of recording. The Rotoreliefs  with their pulsatile yet 
silent music evoke the listener’s fascination with the spectacle of the turn­
table’s monotonous spiral, with the sameness of its hypnotic beat whatever 
the melodic phrasing. What the Rotoreliefs  throw in the face of Art and 
of Painting is not the image of another culture but a form, that of a pulse 
or beat, that the modernist artist senses all too well as the enemy of his

craft. For that pulse is devolutionary, destructive, dissolving the very co­
herence and stability of form.
In this, Duchamp was not alone in the ’30s. The artists of the “ optical 
unconscious” were particularly drawn to this beat, acknowledging the role 
it had begun to play in all forms of the popular.
From his outpost in the Ardeche at the end o f the 1920s, Max Ernst would  
look through his pile o f  La Nature dating from the 1880s and ’90s,  
vicariously reliving the fascination its readership had had with whole ranges  
o f optical devices —praxinoscopes, zootropes, phaenakistiscopes—through  
which an early version o f the “movies” was then being imagined. The toys  
o f children, the attractions at village fairs, the after-dinner amusements o f  
middle class families, these had been the devices o f visual prestidigitation:  
producing astonishing effects o f three-dimensionality and o f images in  
motion. But as he knew all too well, the movement, far from being fluid,  
was captive to the intermittence of, for example, the little slitlike openings  
along the drum o f the zootrope. Through each o f these slits you could see  
an image on the far side o f the drum’s inner wall, each one a single station  
in a sequence o f positions, the frozen moment from within a recorded  
burst o f motion.  As the drum turned each new slit would uncover an  
additional position, the whole revolution revealing the entire arc o f activity:  
a bird’s wings dipping as its neck strains forward and then lifting upward  
as its head retracts. “Flight” would thus be captured in the circuit o f the  
drum and giddily released for the onlooker.
But “flight” was nonetheless syncopated by the march o f the little openings  
passing before your fascinated gaze, separated as they had to be by stretches  
o f blankness. Onto the effortless freedom o f the bird’s forward motion  
would thus be projected the stop-and-go flicker o f these visual interrup­
tions. This hiccup, this jerkiness, this twitch, would enter the projection of  
early films, from nickelodeons to silents, finally to be internalized in Chap­
lin’s very walk, as hitching up his pants and bouncing his cane he imitated  
the tremor that constantly palsied the visual space o f primitive cinema,  
everyone seeming to march to the sound o f an invisible drummer.
Adoring these optical devices, drawn by the beat that coursed through  
their illusion, he would exploit them often. For an important image in his  
collage novel  A Little Girl Dreams of Taking the Veil he would place his  
heroine at the center o f what she calls a dovecote but his viewer would  
recognize as the drum o f a zootrope. He had lifted the image from the  
pages o f  La Nature, where the mechanism had been displayed from slightly

The little slitlike openings along the drum of the zootrope . . .  (p. 206)

Bronze figures representing eleven successive positions 
of a pigeon in flight, La Nature  (1888), p. 12.
The frozen moment from within a recorded burst of motion . . .  (p. 206)

above so that you could see how each o f the birds in the sequence was  
mounted on a little stand to bring it to the level o f the slits in the drum.  
In a different illustration you were shown, as well, the separate models o f  
birds in flight that Marey had had sculpted on the basis o f his chronopho-  
tographic evidence. Here, in this serialized progression, was the “analysis”  
o f motion, o f which the “synthesis ” could then be produced by the whirl  
o f the zootrope’s illusion.
From the pages o f  La Nature it was perfectly evident to him that the  
nineteenth-century audience o f this magazine o f popular science liked to  
play with both analysis and synthesis at the same time, wishing to be  
captivated by the appearance o f the spectacle and, like the child in front  
o f the clock he has just dismantled, wanting also to be connected to its  
inner works. The magazine had catered to this double pleasure. Ernst looks  
at an illustration in which such an audience is shown sitting spellbound in  
front o f a screen onto which an anaglyphic image is being cast by means  
o f a stereoscopic projector. Waistcoated, goateed, or in stays and flowered  
hats, each o f the viewers is wearing glasses, one lens red and the other  
green, as he or she stares at the utterly enthralling display o f a cow in  
3-D drinking from the banks o f a startlingly convincing stream. For the  
reader, looking on from outside, everything is labeled, the red beam, the  
green one, and, where they cross, the emergence o f white light.
This both-at-once, this being caught inside the illusion and this looking on  
nonetheless from without, would, he understood, suit his purposes per­
fectly. It would manifest that peculiar feeling you have when you dream  
and even while captured by the emotions o f its drama you can speak o f  
yourself as someone else: “You’re only dreaming, you know.” So in his  
collage he will use the zootrope in such a way that, simultaneously inside  
the illusion and outside it, the little girl will dream o f taking the veil.
And, inevitably, her dream will be pulsatile. The surge o f the wings beating  
up and down from within the illusion will visually rhyme with the flickering  
staccato o f the zootrope’s motion, a rhythm connecting the interior image  
with the exterior “form .” This is the rhythm that will simultaneously  
construct the gestalt and threaten it with dissolution, with a breakup into  
its separate, impotent fragments. And this is the rhythm, he knew as well,  
that will allow the erotic currents o f the dream to surface.
Although Helene is sitting on a rocking chair—his “throne,” as he calls 
it—she remains carefully motionless, any movement, she realizes, threat­
ening this fabulous stillness, this sense of being suspended, weightless, in

an imperceptibly dilating, luminous void. Her thoughts seem infinitely to 
expand within the radiance of the enormous studio, their intensity match­
ing that of the brilliant Midi sun. A sob almost catches in her throat as 
the very meaning of painting seems to flood her brain. “ Everything,” she 
thinks, “ is clear to me. I am living one of those moments when the workings 
of the mind are at their keenest and one’s intellect reaches out to meet the 
creator’s which floods and gratifies it.”
She is happy for once that Picasso isn’t here, won’t speak into this silence, 
won’t rupture this concentration, scattering it with words no matter how 
brilliant. She thinks of the importance of this blazing sun for Picasso. She 
thinks of how he hates gray weather, rain, wind. “The sun here is a sort 
of charm,” she muses, “protecting the illuminated silence of work.”
The silence and the stillness go together, the stillness that is painting’s 
hallmark, painting’s genius. She remembers Picasso saying, “For me, 
Helene, the role of painting is not to depict movement, to put reality into 
motion. Its role is rather, I think, to arrest motion. In order to freeze the 
image you have to outdistance motion. If not, you are always running 
behind. Only at that very moment,” he would add, “ do you have reality.”
That very moment, she muses, is a paradox. That very moment involves 
the amazing speed of the eye as it outruns motion by synthesizing it into 
the single image of its “meaning.” Photography’s picture can never be 
anything but frozen movement, the gesture deprived of its inner life. Paint­
ing, she thinks, in its very stillness, its carefully structured immobility, is 
the true analogue of the visual completeness of this mastery by the gaze.
Silence, the silence of these studios in which Picasso obsessively works, the 
completeness of this silence, guaranteed by this baking, dazzling sun, is the 
necessary medium within which the blade thrust of this gaze which is both 
lightning-quick and timeless—hanging as it does in the perpetual sugges­
tiveness of this race between the tortoise and the hare—will be able to 
swell to infinity.
She tears her eyes away from the painting mounted on its easel to look 
through the deep arches of the doorway-windows. Her gaze sweeps over 
the tops of the olive trees past the silhouettes of the distant buildings to 
the sea lying in wait in the background. Under the flaming sun the sea is 
molten, a buckling sheet of metal, its surface radiating waves of heat. She 
hears the cicadas’ frenzy as they fill the air with a constant shriek. “There 
is this kind of invisible cloak of crazy heat,” she thinks, “ under which the 
whole of nature vibrates, the air trembles,” as even the sound of the

Wishing to be captivated by the appearance of the spectacle . . .  (p. 209)

This both-at-once, this being caught inside the illusion and this looking on  
nonetheless from without...  (p. 209)

highway below— “ this incessant r o n r o n she smiles—completes the qual­
ity of the atmosphere in its almost hysterical pulsing, shimmying, beating, 
bopping . . .
She looks back at the painting on the easel, Jacqueline royally lounging on 
her green chaise.  “ The absolute silence of this place,” she jots in her 
notebook, “ its utter stillness, this perfect ambience for painting’s timeless, 
motionless gaze.”
Helene Parmelin is, in this, nothing if not orthodox. She agrees with the 
art historian about painting’s genius, painting’s truth.  She agrees that this 
is coextensive with the truth of the terms of vision. Those terms, she 
concurs, have their existence in a space that has nothing to do with 
sequence, with narrative, with movement through time. The terms of 
vision’s truth are instead a function of what happens in the twinkling of 
an eye.
The visual pyramid on which classical perspective is built is a geometry, 
after all, by which the lines of sight and the lines of light are absolutely 
coordinated, a coordination that produces the identity (in mirror) between 
the vanishing point within the picture and the viewing point within the 
eye. And it is not for nothing that this geometry turns around the almost 
unimaginable limit of “infinity,” a point that is literally reduced to nothing. 
Far from nothing coming from nothing, the truth that arises from this 
Euclidean meeting of parallel lines at that point beyond the limit of im­
agining is the solidity of the construction’s basis in geometrical law. And 
the infinite smallness of this point in the eye from which the entire archi­
tecture is suspended is, as well, an infinite rapidity. If, in the art historian’s 
perspective diagrams, the eye is always pictured open and fixated, staring 
into the pyramid’s tunnel, that’s because it is an eye that sees with such 
dazzling quickness that it has no need to blink. It sees in a twinkling, 
before the blink. And this twinkling, this infinite brevity or immediacy of 
the gaze, is the analogue for the picture’s own condition in the all-at-once, 
for painting’s ontological truth as pure simultaneity.
It is in this sense that painting is radically unassimilable to time. For it 
lives in a perpetual “now.”
If the Renaissance had diagrammed the punctuality of this viewing point, 
it was modernism that insisted on it, underscored it, made the issue of this 
indivisible instant of seeing serve as a fundamental principle in the doctrine 
of its aesthetic truth. Modernism was to absolutize this “ now,” to insist 
that Painting exist within the indivisible present of the extremest possible

perceptual intensity: the rush of pure color; the shock of light-on-dark as 
ground pulls level with figure; the reduction of the world to pattern. 
Nothing was to segment off the “now” from itself, not the chatter of 
narrative nor the distraction of description nor even the sense of a sepa­
ration between the surface life of the image and the physicality of its 
support. The singleness of the pictorial datum was to be the mirror image 
of the form through which it was apprehended, it was to be the very 
picture of the instantaneity of vision-in-consciousness.
And even while the modernist artist had intuited the need for this speed, 
this visuality of the instant, Husserl had theorized it. Phenomenology had 
also needed this concept of punctuality, of the now  as stigme.  In seeking 
to found the truth of consciousness in primordial intuition, in the fact of 
the immediate self-presence of lived experience as the mode of certitude 
and absolute necessity, Husserl fought the idea that consciousness needed 
to tell itself about what it was living. Consciousness did not have to be 
redoubled into an experience and a thought about, or an analysis of, that 
experience in order to breathe meaning into it. The existence of mental 
acts, Husserl insisted, does not have to be analyzed by the subject because 
their effects are immediately present to him in the present moment. And 
in this immediacy of self-presence the present, as lived intuition, is already 
fully meaningful.
The self-immediate is the unredoubled. It does not say “ now you are going 
. . . ,” “now you are doing . . . ,” “now you are thinking. . . .” There is 
no time for that. If, Husserl argues, mental acts are not announced to 
themselves through the intermediary of analytical discourse, it is because 
they are “lived by us in the same instant” (im selben Augenblick).  This 
instant, the instant of self-presence, is indivisible. It is as indivisible as a 
twinkling of the eye.
Thus the indivisibility of self-immediacy will go hand-in-hand with the 
indivisibility of a temporal present, characterized as “now.” Jacques Der­
rida thinks about Husserl’s need for this concept of “ now,” this point that, 
like the “ infinity” of the perspective diagram, cannot be subdivided.
It is a fiction, he thinks. It is a myth. “ It is a spatial or mechanical metaphor, 
an inherited metaphysical concept.” He knows why Husserl must preserve 
this fiction, this myth of the instant as a point. He knows that if pheno­
menology’s central concept of self-presence must be produced in the un­
divided unity of a temporal present, this is because it must have nothing 
to reveal to itself by what can only be the secondhand agency of signs. As

Husserl had written in Ideen,  “ between perception on the one hand and 
the symbolic representation by means of images or signs on the other, there 
exists an insurmountable eidetic difference.”
But this is an eidetic difference, Derrida sees, that Husserl himself is forced 
to erode as, writing with the whole of nineteenth-century neurophysiology 
at his back, he is led to expand or dilate this “now,” to make it continuous 
with something else. There can be no lived experience, in fact, in the 
absence of memory and expectation, or as the physiologist would term 
them, retensions and protensions. Husserl admits this. Listen to him saying, 
“the now-apprehension is, as it were, the nucleus of a comet’s tail of 
retensions,” adding that “ a punctual phase is actually present as now at 
any given moment, while the others are connected as a retensional train.” 
Husserl tries to get around the problem of this retensional train as some­
thing apart from the “now.” If the now is primordial experience, retension 
is seen as a kind of primary memory that Husserl also wants to call 
primordial. It is immediate to the “now” ; not secondhand like something 
remembered later, after the event.
Derrida leaps on this fact of retension, this nonpresent carried into the 
present, this not-now infecting the now. For it points to the very tempor­
ality of consciousness’s putative “present” that phenomenology cannot 
acknowledge. “ As soon as we admit this continuity of the now and the 
not-now, perception and nonperception,” Derrida writes, “in the zone of 
primordiality common to primordial impression and primordial retension, 
we admit the other into the self-identity of the Augenblick; nonpresence 
and nonevidence are admitted into the blink of the instant. There is a 
duration to the blink, and it closes the eye.”
Onto the screen o f that closed lid, Ernst had projected the pulsations o f  
the zootrope as an emblem o f temporal distension and o f the self-division  
o f the dream: consciousness as decidedly not self-present in the present,  
consciousness crying out to itself from the depths o f its spasm o f fear or  
pleasure, “Now, that is you; and you are dreaming. ”
Ernst’s dream shares with Duchamp’s pulse, the pulse o f the  Rotoreliefs 
and o f the whole o f Precision Optics, an attention to the forms o f mass  
culture. Just as it shares a sense that this pulse is erotic. Indeed the dance  
staged by the  Rotoreliefs, as the bump and grind o f their gyrations pushes  
them from the illusion o f one body part to the next, is Duchamp’s version  
o f a seven veils that is deeply exploitative o f Husserl’s “comet’s tail, ” his  
“retensional train.” The “now” o f Husserl’s self-presence might be utterly

disincarnated—defined by the absence o f that very body within which  
retensional memory could unfold—just as the disembodied “eye" o f Leo­
nardo’s perspective diagrams is presented as a viewing “point,” detached  
and abstracted. Duchamp’s reliefs are fixed, instead, on corporealizing the  
visual, on restoring to the eye (against the disembodied opticality o f mod­
ernist painting) that eye’s condition as bodily organ, available like any  
other physical zone to the force o f eroticization. Dependent on the con­
nection o f the eye to the whole network o f the body’s tissue, this force  
wells up within the density and thickness o f the carnal being, as, tied to  
the conditions o f nervous life, it is by definition a function o f temporality.  
For the life o f nervous tissue is the life o f time, the alternating pulse o f  
stimulation and enervation, the complex feedback relays o f retension and  
protension. So that the temporal is mapped onto the figural in the space  
o f Precision Optics as the specific beat o f desire—o f a desire that makes  
and loses its object in one and the same gesture, a gesture that is contin­
ually losing what it has found because it has only found what it has  
already lost.
And it is time as well that Giacometti courts, placing it in the center o f  
the cage o f his  Suspended Ball, allowing the visual frame to be invaded by  
the emotionally disturbing disruption o f a beat.  As the pendulum o f the  
cloven ball swings over the attendant wedge, this beat seems to measure  
out the oscillating determinations o f genitality. The back-and-forth o f the  
work’s rhythmic arc operates as a temporal analogue to the shifting un­
decidability o f its definition o f gender, the sculpture thus asserting itself as  
a machine geared to the collapse o f sexual difference. As Giacometti’s little  
guillotine o f castration works once again in relation to a beat, its pulse  
can be seen to be operating in a way that is deeply inimical to the sta­
bility and self-evidence o f form, to the permanence—let us say—o f the  
good gestalt.
Form was what Helene Parmelin had understood that day, as the meaning 
of painting rushed to her head with a conclusiveness that left her faint. 
Form—the gestalt—was what had presented itself to her as founding prin­
ciple in the field of the visual: a sense that painting’s meaning was to be 
found in the simultaneous separation and intactness of figure and ground, 
in the gestalt’s operation as the concordance between absolute difference 
(figure versus ground) and complete simultaneity (no figure without 
ground). She had known, Picasso had indeed told her, that the field of 
good form has no need of motion; that motion comes from outside the 
domain of the visual. All those beats that surrounded the studio—the 
ronron  of the highway, the trill of the cicadas, even the trembling of the

heat—must logically be distinct from this visual field, can be nothing but 
interlopers from the domain of the temporal, the auditory, the discursive. 
No, she had thought, they cannot be the matrix within which the master 
works. And the pulse of the television’s image also must be outside the 
“visual,” must be external, eccentric to this world of form.
But this notion of outsideness, of the temporal as necessarily outside the 
visual, this idea of the separation of the senses on which modernism’s logic 
is built, it is just this that the beat exploited by the artists of the “ optical 
unconscious” contests. The pulse they employ is not understood to be 
structurally distinct from vision but to be at work from deep inside it. And 
from that place, to be a force that is transgressive of those very notions of 
“ distinctness” upon which a modernist optical logic depends. Insofar as 
they insist that it is not temporal, the beat they employ must, in some 
sense, be figural—but of an order of the figure that is far away from the 
realm of space that can be neatly opposed to the modality of time.
The order of the figure. Modernism imagines two such orders. The first is 
that of empirical vision, the object as it is “seen,” the object bounded by 
its contours, the object modernism spurns. The second is that of the formal 
conditions of possibility for vision itself, the level at which “ pure” form 
operates as a principle of coordination, unity, structure: visible but unseen. 
That is the level that modernism wants to chart, to capture, to master. 
That is the formal order of the gestalt that Helene, dizzy with comprehen­
sion, had grasped. But there is a third order of the figure, one that Jean- 
Frangois Lyotard has decided to call matrix,  by which he means an order 
that operates beyond the reach of the visible, an order that works entirely 
underground, out of sight.
He had started off, of course, from the position of Husserl, and of Merleau- 
Ponty, with a belief in a primordial intuition that is not in need of “con­
cepts” in order to grasp its world. Nothing comes “before” to shape the 
aperture that perception opens onto the field of experience; nothing struc­
tures that opening in advance. That is why, he thinks, phenomenology’s 
founding principle is not “intentionality” but passivity. Sure, Cezanne 
intended an experience in which depth  would burgeon forth from the 
evidence of mountains and trees; but the background of this intention, 
Lyotard sees, was an extreme passivity, a voluptuous stillness through 
which Cezanne could allow this meaning-in-depth to happen. That passiv­
ity, he thinks, permits the body’s own density to well up into the field of 
perception and to carry along with it not phenomenology’s unconscious— 
a kind of primordial unity that is itself the subject of constitution—but a

different unconscious, the one that is the object of repression. What Mer- 
leau-Ponty cannot address, Lyotard muses, is Cezanne’s desire.
No matter, he thinks. He will address it. Though phenomenology’s uncon­
scious is not that of Freud, the two are compatible in their belief in a 
primordial spatiality. For the continuous extension within which the body’s 
gesture unfolds its meaning is, after all, the same medium in which the 
complex dance of displacements and condensations occurs, a continuity 
hostile to the staccato break-up of the spatial medium which is that of 
speech. The transparent grid where signifiers are formed through the reg­
ulated action of spacing is an abstract, purely conceptual medium disjunct 
from the one through which the perceptual event unrolls or the impress of 
desire swells.
Lyotard thus begins with phenomenology’s disdain for discourse, for lan­
guage, for concepts, for the law. And to this he adds that of psychoanalysis. 
In their mutual opposition to language, libidinal and sensory meaning, he 
thinks, seem to map one onto the other. But it is in the realm of this 
“ lived” space of experience that they also break apart. For phenomenol­
ogy’s world is forever that of the partes extra partes,  of a space that 
unfolds progressively, constantly making room for the bodies that fill it. 
In this it is a space that is fundamentally visible,  whether its organizing 
principle be seen or not. It is the space in which “ form” will come into 
being; the space of good form, of the gestalt.
Psychoanalysis’s space, the space of the unconscious, he comes to realize, 
disdains this fundamental notion of the coordinates of the real. In defiance 
of all probability it allows two, or three, or five things to be in the same 
place at the same time. And these things are themselves utterly heteroclite, 
not variations on one another but things in total opposition. This “ space” 
is therefore quite literally unimaginable: a congealed block of contradic­
tions. Not a function of the visible, it can only be intuited through the 
projection of various “ figures” that surface from the depths of this “ space” : 
the slip of the tongue, the daydream, the fantasy. To this medium, lying 
below the level of the visible, he gives the name matrix,  and he begins to 
follow its activity, which he recognizes as the production not of the gestalt 
but of bad form, the activity through which form is in fact transgressed.
Looking for instances of these “ bad forms” in Freud’s accounts of his 
cases, he thinks of the story of the young woman who, in a fit of paranoid 
fantasy, imagines her lover has photographed her lying with him on a 
couch. She “ hears” a noise that she insists is the clicking of a camera’s

shutter. But Freud understands it otherwise. It is, he says, a repetition of 
that primal fantasy, so common in children, of watching their parents 
making love, a fantasy whose auditory component is simultaneously the 
sound of what is happening and a fear of making a noise that will betray 
their presence. Going even farther than this, Freud argues that the fantasy 
allows the young woman here to play the role of her mother, and having 
entered onto the stage of its sexual action, to produce the “ click” of the 
camera as a paranoid denial of the pulse of her own excitement.
He likes the “ click” as a figure. But, he concludes, there is not enough in 
what Freud relates here to be able to plot the workings of the matrix.
So he turns to the case called “A Child Is Being Beaten.”
It is the story of a fantasy that several patients—filled with terrible shame— 
confess to Freud. “A child is being beaten,” they think, as they find 
themselves shaking with pleasure. The single sentence is startling in its 
brevity. Freud probes. He discovers what he thinks must be an earlier 
version of the fantasy, one where the patient—one of four women whom, 
along with two men, he has analyzed—is able to say that an adult, yes, 
undoubtedly her father, is beating another child; she is looking on. So he 
has two sentences: “The father beats the (other) child” ; and “A child is 
being beaten.” Something has happened between the first sentence and the 
second, he notices. Active has turned to passive. This leads him to imagine 
an intermediary stage in which such a transformation could occur. It is a 
stage, he realizes, of utmost importance to the obsessional character of the 
fantasy, because it is that transition that gives it its erotic spin. The patient 
does not produce this stage; Freud reconstructs it, by ventriloquy, as it 
were. “I am being beaten by the father,” it goes.
In his rebellion against what has come to seem to him the absolutism and 
ubiquity of an ideology of the “sign,” of the rise and triumph of structural 
linguistics, and of semiology, Lyotard is filled with admiration for this 
move. Structuralism, grounding its own truth in the laws of opposition 
between binary pairs, is fond of the principle of commutability. In the 
abstract, logical space of the table in which S is contrasted with S, it makes 
no difference if S were to precede its opposite. This commutability is an 
equally neutral affair for the linguist, who says that a transformation into 
the passive is correct if it changes nothing in the meaning; thus, “ X  beats 
a child” is the same as “a child is being beaten by X .” But unlike the 
linguist, the analyst has seen desire sneaking through the space of this 
diagram, trying to escape attention by, of course—why not?—following

the rules. “At the very interior of this legitimate transformation wholly 
contained within the system of oppositions,”  Lyotard marvels, “the thrust 
of an anal-sadistic regression toward masochistic pleasure is nonetheless 
‘represented.’” The analyst, caring nothing for the logic of commutability’s 
“ no change,” has spotted the way desire has put the innocence of syntax 
to work so that the “neutral” fact of the passive voice might carry the 
psychic meaning implied by a retreat from action. The activity of “X  beats 
the child” is genital, the expression of Oedipal desire, as the girl identifies 
with her father. But as the repression of this desire and its release of guilt 
transports the watching patient into the place of the (other) child, passive, 
she now assumes the role of victim. Yet the masochism of this position 
has its own rewards, as a spanking that is also understood as a caress 
hastens a regressive debasement in the libidinal nature of the drive. “The 
father beats the child” had been understood as “ (Therefore) my father 
loves me,” which was meant in the genital sense. “ Owing to regression,” 
Freud writes, “it is turned into ‘My father is beating me (I am being beaten 
by my father).’ This being beaten is now a meeting-place between the sense 
of guilt and sexual love. It is not only the punishment for the forbidden  
genital relation, but also the regressive substitute for it,  and from this latter 
source it derives the libidinal excitation which is from this time forward 
attached to it.”
“A Child Is Being Beaten” is everywhere filled with this logic of “ but also.” 
That is what Lyotard admires in it. For just as the beating is not only 
punishment for guilt but also  a source of pleasure, every other element is 
similarly ruled by this wild ambivalence, this simultaneous holding of two 
wholly contrary positions. This simultaneity is the peculiar temporality of 
the matrix, the fact that within it, one “ stage” does not progress beyond 
and thus supersede another; rather, the meanings of all the stages remain 
suspended within it, in the form of a “ but also.” Lyotard decides to call 
this “but also” a “difference” and to cast this notion of difference  in the 
teeth of structuralism’s rule of opposition.  Opposition is what logically 
constructs the distributive distances within the diagrammatic space of 
structuralism, holding apart one thing from another and therefore at 
one and the same time establishing the elements of the system (what Lyo­
tard calls “the products of separation” ) and the rules of their transforma­
tion (“the productive separations” ). The lucidity of structuralism’s space, 
the perfect transparency of, for example, the Klein Group, is a function 
of this continual separation of opposites, this maintenance of the law of 
noncontradiction.

The work of the unconscious, however, doesn’t recognize this law, has no 
use for negation. It thus courts the transformation of everything into its 
opposite, holding both of these things together at once.
It amuses Lyotard to compare the matrix figure of the unconscious to the 
structuralist’s system, since both, after all, share the properties of invisi­
bility and synchrony. But the structuralist’s invisibility is that of a virtual 
order working within the system to produce its intelligibility: the system 
as a producer of meaning. While the matrix’s invisibility is a function of 
the repressive work of mutating everything into its opposite, thereby un­
dermining the productive work of structure. The elements of the matrix, 
Lyotard thinks, do not form a system but a block. “If the matrix is invisible, 
it is not because it arises from the intelligible, but because it resides in a 
space that is beyond the intelligible, is in radical rupture with the rules of 
opposition. . . .  It is its characteristic to have many places in one place, 
and they block together what is logically incompatible. This is the secret 
of the figural: the transgression of the constitutive intervals of discourse, 
and the transgression of the constitutive distance of representation.”
As it blocks together active and passive, genital and anal, sadism and 
masochism, watching and being watched, “ A child is being beaten”—the 
completed work of the matrix—overlays contradiction and creates the 
simultaneity of logically incompatible situations. Yes, Lyotard thinks, the 
fantasy is the perfect matrix figure, because “ the statements one can project, 
as layered within it that organize the goal (to beat), the source (the anal 
zone), and the object (the father) of one sentence are in their turn condensed 
into a single product formula—‘A child is being beaten’—whose apparent 
coherence allows the psychic life to contain in a single manifold a multi­
plicity of logically incompatible ‘sentences.’ These do not form a system 
but a block. Thus the drive to be and to have the father is simultaneous; 
and the investment is both genital-phallic and sadistic-anal.”
But there is one invariance in all of this, one constant. It is in a sense the 
matrix figure’s own medium, the one that measures off all the oscillations 
of place and of direction, the one that then blocks them together on the 
rhythm of its particular action. That action is “to beat” and it is this pulse 
that remains unchanged from stage to stage. The contents of the fantasy 
may be in continual flux, marked by a constant instability. But underlying 
these contents is a form: a rhythm, a pulse. It is this form that works to 
secure the identity of the fantasy such that in each of its obsessional 
repetitions it will always return as the same. “The fantasmatic matrix,” 
Lyotard thinks, “ is evidently a ‘form.’ ”

222J h eLyotard is not happy. “How in general,” he thinks, “ can that which is 
form also be transgression? How can what is deviation, derogation, de­
construction, be at the same time form?” This pulse, he objects, is too easy 
to assimilate to musical intervals, to chromatic oppositions, to the dia­
chronic rhythms of meter or even the synchronic rhythm of columns on a 
facade, in short, to the law of proportionality. “All the Pythagorean Pla- 
tonists will burst into applause,” he fumes, “ if we are forced to grant that 
the order of the fantasy, the regularity within which the subject’s uncon­
scious is so to speak ‘caught,’ the formal matrix of its dreams and its 
symptoms, is obedient to a rationalizable proportion.” Bum-bah, bum- 
bah, bum-bum. This pulse would seem to return us to the intervalic, and 
through “ good form” to language. A kind of “fundamental iamb,” he 
worries.
Then he thinks about Beyond the Pleasure Principle  and the two different 
pulses that Freud weaves together there. One is the hum of charge and 
discharge as the pleasure principle operates toward the release of tension 
and the maintenance of the lowest levels of excitation. This rhythm, which 
is the on/off throb of +  —  +  —  +  or of the presence and absence of 
contact, can be seen as the metrical “ figure” of to beat:  its form. But the 
second pulse is not a principle of recurrence guaranteeing that an “ on” 
will always follow an “ o ff” ; it maps the principle, instead, of interruption. 
It is a pulse that is rather to be figured as +  0, which is to say existence 
followed by total extinction. It is thus a “beat” that does not promise the 
return of the same, but simply re-turn, the coming of nothing. This second 
pulse is not a good form, not a good gestalt. Rather, he thinks, “it is a 
form in which desire remains caught, form caught by transgression; but it 
is also the, at least potential, transgression of form.” The anxiety that is 
part of the affect of “ A Child Is Being Beaten,” combining with its erotic 
pleasure, arises precisely from the force of rupture that is recurrent in the 
rhythm of the figure, a rupture that is not experienced as the onset of yet 
another contact but as an absolute break, that discontinuity without end 
that is death. Thus it is the death drive, operating below the pleasure 
principle, Lyotard sees, that transcodes this rhythm—as it beats with the 
alternation between pleasure and extinction—into a compulsion to repeat. 
The matrix is the form that figures recurrence.
The beating o f the zootrope, cranking up to speed, the beating o f the gull’s  
wings within the imaginary space, the beating o f all those mechanical  
devices through which the real appears to burst into life from the shards  
o f the inorganic and deathly still, and the particular form o f the pleasure

Pablo Picasso, Dejeuner sur I'herbe d ’apres Manet,  10 July 1961.
The variation on a theme is a complete thought about another complete  
thought...  (p. 225)

Pablo Picasso, Dejeuner sur I’herbe d ’apres Manet,  13 July 1961.
Hundreds of preparatory studies by means of which the original could be  
seen to be varied over the time of his creative attention . . .  (p. 226)

connected to that rhythm, all this became a resource for an artistic practice  
disinclined to obey the modernist law o f the immobility o f painting. Fo­
cused simultaneously on the unconscious ground o f that pleasure and on  
its media form, which is to say its relation to mechanical reproduction,  
the artists o f the “optical unconscious” were concerned with the vehicles  
o f mass culture. It seemed to them that what was confirmed there was an  
order in which the neat separation o f the senses—space logically segmented  
off from time—had been dissolved, deconstructed. That the beat sum­
moned by these devices could not be understood as structurally distinct  
from “vision” but as operating from within it. They welcomed this beat,  
then, as a force that could transgress those very notions o f “distinctness”  
on which modernism relies. The beat seemed to scatter the certainty o f a  
statement like Picasso’s: “For me, the role o f painting is not to depict  
movement, to put reality into motion. Its role is rather, I think, to arrest  
motion.”
The analysis of the gesture into its incremental displacements, so that the 
animation process can photograph the separate renderings of the same 
body each time ever so slightly reconfigured; the mechanical procedure of 
creating the minute variations that can subsequently be jerked into motion 
by their passage through the camera’s gate or by the even cruder riffling 
of pages in the common flipbook: all this, as a resource of the beat, exists, 
it would seem, miles away from Picasso’s studio. There his work was 
dedicated, for the last two decades of his life, to another process entirely: 
that of theme and variation.
How apt this procedure seems to his strictures against the admission of 
movement into painting. The variation on a theme is a complete thought 
about another complete thought, each wholly imbricated within the other, 
which is to say, within the confines of the pictorial frame, as neatly as if 
in a nest of Chinese boxes. As the variation secures its own pictorial unity 
both against and in relation to the unity of the theme, it becomes a 
declaration of the energies of the invention of its author, of the continual 
upsurge within his imagination of ever new ways of conceiving the original 
idea, no matter how powerful. A warrant of a fund of originality that 
seems never to be spent, the variation declares itself a resource of voluntary 
repetition, the outpouring of the controlled play of difference, wholly 
unlike the empty recurrence of the media forms. Deep into the later phases 
of the age of mechanical reproduction—television, discos, transistor ra­
dios—the austerity of the pictorial variation seems secure against the rhyth­
mic pull of the “ beat.”

The Femmes d’Alger,  the Meninas,  the Raphael and the Fornarina,  the 
Dejeuner sur I’herbe,  all served as armatures for this process, through 
which the master spun out hundreds of preparatory studies by means of 
which the original could be seen to be varied over the time of his creative 
attention, each study sustaining and tracking the bursts of his imaginative 
energy. Even from within the fury of work, Picasso carefully located each 
element in the process, recording its date and, since the mere indication of 
a day would not suffice to distinguish the individuals in this multitude, its 
number. Thus it is possible to follow these creative strands, to reel up the 
thread of this fabulous abandon, and to try to enter the cave of the master’s 
inspiration. It is in this vein that the art historian discusses the sketches 
leading toward one of Picasso’s versions of the Dejeuner sur I’herbe.
“During the three days from the 7th to the 10th of July Picasso gave 
himself up to a period of intense creative work on the Dejeuner,”  he 
reports. “ In that short time he drew no less than 28 new compositional 
studies— 18 of them in one day—and executed a second definitive variation 
in oils. These drawings reveal even more than those which preceded them 
the concentration of his thought.” The historian describes the stutter with 
which the drawings announced repeated small corrections and revisions. 
From one to the next, “ things are changed around ever so slightly,” he 
observes, as “ an arm or a leg will be moved for the sake of the general 
design.” But no matter how seemingly transitory, the drawings are declared 
to be “masterly,” and within them the historian sees Picasso “working 
with the fervor and conscientiousness of a Cezanne.”
Cezanne, we remember, is the very personification of the phenomenologist’s 
“ now,” the artist who was able to outwait appearances so that the meaning 
of depth could well up within him. He is the artist who was able so 
absolutely to synthesize the time of this waiting into a single, inextricable 
unity that he seemed to provide the very proof of the notion of the gestalt.
Picasso’s drawings, however “ masterly,” are not syntheses in this sense. If 
he was able to produce eighteen in a day—something that would have 
been inconceivable for Cezanne—it was because, to a certain extent, he 
had a mechanical, reproductive basis for his process. The sketchbooks 
Picasso filled in the two and a half years of his work on the Dejeuner  are 
produced in the manner of the animation film. For the drawing on each 
page—incised into its soft, thick paper with sharp penciled lines—in fact 
embosses its contours into the page lying beneath it. This trace, identical 
to the first, serves as the contour for a new drawing almost the twin of the 
one on the page above but for the fact that, as the art historian had noted,

Pablo Picasso, Dejeuner sur I’berbe d ’apres Manet Sketchbook, 4  July 1961  I.
In fact embosses its contours into the page lying beneath it...  (p. 226)

Pablo Picasso, Dejeuner sur I’herbe d ’apres Manet Sketchbook,  4 July 1961 II.
“Things are changed around ever so slightly”. . . (p. 229)

“things are changed around ever so slightly.” With this now as the basis, 
the process then continues, as the new page etches its own configuration 
in turn into the succeeding level of the sketchbook, and so on. The mode 
of production Picasso can thus be seen to adopt is not that of the successive 
upsurge of renewed inspiration but that of the mechanically reproduced 
series, each member of which sustains those minute variations that seem 
to animate the group as a whole. And this animation cannot be thought 
of as a form of aesthetic vitalism; it is not on the order of the old organic 
metaphor applied to compositional unities. It is an animation that has 
humbler associations: the relative of the comics, of cartoons, of Disney. 
And indeed to explore successive layers of the sequence—as peeling them 
back one from the next we see the tiny anatomical shifts and swellings— 
is to have the impression not of watching an idea in development but 
rather of observing gesture in motion. Thus quite unexpectedly, Picasso 
places his viewer in the presence of a flipbook.
No one ever talks about this process to which the sketchbooks bear witness. 
No one ever says that it resembles the flipbook. Zervos reproduces the 
drawings in vertical columns, so that one would never know, one would 
never suspect, the manner in which they were in fact made. You would 
only know it if you had held them in your hands. You would have to have 
been able to turn their pages. And this you could only have done if you 
had been admitted to his studio. An intimate. Like Helene Parmelin.
What is focused on, instead, when speaking of these compositions based 
on the work of others, is the freedom of Picasso’s relation to the original, 
the liberty with which he enters and leaves it. “A painter of genius,” it is 
typically said of him, “ seems to have the capacity to surrender voluntarily 
to inspiration deriving from another work of art and then, escaping from 
it, find his imaginative strength renewed and capable of projecting an image 
of his own.” This discussion of surrender and capture is interesting. Be­
cause, even though it is always climaxed by reassurances about the artist’s 
freedom, it betrays, nonetheless, a kind of anxiety about Picasso’s enter­
prise in these works, even while it utterly mistakes the nature of the 
“ surrender” involved. For the surrender of the artist’s imagination, the 
place in which it is caught by being given over to pleasure, is the function 
of a mechanical device—an apparatus of the spectacle—the production of 
a voluptuous passivity: the mechanism of the serial animation of the flip- 
book’s beat.
Nowhere is this voluptuous succumbing to the unconscious productivity 
of the device clearer than in the sketchbook Picasso made as a kind of 
climax toward which all the others were leading, the sketchbook of August

2, 1962. Here the erotic investment in the scene is made as explicit as 
possible, as through nine successive pages the orgiastic subtext of the 
Dejeuner sur I’herbe  is enacted, the important variations within this re­
peated appearance and disappearance of the scene being the migration of 
the actors’ genitals to various sites on their bodies.
The display of the genitals within this matrix of the flipbook form can, 
moreover, be seen to be what much of the preceding 200 sketches had 
been preparing for. Picasso’s long-held fascination with the figure of the 
woman bending over and seen from above—bending to tie her sandal, to 
dry herself, or as in the Dejeuner,  to bathe—had already been at work 
within this series of variations to sexualize the image. The female figure 
viewed in this position is vulnerable to a transmutation that Picasso re­
peatedly performs on it, whether it occurs in the keening Magdalene from 
the Crucifixion  or the bather from the Dejeuner.  Bent to project below her 
breasts, the female head submits again and again to the same transfor­
mation, as it is recast as phallic signifier, the stand-in—mapped onto the 
nose and hair of the female face—for the genitals of an absent male.
That Picasso should have pursued this image over many years, that he 
should have had frequent and spectacular recourse to the depiction of 
sexual acts, means—one could object—that he certainly did not need  the 
flipbook structure for permission to vent the erotic turn of his imagination. 
Yet even while agreeing that he did not need it, it is possible to think that 
as, at the end of his life, it became the medium of his activity, he did indeed 
become caught in its mechanism, his art becoming more and more a 
function of its pulse. And so though he did not need it he yielded to it, to 
the appeal of pure recurrence, to the seduction and the content of an 
endless pulse. The mechanically repeated and the erotically enacted seemed 
to have trapped him and he created the metaphors of this capture. In 1964 
he made some ceramic tiles on each of which a priapic satyr pursues a 
nymph with the repetitive exactitude a template provides. He was showing 
Helene Parmelin the dozen or so examples he had made and he asked her, 
“Wouldn’t it be pretty to have entire rooms tiled like that?” She includes 
this remark in a section of her book titled “ Picasso, the M oralist.”
As witness to much o f the theater o f Picasso’s variations, she remembers  
the sessions at night in his studio where they would all gather to marvel  
at the slides projected five times, ten times life-size onto the far wall o f the  
room: Poussin’s  Massacre of the Innocents grown to thirty feet high;  
Delacroix’s  Entrance into Constantinople an immense blaze o f color. Other  
people might go to the movies, she would think. This is our spectacle!

Pablo Picasso, Raphael et la Fornarina,  4 September 1968 I.
Even while it utterly mistakes the nature of the “surrender”  
involved...  (p. 229)

U !
Pablo Picasso, Dejeuner sur I'berbe d’apres Manet Sketchbook,  2 August 1962 I.
This voluptuous succumbing to the unconscious productivity of the  
device . . .  (p. 229)

Pablo Picasso, Dejeuner sur I’berbe d'apres Manet Sketchbook,  2 August 1962 II.
The display of the genitals within this matrix of the flipbook  
form . . . (p. 230)

Pablo Picasso, Untitled,  15 November 1966 VI.
That Picasso should have pursued this image over many years . . .  (p. 230)

But one time the spectacle is not so pleasant. It is a day at Vauvenargues  
Castle, massed at the foot o f the Mont Sainte Victoire, with Picasso’s mood  
as black as the day is crystalline. Nonetheless he invites his guests into his  
studio, offering to show them his own collection o f the paintings o f other  
masters. One o f the pictures he shows them is a Cezanne o f this very  
mountain, a painting no one has ever seen before. She enters deeply into  
the space o f the work; her meditation so intense that his words barely  
reach her. “Why don’t you get your camera, Helene? ” he is asking. “Why  
do you have one if you never use it? Why are you standing around doing  
nothing? You don’t seem to realize what an occasion this is. You should  
be photographing the studio, photographing the pictures.” She rises,  
stunned, to the surface o f her silent concentration.
She gets the camera and it seems to her that with each “click ” a knife is  
thrust into the freedom o f her experience o f the work, that at each slap o f  
the shutter something live has just died. Suddenly Picasso wheels on her,  
enraged that “without his permission" she has photographed his Renoir.  
“His  Renoir!" she thinks. She tears the film out o f the camera and throws  
it in his face. “No one talks to me like that, ” she says.
In the weeks that pass Jacqueline tries to get her to return, to relent. “You  
know how he is!” she keeps repeating. And it is true. Helene knows  
perfectly well how he is. Which makes her obstinance all the more  
interesting.
She keeps saying that Picasso had no right to violate her silence, to interrupt  
the completeness o f her connection to the works, to scatter this to the  
winds as though it were so much trash. She couches her complaints to  
Jacqueline within the moralism o f a defense o f Painting, a modernist  
defense.
But o f course she knows Picasso so well; had so often seen him conniving,  
manipulating, controlling; had herself been its victim. So it was not he  
who had violated her silence, provoking the extremes o f this reaction. It  
had been the click that had troubled her, as it created its own rhythm  
within the immobility o f the pictorial image.
Would Dr. Freud have had something to say about that click’s content  
as—like the pure syntax o f the passive voice—it could have acted to  
smuggle the beat o f eros past the gates o f repression?
“ Picasso, the M oralist” could be the subtitle of almost every book on 
Picasso over the past fifty years, bringing one over and over again the

message of art’s assurance about voluntarism, intentionality, and freedom. 
Does anyone listen to Picasso himself as he speaks, in all innocence, of the 
way he is possessed by the dispositif  he has constructed? Acknowledging 
that “with the variations on the old masters [Picasso] systematizes the 
process; the work is the ensemble of the canvases on the same theme and 
each one is only a link of the whole, a suspended moment of creation,” 
one of the writers on this phase of his work quotes him as saying that 
what interests him “is the movement of painting, the dramatic push of one 
vision to the next, even if the push is not forced to its conclusion. . . .  I 
have arrived at the point where the movement of my thought interests me 
more than my thought itself.” The passivity of this interest comes out in 
another remark where he says, “I make a hundred studies in several days, 
while another painter might spend a hundred days on a single picture. In 
continuing, I will open windows. I will get behind the canvas and perhaps 
something will happen.” “ Quelque chose,” he says, “ se produira.” The 
window will open and something will happen before the eyes of the 
painter who is caught there, fascinated—like the Wolf Man for whom the 
window opens onto that beyond where something takes place, as it dis­
plays for him the matrix figure of a scene in which he will be, for the rest 
of his life, entrapped.

Pablo Picasso, Untitled,  14 August 1962.
“Wouldn’t it be pretty to have entire rooms tiled like that?”. . . (p. 230)

Sketch made by the Wolf M an, from Sigmund Freud, 
“ From the History of an Infantile Neurosis.”
“I will get behind the canvas and perhaps something will  
happen”. . . (p. 236)

Bibliographical Note
Roland Barthes’s analysis is in “ The World of Wrestling,” the text that opens Mythol­
ogies,  his essays on mass-cultural phenomena as depoliticized speech, collected as one 
volume in 1957 ( Mythologies,  trans. Annette Lavers [New York: Hill and Wang, 1972]).
Photographs of the television set in Picasso’s living room at Notre Dame de Vie were 
published in Roberto Otero’s Forever Picasso  (New York: Abrams, 1978). The famous 
images through which we know Picasso in his various milieux are by David Doublas 
Duncan ( The Private World o f Pablo Picasso  [New York: The Ridge Press, 1958]) and 
Edward Quinn ( Picasso avec Picasso  [Paris: Pierre Bordas, 1987]).
Helene Parmelin, with her husband, the painter Edouard Pignon, became friends of 
Picasso’s in the late 1940s and intimates of Picasso and Jacqueline Rocque during the 
turbulence of Fran^oise Gillot’s break with Picasso. The three-volume work Intimate  
Secrets o f a Studio at Notre Dame de Vie  (New York: Abrams, 1966), Picasso: Women,  
Mougins and Vauvenargues  (London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1965), and The Artist  
and His Model  (New York: Abrams, 1965), are the record of Helene Parmelin’s access 
to Picasso’s studios, her reflections on what she saw there, and the conversations that 
she either had with Picasso directly or overheard between Picasso and others, mainly 
Pignon. The conversations, sometimes in direct quotation, sometimes summarized by 
her, were subsequently extracted from these volumes and consolidated in the more 
modest book, Picasso Says  (London: George Allen and Unwin, 1969).
Voyage en Picasso  (Paris: Robert Lafont, 1980), written by Parmelin as a more intimate 
portrait of Picasso, particularly during the time of his approaching death, describes the 
interior of Notre Dame de Vie, including the television set that sat at the foot of Picasso’s 
bed during the last years (p. 201). She also gives an account of Picasso’s passion for 
watching wrestling— catch  in French, which Picasso pronounced cache  (p. 202). Picasso’s 
comment, “ They are ransacking Duchamp’s warehouse and changing the packaging,” is 
from this book (p. 71), although Parmelin’s Art et anartisme  (Paris: Christian Bourgois, 
1969) is a pamphlet-sized work committed to this idea, where she describes the May 
Salons in Paris (p. 25), Tinguely’s lunatrack (p. 52), and the “ Concours Lepine of anti­
art” (p. 54).
Helene’s account of her emotions alone in Picasso’s studios, as the meaning of art is 
revealed to her, is from Women o f Mougins  (p. 7), as are her descriptions of the sun 
and heat beyond the studio (p. 13), the sun protecting the studio’s silence (p. 20), the 
sound of the highway in the distance (p. 20), and Jacqueline’s calling the canal “ my 
Seine” (p. 20). Picasso’s comment about the nymph and satyr tiles is from The Painter  
and His Model  (p. 153) and Picasso Says  (p. 61). The discussion of the rapidity of the 
eye is from Picasso Says  (p. 46), as are Picasso’s strictures against painting’s trying to 
depict movement (p. 39). In Voyage en Picasso,  Parmelin tells about the incident at 
Vauvenargues when Picasso charges her to photograph works in his collection (pp. 31—  
35); about projecting slides on the studio walls at night, particularly Poussin’s Massacre  
o f the Innocents  (p. 75); and once again the effect on her of the pulsing of the Midi heat 
around the house, coupled with the “ ronron  of the traffic,” as she turns away from the 
work in the studios to the brilliance outside (p. 77).
M ax Ernst published A Little Girl Dreams o f Taking the Veil  in 1930. The image of the 
zootrope comes from L a Nature  (1888), p. 12. The “Praxinoscope a projection” was

pictured in La Nature  (1882), p. 357; the “ Projections stereoscopiques” in (1891), p. 49; 
the hands serving as the basis for the cover of Repetitions  is from (1887), p. 144; for 
Oedipus Rex  (1891), p. 272; for At the First Clear Word  (1881), p. 584. For the Schreber 
diagrams that appear in Les malheurs des immortels,  see Dio Lewis, The New Gymnas­
tics, with a translation o f Professor Schreber’s Pangymnastikon  (Boston: Ticknor and 
Fields, 1862).
My discussion of Husserl’s punctual moment [im selben Augenblick)  follows that of 
Jacques Derrida, in Speech and Phenomena,  trans. David B. Allison (Evanston: North­
western University Press, 1973), pp. 60-69.
Lyotard’s extraordinary analysis of the matrix figure, using “ A Child Is Being Beaten” 
as its example, is from the section “ Fiscours Digure,” in Discours, Figure  (Paris: Klinck- 
sieck, 1971), pp. 327-354: the discussion of the passive voice (p. 343); the comparison 
with the structuralist’s structure (p. 339); blocking together of logically incompatible 
sentences (pp. 338-339); the matrix figure as “ bad form” (pp. 349-350); the relation 
to the death drive (pp. 350-353). For his discussion of Cezanne’s passivity, see p. 21. 
For “A Child Is Being Beaten” (1919), see Sigmund Freud, Standard Edition,  vol. 17, 
pp. 177-204.
Douglas Cooper’s account of the unfolding of work on the Dejeuner sur I’herbe  variations 
is in Cooper, Pablo Picasso: Les Dejeuners  (New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1963), where 
he describes how the drawings proceed (p. 19), comments on Picasso’s escape from the 
influence of the older work (p. 23), and reproduces much of the work, omitting, however, 
the sketchbook from August 2. This latter object is catalogued as no. 165 in Je suis le  
cahier: The Sketchbooks o f Pablo Picasso,  ed. Arnold Glimcher and Marc Glimcher 
(Boston: Atlantic Monthly Press, 1986), where two images from  this sequence are 
illustrated. The importance of the female head and breasts mapped onto the male genitals 
is brought out by Robert Rosenblum in “ Picasso and the Anatomy of Eroticism,” in 
Studies in Erotic Art,  ed. Theodore Bowie and Cornelia V. Christenson (New York: 
Basic Books, 1970), see figure 198.
Marie-Laure Bernadac (“ Picasso, 1953— 1973: La peinture comme modele,” Le dernier  
Picasso  [Paris: Musee National d’Art Moderne, 1988], p.49), quotes Picasso as saying, 
“The movement of my thought interests me more than my thought itself” ; Douglas 
Cooper ( Les Dejeuners, p. 33)  quotes Picasso, although to support a wholly different 
argument, as saying, “ I will get behind the canvas and perhaps something will happen.”

Once the secondary elaboration of style has covered the wild form-play of  
art, never again can the human eye see its full effects, neither this  
generation, nor future generations.
—Anton Ehrenzweig

He’s sitting there just as I remember him, next to the neat little marble- 
topped table, with its prim lamp in gilt bronze mounted by a simple white 
shade, and behind him a painting that might be by Kenneth Noland but 
is hard to identify in the tightly held shot that frames him. His face is 
much the same, flabby and slack, although time has pinched it sadistically, 
and reddened it. Whenever I would try to picture that face, my memory 
would produce two seemingly mismatched fragments: the domed shape of 
the head, bald, rigid, unforgiving; and the flaccid quality of the mouth and 
lips, which I remember as always slightly ajar, in the logically impossible 
gesture of both relaxing and grinning. Looking at him now I search r r 
the same effect. As always I am held by the arrogance of the mouth— 
fleshy, toothy, aggressive—and its pronouncements, which though voic d 
in a kind of hesitant, stumbling drawl are, as always, implacably final.

3 4 4
s ix“ I first met Jackson Pollock in ’42,” he’s telling the interviewer. “ Came 
down the sidewalk and there was Lee Krasner whom I’d known of old 
and she was with a very respectable gentleman.”
He hesitates so we can let it sink in, the coupling of Pollock’s name with 
the words respectable  and gentleman.
He begins again. “And I saw this rather nice-lookin’ guy. Lee said to me, 
‘This guy’s gonna be a great painter.’” Pause.
Then the singsong of his own reply: “Well. Uh. O-kay.”
As the film cuts away from Clement Greenberg to the notorious photo­
graphs of Pollock painting, one of us is unable to hold back the question, 
“How many times has he told that story? One hundred? Two hundred? 
Three? How completely bored he sounds!”
But Clem is not bored, I think. If he’s willing to broadcast the story over 
so many retellings, no matter how routinized and compressed, it’s because 
he has a project, a mission. Lee had always said she introduced Pollock to 
him at a party, with dancing. Pollock, however, was never at his best at 
gatherings, alternately frozen with shyness and blustering with drink. So 
Clem’s account labors to relocate their meeting: outside the customs house 
where he worked; therefore during the daytime; and thus the encounter 
with a sober Pollock— “respectable,” a gentleman.
This, I think, is the process of sublimating Pollock. Of raising him up from 
that dissolute squat, in his James Dean dungarees and black tee-shirt, 
slouched over his paintings in the disarray of his studio or hunkered down 
on the running board of his old Ford. This is the posture, in all its lowness, 
projected by so many famous photographs, images recording the athletic 
abandon of the painting gesture but also the dark brooding silence of the 
stilled body, with its determined isolation from everything urban, every­
thing “ cultured.” The photographs had placed him on the road, like Ker- 
ouac, clenching his face into the tight fist of beat refusal, making an art of 
violence, of “howl.” Clem’s mission was to lift him above those pictures, 
just as it was to lift the paintings Pollock made from off the ground where 
he’d made them, and onto the wall. Because it was only on the wall that 
they joined themselves to tradition, to culture, to convention. It was in 
that location and at that angle to gravity that they became “painting.”
“ He wasn’t this wild, heedless genius,” Clem continues. “No. He wasn’t 
that. He looked. He looked hard; and he was very sophisticated about 
painting.” His voice trails off, as though he were remembering.

And it’s right there, in that brief paragraph, in that little clutch of sentences, 
that you have the whole thing, the full redemptive gesture, the raising of 
the work from off its knees and onto the grace of the wall in one unbroken 
benediction, the denial of wild heedlessness in order to clear a space for 
the look, the look that will (in its very act of looking) create order, and 
thus create painting— “ sophisticated” painting.
This trajectory, moving ineluctably from disorder to order, can be tracked 
through the statements made by journeyman critics at the turn of the 
decade, as one after another they reversed themselves on the subject of 
Pollock’s work. Before, they confessed, they could only see the wild heed­
lessness. Now, they say, they see the order. After the 1949 show, Henry 
McBride admits that previous works had looked to him “as though the 
paint had been flung at the canvas from a distance, not all of it making 
happy landings.”
That’s the language of before.
But now, he writes, “The spattering is handsome and organized and there­
fore I like it.”
Which is to say that before,  it was on the floor: “ a child’s contour m ap,” 
“ a flat, war-shattered city, possibly Hiroshima, as seen from a great 
height,” “dribblings,” “ drooling,” “ a mass of tangled hair.” And now,  it’s 
on the wall. Where it takes on order, and the sophistication of tradition: 
“elegant as a Chinese character,” said the Times,  while in Art News  
Pollock’s use of metallic paint joins his work to Byzantium, to Siena, to 
all those sacred walls glittering with the illusioned light of transcendence: 
“Pollock uses metallic paint in much the same sense that earlier painters 
applied gold leaf, to add a feeling of mystery and adornment. ”
The welling up of this tide of benediction has a momentum of its own, 
carrying everything before it, even Greenberg. Before,  the wall—the wall 
that was the guarantor for him of the work’s condition as painting—the 
wall had signaled compression, concreteness, flatness; it had meant the 
transformation from the easel picture to the mural painting, the movement 
from illusioned depth to a declaration of the wall’s impermeable surface 
in all the “positivity,” as he said, of its observable fact. The wall, the mural, 
was about thisness.  It was a vertical, bounded plane, an object that stood 
before the viewer’s own vertical body, facing off against it. This object, he 
reasoned, this continuous, planar object could function as an analogue for 
another continuous object, namely positivist science’s “ space,” the contin­
uum of neutral observation, the space everywhere open to examination,

2 4 f
s i xeverywhere absolutely equal before the (scientific) law. “The picture plane 
as a total object,” he had written, “represents space as a total object.” And 
the extended plane of the mural-sized painting, he thought, will make this 
analogy into solid, pictorial fact.
But now  the very verticality of that wall seemed to carry the force of 
transcendence.
Greenberg’s first word for this was “hallucinated,” as he began to search 
for a term that would capture the way this expansive vertical surface 
seemed to outrun the very world of facts, and the wall itself appeared to 
give way: “ object” now rewritten as “ field.” “ Hallucinated literalness,” he 
first decided, would set up just the right kind of tension between the 
pictorial wall’s flatness and the optical illusions it nonetheless released. He 
tried to characterize these illusions. The wall seemed to breathe, he thought, 
to exhale color. It took on a kind of radiance, a luminous openness, 
volatilizing substance. By the mid-1950s he was reading Pollock’s drip 
paintings as a matter of creating the “ counter-illusion of light alone.”
The stolid neutrality of “ space as an object,” materialist and literal, would 
cede its place to the idea of the pictorial field as “ mirage,” which is to say 
a zone enveloped by the subjective possibility of error. But as such this 
weightless, hovering, exhaling plenum would now stand, Greenberg 
thought, as the analogue of “vision itself.” It would be the matrix of a 
gaze that, cut loose from the viewer’s body, was free to explore the di­
mensions of its own projective movement buoyed by nothing else but 
subjective reflection on its own form of consciousness. “ To render sub­
stance entirely optical,” he wrote, “ and form as an integral part of ambient 
space—this brings anti-illusionism full circle. Instead of the illusion of 
things, we are now offered the illusion of modalities: namely, that matter 
is incorporeal, weightless and exists only optically like a mirage.”
The vertical is not, then, just a neutral axis, a dimension. It is a pledge, a 
promise, a momentum, a narrative. To stand upright is to attain to a 
peculiar form of vision: the optical; and to gain this vision is to sublimate, 
to raise up, to purify.
Freud had told that story years before, had he not? “ M an’s erect posture,” 
he had written, could in and of itself be seen to “represent the beginning 
of the momentous process of cultural evolution.” The very move to the 
vertical, he reasoned, is a reorientation away from the animal senses of 
sniffing and pawing. Sight alone, enlarging the scope of attention, allows

for a diversion of focus. Sight alone displaces excited humanoid attention 
away from its partner’s genitals and onto “the shape of the body as a 
whole.” Sight alone opens the possibility of a distanced, formal pleasure 
to which Freud was content to give the name beauty;  this passage from 
the sexual to the visual he christened sublimation.
“Sight alone” was very much the province of gestalt psychology, which in 
those years was running fullback for Freud’s fancy speculative passing 
plays in this matter of a psychohistory of the senses. The animal can see, 
the psychologists wrote, but only man can “ behold.” Its connection to the 
ground always ties the animal’s seeing to touching, its vision predicated 
on the horizontal, on the physical intersection of viewer and viewed. Man’s 
upright posture, they argued, brings with it the possibility of distance, of 
contemplation, of domination. “ We are able to behold things in a plane 
perpendicular to the direction of our gaze,” they wrote, “ i.e., in the plane 
of fronto-parallel Pragnanz  and of transparent distance.” Pragnanz  was 
the gestalt psychologists’ term for the clarity of a structure due to its 
simplicity, its ability to cohere as shape. Beheld shape, they made clear, 
depended on being “ fronto-parallel,” which is to say, vertical.
The afterlife of the drip pictures continued to be conducted within this 
sublimatory, formal plane of the vertical. To that we have the testimony 
of the procession of artists who claimed themselves as Pollock’s heirs: 
Helen Frankenthaler, Morris Louis, Kenneth Noland, Jules Olitski, Larry 
Poons. And the accounts of critics and historians—Michael Fried, William 
Rubin, T. J. Clark—do nothing if not concur. The drive of sublimation 
moves the paintings steadily away from the material, the tactile, the objec­
tive. By 1965 this drive had already reached a kind of climax when the 
next logical conclusion was drawn from Greenberg’s claim that the vola­
tilizing abstractness of Pollock’s line “bounds and delimits”—in Michael 
Fried’s paraphrase— “nothing—except, in a sense, eyesight.” Turning his 
attention to those few paintings in 1949 where Pollock has removed figu­
rative shapes from the optical web of the drip pictures by knifing out 
sections of canvas, Michael describes the result. It is a break, he says, 
although it is not experienced as a rupture in the physical surface of the 
painting so much as it is felt as a lacuna—a kind of “ blind spot”—in the 
viewer’s own field of vision. “It is like part of our retina that is destroyed,” 
he urges, a part that “ for some reason is not registering the visual field 
over a certain area.” Evacuating the work altogether from the domain of 
the object and installing it within the consciousness of the subject, this 
reading brings the sublimatory movement to its climax. “ In the end,”

248
M JOMichael adds, “ the relation between the field and the figure is simply not 
spatial at all: it is purely and wholly optical: so that the figure created by 
removing part of the painted field and backing it with canvas-board seems 
to lie somewhere within our own eyes, as strange as this may sound.”
To Michael’s good friend Frank Stella, however, it rang not only strange 
but false. The sublimated Pollock—the volatilized pigment, the patches of 
aluminum paint read out as a silver analogue for the gold grounds of Siena 
and Byzantium—raised a kind of skepticism in him. What he liked, instead, 
about Pollock’s metallic paint, he told the interviewer in the film Painters  
Painting,  was that it was “ repellent.” It repels the eye, as does much of 
the surface quality of the drip pictures seen up close, the coagulation of 
the paint in the areas where it had puddled and then shriveled in the 
process of drying, forming a disgusting film, like the skin on the surface 
of scalded milk. But Frank’s objection went in large part unnoticed; and 
his own use of metallic paint would itself be gathered into the sublimatory 
embrace of “ opticality.”
Only three demurrals register within the afterhistory of the works that 
cannot be so assimilated, three refusals of the verticalization of Pollock, 
three reminders of the time when the drip pictures could still be thought 
of as having been “painted with a broom,” a floorbound condition that 
elicited the comment that “ a dog or cat could do better,” the polite version 
of what both Thomas Craven and Tom Benton accused Pollock of in 1950: 
making the drip pictures by peeing on them. The three dissenting voices 
came from the practices of Cy Twombly, Andy Warhol, and Robert Morris. 
None of these was interested in the sublimated Pollock.
He’s sitting there just as I remember him, next to the neat little marble- 
topped table, its prim lamp in gilt bronze mounted by a simple white shade, 
a painting behind him that might be by Kenneth Noland but is hard to 
identify in the tightly framed shot we see. His face is much the same, flabby 
and slack, although time has pinched it slightly and reddened it. There are 
two seemingly mismatched fragments, just as I remember them: the domed 
shape of the head, bald, rigid, unforgiving; and the flaccid quality of the 
mouth, slightly ajar in the physiologically impossible gesture of both re­
laxing and grinning. As always I am held by the arrogance of the mouth— 
fleshy, toothy, aggressive—and its pronouncements, which though voiced 
in a hesitant, stumbling drawl are, as always, implacably final.

Jackson Pollock, Out o f the Web: Number  7, 1949.
“It is felt as a lacuna—a kind of “blind spot”—in the viewer’s own field of  
vision . . . (p. 247)

“After the ’50 show,” she would ask dramatically, “what do you do next?  
He couldn’t have gone further doing the same thing”. . . (p. 255)

I try to imagine his tone the time he told an interviewer that by 1952 
Pollock had “ lost his stuff.” It was an expression I know he liked. I imagine 
him savoring the finality of it, its assaultiveness, the Middle English abrupt­
ness of the word stuff.  He had given a lecture at the Guggenheim in the 
early ’50s where he said that Dubuffet had “lost his stuff.” And then, 
against the angry murmur of his audience, he added that de Kooning was 
another case “of an artist who has lost his stuff.” He had, he claimed, said 
this to Pollock directly, at the same time in 1953 when he told him the 
paintings in his latest show were “ soft” and “ forced.”
He smiles his slow, voracious grin. “Jackson knew he had lost his in­
spiration.” He shrugs. “Jackson had a phenomenal ten-year run, but it 
was over.”
I try to imagine him saying it: “ All artists have their run; and yours, 
Jackson, is over.”
He shrugs. Sooner or later all great artists lose their stuff, after which they 
just keep going in the day-to-day activity of the artist treading water, 
making derivative, minor painting, like Dubuffet after 1950, or de Kooning 
after the first bout of Women.
Pollock, however, didn’t keep going. After he “lost his stuff” he was able 
to put together just three more shows before falling apart completely; in 
another year and a half, by August 1956, he was dead.
And where there’s a corpse, you could say, there’s a mystery.
It’s often imagined that the enigma surrounding Pollock’s work concerns 
the onset of the drip pictures, which is to say the invention of a procedure 
for making paintings more radical than anything else that had come 
before it. Out of what kind of inspiration did this arise, it is asked, out 
of what measure of formal intelligence? Was it the canniness of the mas­
ter or just the result of happy accident? From whom did he copy it? Into 
what tradition did he imagine himself tapping? But this is surely the 
wrong question.
The scientist sets up an experiment. He has a hunch that if he does a 
certain group of procedures in a certain order he will get a certain result. 
And he knows he can repeat the experiment, that in subsequent tries he 
can widen the variables it will account for by altering it slightly. He is 
working by induction, from “ case” to “ rule,” in a logic of relations that 
looks like this:

Induction
262
s i r ,Case These beans are from this bag.
Result These beans are white.
Rule All the beans from this bag are white.
We can follow Pollock’s experiment as he performed and reperformed it: 
laying the canvas down on the floor, building up the linear tracery that 
covered its surface with whorls and loops of liquid paint, varying the 
viscosity of the network and the size and format of the surface. We can 
follow the progression toward an increasingly open lattice and toward 
formats of less and less conventional dimensions, at first breaking with the 
traditionally vertical canvas by exploring exaggeratedly horizontal friezes, 
and then bursting the bounds of the easel picture itself by claiming extrav­
agant amounts of surface: thirteen feet high, for example, by twenty feet 
wide. As he does this again and again he is, as Art News  has already 
informed us, “painting a picture” ; and although we may have questions 
about how and why he does it, it does not take the form of a mystery.
The mystery arises, rather, from what cannot be repeated, from what has 
been brought to an end, terminated, closed out. The murder mystery 
dramatizes this finality by producing a body: by giving finality the concrete 
form of the corpse. The mystery’s form is the reverse of the scientific 
experiment, since its logic works backward from “rule” to “ case,” which 
is to say, from clue to cause. C. S. Peirce, to whom we owe the example 
of the beans in the bag, gave this logic the name of retro- or abduction:
Abduction
Rule All the beans from this bag are white.
Result These beans are white.
Case These beans are from this bag.
And a host of writers, fascinated by the retroactivity of the logic and 
attracted to the structure of the clue itself—whether that be called index, 
trace, or symptom—have supplied the names of famous workers in the 
field of retroduction: Sigmund Freud, Giovanni Morelli, Sherlock Holmes.
“The murderer always brings something to the scene of the crime,” says 
the detective, his voice low and nasal and portentous, adding, “ and, just 
as surely, he always leaves something behind.”
Just so. It is obvious, a piece of street wisdom, a commonplace of the 
genre. Whether the “ murderer” is repressive censor or forger or criminal,

the clue is structured by this strange caesura that announces its break with 
the psychological fabric of intention. The clue is precisely what was not 
meant, what was never considered, what was inadvertent, unconscious, 
left by mistake. The clue is structured by the peculiar fact that though, as 
a trace, it is ineradicably connected to its “ maker,” its maker’s connection 
to it cannot be said to have the same perspicuousness. And with this 
slackening of the criminal’s grip on the “ meaning” of his own clue, his 
story likewise passes out of his hands, becoming a newly born narrative. 
No longer the tale of the crime’s commission, it is now the story of the 
deed’s detection. As Holmes liked to explain to Watson, it becomes a 
matter of “reasoning backwards.”
We could say that both clue and corpse announce this peculiar temporal 
structure, each in its own way. The corpse stands for finality, for what can 
never be repeated; the clue stands for a break in the chain of consciousness, 
for what was never intended. And the story, though focused on the past, 
is thus strangely delivered from it. For the narrative inhabits a present that 
is free to continue, to keep receiving the aftershocks of the crime, it is true, 
but also to keep forming its own new sets of events from which its inter­
pretation of the crime will build.
So when the detective turns his leaden gaze on the frazzled housewife 
standing in the black and white glare of a Hollywood noon and insists, 
“Just the facts, ma’am ,” is he affirming Ranke’s demand that the historian 
summon forth “ things as they really were,” thereby moving toward a truth 
contained in the past and unaffected by the present? Or is he rather just 
brushing aside her interpretation, her set of readings, the better to clear a 
space within which to discover his own? He wants the facts, and he wants 
them raw. But he does not think they will come bearing their own meaning. 
Interpretation is his job. And it occurs after the event. It happens now. 
According to the inexorable logic of the clue.
And what were the “facts,” just the facts . . . ma’am?
In 1950, at age 38, Jackson Pollock was on a roll. He had made $5,800 
from the 1949— 50 gallery season—the result of record sales from his 1949 
show and payments for a treasured mural commission. At a time when 
the average white-collar worker took home $3,500 a year, this was success 
measured in hard monetary terms. But success was not only financial. In 
large banner type, Life magazine had asked twelve million readers, “Is He 
the Greatest Living Painter in the United States?” And although the writers

2 6 4of the article’s captions tried to tip the question over into derisive irony 
(the “ drooling” business), the body of the story and the size of the repro­
ductions did nothing but imply that the answer was “yes.”
By 1950, Alfred Barr had purchased Number 1, 1948  for the Museum of 
Modern Art and, though still wavering in his own assessment of Pollock, 
had given impressive space to his work in the American Pavilion at the 
Venice Biennale.
Beginning with the spring thaw, Pollock had opened the year’s working 
season by embarking on a series of larger and larger paintings, climaxing 
in his four most ambitious and, to some, his most masterful works: Lav­
ender Mist, One, Number 32,  and Autumn Rhythm.
Deep into the summer Hans Namuth had begun a series of shooting 
sessions, photographing Pollock both in his studio at work and relaxing 
on the grounds of his house in Springs. Pollock seems to have found his 
reflection in the camera’s gaze all of a piece with his newly consolidated 
fame. In any event he agreed to Namuth’s next proposal, which was to 
make him the subject of a film and to train the camera on him at work 
. . . painting. The only other American artist he knew to have had a film 
made about him was Alexander Calder. So this put him in a league 
with the most established of artists and one moreover with important 
ties to Europe.
The filming began in September and finished on a cold day in late October. 
Pollock marked its completion by downing glass after glass of bourbon. 
During the dinner that followed he fought with Namuth, oblivious to the 
dozen or so other guests. “ I’m not a phony. You’re a phony,” he kept 
saying. And then he upended the table, dinner and all. For four years he 
had stayed sober. Now he had fallen off the wagon.
He never got back on. As he wrote to his friend and supporter Alfonso 
Ossorio, his time in New York during and after his winter show represented 
“ an all-time low.” The “ drinking and depression,” he admitted, were 
“ brutal.” In the spaces between wave after wave of binges, the most he 
could do was to make some ink drawings on the pads of Japanese paper 
Tony Smith had given him. Back on Long Island in early spring these 
drawings, becoming ever more figurative, were soaked onto long stretches 
of canvas to constellate paintings with, as he once more wrote Ossorio, 
“ some of my early images coming thru.” This work, his 1951 black and 
white show, marking his definitive break with the drip pictures, signaled

the beginning of the end of both his art and his life. And it is this ending, 
this revocation, this rupture that is the mystery, the shroud of the corpse.
For Lee, of course, there was no mystery. “After the ’50 show,” she would 
ask dramatically, “ what do you do next? He couldn’t have gone further 
doing the same thing.”
The idea that Pollock refused to repeat himself, that he was too authori­
tative a master to sink into self-imitation, is part of the myth of Pollock’s 
greatness. Michael Fried reverts to it in discussing the cutout pictures of 
1949, with their stunning invention of the “ blind spot,” as he parries the 
entirely plausible question about why, if this solution were so important, 
Pollock had limited himself to exploring it only twice. But nothing, Michael 
attests, could be less surprising: “Among the important American painters 
who have emerged since 1940 Pollock stands almost alone in his refusal 
to repeat himself.”
The idea of mastery as a refusal to repeat rings oddly hollow, however, 
amidst the actual practice of modernist art. What would we say about 
Mondrian, who, after having broken through to the invention of the 
neoplasticist grid, spent the next two decades “repeating himself” ? Isn’t 
repeating oneself precisely what painting allows one to do, especially once 
one has found one’s particular language, the stylistic invention that will 
allow one to move inside it and inhabit it, growing and changing within 
the new syntax one can call one’s own? That’s what Clem praised in 
Pollock: the variety and drama latent within “what may at first sight seem 
crowded and repetitious. . . . One has to learn Pollock’s idiom,” he said, 
“ to realize its flexibility.” He looked at the great drip pictures of 1948, 
Number 1, 1948,  for example. “Beneath the apparent monotony of its 
surface composition,” he wrote, “it reveals a sumptuous variety of design 
and incident.” But it was not just the variety within a given work that 
struck him; it was the range of feeling made possible by his newly in­
vented idiom.
This is why for Clem, too, there was no mystery. At least not at first. In 
1951 Clem greeted the black and white pictures as “ a turn but not a sharp 
change of direction.” At the time they merely seemed to confirm the 
suppleness, the range of possibilities offered by the new language. He 
ignored the “ images coming thru” and looked instead at the development 
of Pollock’s line, sinking as it did into the white cotton duck like ink into 
a blotter. “Now he volatilizes,” Clem said, remarking on nothing more 
than a logical permutation within an ongoing series.

366'
s i rIt was only later that he would return to this moment and reevaluate it, 
understanding it not as a progression but as a rupture and a breakdown. 
In 1955, situating One  and Lavender Mist  at the very frontier of painting’s 
future, which is to say, at the very pinnacle of opticality, Greenberg would 
castigate the black and white pictures as having been, in fact, a massive 
recantation. “In 1951,” he said, “ Pollock had turned to the other extreme, 
as if in violent repentance.” Gone was the optical radiance, the “vaporous 
dust of interfused lights and darks.” In its place there was now “ a series 
of paintings, in linear blacks alone, that took back almost everything he 
had said in the three previous years.” Pollock took it all back, he wrote. 
Though he didn’t ask why.
Into the explanatory gap of this mystery there have rushed a set of reasons 
based on Pollock’s intentions. A few are art-historical, like the notion that 
Pollock turned to figuration in order to design a set of windows for a 
church project; but most are biographical. He stopped the drip pictures, 
one goes, because the 1950 show didn’t sell, didn’t even get reviewed. He 
stopped the drip pictures, states another, because he got tired of the ac­
cusations that what he was doing was undisciplined, meaningless. “No 
chaos, damn it,” he had fired back to Time  magazine in November 1950. 
He stopped the drip pictures, yet another speculates, because the only 
source of his inspiration was the set of childhood memories out of which 
he painted, supercharged memories whose images he “ drew” in the air 
above the canvas letting the sprays of pigment fall where they might, in 
order to achieve the abstractness necessary to secure Greenberg’s support, 
but memories which, increasingly, he no longer wished to veil. In this 
explanation Pollock’s restlessness with the drip pictures’ subterfuge had 
already become apparent in 1949; it only needed Tony Smith’s urging in 
the spring of 1951— “Well, what you did was great, Jackson, but what are 
you going to do next? What is the development ?”—to drop the veil.
But the very fact of the mystery—and the structure of the clue—should 
make us refuse this whole litany of intentions, this recital of “ he no longer 
wished . . . ,” “he got tired of . . . ,” “he refused to repeat.” We know 
what the detective has taught us, that the clue has already cut the act off 
from Pollock’s control and in so doing has delivered it to another.
. . . Has delivered it to Cy Twombly, perhaps, meditating in the mid-1950s 
on the meaning of Pollock’s art and constructing his own reading precisely 
on the clue’s very nature.
By 1955 Twombly had stopped making paintings with the expressionist’s 
loaded brush and had started using the sharp points of pencils to scar and

He had begun, that is, down the attack route which is that of the  
graffitist. . .  (p. 259)

Entering the scene as a crim inal...  (p. 260)

maul and ravage the creamy stuccoed surface of his canvases instead. He 
had begun, that is, down the attack route which is that of the graffitist, 
the marauder, the maimer of the blank wall. And he had made it clear that 
the maimer he had taken as his model was Jackson Pollock. It is not just 
the circularity of Twombly’s marks and the loopy aimlessness of their 
tracks repeating over the canvas field that is addressed to the drip pictures. 
Rather it is the experience of the trace itself—the trace that composes the 
tracery of the drip paintings—as violent.
The violence that Twombly read in the traces left to mark the path of so 
many sprays of liquid thrown by Pollock from the end of stick or brush, 
the violence that he therefore “completed”—to invoke Harold Bloom’s 
notion of the strong misreading—as graffiti, invested Pollock’s traces with 
a form. For the formal character of the graffito is that of a violation, the 
trespass onto a space that is not the graffitist’s own, the desecration of a 
field originally consecrated to another purpose, the effacement of that 
purpose through the act of dirtying, smearing, scarring, jabbing.
The graffitist makes a mark. Like all marks it has the character of a sign, 
structured thereby onto the double level of content and expression. Some­
times the content is a written message, “ Kilroy was here,” it says; some­
times it is the mere hiss of negation, the great big “ X ” that bruises the 
cleanliness of the wall, the slash that labels the surface “canceled.” What­
ever the content, however, the mark itself is its vehicle, its support, that 
which bodies the message forth. This is what the structuralists call the 
sign’s level of expression, constructing it either through the medium of 
sound or that of image. But further, as the structuralists have taught us, 
each of these levels is itself subdivided, layered into a plane of form and a 
plane of substance. With the graffito, the expressive mark has a substance 
made up of the physical residue left by the marker’s incursion: the smear 
of graphite, the stain of ink, the welt thrown up by the penknife’s slash. 
But the form of the mark—at this level of “ expression”—is itself peculiar; 
for it inhabits the realm of the clue, the trace, the index. Which is to say 
the operations of form are those of marking an event—by forming it in 
terms of its remains, or its precipitate—and in so marking it, of cutting 
the event off from temporality of its making.
The graffitist goes up to a wall. He makes a mark. We could say that he 
makes it to register his presence, to intervene in the space of another in 
order to strike against it with his declaration, “ I am here.” But we would 
be wrong to say this. Insofar as his declaration is a mark, it is inevitably 
structured by the moment after  its making that even now infects the time

of its making, the future moment that makes of its making nothing else 
than a past, a past that reads “I was here,” “ Kilroy was here.” Thus even 
at the time the marker strikes, he strikes in a tense that is over; entering 
the scene as a criminal, he understands that the mark he makes can only 
take the form of a clue. He delivers his mark over to a future that will be 
carried on without his presence, and in so doing his mark cuts his presence 
away from himself, dividing it from within into a before and an after.
When Derrida would come to analyze this condition—the pure form of 
the imprint—to which he would give the name arche-trace, he would invent 
the term differance  to account for the temporal disjunction internally 
Assuring this event. He would say of this form, “It is not the question of 
a constituted difference here, but rather, before all determination of the 
content, of the pure  movement which produces difference. The (pure) trace  
is differance.  It does not depend on any sensible plenitude, audible or 
visible, phonic or graphic. It is, on the contrary, the condition of such a 
plenitude.” Unity, the unity of the sign, is thus preceded by multiplicity, 
or at least by the formal conditions of separation, of division, of deferral, 
which underlie the sign as its very ground of possibility. And this prior 
condition, intervening like a knife to cut into the indivisibility of presence— 
the presence of the subject to himself—is understood to be a form of 
violence. For if to make a mark is already to leave one’s mark, it is already 
to allow the outside of an event to invade its inside; it cannot be conceived 
without “the nonpresence of the other inscribed within the sense of the 
present.” This marking, which “ cannot be thought outside of the horizon 
of intersubjective violence,” is thus “the constitution of a free subject in 
the violent movement of its own effacement and its own bondage.”
The index’s violence is not, then, just a consequence of its being the residue 
of a crime, but is instead a condition of the structure of the marker’s having 
been cut away from himself; it is as though he had gone up to a mirror to 
witness his own appearing and had smashed the mirror instead. Had 
thereby voided his own presence, leaving only his mark. “ Kilroy was here,” 
he writes in a present already invaded by the future.
Twombly acknowledges the structure of Pollock’s mark, his drip, his clue, 
as the residue of an event. Clearly, however, it is not the event that 
Rosenberg had sketched in his essay on action painting. When Rosenberg 
had said that what was to enter the canvas’s “ arena” was “ not a picture 
but an event,” he had made it clear that what he had in mind was one in 
which “ form, color, composition . . . can be dispensed with.” Voiding 
“ form,” the canvas would become a mirror, a vehicle of “ self-revelation” ;

Pollock’s first drip pictures were made indeed by striking at the figure, by  
effacing it.. . (p. 265)

Jackson Pollock, Number 1, 1948,  1948.
It is this schema that is then buried by the avalanche of the poured  
skein  . . . (p. 265)

Thomas Hart Benton, diagrams, published in “ Mechanics of Form Organization in Painting,”
The Arts  (November 1926), p. 288.
A relation to figurative art that was visible through its most diagrammatic  
mapping...  (p. 265)

Cy Twombly, Panorama,  1955 (New York City),
His graffiti as a dispersal of abstract marks, white arcs and switchbacks  
here scratched into gray . . .  (p. 266)

it would be “ of the same metaphysical substance as the artist’s existence.” 
Reflecting back to the artist the image of his own acts, it would allow the 
actor to look his own choices in the face, to judge the authenticity of his 
own claims to spontaneity, to self-invention.
Twombly does not buy into this idea of an escape from form through the 
presence of the mark to its maker, as though in a mirror. If Pollock’s 
pictures can be said to have the structure of an “event” it is because they 
inhabit the condition of the trace and are formed by its violence against 
the very possibility of presence. They strike at the figure in the mirror. 
They smash it.
Pollock’s first drip pictures were made indeed by striking at the figure, by 
effacing it. Below the early webs of Galaxy  and Reflection o f the Big  
Dipper,  the images of human figures are clearly visible. The web of black 
line has been set up to efface those figures, to cancel them. Twombly has 
the sense that this striking at the figure is systematic within Pollock’s 
operation of the trace, which is to say that it is in operation even where 
there are manifestly no “ figures” in the underlayers of the painting.
In Number 1, 1948,  for example, the sumptuous web that Alfred Barr 
bought for M oM A, one can barely make out an underdrawing that maps 
the surface with three more or less vertical poles, one at the center and the 
other two at either edge. It is this schema that is then buried by the 
avalanche of the poured skein, although the flurry of palm prints at the 
web’s upper margin, made toward the completion of the painting, can be 
said to mark the sites of the schema, lying below.
The palm prints have led recent writers on the picture to make strangely 
representational claims for the painting, to insist that there really are figures 
underneath the tracery. But Pollock did not need “ figures” in order to 
strike at the figure. Years of training in harness to Thomas Benton, ana­
lyzing Michelangelos and El Grecos by means of schematic plumb lines 
and implicit vectors, had left him a relation to figurative art that was visible 
through its most diagrammatic mapping. In 1948 he would spend evenings 
pouring over art books with his new friend and acolyte Harry Jackson, 
analyzing the structures of the work by means of their buried schemata. 
Jackson has described how Pollock “brought out Cahiers d’art  and ana­
lyzed Tintoretto in great detail, explaining the composition of this and 
that; what he was doing was bringing me pure Tom Benton: Venetian 
Renaissance to Tom Benton. Tom to Jack, Jack to Harry.”

s6 F
SUVIn striking at the schema, the web cancels more than just this or that figure. 
It operates instead on the very idea of the organic, on the way composition 
can make the wholeness of the human form and the architectural coherence 
of the painting into analogues of one another, each repeating and magni­
fying the other’s continuity. It strikes against the organic form’s condition 
as unified whole, its capacity to cohere into the singleness of the good 
gestalt, its hanging together, its self-evident simplicity, its Prdgnanz.
The form of the mark-as-graffito is, in its attack on presence, an attack on 
organicity, good form. Twombly would increasingly celebrate this aspect 
of the graffito’s “ content” in his own versions of the dispersed, dissemi­
nated body. If in Panorama  (1955) he had stayed within the formula of 
the all-over web and maintained his graffiti as a dispersal of abstract marks, 
white arcs and switchbacks here scratched into gray, he had by the early 
1960s felt the need to acknowledge that it was in fact the body that was 
at stake. The savagery of the mark does not let up but its crude violence 
is now the site of an obsessional formulation of bodily parts. Heart-shaped 
pudenda and barbell testicles, hairy penises and tick-tack-toe-like vulvas, 
many of them surrounded by the vicious emphasis of separate frames, 
coalesce within a work like The Italians  (1961). Over the surfaces of his 
Roman paintings would thus appear so many cocks and cunts, so many 
wounds and scorings, so many tatters splayed over the surface of the work, 
the erotics of which is that its body will never be reconstituted, whole.
He’s sitting there just as I remember him, next to the marble-topped table, 
its lamp in gilt bronze mounted by a white shade, a painting behind him 
that might be by Kenneth Noland but is hard to make out in the tightly 
framed shot we see. His face is much the same although time seems to 
have pinched and reddened it. Whenever I would try to picture that face, 
my memory would produce two seemingly mismatched fragments: the 
rigidly domed form of the head, and the slackness of the mouth. Looking 
at him now I am held, as always, by the arrogance of that mouth—fleshy, 
toothy, aggressive— and its pronouncements, which though voiced in a 
hesitant, Southern slur are, as always, implacably final.
In its flat compression, the story he’s told about his meeting with Pollock 
is typical of Clem’s resistance to any detailed accounts of other people. 
Whenever you would ask him about someone he would answer categori­
cally: “He’s a borderline,” “She’s a pathological liar,” “ He’s a drunk.” He 
would slam the lid shut on the past, as though looking back at the char­
acters that filled it was simply not his affair. He only thought it respectable 
to talk about their art.

.  f-/-A  A’v '•  X  V-! \S [ , \
;V-S’- 'v . .
■ '.. ! £ #  ■  !■■?: S*tk -
'  .  r, ijy -  ^'A V .'x  !  •
Cy Twombly, The Italians,  1961.
So many wounds and scorings, so many tatters splayed over the surface of  
the work . . .  (p. 266)

The great artist as dead celebrity who had Pollock completely outdistanced  
was Vincent Van Gogh . . .  (p. 275)

But over the years he had been led to speak about his and Pollock’s 
friendship with somewhat greater specificity, at first to his confidants and 
later to the writers and scholars who came in increasing numbers. One of 
the stories he told was a demonstration of their intimacy, particularly in 
the glory days, at the height of Pollock’s power, the summer of 1950. The 
two of them had left an East Hampton party one night in a common need 
for escape. “ I didn’t tell him I was depressed,” Clem told an interviewer, 
“ I didn’t have to—he sensed it.” And for his part he had seen Pollock’s 
panic in the midst of the swirl of people who were now attracted to him 
in the light of his Life magazine notoriety. “They didn’t see the man or 
the genius, they saw only a freak,” Clem said. Pollock had driven them 
out to the dump, sited high on a bluff overlooking Gardiners Bay, and 
while for the most part they sat in companionable silence, Pollock had 
told Clem about the fear that now possessed him. “He said he’d had a 
terrible nightmare. He was at the edge of this cliff and his brothers were 
trying to push him off.”
The terribleness of Pollock’s nightmare was, apparently, in direct relation 
to the spectacular quality of his sudden fame. If Pollock had, as de Kooning 
called it, “ broken the ice,” so that collectors and museum people formerly 
known only for snubbing American painters now flocked to his openings, 
the publicity surrounding his work had also attracted the envy and rancor 
of his fellow artists. The brotherhood of the art world seemed to merge 
into the composite of his own family of five male siblings: he dreamed of 
“ triumphing over them,” but at the same time he winced in advance before 
their judgment, imagining their jealous hatred. He had said as much to 
Denise Hare: “They only want me on the top of the heap, so they can 
push me off.”
When Pollock died in the car accident of 1956 his agony ended, but his 
fame grew exponentially. His was a famous car crash, second in media 
value only, possibly, to that, the year before, of James Dean.
Could Andy Warhol, obsessed by fame, not be fascinated by Jackson 
Pollock’s? It was Warhol’s custom in the late 1950s and early ’60s to strike 
up conversations by asking his interlocutor if he or she ever thought about 
being famous. Whatever the reply Warhol would launch into his own 
fantasies. “He said he wanted to be as famous as the Queen of England,” 
a report of one of these encounters goes. “Here was this weird coolie little 
faggot with his impossible wig and his jeans and his sneakers and he was 
sitting there telling me that he wanted to be as famous as the Queen of 
England! I thought that Andy was lucky that anybody would talk to him.”

The jeans, the worn sneakers, and the tee-shirts Warhol affected through­
out the 1950s were inspired by Brando’s Stanley Kowalski and Dean’s 
Rebel without a Cause.  It didn’t matter that the type was not his own, he 
was lost in admiration for the fame. And in the art world no one was as 
famous as Jackson Pollock for being famous.
His fascination with Pollock was not unmixed, since the machismo and 
the brutality were not his taste. But still he would pump Larry Rivers for 
personal details, and in 1962, barely established at the Stable Gallery, he 
would seek out Ruth Kligman, the “ death car girl,” to go around the art 
world with. “ Andy was fascinated with de Kooning and Pollock, and 
through me, he wanted to be part of that lineage,” she said. “He asked 
equally about their world and personalities.” Years later when Kligman 
published Love Affair,  her account of her connection to Pollock, Warhol 
briefly contemplated making the movie, with Jack Nicholson playing Pol­
lock. If there were to be a movie about his own life, however, Warhol 
wanted to be played by Tab Hunter.
Warhol freely spoke of his admiration for Pollock’s work—he had said, 
dismissing a late, abstract Siqueiros in 1972, “It’s just action paintings. 
Anyway, Pollock was much better. Pollock was a great painter. I wish I 
had a Pollock”—but it’s always hard to know how to separate the feelings 
about the art and the feelings about the fame. When Julian Schnabel 
boasted, “There are three great American artists in this century. Pollock, 
Andy, and me. And Andy would agree,” Warhol’s “ agreement” carries its 
inevitable load of irony. For his posture was always meant to imply that 
greatness had far more to do with the breadth of the notoriety than the 
profundity of the work.
It was this double sense of “ great” that worked as a strange control over 
many of Warhol’s choices of themes, guaranteeing that the most kitschig  
image from the public imaginaire  would also hook into the art of the 
museum, a resonance in which the utter banality and ubiquity of the one 
(flowered wallpaper for example) would perversely inflect the public rep­
utation of the other (impressionism). “Andy liked his work to have art- 
historical references,” Bob Colacello insisted, “though if you brought it 
up, he would pretend he didn’t know what you were talking about.” 
Colacello said this in the context of Warhol’s most explicit reference to 
Pollock, the series of abstract expressionist look-alikes he made in 1977 
and referred to as his Oxidation Paintings.  But Warhol’s early Pop pictures 
had also announced their connection to Pollock, and this in his more 
typical way of furtively marrying the lowest cultural associations to the

Installation view, Andy Warhol,  Institute of Contemporary Art,
Philadelphia, 1965.
“I’d rather stand on my painting”. . . (p.

Warhol’s formal reading of Pollock’s act of branding his work as  
“horizontal”. . . (p. 275)

Hans Namuth, Jackson Pollock,  1950.
One massive index of the position the pictures had had to be in during the  
time they were being made . . .  (p. 276)

“Andy liked his work to have art-historical references” . . .  (p. 270)

highest aesthetic ambitions. The car crashes Warhol began in 1962 were 
in this sense both the stuff of the most debased journalistic prying into the 
pain of anonymous lives and, though never announced as such, the cele­
bration of famous deaths, for the two most important car crashes in 
Warhol’s experience were those of Pollock and of James Dean.
In a certain sense, of course, the great artist as dead celebrity who had 
Pollock completely outdistanced was Vincent van Gogh, whom Warhol 
acknowledged in his 1962 Do It Yourself (Irises)  but might also have been 
considering as the fame component in his decision to paint electric chairs, 
thus paying secret homage to the figure who had entered the hip art 
vocabulary of the early 1960s as the artist “ suicided by society.” But van 
Gogh did not, as did Pollock, inhabit Warhol’s immediate art world ho­
rizon. And so Warhol’s consideration of Pollock’s work, for all its character 
of having been cathected by “fame,” had a component that reached past 
the thematic surface and down into the structural level of form.
Take the Dance Diagrams,  for example. The tacky image of the middle- 
aged rake trying to learn the rumba from the Arthur Murray instructor in 
a mass-cultural fantasy of Everyman his own Fred Astaire rises from these 
schematic renderings of dance steps lifted from the ads carried by super­
market magazines. But as footprint finds its way to canvas, its new context 
carries other resonances, and we seem to hear Pollock’s famously defiant, 
“I’d rather stand on my painting,” the possible double meaning of which 
Time  magazine rushed to exploit in its well publicized sneer at Pollock’s 
technique: “All it says, in effect, is that Jack the Dripper, 44, still stands 
on his work.”
That Warhol exhibited the Dance Diagrams  by laying the canvases on the 
floor of the Stable Gallery in 1962 made it clear that his own reading of 
Pollock was directed toward the unmistakable horizontality that had been, 
as far as he could see, branded into the very weft of the drip pictures. Even 
before Warhol had become a certified Pop Artist, even, that is, as “ Raggedy 
Andy,” the commercial artist, was casting around for a mode of entry into 
the art of the galleries, he had taken Pollock’s example as one point of 
departure. In 1961 he had spread blank canvases in front of the door to 
his house so that people would have to walk on them, leaving a network 
of darkened tracks; and it was also in 1961 that he executed what he 
referred to as “ the piss paintings,” in materials specified in their later 
reproduction as “urine on canvas.” It is in this convergence between the 
footprints and the urine that Warhol’s formal reading of Pollock’s act of 
branding his work as “ horizontal” is made wholly explicit.

27&
six>Abstract expressionism, for all the heated-up press about its release of 
transgressive means of applying paint, for all the sprays and showers and 
splatters of pigment, for all the viscosity and oily smears of wet-into-wet, 
continued for the most part to ratify the fact that the canvas field was a 
vertical facing the viewer, that the register of the image continued the age- 
old tradition of occupying the plane that transects the cone of vision, 
falling before the upright artist or viewer like a translucent veil or, for a 
far longer time, a transparent window.
In the work of de Kooning or Gorky or Kline, that is, the liquid paint 
registers the intensity and abandon of its application in runs and rivulets 
that, in responding to the pull of gravity, leave an indelible index of the 
picture’s upright position over the course of its production. Pollock’s ap­
plication had also left an indelible index, but this time it was of the prone 
position of the canvas in relation to the artist who had worked above it. 
Whether it was in the puddles that massed in certain areas attesting to 
both the liquidity of the medium and the horizontality of the surface that 
received it, or in the throws of fluid lines leaving the trace of their fall in 
the halations of paler color soaking around them into the unprimed canvas, 
Pollock’s drip technique was unique in being one massive index of the 
position the pictures had had to be in during the time they were being 
made. And unlike the other abstract expressionist works, his bore no 
telltale vertical runoff.
If, for Warhol, the pictures begged to be read as the residue of a liquid 
gesture performed by a man standing over a horizontal field, then peeing 
had become a way of decoding this gesture; and it was to this logical 
extreme that he carried his “interpretation” of Pollock’s work in both 
1961 and 1977. And whether it was true of the 1961 version, it was 
certainly the case that in 1977 the gesture had become, for Warhol, fully 
homoeroticized. He would not have needed anything as classy as Freud’s 
peeing-on-the-fire footnote from Civilization and Its Discontents  to make 
this association. Freud might have spoken about the first great feat of 
civilization as man’s capacity to curb his impulse to pee on the fire, a desire 
Freud saw as arising from a primitive experience of the flames themselves 
as phallic, so that “putting out fire by urinating therefore represented a 
sexual act with a man, an enjoyment of masculine potency in homosexual 
rivalry.” For Warhol the Oxidation Paintings  were simply once again 
motifs that connected high and low culture—action painting and the world 
of the baths and their golden showers—along the vector of notoriety or 
“ fame.”

But if the Oxidation Paintings  can and have been read as a homosexual 
decoding of the drip technique, it can also be said that they fail that 
technique and the mordancy of Warhol’s other readings of it. Because with 
the bursts and clouds of color that bloom across their surfaces, the Oxi­
dation Paintings  give no manifest testimony to the situation through which 
they were made. Airborne on the canvases, the halated images have no 
perspicuous connection to either the horizontality or the liquidity of their 
production; and further, exploiting a Warholian “ all is pretty” decorative 
instinct, and as a consequence leaving behind the sense of violence that 
Pollock’s traces had carried, they bury the erotics of aggressive rivalry that 
was potential in the original, the very erotics that had probably attracted 
Warhol in the first place. For if the fixation on fame—as Warhol first 
wanted to be Matisse and then Picasso and then the Queen of England— 
and thus the attractions of rivalrous identification, was Warhol’s very 
medium, then no one was better equipped than he to appreciate the psy­
chodynamics of violence encoded in the drip technique.
If there is a vector that connects a banalized worship of fame—the paradox 
of thousands of teenagers asserting their individualities, for example, by 
wearing the mass-produced badge of a celebrity, so that in “wanna-being” 
Madonna as a way of sharing in fame’s release from the crowd, they 
participate ever more resolutely in mass behavior—if there is a vector that 
connects this to mimetic rivalry, it surely moves along the course that Rene 
Girard maps as “ metaphysical desire,” just as it is surely powered by a 
unquenchable thirst for recognition in order to feel that one “is.”
Metaphysical or triangular desire assumes that no desire is original, no 
wish spontaneous. Every desire is copied from someone else’s desire; every 
desired object is lodged in the heart of a desiring subject by having been 
first spotted as the object of someone else’s—the mediator’s— quest. Thus 
there is always, in the universe of metaphysical desire, a necessary trium­
virate, the subject, the object, and the mediator. Even in the sexual love 
between just two people, this triumvirate is in place. For the lover and the 
beloved are both in the position of desiring the same object, the body of 
the beloved, with each one serving as the mediator for the other’s desire. 
This structure, which is that of double mediation, brings out the essentially 
rivalrous condition of triangulated desire. It is, Girard claims with Sartre, 
by this very rivalry, which leads the beloved to withhold the body the lover 
desires, that the beloved becomes ever more desirable, now clothed in the 
imagined majesty of a supposed autonomy and envied freedom; just as it 
is through the lover’s persistent pursuit of the beloved’s body that this 
otherwise disenchanted object becomes ever more precious in the beloved’s

278
m oown eyes, given luster by the lover’s desire for it. That the triangle of desire 
between three—subject, mediator, and object—can, through the cat’s cra­
dle of mimetic rivalry over the same object, shrink the dramatis personae 
to two, makes no difference to the triangular structure  of metaphysical 
desire. One has here simply the interlocking of the triangles, or double 
mediation. And it is also the case that the cast of characters can narrow 
to one, with the subject now in competition with itself.
If the psychoanalytic version of triangular desire casts its origin in the 
Oedipal scenario, which ends the rivalrous struggle by the subject’s inter­
nalizing the mediator and identifying with his interdictions, then a post- 
Freudian attempt has been made to find an origin for this origin in a 
rivalrous identification of the subject with itself. The Kleinian depressive 
position is one such; the Lacanian mirror stage is another. In both, the 
model is a paranoid identification with one’s rival such that by striking at 
that rival one is striking at oneself. If, Lacan argued, the ego can be seen 
to be formed in the mirror stage’s labyrinth, then it is an ego constituted 
through the subject’s emergence as its own first rival, forced to choose 
between the other and itself even though the other is itself. Although adult 
paranoia is this reflexive aggressivity writ large, it must, Lacan reasons, 
obey a structure of identification between subject and rival that “ can only 
be conceived of if the way is prepared for it by a primary identification 
that structures the subject as a rival with himself.” And this, then, is a 
primary rivalry that assures a primary violence.
Girard is clear about the violence inherent in metaphysical desire, driven 
as it is far more by rivalrous envy and hatred than by anything that could 
be called love for the object. He is also insistent about the degree to which 
this violence increases as the mediator comes closer and closer to the 
subject, no longer being, for example, the distant figure of the Knight that 
Don Quixote wants to imitate, but now merely the former schoolfellows 
that Dostoevski’s underground man needs with all his might to force into 
recognizing him. And, further, since the rivalry between the subject and 
the mediator is, in most cases of triangular desire, between persons of the 
same sex, this intensity and focus can be thought, Girard says, as something 
to be decoded as latently homosexual. But “homosexuality, whether it is 
latent or not,” he argues, “ does not explain the structure of desire.” Rather, 
he wants to claim, homosexuality is itself a function of a structure that 
produces a spectrum along which erotic value can be attached at one end 
to the object and at the other to the mediator. “This gradual transfer is 
not impossible,” he writes, “it is even likely, in the acute stages of internal 
mediation, characterized by a noticeably increased preponderance of the

"He delved into the deepest recesses of the unconscious, where lies a full  
record o f all past racial wisdom”. . . (p. 282)

Jackson Pollock, M asqued Image , c. 1938— 1941.
Picasso’s object became Pollock’s “own” desire . . . (p. 282)

mediator and a gradual obliteration of the object.” But Girard also argues 
that as the mediator approaches ever more closely and the struggle is over 
the subject’s very being, sexuality tends to drain out of the structure: “As 
the role of the metaphysical  grows greater in desire, that of the physical  
diminishes in importance. As the mediator draws nearer, passion becomes 
more intense and the object is emptied of its concrete value.” Or again, 
“ The ‘physical’ and ‘metaphysical’ in desire always fluctuate at the expense 
of each other. This law has myriad aspects. It explains for example the 
progressive disappearance of sexual pleasure in the most advanced stages 
of ontological sickness.”
Ontological sickness was not the name that any of his doctors or psychoan­
alysts or teachers gave to Pollock’s drinking disorder. But the man who 
ricocheted between an obsession with greatness— “Everyone’s shit but de 
Kooning and me” ; “ I’m the only painter alive” —and an increasingly over­
whelming fear of nothingness— “ I’m no damn good” ; “ I’m a fucking 
phony”—such that he could make these opposing claims was surely suf­
fering from a malady of this sort.
That it was structured by mimetic rivalry is also not a difficult case to 
make. Pollock, after all, was the youngest of five brothers all of whom 
became artists. Within the family his most particular rivalry was with his 
oldest brother, Charles, whom he followed not just to New York and the 
Art Students’ League but into the very studio where Charles had become 
the star disciple, and there, in a struggle for Thomas Benton’s attention, 
he displaced Charles to become the trusted intimate of the Benton family. 
But it was not restricted to Charles. His brother Sande, who had worked 
in Los Angeles with Siqueiros, had communicated his enthusiasm to Jack­
son such that, in 1936 when the two of them briefly entered Siqueiros’s 
studio in New York, it was Jackson who grabbed the master’s attention. 
But several years later the mediator who entered Pollock’s consciousness 
most deeply, to become a far more permanent and infinitely more danger­
ous rival, was Picasso.
That Pollock had begun by 1938 to imitate Picasso’s current style as well 
as his image repertory—something that would intensify after the 1939 
appearance of Guernica —has long been the stuff of art-historical accounts 
of Pollock’s work. What has tended to be increasingly stressed more re­
cently, however, is that this imitation had as its deepest goal a desire for 
what Pollock understood as Picasso’s desire, namely, access to the uncon­
scious. Perhaps Pollock did not need John Graham to reveal the secret of 
Picasso’s desire, but Graham, who was Pollock’s sole aesthetic and emo­

282
& ia }tional support in the opening years of the 1940s, had dedicated a whole 
system and dialectic of art to this revelation. In 1937 he had publicly 
celebrated Picasso’s conquest of the unconscious object. “He delved into 
the deepest recesses of the unconscious, where lies a full record of all past 
racial wisdom,” Graham wrote. It was enough for Picasso to desire this 
object for it to take on unparalleled glamour, and the idea of the uncon­
scious, to which Pollock had already been introduced in not one but two 
analyses—the first one Freudian, in summer 1938, in the asylum called 
Bloomingdales; the second Jungian, in 1939-1940, in his New York ses­
sions with Joseph Henderson—now, having surfaced as Picasso’s object, 
became Pollock’s “own” desire.
His pursuit of this “ object” led him into the places where it was claimed 
to be kept, led him to the whole discourse on automatism, beginning in 
1939— 1940 with the group experiments in automatic drawing with Ba- 
ziotes and Kamrowski, to the lectures in 1941 on surrealism at the New 
School by Gordon Onslow-Ford, to the surrealist game sessions at M atta’s 
house organized by Motherwell in 1942, and finally to the den of the 
surrealists themselves, the gallery of Peggy Guggenheim, in 1943. That he 
was puzzled and disappointed by the automatist image  we know from 
Baziotes. The idea of the unconscious as a place from which to recover 
this or that figure, the idea of it as a kind of projective test, a “ doodle 
reading,” was clearly not what Pollock would accept as an answer. Because 
in his pursuit of the unconscious object what seemed consistently at stake 
was to do violence to the image. And the outcome of this pursuit seems to 
have been the drip pictures: the competition with Picasso over the uncon­
scious won at last.
Although it is possible to speak of Pollock’s mimetic behavior in specifically 
biographical terms—his imitation of the cowboy image as projected by his 
brother Sande; the impression he gave to so many as consistently acting a 
part, or many different parts: “a magpie,” Rosenberg sneered at him— 
mimetic rivalry is, as Girard makes insistently clear, a structure. At a 
sociological level this structure clarifies something of the peculiar shape 
abstract expressionism took as it developed over the course of the 1940s 
into a multiplicity of signature styles announcing so many different ident­
ities in a rivalrous struggle over the prize for originality.
While the modern masters were in Europe acting as a set of external 
mediators, the American vanguard artists had a more or less homogeneous 
style, collectivized around the imitation of a limited formal repertory: a 
biomorphism that went from abstraction to cloisonnist Picasso. It was only

when these adored models arrived in New York and settled down amidst 
their imitators that, in coming nearer, the mediation switched from external 
to internal, from distant to proximate. And it is this very proximity that, 
in leveling hierarchical distinctions, increases both the violence and the 
abstractness of metaphysical desire. Thus David Smith’s lines could have 
been written by Girard himself when, in 1942, he spoke of Mondrian and 
Lipchitz. “We have met them and we have found that they were humans 
like we were and they were not gods,” he said. De Kooning agreed as he 
compared himself to Leger: “ One day I looked at what I was doing, and 
I said it’s just as interesting as what they’re doing.”
In realizing that their rivals were not gods, the abstract expressionists were 
mistakenly basking in the very equality that is necessary to internal media­
tion’s most desperate forms of rivalry, born of a need to create distinctions 
where no external hierarchies seem to establish them. Girard writes of the 
Proustian novel’s capture of this new form of alienation arising “when 
concrete differences no longer control relationships among men.” He also 
analyzes the tradition in American sociology to understand triangular de­
sire, beginning with Thorstein Veblen’s ideas of conspicuous consumption 
with its notion that the compulsion to buy is powered strictly by a value 
conveyed to an article based on a perception of the Other’s desire. “ David 
Riesman and Vance Packard,” he writes, “have shown that even the vast 
American middle class, which is as free from want and even more uniform 
than the circles described by Proust, is also divided into abstract compart­
ments. It produces more and more taboos and excommunications among 
absolutely similar but opposed units. Insignificant distinctions appear im­
mense and produce incalculable effects. The individual existence is still 
dominated by the Other but this Other is no longer a class oppressor as 
in M arxist alienation; he is the neighbor on the other side of the fence, the 
school friend, the professional rival. The Other becomes more and more 
fascinating the nearer he is to the Self.”
The rivalry unleashed among the Americans by the approach of the Eu­
ropeans produced a rage for stylistic distinction and individuation that, it 
could be claimed, was structurally  generated by the situation of internal 
mediation. Given at last the possibility of real competition with the me­
diators, the form  the response took had the quality of finding a set of 
abstract marks of “uniqueness” to set each one off from his rivals. But in 
Pollock’s case, we could say, the grip of internal mediation was all the 
more strengthened by the presence in his studio of Greenberg, whose entire 
critical vocabulary was that of rivalry and of American artists besting the 
Europeans, outwitting them in the battle for History. Whatever the struc-

tural conditions were, whatever Pollock’s own inclinations to mimetic 
behavior, Greenberg’s constant extending to him of the carrot of “ the best 
American artist,” over the last half of the 1940s, reinforced the socio-logic 
of the structure.
Caught up in this structure of rivalry—along with Rothko and Kline and 
Still and Newman and de Kooning and Gorky, only, one could argue, more 
so—Pollock was in a battle of hatred and envy with his particular mediator, 
Picasso, the desired object of which would be the “figure” of the 
unconscious.
At some point it became clear that that figure could only be approached 
through bassesse,  through lowering, through going beneath  the figure into 
the terrain of formlessness. And it also became clear that the act of lowering 
could, itself, only register through the vehicle of a trace or index, through, 
that is, the stain that would fissure the event from within into act of 
aggression and mark, or residue, or clue.
When Pollock began to dribble a network of line over the figures on the 
canvases of what became Galaxy  and Reflections o f the Big Dipper,  this 
bassesse  was suddenly in place: both the cancellation of the figure and the 
registration of the beneath  in the unmistakable trace of the horizontality
______ £$£ of the event. It was as if, in a way, he had solved the riddle of She Wolf.
M SP
Both She Wolf  and Stenographic Figure  date from Pollock’s opening en­
counter with surrealist notions of automatism, most concretely explained, 
by Graham, by Baziotes, by Matta, as “ automatic writing.” Writing, which 
differentiates itself from pictorial images by orienting itself to the horizontal 
surface of the table rather than to the vertical field of vision, should, by 
all logic, go very far in defeating the “image.” That it does not was a long­
standing paradox of surrealist theory and something quickly observed by 
Pollock. For as soon as writing is “framed” it becomes an image: either 
“writing” turned into a decorative picture of itself, as in Breton’s presen­
tations of schizophrenic production, or a projective matrix within which 
to see images, as Polonius saw the camel in the clouds or Leonardo the 
figures in the fire. If writing stands to painting at the right angle of hori­
zontal to vertical, it does so, as has been remarked, through an opposition 
of culture to nature, its horizontality removing it from the “ natural” 
upright field of vision to the more culturally processed domain of the 
written sign. But that there is an axis along which these two planes can 
always be folded onto one another is a function of what Foucault would 
call the “ commonplace” of representation. What matter “pipe” or [pipe],

Jackson Pollock, Sea Change,  1947.
Both the cancellation o f the figure and the registration of the  beneath in the  
unmistakable trace o f the horizontality o f the event...  (p. 284)

Jackson Pollock, Stenographic Figure , 1942.
Their supposed horizontality could not defeat the image, it could only join  
it...  (p. 289)

D E S S IX  A fT O M A T ig U E  A LA PLUM!*-, 
n h . Flournoy : hsprtts et Mediums)
Illustration in Andre Breton’s “ Message Automatique,” 
Minotaure  (1933).
As writing is “framed "  it becomes an image . . .  (p. 284)

Jackson Pollock, The She Wolf,  1943.
But it carried nonetheless these vague, original associations with the  
ground...  (p. 289)

the language game of representation sets up an extraordinary continuity 
between the two. And thus it was not hard to see, as in Stenographic  
Figure  for example, that the minute the written scribbles hit any portion 
of the painting, they were framed and thereby verticalized by that section 
of the image—becoming the “ tattoos” on thigh or chest, the “ patterns” 
on couch or bedclothes, the “ grating” on wall or floor. Their supposed 
horizontality could not defeat the image, it could only join it.
In She Wolf  of the following year this was even more so, since the random 
pattern produced by the all-over background of automatic doodling had 
in fact been expressly repackaged as an image. Onto this surface prepared 
by drips and spatters and sprays of color, Pollock produces an animal 
image by supplying a thickly painted frame that opaques out a contour 
around that part of the scrabbled field that will remain—left in negative 
as it were—as figure. Pollock had of course constructed images this way 
before, in the frenzy of work that spring in Siqueiros’s studio as the May 
Day murals and floats and banners were produced by laying stencils down 
on the floorbound panels and spray-painting around them. As the process 
continued the floor itself had become a field in which the “ negative” zones 
left by mists of spray would mark the place where the stencils had lain, 
zones now profiled by the opaque color that had landed beyond their 
edges. Like everything Siqueiros had been producing, She Wolf  operated 
the “ stencil” to achieve an image. But it carried nonetheless these vague, 
original associations with the ground, which had been encoded into the 
Siqueiros process. And everything else that Siqueiros had thought he was 
encoding: good riddance to bourgeois culture, death to easel painting, out 
to pasture with “the stick with hairs on its end,” etc. Nothing that Siqueiros 
had managed had gone below “culture,” of course, since he had continued 
to produce the image. But what was lower than both the pictorial image 
and the cultural plane of writing was, it could be seen, the floor, the 
ground, the beneathness of the truly horizontal. That was lower. That was 
out of the field of vision and out of the cultural surface of writing and 
onto a plane that was manifestly below both, below the body.
At the time Pollock made She Wolf  he could not use this knowledge. It 
only came to hand when he was engaged in striking, or canceling, the 
figure.
He’s sitting there just as I remember him, next to the neat little marble- 
topped table, its lamp mounted by a white shade, a painting behind him 
that might be by Kenneth Noland but is hard to read in the shot we see.

Time seems to have pinched and reddened his face. Whenever I would try 
to picture it, my memory would produce two seemingly mismatched frag­
ments: the domed shape of the head, and the slackness of the mouth. 
Looking at him now I am held, as always, by the arrogance of that mouth— 
fleshy, toothy, aggressive— and its pronouncements, which though voiced 
in a modulated, hesitant drawl, are, as always, implacably final.
He had made such a pronouncement when, much to her relief, he had told 
Lee that the black and white pictures bore out her contention that Pollock 
could indeed, “ draw like an angel.” But this angelism had a different 
meaning for him from the traditional gifts Lee thought it signified. Attached 
to the choo-choo train of history the angelic aspect of Pollock’s use of line 
was, for Clem, registered in the flight it could take, the statement it could 
make against the realm of matter and substance, and thus the sublimation 
it could perform. “Now he volatilizes,” he had said.
The meaning of Pollock’s black and white drawing for Pollock  was clearly 
different since it left him feeling strangely shaken and insecure. Ibram 
Lassaw said “he seemed terribly unsure of himself,” confirming Carol 
Braider’s sense that Jackson “was worried about the image having 
come back.”
That the image had to be the dross to be left behind in order for Pollock’s 
recent drawing to have any aesthetic significance within an era of abstrac­
tion was the position Clem acted on as he encouraged Helen Frankenthaler 
to follow the lead of Pollock’s soaked black line into the antimatter field 
of the stained, nonobjective image. One after another Frankenthaler, M or­
ris Louis, Kenneth Noland began to “ draw” by staining. And one after 
another they “righted” Pollock’s painting, declaring that the spumes and 
furls and sprays had all along been verticals, had all along declared an 
analogy to landscape. “ Mountains and Sea,” said Frankenthaler, smiling.
One doesn’t, however, imagine Louis smiling, as he labored in his tiny 
suburban room to lift his vast sheets of canvas so that the colored pours 
of acrylic could course down the channels he made for them in order to 
constellate his own version of Pollock’s linear bleeds. That he had “righted” 
Pollock’s line is all too evident in his own indexes of the upending of the 
painting process, with the individual streams of pigment still legible even 
as they soaked one into the other, and the “ cusps” of the excess liquid 
building up along the bottom edge of the canvas. That Louis’s paintings 
are often generically referred to as veils attests to the verticalization they 
reconstitute as felt image. But even further, that these veils are often felt 
to be themselves composed of flames of color, such that what is also imaged

The final, triumphant sublimation of Pollock’s line . (p. 293)

Jackson Pollock, Full Fathom Five,  1947.
Onto the surface he had thrown a heterogeneity o f trash —nails, buttons,  
tacks, keys, coins, cigarettes, matches . . . (p. 293)

forth is fire, is witness to the final, triumphant sublimation of Pollock’s 
line. If peeing on the fire is the destructive barrier to civilization in an 
excess of aggression against a symbolically charged nature, the preservation 
of fire is, Freud contends, the first step toward mastering this aggression 
and producing culture. Louis reconstitutes the cultural artifact that Pollock 
had trampled, and in the place of his strike against the vertical body, Louis 
remakes and thus preserves—in the abstract, purified language that itself 
marks the field of sublimation—the fire.
For Pollock there had been other ways besides the liquid residue of the 
pour to construct the index of this horizontalization of the image that had 
definitively canceled and dispersed it. The residue of “dumping,” for ex­
ample, was another to which he had recourse early on, as in Full Fathom  
Five.  There he had not only struck out the image by means of the black 
skein, he had also deposited great gouts of white lead and onto the surface 
he had thrown a heterogeneity of trash—nails, buttons, tacks, keys, coins, 
cigarettes, matches—to testify to the connection the work had had to have 
to the ground. The names he ratified for this first group of drip pictures 
also functioned to signal the fact of standing over the work and looking 
down: in addition to Full Fathom Five  and Reflection o f the Big Dipper,  
there were Watery Paths, Sea Change, The Nest, Vortex.
But the liquid gesture was perhaps the most efficient in that in one and the 
same stroke it canceled and testified, like the graffito mark, like the clue. 
Twombly had decoded Pollock’s gesture in one way, Warhol in another. 
In the late 1960s when Robert Morris was to consider the logic of “Anti­
form,” he would decode it in yet a third. For Morris did not look at the 
structural condition of the mark, nor at the thematics of the man standing 
over the supine field. He looked instead at the operations of gravity, of the 
way the horizontal is a force that pulls against the vertical, pulling it down.
Gravity, he saw in Pollock’s work, had become a tool for the production 
of the work, every bit as much as the sticks from which the paint was 
flung or the arm’s gestural reach as it flung it. Because of this, Pollock’s 
work had constituted a “ direct investigation of the properties of the ma­
terial in terms of how paint behaves under the conditions of gravity.” 
Gravity was what had combined with the liquidity of the paint to read 
through the finished work as a sign of process.  “ Of the Abstract Expres­
sionists,” Morris wrote, “ only Pollock was able to recover process and 
hold on to it as part of the end form of the work. Pollock’s recovery of 
process involved a profound re-thinking of the role of both material and 
tools in making.” The rigidity imposed on most art materials—canvas is

% 94
s ixstretched, clay is formed on internal armatures, plaster is applied to lath—  
is a fight against gravity. So that ultimately what is conceived of as form  
is what can maintain itself as vertically intact, and thus a seemingly auton­
omous gestalt. It’s not, Morris reasoned, that what he was calling anti­
form— “ random piling, loose stacking, hanging”—had no form, no edge,  
no boundaries. It was that lacking rigid form it could not remain upright,  
resistant to gravity.
When Greenberg had produced his own analysis of Pollock’s dripped line,  
his own scenario for why the artist had turned to this manner of drawing,  
he had explained it as a way of avoiding the cut. “ Pollock wanted to get  
a different edge,” he said. “A brush stroke can have a cutting edge that  
goes into deep space when you don’t want it to.” For Greenberg the dripped  
line avoided the edge that would cut into space, the edge that would  
differentiate figure from ground, by isolating forms. By not cutting it would  
allow the canvas to read as an unbroken continuity, a singular, undivided  
plane. And that plane would then, according to the logic of opticality, yield  
up an analogue of the immediacy, the unbrokenness of the visual field and  
of the viewer’s own perception of that field in an all-at-onceness of visual  
reflexiveness. By avoiding the production of forms (cut out within the field)  
the work would produce form  itself as the law of the formulation of form.
But for Morris everything in Pollock’s line had indeed to do with the cut,  
with something slicing not into space but into the continuity of the canvas  
plane as it conventionally stretches, rigid, across our plane of vision. The  
lengths of felt Morris began to work with were submitted to a process of  
systematic cuts, slicing into their pliant fabric surfaces, disturbing their  
planar geometries even while the cuts themselves were geometrically regular  
slashes. The irregularity came when, the work lifted onto the plane of the  
wall, where it hung from hooks or suspended from wires, gravity pulled  
open large gaps in the fabric surfaces, gaps that could be called neither  
figure nor ground, gaps that somehow operated below  form.
Gravity had also been what Hans Namuth had had to respect when plan­
ning for his film on Pollock. It was not enough merely to stand back from  
the process as he had done in his still photographs, the upright body of  
the photographer tracking and recording the gestures made by the upright  
body of the painter. He wanted the connection of the flung paint to the  
horizontal field to be absolutely manifest, something that could only occur  
if one could see the painter’s body and the result of the gesture conflated  
onto the same visual plane. The answer to his dilemma, he said, came to

Jackson Pollock, One (Number 31, 1950),  1950.
Gravtfy was what bad combined with the liquidity of the paint to read  
through the finished work . . .  (p. 293)

Something slicing not into space but into the continuity of the canvas plane  
as it conventionally stretches, rigid, across our plane of vision . . .  (p. 294)

Robert M orris, Untitled,  1967— 1968.
Gaps that could be called neither figure nor ground, gaps that somehow  
operated  below form . . .  (p. 294)

Suspended on the other side of two sheets of glass were two painters  
painting. . .  (p. 301)

Gjon Mili, Picasso  “Drawing ” with Flashlight, Vallauris,  1949.
Picasso had come suddenly, frighteningly, nearer. . .  (p. 301)

Jackson Pollock, Hum ber  7, 1951,  1951.
Drawing images across an imaginary “fronto-parallel,” vertical  
expanse . . . (p. 302)

him in a dream. He decided to use a sheet of glass as Pollock’s “ canvas”  
and, lying below it, to take up the same absolute horizontal as Pollock’s  
own pictorial surface, to shoot upward through the glass and onto the  
spectacle of Pollock painting.
But Namuth’s dream had a name, of course. It was called Picasso.
As a European and a cosmopolite, Namuth knew what was happening in  
Paris and most particularly knew of the comings and goings of the most  
famous artist of his century. A filmmaker himself, he had to know of Paul  
Haesaerts’s film Visite a Picasso,  which was shot in 1949 and released in  
the spring of 1950. This, the first film to which Picasso had consented, is  
also determined to give its viewers direct access to the maestro at work.  
To this end it captures its image through the pane of glass on which Picasso  
obligingly paints. O f course in this case the transparent working plane is  
vertical and never more so than in the final shot when we see Picasso  
framed by a long French window inside the farmhouse at Vallauris as he  
fills its surface with a whimsical figure displayed for those of us looking  
on from without. He ends the film with his famous signature which he  
signs on another pane of glass in anticipation of the actual date when the  
film will be finished: “Picasso 50.”
Namuth opens his film with Pollock signing his name. Although the shoot­
ing occurred in October 1950, Pollock is directed toward the date of its  
release. So he signs “Pollock 51.” Perhaps the idea came to him in a dream.
But the encounter with Picasso across the medium of this film had, I would  
venture, more the character of a nightmare. For now, suspended on the  
other side of two sheets of glass were two painters painting, each one able  
in this strangely resemblant activity to be substituted for the other, to be  
slipped the one on top of the next. From being a distant rival, an external  
mediator, Picasso had come suddenly, frighteningly, nearer. This was now  
the arrival of the internal mediator, so close that he strangely doubles the  
subject. And the result, as Girard sees Dostoevski predicting, is a kind of  
poisoning of the will, a paralysis.
There are not one but two stories of Lee Krasner’s hearing Pollock hurl a  
book of Picasso’s work on the floor and rage about the fact that “ that guy  
missed nothing.” The first is located in New York, before they moved to  
Springs; the second in 1954 while Pollock was recovering from a broken  
ankle. Whatever the date of the incident, the two versions bracket the  
period of the drip pictures during which time Pollock had discovered

302
SOX>something Picasso had not. But the revelation of the film was its creation  
of a condition in which the two of them can be seen to have discovered  
the “ same” thing: the possibility of making an image by means of an  
airborne gesture through which one could see the body of the artist himself.  
Pollock would probably not have seen illustrations from Haesaerts’s Pi­
casso film (although Namuth probably would have). But he would most  
certainly have seen the next best thing: Picasso’s Space Drawings  photo­
graphed by Gjon Mili and not only widely published in 1950 but exhibited  
as well at the Museum of Modern Art. Looking through the extraordinarily  
authoritative pencil line of light that curves through open space to sketch  
the outline of the bull or the gesture of a figure running, one can see  
him there as well, bare-chested, in his all-too-familiar boxer undershorts,  
impishly grinning: Picasso—sucking all the air out of the space, taking  
up all the room. “ Goddamn it, that guy has done everything. There’s  
nothing left.”
The scene Pollock carried out with Namuth just before he upended the  
table and dumped twelve dinners in the laps of his guests rings with this  
sense of outraged revelation at the sight of his own diminished stature and  
that of the bearer of bad tidings. “ I’m not a phony,” he kept saying to  
Namuth. “ You’re a phony.” His sense of his own fraudulence never left  
him after that. He would say that there were three great painters in the  
twentieth century, Matisse, Picasso, and himself. And tears would course  
down his face. After the film Pollock had painted just one more full-scale  
exhibition, the black and white pictures, and then had barely been able to  
put together the five works he needed for the next show. The following  
year’s exhibition had had to be a retrospective since, as everyone now  
knew, Pollock could no longer paint. A year and a half later he was dead.
After the film Pollock’s work had simply lost its relation to gravity, and  
so even though he continued, in the black and white pictures, to make  
paintings by pouring liquid paint, these were now conceived as huge,  
representational drawings, and even his tools—basting syringes filled with  
black enamel instead of his old battery of sticks and encrusted brushes—  
resembled the draftsman’s equipment of pen and ink, the better to form  
the image. And the image, resistant to gravity, floated above the canvas  
onto the plane of the vertical, just like the “pictures” that are formed by  
the myriad tesserae of Roman mosaics which, in constellating a figure  
from the zodiac on the floor, resurrect out of the ground itself an image  
of the sky above. Pollock’s “volatilized” line cannot but act now like  
Picasso’s light-pencil, drawing images across an imaginary “ fronto-parallel,”  
vertical expanse.

Even when Pollock tried to return to the abstractness of the drip technique,  
his way was now blocked by a rivalry that meant he was condemned to  
the plane, if not the letter, of the image. Blue Poles  is the massive testimony  
to this confusion. Though parts of it look like the earlier dripped skeins,  
the work is also awash with great runs and rivulets of paint that stream  
like so much cream-colored rain “ downward” along its surface, giving  
evidence to that part of the picture’s execution done while the canvas was  
hanging vertical, on the wall. The “blue poles” that were added near the  
picture’s completion only ratify both this commitment to the vertical and  
this resurrection of the schematized “ body,” as Tom Benton’s diagram­
matic vectors from his analyses of the world of Renaissance art now  
recompose themselves from their former dispersal in Number 1, 1948  to 
constellate the traditional decorum of the processional frieze. “ From Tom  
to Jack. From Jack to Harry.”
The relation of Pollock’s authentic drip pictures to gravity in the field of  
the real is different of course from the way the pictorial image—from  
within its virtual field—can come to visualize our own upright bodies and  
their relation to gravitational force. For gestalt psychology all vertical fields  
will—like a kind of mirror—already be structured according to the body’s  
own organization, with a top and a bottom, a left and a right. The field,  
they say, is anisotropic. This internal differentiation lying in potentia  in 
the very background within which the gestalt will appear already attests,  
then, to the features the brain will project onto the perceptual field in order  
to organize the gestalt: its simplicity, its hierarchy, its balanced dynamism.  
The gestalt will thus be, in a sense, a projective image of our bodies’ own  
resistance to, their triumph over, the gravitational field.
Through the distance Pollock’s drip pictures had traveled from this mir­
rored projection of the organization of the viewer’s body, they had become  
anathema to the Gestalt psychologists, the very thing they loved to hate.  
What the works projected instead, as Rudolf Arnheim saw it, was the  
directionless monotony of “ a kind of molecular milling everywhere.” They  
were nothing but an attempt to make a picture out of mere background  
trivia, the very thing the human perceptual apparatus does not even see.  
The retina at the back of the eyeball may duly register background forms  
but, the gestaltists insisted, such forms have no psychological existence  
whatsoever. Since they are not included in the chosen gestalt (or figure),  
they are not perceived at all.
But if they are not perceived, Anton Ehrenzweig replied, it is because they  
are repressed. Speaking in 1948 in the service of what he chose to call

304
&Lvdepth vision,  he thought of this domain of unconscious, primal sight as  
“ gestalt-free, chaotic, undifferentiated, vague, superimposed.” He likened  
its lack of differentiation to the perceptual field of the infant whose own  
Ego fills the entire world, running together inside and outside, making of  
all men, for example, “papa.” He likened its superimposition and ambi­
guity to that of the dream or the fantasy. He likened the way it tended to  
project sexual imagery uniformly onto all parts of the visual field—as in  
the phallic profusion of both dreams and “primitive” sculptures—to the  
libidinal thrust of the unconscious and its drive toward pleasure, only to  
meet the stern resistance of the superego of form.  He thought of the  
formless, gestalt-free products of depth vision on the analogy of the dream  
thoughts that, upon waking, are submitted to the censorship of the orga­
nizing principle Freud had called secondary revision, a force that creates  
the good form of a narrative where in the dream itself there has only been  
the Dionysian chaos of unrepressed affect. He thought of depth vision also  
as manifesting itself in the artist’s unconsciously wrought technique—its  
linear meanders, the nervously erratic quality of its brush work—only to  
be made over, in its own kind of secondary revision, into the “ form-  
control” of the “ surface gestalt.”
It was clear to Ehrenzweig, however, that the implacable force of the  
superego’s will-to-form would mean that whatever had surfaced from  
“unconscious depth perception” would itself be denied through a need to  
impose order. In thinking about this phenomenon in the historical devel­
opment of art, he saw two ways in which this imposition had been asserted.  
One had been to submit the ambiguous field to what he called “the  
constancy of thing-perception,” or more simply put, to realism, and to  
accede thereby to the authority of science. Another form of denial had  
been, he said, “ style perception,” which takes the new way of seeing and  
rationalizes it by turning it into form. “ All subsequent generations,” he  
said, “ will perceive the style instead of the gestalt-free symbol play, once  
the style formation is achieved.” And he added, “ Once secondary style  
elaboration has covered the wild form-play of art, never again can the  
human eye see its full effect, neither this generation, nor future  
generations.”
Thus it was not only that Ehrenzweig could have predicted that what had  
initially been registered as Pollock’s aggressivity—the work’s “violence,  
exasperation and stridency” ; its “ Gothic-ness, paranoia and resentment”—  
would be made over into the “ secondary style elaboration” of opticality;  
he could also have foreseen that even the psychologist’s experience of all  
that wild “ molecular milling” would be made over into the structural

Runs and rivulets of paint that stream like so much cream-colored  
rain . . .  (p. 303)

4 v /\ N
V
Diagram for Convergence,  from Matthew Rohm, Visual Dynamics in Jackson Pollock.
Made ovet into the “secondary style elaboration of opticality  . . . (p* 304)

composure of gestalts. Thus a disciple of Arnheim, in service both to his  
gestaltist master and to the doctrine of opticality, now reads into Pollock’s  
dripped pictures the very anisotropism of the vertical field’s way of “ mir­
roring the living organism.” This latter-day interpretation thus sees Pollock  
as building the gestalt into the drip paintings both at the level of the  
“microstructure”—the drips themselves—and at that of “primary struc­
tural configurations”—the overarching forms Pollock is imagined as infus­
ing into his dripped fields in order to achieve Pragnanz.  The configurations  
that are listed by this strange intellectual hybrid, the optico-gestaltist, are  
the basic motifs of pole, butterfly, arabesque, and labyrinth. Although there  
is an attempt to read Autumn Rhythm  itself in terms of the structural  
configuration of repeated poles, this breaks down into an admission that  
here the poles are strangely “exploded,” “diffuse,” and only vestigial.  
Instead it is to Blue Poles  that the writer turns for unalloyed evidence of  
Pollock’s looking to enforce the gestalt, to Blue Poles  and to the other drip  
picture Pollock tried to make once his hold on his own mark had been  
broken: the 1952 painting Convergence.  But these disastrous works are  
not happy examples to project back onto the drip paintings. Pollock had  
produced Blue Poles  in an agony of desperation to retrieve something he  
had lost, but according to Clem, he knew it “wasn’t a success. He knew  
it was over, that he’d lost his inspiration.”
But Pollock’s public “success” was made for him by a systematic misread­
ing of his painting, by—to say the word—a repression of the evidentiary  
weight of its most basic and irrefutable mark. Pollock’s “ success” depended  
on a reading that overlooked the horizontal testimony of his line, a testi­
mony that resonates indexically from within any other possible apprehen­
sion of it. For even as the dripped labyrinth permits an experience in terms  
of “interfused lights and darks,” even as it evokes the luminous cloudiness  
that would seem to underwrite a name like Lavender Mist,  the indexical  
mark can be read across and through that very ascensional axis, doing its  
work to lower  and desublimate the perceptual field, doing the “job” that,  
two decades earlier, Bataille had given to the informe:  to undo form by  
knocking it off its sublimatory pedestal, to bring it down in the world, to  
make it declasse.  Given the sublimatory force of the modernist reading,  
however, Pollock’s thrown lattice was no longer seen as violent; it was  
now hallucinatory, a mirage. According to the principles of opticality  
projected within it, it had become a visual plenum in which nothing “ cut”  
into space. Further, due to there being no inside or outside to the contours  
formed by this line, the continuum it seemed to project was now felt to  
resonate with that peculiar soothing and compensatory sense of indisso-

luble connection of the individual to eternity, “a feeling,” Freud had said  
in another context, “as of something limitless, unbounded, something  
‘oceanic.’ ”
It was only in 1951, when Pollock had “lost his inspiration” and his  
relation to the miragelike, optical character of the oceanic could be thought  
to have failed, that he would once more be seen as “violent.” With the  
black and white pictures, he took it all back, Clem had said, “ as if in  
violent repentance.”
If the oceanic feeling can be regarded as an analogue for modernist opti­
cality, it is itself, however, a strangely slippery concept. In Freud’s view,  
the oceanic feeling is at one and the same time the basis of religious  
sentiments and the ground of a limitless narcissism, the infant’s experience  
of a total lack of difference between itself and its world. It is this very lack  
of difference that, Freud also asserts, allows for primitive man to see nature  
as an extension of himself and thus, in phallicizing the fire, to enter into  
aggressive, sexualized play with it. Civilization will deeroticize the fire,  
returning it to the reality of its naturalized, desymbolized difference from  
the human sphere. Civilization will strip the oceanic of this aggressive,  
undifferentiated lining, will repress it.
sos
sax>Against the “ success” that a modernist reading had in store for them,  
however, the drip pictures can still be seen to retain the cutting edge of an  
indexical mark, one that slices the works lose from their purported verti-  
cality, by dropping them, visually, to the floor. It is a mark, as well, that  
cuts itself away from any intentional matrix to achieve its own isolation  
as “clue,” the simultaneity of the visual present already thus fissured by  
time. And it is a mark that cuts loose the work it marks from any analogies  
with the gestalt of the body whole. Instead, in dispersing and disseminating  
the corporeal itself, it sets up a thematics of the sexual and the rivalrous  
that will return against the very “oceanic” condition of modernist aesthetics  
the aggressivity and formlessness of its repressed.

All this happens and is all recorded on the surface of the body without  
organs: even the copulations of the agents, even the divisions of God, even  
the genealogies marking it off into squares like a grid, and their  
permutations. The surface of this uncreated body swarms with them, as a  
lion’s mane swarms with fleas.
— Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari, Anti-Oedipus
He’s sitting there just as I remember him, next to the neat little marble-  
topped table, with its prim lamp in gilt bronze and its assortment of tiny  
ashtrays, one of them containing a heap of crumpled butts, the only  
disarray in this fanatically ordered space. I am across the room from him,  
perched on a long yellow sofa above which there hangs a dour Hans  
Hoffman, a brown surface of palette scrapings from which two squares of  
pure color have been allowed to escape with relative impunity, a larger  
one of vermillion, a smaller, acid one of green. As usual he is lecturing me,  
about art, the art world, people we know in common, artists I’ve never  
met. As always I am held by the arrogance of his mouth—fleshy, toothy,  
aggressive—and its pronouncements, which though voiced in the studied  
hesitancy of his Southern drawl are, as always, implacably final.
We have been talking about critics, one of whom has just presented her  
views in an attention-grabbing article about art he detests.
“ Spare me smart Jewish girls with their typewriters,” he laments.
“ Ha, ha, ha,” I reply, sparkling with obedient complicity.
I think of that now as I wonder how many of us there were in those days,  
in the mid-1960s, smart Jewish girls with typewriters, complicit, obedient,  
no matter what long streak of defiance we might have been harboring.
And I remember that as what Mark thought to mention first, picturing  
Eva Hesse to me from their days at Yale, starting off his description by  
telling me of her desire for instruction, of the way she faithfully jotted  
down the titles of books he referred to and the things he said about them.  
Though he had, perhaps, been drawn to her, what he immediately recalled  
was the air she often had of an obedient schoolgirl, the one that had made  
her a star in Josef Albers’s class, far and away his favorite pupil.

3 /0
& ia>Lucy Lippard is struck by this also and she remembers Eva’s dutifulness  
in the role of wife, such that when they first knew her none of them really  
understood how seriously she took her art. Over and over her book on  
Hesse corroborates M ark’s memory as she tells of Hesse’s lists: the column  
of writers—Gide, Nabokov, Joyce, Dostoevski, Austen, Ortega—followed  
by the note confessing, “ I have become a reader—the thing I’ve wanted  
most, but was in too great a conflict with myself to do” ; the lists of word  
definitions, which became a habit all through the decade, aided by the  
huge thesaurus she finally bought as she searched for titles with the right  
degree of literacy for her work. Lippard tells how a list of possible titles  
with a somewhat poetic cast— “ marking time, nice question, liar’s dice,  
make sense, last not least, fairly fast, three of a kind, pride’s profile”—was  
jettisoned to be replaced by quite another kind of roster, one filled with  
more “intellectual” words, “like those drawn from the thesaurus category  
‘circular motion’ referring to the forms she was using: Circumnavigation/  
circumflexion/circuit/evolution/circumscribe/circuitous, devious/rotation,  
gyration, convolution/vortex, maelstrom, vertigiousness, vertigo/rotate,  
box the compass, gyrate/enfoldment, evolution, inversion/circle—cordon,  
cincture, cestuis, baldric/(complex circularity) convolution, involution, un­
dulation, sinuosity/coil—labyrinth/wind, twine, twirl, entwine, undulate/  
meander, indent, contort/involved—labyrinthine/in and out/eccentric.”
And here’s another list: “Vertiginous Detour/ box the compass/baldric/  
labyrinth/Ennead/Several/ingeminate/biaxial/diadic dyadic/dithyletic/bige-  
minate/ingemination-repetition.”
Standing back now and looking at those swarms of words zanily filling  
the page, producing the strange ululalia of a burble of off-rhymes— “wind,  
twine, twirl, entwine” —so dear to Artaud, we cannot help but think of  
Hesse’s favorite term for her art, her highest critical encomium, the word  
“absurd.” When she speaks of her “ most important early statement”—the  
1966 Hang Up —she justifies its centrality to her work by specifying, “It  
was the first time where my idea of absurdity or extreme feeling came  
through.” And absurdity, Hesse was fond of pointing out, is one of the  
things repetition is effortlessly capable of producing. “My idea,” she had  
said in 1970, speaking about the aesthetics of composition, of form, “is to  
counteract everything I’ve ever learned or been taught about those things,  
to find something else. . . .  If something is absurd, it’s much more exag­
gerated, more absurd if it’s repeated.”
Indeed, Hesse had made herself into the specialist of repetition-as-absurd-  
ity, which is to say repetition recast from the minimalist projection of

“And —oh! more absurdity!—it is very, very finely done . . (p. 313)

“Convolution, involution, undulation, sinuosity/coil —labyrinth/wind,  
twine, twirl, entwine, undulate .  . (p. 310)

arithmetic, impersonal law—the grids, the serial expansions, the systemic  
progressions—into the disruptive subjectivity of an infantilized world of  
babble, of gurgle, of a viscerally conceived world of play. The exquisitely  
wrought drawings of hosts of concentric circles each graded from white  
through middle gray to dark, each placed on its own square within the  
compartment of a delicately inscribed grid, always managed to escape the  
realm of conceptual art’s logic and to lodge themselves within the bodily  
and the obsessional, all the more so when, from the center of each targetlike  
circle, there would project the delicate filament of a length of clear plastic  
string—so many hairs marking the aureoles of so many nipples.
But Hesse would not have placed the lists copied down from the thesaurus  
in this domain of the absurd. Those lists came from a world of intellect it  
would not have occurred to her to challenge. This, we could say, was what  
marked her obedience.
The other thing that marked it was her adherence to painting, to its  
problematic, which is that of the vertical field: bounded, image-filled, wall-  
oriented, the vehicle of “fronto-parallel” address. Although she had decided  
to contest its rules, and that in the most subversive way possible, she had  
not simply walked out of its discursive space and slammed the door. She  
had not, that is, as so many of her critics suppose, become a sculptor.
SfS
Indeed, when she returned from her year in Kettwig, Germany, during  
which she had lifted the imagery of her painting into the realm of bas-  
relief, she thought she was headed into the three dimensions of the world  
of sculpture. So she made Laocoon,  undoubtedly naming it in a rededica­
tion of her art to a new medium. But the work is a disaster—literal,  
awkward, depictive: a big jungle gym with a lot of snakes. No, the “ ab­
surd” work of the same moment is Hang Up,  an enormous, empty picture  
frame, the site of painting declared and defied at the same time: “It sits on  
the wall,” Hesse said, “with a very thin, strong, but easily bent rod that  
comes out of it . . . and what is it coming out of ? It is coming out of this  
frame, something and yet nothing and—oh! more absurdity!—it is very,  
very finely done. The colors on the frame were carefully gradated from  
light to dark.”
Hang Up  not only marks Hesse’s convocation of her art to the realm of  
the absurd, it declares her refusal or her inability to leave the territory of  
painting. She bridled at Albers’s limitations, his rules, his dicta, at the  
monomania of an art “ based on one idea.” She wondered, “ How much  
more can be done with this notion?” She said, “There isn’t a rule . . .  I

3 /4
s ia >don’t want to keep any rules. I want to sometimes change the rules.” But  
the same docility that led her to buy the thesaurus kept her fixated on  
the pictorial.
Do we need examples to drive this point home? She invented a new support,  
rubber and fiberglass over cheesecloth, and from this she made Contingent  
(1969), hanging, veil-like, perpendicular to the wall, or as Expanded E x­
pansion  (1969), propped directly against it. The huge scale of the latter,  
or of the propped fiberglass poles of Accretion  (1968) or of the fiberglass  
boxes of the wall relief Sans II  (1968), orients itself to the heroic scale of  
abstract expressionism, to its claims to mural status, to its bluster and  
scope. Just as the medium itself in its translucence and relative weightless­
ness proclaims its proclivity toward the “ optical.” “What Eva was able to  
do,” Mel Bochner would later say, “was to work directly with light; she  
was able to make light a medium of sculpture.” But surely it was the other  
way round? By infusing the rigid materials normally associated with sculp­
ture with this effulgent luminosity, and connecting this radiance to the  
wall, she had reassociated them with painting and with the problematic of  
two dimensions, not three.
And then there is the glittering fiberglass bramble of Right After  (1969),  
with its later Untitled  version in a skein of latex-covered rope, and the last  
work she completed, the seven hanging, fiberglass-covered poles (1970).  
The relationship of all of these to Pollock is wholly explicit. Hesse herself  
spoke of this to Time  magazine. Referring to the rope piece, she said,  
“Chaos can be structured as non-chaos. That we know from Jackson  
Pollock.”
This knowledge is projected within the vertical domain of painting; it is  
suspended, it is airborne, it is optically displayed. And yet the knowledge  
itself is understood as transgressive. Hesse’s complicity is here at work in  
the most corrosive of ways, burrowing from within the pictorial paradigm  
to attack its very foundations . . . like the L Schema tunneling away from  
within the inner core of the Klein Group. For Hesse had come to have a  
very particular take on the domain of painting, the shorthand name for  
which—although she would never have called it this—is bachelor machine.
It surely was fortuitous that in May 1965, almost at the end of Hesse’s  
year in Germany, she and her husband, Tom Doyle, would travel to Bern  
for a show that included objects by Marcel Duchamp. All during the spring  
Hesse’s work had been changing, projecting outward from the picture  
plane into a kind of low relief built up of papier-mache, plaster, rope, and

sometimes metal. In their strange connection of the organic—she described  
one as comprised of breast and penis forms—to the mechanical— “Thus  
they look like machines,  however they are not functional and are non­
sense,” she wrote—the works move toward the domain that Duchamp had  
mapped in the Large Glass.  One, called Lighter from Decatur,  has the look  
of an electric fan, its wire blades projecting from a panel inscribed with  
the arcs of what reads as a partial spiral: the form and motion of the  
Rotoreliefs  reconceived in the contemporary language of early ’60s “ funk.”  
Another, called Top Spot,  is strangely predictive of what was to come once  
Hesse had returned to New York. On a white masonite board that an­
nounces the ground or plane of the relief there swarms a strange assemblage  
6f tubes and porcelain connective sockets, forming a series of aberrant  
machines hooked, daisy-chain-like, one to the other, all of them clinging  
precariously to the blankness of the flat surface. What Hesse would aban­
don once she got back to New York was the funky quality of the forms,  
the obviousness of their dada disorder. What she would keep was the  
system: the hook-up of the bachelor machines and their underlying mean­
ing as “desiring production”—which is to say, pure process — distributed  
over the transparent glass surface, a territory—that of painting—to which  
they cling but which they can never articulate. For painting has now  
become what Deleuze and Guattari were soon to define as “ the body  
without organs.”
It is as anachronistic to read Hesse through the Anti-Oedipus,  published  
two years after her death, as it is to read Pollock through the Oxidation  
Paintings  or Morris’s felt pieces. Because although Hesse may have felt a  
connection between her work and something of what Duchamp meant to  
the 1960s art world, she cannot have known or intended anything like the  
theorization Deleuze and Guattari would develop on the basis of the  
bachelor apparatus. Yet the model projected by that theory maps directly  
onto her work, describing it with a strange exactitude, capturing the schi-  
ziness of its autoeroticism coupled with its fanatical order, projecting the  
cunning of its enormous ambition trapped inside the autistic limits of a  
fixed convention.
Deleuze and Guattari begin with the body understood as a series of part-  
objects—breast, mouth, stomach, intestines, anus—each of which is a  
machine. But unlike the world of mechanical production, where a machine  
is one thing and its product is another, removed from it, discrete, separate,  
the desiring production of the part-objects is a process in which there is  
no distinction between production and product. For the flows produced  
by one machine, the breast, say, provide the continuum into which theS / 6

s/f
s ic onext machine, the mouth, can cut, thereby setting up the precondition of  
the mechanical, which is to articulate matter. As each machine cuts into  
the continuity of the flows produced by its neighbor only to produce a  
new flow for the next machine to cut into in its turn, all are organized in  
relation to three principles. The first is repetition, for as Deleuze and  
Guattari say, “ although the desiring machines make us into an organism,  
at the very heart of this production the body suffers in being organized in  
no way at all” ; the second is continuity, for which the operative term is  
process;  the third is desire, or the connective “labor” that drives libido  
toward producing/product.
Since the model of the Anti-Oedipus  derives from Melanie Klein, it is not  
surprising that it should include that other aspect of the paranoiac-schizoid  
scenario of early development: the infant’s body experienced as invaded  
by the part-objects that persecute and attack it and that the infant tries to  
pulverize and attack back. If the part-objects are rebaptized desiring ma­
chines,  the threatened, paranoid body is now labeled the body without  
organs.  This body, static, nonproductive, is also the body without an image,  
the gestaltless body, or the body without form. And it is over this body,  
locked in a relation of attraction/repulsion, that the desiring machines are  
distributed, although they can never articulate this body, for which the  
term Deleuze and Guattari invent is “ deterritorialized.” Nonproductive,  
formless, the body without organs is instead the site of inscription or  
recording, it is the place through which signs circulate in an effort to  
decode the flows of desire, at the same time setting up the illusion that  
they themselves are the agents of production. “When the productive con­
nections pass from the machines to the body without organs (as from labor  
to capital),” they write, “ it would seem that they then come under another  
law that expresses a distribution in relation to the nonproductive element  
as a ‘natural or divine presupposition’ (the disjunctions of capital).”
When Hesse came back to New York she discovered process, which is to  
say she came to understand the logic of flows of material—latex, fiberglass,  
rubber tubing—that would produce a continuum, a flux, into which the  
moldlike machines of her work could cut. And each mold, each cast  
element— sphere, tube, sheet, open box—by being repetitively set in series,  
would in its turn produce a new flow, a new continuum that would offer  
itself to the next act of cutting. Thus she no longer needed to fashion  
objects that looked like machines in the manner of the German reliefs. She  
had constructed the system of desiring production instead. Far more ab­
stract and morphologically noncommittal, it was far more disturbing and,  
in its Beckett-like ingeniousness, far more “absurd.”

Eva Hesse, Untitled,  completed M arch 1970.
“Chaos can be structured as non-chaos. That we know from Jackson  
Pollock . . (p. 314)

Eva Hesse, Right After,  1969.
A kind o f amorphousness, the threat that a body “that suffers in being  
organized in no way at all” lies behind the surface . . .  (p. 320)

And these machines are, as I have said, always deployed in relation to the  
planarity and verticality of that territorial convention called painting. It is  
thus that when Hesse “reads” Pollock’s work in Right After  and the “rope  
piece,” she locates her reading in the sublimated, fronto-parallel plane of  
modernist opticality, the skeins dancing weightless before our eyes. But  
though she locates this plane by means of her own insistence on upright­
ness, and of the wall as a kind of backdrop or support for the image, she  
also defies the meaning  of the plane, its existence as a precondition of  
form.  The bounded, flattened plane of painting, after all, functions like the  
mirror described by Lacan, reflecting back to the subject the flattering  
picture of Pragnanz,  of the organization and order of the good gestalt  
always there in potentia and, by means of its reflection, always assuring  
the viewing subject a concomitant logical and visual control. Hesse replaces  
this plane. In its stead, the implicit support of her images is the body  
without organs. Which is to say the plane has been redefined as the  
“ uncreated body” over which the process-machines of her work swarm  
“ as a lion’s mane swarms with fleas.”
<3(9
sa x >
Kramer went on to attack this move as yet another example of what  
Donald Judd had announced in 1965 as the strategy of “ specific objects,”  
that attempt to void the convention of painting, with its forms tucked  
away safely behind the plate glass of the surface and cosseted within  
illusionistic space, by producing these forms literally,  in real space, thereby  
rendering painting itself obsolete. “What was formerly part of the meta­
phorical and expressive fabric of painting,” Kramer lamented, “is now  
offered as a literal thing.  A kind of technological positivism triumphs, but  
at the expense, I think, of a genuine imaginative probity. . . . Here, as  
elsewhere, the prose of literal minds effectively displaces the old poetry.”
Lippard’s response to this was to point to the way imagery used up in one  
medium can take on new power in another and so while she admitted theIn 1966 Lucy Lippard instigated Eccentric Abstraction,  an exhibition tai­
lored to, among others’, Hesse’s new work, which she saw as a collection  
of bulbous, organlike, erotico-abstract forms, an aggressive challenge to  
minimalist sculpture. But Hesse surprised her by submitting Metronomic  
Irregularity,  a bramble of cotton-covered wire projected from the relief  
plane of three square panels. That it was not a provocation for sculpture  
but rather organized itself in relation to painting was leapt on at once by  
Hilton Kramer, who denounced its vocabulary as “ second-hand,” since,  
he pointed out, it “ simply adapts the imagery of Jackson Pollock’s drip  
painting to a three-dimensional medium.”

320
s /a >pictorial character of Hesse’s work, she insisted that in the end it should  
be evaluated as sculpture, going so far as to liken it to the problematic,  
begun by Gonzalez and elaborated by David Smith, of “ drawing in space.”  
Thus by beginning with her admiration for Eva’s subversiveness—a feeling  
that resonates on nearly every page of her superb book on Hesse—she  
ends by bringing her into the safe harbor of a three-dimensionality that  
poses no problems for painting, that ignores the notion of “want[ing] to  
sometimes change the rules.”
The rules of painting are clear, as transparent as a diagram is to the logic  
of its relations, as bounded as a frame is by the law of exclusions that  
render it a terrain of self-contained autonomy. We know this logic. We  
have seen its picture.
By projecting the pictorial plane into real space, Hesse confronted it with  
a kind of amorphousness, the threat that a body “that suffers in being  
organized in no way at all” lies behind the surface of that mirror seemingly  
“pregnant” with its own gestalt. For the logic of relations she substituted  
the flux of process, and for the transcendental signified that projects mean­
ing onto these relations she presented the dispersed, disorganized subject  
who is merely the sum of the apparatus. By being redefined as the body  
without organs, the convention called painting  is projected as a paranoid  
space incapable of further articulation, a surface that merely multiplies  
more and more attempts to decode desire, while all the time the machines  
keep laboring in their parallel circuit, producing and intersecting flows.
The circuit of the L Schema maps onto the grid of the Klein Group,  
undermining it from within. Just so does Hesse’s process  elaborate the  
space of painting with its modernist laws, only to sap it from its very  
center: yet one more avatar of the optical unconscious.

Bibliographical Note
Greenberg’s account of his meeting with Pollock is part of his contribution to the PBS/ 
BBC-IV television series “Art of the Western World (Part 9),” made in 1989. He gave 
the same account to Steven Naifeh and Gregory White Smith for their book Jackson  
Pollock: An American Saga  (New York: Clarkson Potter, 1989), p. 398, although Lee 
Krasner provided them with her own, different version (p. 857).
The monographs on Pollock I have consulted are the Naifeh and Smith book; Jackson  
Pollock: Catalogue Raisonne o f Paintings, Drawings, and Other Works,  ed. Francis V. 
O ’Connor and Eugene Thaw (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1978); Francis V. 
O ’Connor, Jackson Pollock  (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1967); B. H. Friedman, 
Jackson Pollock: Energy Made Visible  (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1972); Ellen Landau, 
Jackson Pollock  (New York: Abrams, 1989); Elizabeth Frank, Jackson Pollock  (New 
York: Abbeville Press, 1983); Matthew L. Rohn, Visual Dynamics in Jackson Pollock’s  
Abstractions  (Ann Arbor: UMI Research Press, 1987).
Greenberg on Pollock
Clement Greenberg’s analyses of Pollock’s work have been drawn both from his pub­
lished criticism and from interviews with him as cited in Naifeh and Smith. In the first 
connection his statement about painting and positivist space is found in his “ On the 
Role of Nature in Modernist Painting,” 1949 (reprinted in Greenberg, Art and Culture  
[Boston: Beacon Press, 1961]); “ hallucinated literalness” is from “The Later Monet,” 
1956 (Art and Culture,  p. 42); “ the counter-illusion of light alone” is from “ Byzantine 
Parallels,” 1958 ( Art and Culture,  p. 169); “ optically like a mirage” is from the revised 
version of “ The New Sculpture,” 1958 ( Art and Culture,  p. 144); the flexibility of 
Pollock’s idiom was discussed in Greenberg’s review in The Nation  (April 13, 1946) 
(reprinted in Clement Greenberg: The Collected Essays and Criticism,  vol. 2, ed. John 
O’Brian [Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1989, p. 75]); the variety “beneath the 
apparent monotony” is from his February 1949 review of Pollock’s show at the Parsons 
Gallery in The Nation  (reprinted in Clement Greenberg: Collected Essays,  vol. 2, 
pp. 285-286); his first assessment of the black and white pictures was rt Chronicle,” 
Partisan Review,  1952 (reprinted in Art and Culture,  p. 152); his second view is from 
“ ‘American Type’ Painting,” 1955 ( Art and Culture,  p. 228); for the violence, paranoia, 
and Gothic-ness of Pollock’s art, see “ The Present Prospects of American Painting and 
Sculpture,” Horizon,  October 1947, (reprinted in Greenberg: Collected Essays,  p. 166).
A useful close reading of Greenberg’s evolving interpretation of Pollock’s work is Fran- 
^ois-Marc Gagnon, “ The Work and Its Grip,” Jackson Pollock: Questions  (Montreal: 
Musee d’art contemporain, 1979), pp. 15-42. Gagnon convincingly demonstrates that 
Greenberg continued to analyze Pollock’s work in terms of the relatively traditional 
value of organic structure (variety within unity) and to be hostile to the idea of all-over 
composition, calling it “ monotonous,” until relatively late (1948). He also argues that 
when in 1948 Greenberg related Pollock’s composition to synthetic cubism, this was a 
slip and he really meant analytic cubism, as he stated in his criticism from 1955 on. 
Yve-Alain Bois contests this latter point in his “The Limit of Almost,” in Ad Reinhardt  
(New York: Rizzoli, 1991), pp. 16— 17.

Naifeh and Smith report on Greenberg’s telling either them or other interviewers about: 
Pollock’s having “lost his stu ff” (pp. 698, 731, 895); his contemptuous characterizations 
of others (p. 632), which my own experience of Greenberg throughout the 1960s 
confirms; his discussion with Pollock about Pollock’s nightmare (pp. 628— 629); on 
Pollock “ drawing like an angel” (p. 678); on Pollock’s drip line made to avoid cutting 
into deep space (p. 535); on Pollock’s view that Blue Poles  wasn’t a success (p. 698).
Pollock and Modernism
After Greenberg’s, the later modernist readings of Pollock’s work are those of Michael 
Fried, in his Three American Painters  (Cambridge: Fogg Art Museum, 1965), pp. 10—  
19; William Rubin, “Jackson Pollock and the Modern Tradition,” in four parts, Art- 
forum,  vol. 5 (February, March, April, and May 1967); and E. A. Carmean, Jr., The 
Subjects o f the Artist  (Washington, D.C.: National Gallery of Art, 1978), pp. 124-153.
Paradoxically, T. J. Clark’s account of Pollock’s work in his searching essay “Jackson 
Pollock’s Abstraction” (in Serge Guilbaut, ed., Reconstructing Modernism  [Cambridge: 
MIT Press, 1990], pp. 172-243) both supports and challenges the modernist reading of 
the drip paintings. In the essay Pollock’s act of challenging “ likeness” is seen as putting 
two conflicting images or metaphors into play: ( 1) a figure of unity (the pictorial 
wholeness or “ Oneness” of the modernist reading), of a weightless transcendence of the 
terrestrial and of gravity; and ( 2) a figure of dissonance: of exasperation, interruption, 
and violent refusal of closure. Although the first (modernist) one is characterized as 
being dominant, it is the conflict or challenge posed by the second that destabilizes the 
reading in a canceling out of metaphor itself, one that undoes the work’s relation to 
nature (p. 201). What is implied is that Pollock is trying to get below metaphor into a 
new, hitherto unimagined relation to the world, one in which the mark would manifest 
a premetaphorical sense of presence (see the section “ The Indexical M ark,” below). This 
picture of a struggle between two poles has some overlap with my own reading of 
Pollock’s work as an oscillation between two axes—the vertical and the horizontal— 
with the optical axis invaded and undermined by the indexical reading of the mark, or 
trace. Where it differs (and that on the most basic level) is that for Clark the two 
conflicting poles are both “ images,” which is to say, the indexical is always understood 
representationally and never formally. This means that, as a “ picture” of something, it 
occupies the domain of the vertical just as the image of “ unity” or “ harmony” does. 
Thus Clark’s reading of the drip pictures, while it brings in those aspects of the paintings 
that are difficult to reconcile with the optical reading (the repulsive “skins” of puddled 
paint, the trash piled on the pictures, etc.), proposes no alternative reading that could 
undo the “ dominant” one from within.
Our interpretations also diverge in Clark’s desire to assess Pollock’s own intentions in 
making the drip paintings. To this end he quotes extensively from Pollock’s various 
statements. My own feeling is that since Pollock’s statements can be shown to have been 
the result of a kind of ventriloquy practiced by his various mentors, starting with Benton 
and Graham and his psychoanalysts and going up to Greenberg and Krasner (and even, 
beginning in 1950, Michel Tapie), they give us no reliable sense of his own intentions, 
but rather a script of self-justification to which he had recourse. I don’t feel that Pollock’s 
“intentions” are recoverable in any useful sense.
Pollock’s Biography
Accounts of Pollock’s life in Naifeh and Smith concern: his finances in 1950 (p. 624)— 
although Tony Smith’s version of Pollock’s income for one year in the early 1950s was

the figure $2,600 scribbled on the back of an envelope, which represented an experience 
of financial failure that, Smith claimed, accounted for Pollock’s return to drink (in 
Friedman, Energy Made Visible,  p. 199), a report that itself tends to undermine Smith’s 
credibility as a witness for Pollock; the filming with Namuth (pp. 647-649), although 
where Namuth himself states that the shooting ended in late October (“ Photographier 
Pollock,” L ’atelier de Jackson Pollock  [Paris: Macula, 1978]), Naifeh and Smith place 
the ending and the scene of the dinner party in late November just before Pollock’s post- 
Thanksgiving opening; Pollock’s despair over the meager sales and lack of reviews from 
the 1950 exhibition (p. 656); Tony Smith’s urging Pollock to do something new (p. 665);
Pollock’s analysis of old master art using Benton’s method (p. 564); Pollock’s dream of 
triumphing over his brothers (p. 642); Pollock’s nightmare about his brothers pushing 
him off a cliff (p. 628); Pollock’s boasts about being the greatest (pp. 617, 693); Pollock’s 
fears about being a fraud (pp. 721, 763); Pollock’s early experiences in automatism 
(pp. 415— 417, 424— 427); Pollock’s mimetic behavior (p. 621; and see Harold Rosenberg,
“ The Search for Jackson Pollock,” Art News,  59 [February 1961], p. 36); Pollock in 
Siqueiros’s studio (p. 288); Pollock worried “ about the images coming back” (p. 669);
Pollock’s rage at Picasso for having missed nothing, dated to 1954 (p. 737; in her 
interview with B. H. Friedman, Lee Krasner dates the incident to New York before they 
moved to Long Island [Energy Made Visible,  p. 183]).
Contemporaneous Criticism o f Pollock’s Work
Journalistic praise of Pollock’s drip painting includes Robert Goodnough, “Jackson 
Pollock Paints a Picture,” Arts News,  50 (May 1951).
Dismissal of it as “ a child’s contour m ap” is from Time,  53 (February 7, 1949); as 
“ drooling,” from the captions to “Jackson Pollock: Is He the Greatest Living Painter in 
the United States?” Life,  27 (August 8, 1949); “ Hiroshima seen from above” is by Henry
McBride, New York Sun  (December 23, 1950). The comments about painting with a -----
broom as well as Benton’s and Craven’s remarks about peeing are from Naifeh and 
Smith (pp. 630-631). The “Jack the Dripper” article was in Time,  67 (February 
20, 1956).
The comparison between Pollock and van Gogh as “sacrificial” victims was first made 
by Allan Kaprow in “ The Legacy of Jackson Pollock” (Art News,  51 [October 1958], 
pp. 24-25, 55-57); Kaprow made the connection again in “ Should the Artist Become a 
Man of the World” (Art News,  63 [October 1964], p. 35): “The modern artist is the 
archetypal victim who is ‘suicided by society’ (Artaud). . . . Cultured reactionaries . . . 
remind you that Rembrandt, van Gogh and Pollock died on the Cross (while you’ve 
‘sold out’).”
The Drip Pictures and the Unconscious
John Graham, “ Primitive Art and Picasso,” Magazine o f Art,  30 (April 1937), p. 260.
In his “ Art for Modem Man:  New York School Painting and American Culture in the 
1940s” (Ph.D. thesis, Harvard University, 1988), Michael Leja argues: “ Rather than 
being a conglomeration of unconscious material, Pollock’s is a representation  of that 
unconscious” (p. 176). This representation, he says, was itself determined by two dis­
cursive systems operating in American in the 1930s and ’40s, both of which involved 
popularizations of depth psychology: a Jungian discourse on the one hand and an ego- 
psychological discourse on the other. Leja sees the turbulent sea of imagery of the pre­
drip paintings as an employment of both Jungian motifs (the snake, the mandala, etc.) 
and an attempt to image forth the Jungian idea of unconscious struggle. He sees the drip323

,u a >pictures as a response to the ego-psychological model adopted from Freud, in which the 
unconscious is pictured as an electrodynamic building up of energies that are then 
released in bursts of activity. This latter model was employed in what Leja calls the 
“ Modern M an” discourse to develop ideas about the importance of “integrated experi­
ence,” and of the ego’s growth toward stability and unity. That Pollock, under the 
impress of this discursive context, was trying to image forth such integration or unity 
accounts, Leja argues, for the visual integration of the drip paintings and Pollock’s 
threefold use of the name “ One” to mark such unity. Several aspects of such an account 
need noting: (1 ) whether it addresses the works of the early ’40s or the period 1947—
1950, this account is resolutely representational, based on the notion that the unconscious 
will be depicted according to received pictorial schemata (Leja acknowledges Gombrich 
for this conception, p. 186), which will express an idea through “pictures” of it; ( 2) it 
depends on a conception of the relation of the artist to the work that is based on 
traditional art-historical notions of “ intention” ; and (3) it leaves the modernist subli­
matory reading of Pollock’s drip pictures wholly intact.
The Jungian theories of the unconscious applied to Pollock’s early work as a thematics 
of his art, which took up much space in the Pollock literature of the 1970s, have been 
analyzed by William Rubin in “ Pollock as Jungian Illustrator: The Limits of Psychological 
Criticism” ( Art in America,  67 [November 1979], pp. 104-123, and [December 1979], 
pp. 72-91).
Verticality, Erectness, Sublimation
Freud’s discussions of man’s assumption of an erect posture as the first step toward 
culture and as making possible a sublimated visuality are from “ Civilization and Its 
Discontents” (1930), Standard Edition,  vol. 21, pp. 99-100; and “Three Essays on the 
Theory of Sexuality” (1905), Standard Edition,  vol. 7, pp. 156— 157.
The gestalt psychological and phenomenological interpretation of the upright posture is 
from Erwin Straus, “ Born to See, Bound to Behold: Reflections on the Function of 
Upright Posture in the Aesthetic Attitude” (1963), in The Philosophy o f the Body,  ed. 
Stuart Spicker (New York: Quadrangle, 1970), pp. 334-359; this is an elaboration of 
his earlier “The Upright Posture” (1948), in Essays in Phenomenology,  ed. Maurice 
Natanson (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1966), pp. 116-192 (as cited by Michael Fried, 
“ The Beholder in Courbet: His Early Self-Portraits and Their Place in His Art,” Glyph,  
no. 4 [1978], p. 125).
Abduction
Analyses of Peirce’s theories of abduction and their relation to the methods of Sherlock 
Holmes, Freud, and Morelli are collected in The Sign o f Three,  ed. Umberto Eco and 
Thomas A. Sebeok (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1983). The best-known of 
these essays is Carlo Ginzburg’s “ Morelli, Freud, and Sherlock Holmes: Clues and 
Scientific Method” (pp. 81-118).
The Black and 'White Pictures
Lee Krasner’s assessment of the black and white paintings is published as “ An Interview 
with Lee Krasner Pollock,” by B. H. Friedman, in Jackson Pollock: Black and White  
(New York: Marlborough-Gerson Gallery, March 1969). Michael Fried’s discussion of 
Pollock’s refusal to repeat is in his Three American Painters  (p. 18).

Opposing contentions that Pollock refused to repeat, E. A. Carmean mounts an art- 
historical explanation of Pollock’s development, beginning in the summer of 1950 and 
continuing into the black and white paintings, based on repetition conceived on the 
pattern of traditional academic art’s reliance on the precedents offered by earlier sources. 
Carmean tries to cast Pollock in this mold, arguing that in Lavender Mist  Pollock began 
to reuse configurations offered by his own earlier work, in this case Number 1, 1948.  
What necessitated this, Carmean argues, is the fact that by 1949 and 1950 Pollock’s 
paintings were so large and so heavy that the process of lifting them off the floor in 
order to view them hanging on a wall (Pollock’s famous “ get acquainted” interludes) 
was becoming more and more difficult (according to Lee Krasner [in an interview with 
Carmean, The Subjects o f the Artist,  p. 135]; the photographic evidence supplied by 
Namuth makes it likely that Pollock finished the big 1950s paintings without lifting 
them). Therefore, Carmean reasons, Pollock must have had a pregiven configuration 
from which to work, supplied to him from sources within his earlier drip pictures. 
Having adopted this mode of working, Pollock then went on in the black and white 
pictures to use his earlier, figurative drawings and paintings as such “ sources” (see The 
Subjects o f the Artist,  pp. 129ff.). Subsequently Carmean enlarged his analysis of the 
black and white pictures to find sources in them from the history of religious painting 
and casting them as cartoons for the project for a private church on which Tony Smith 
was then working (see E. A. Carmean, “ The Church Project: Pollock’s Passion Themes,” 
Art in America,  70 [Summer 1982], pp. 110-122). My own reply to this is “ Contra 
Carmean: The Abstract Pollock,” Art in America,  70 (Summer 1982), pp. 123— 131, 
which I was led to write both because I thought that Carmean had a misguided notion 
of Pollock’s process and because Lee Krasner discussed with me her own deep objections 
to the essay (which had originally appeared in the catalogue Jackson Pollock  [Paris: 
Centre Georges Pompidou, 1982]) as well as her desire that it be publicly repudiated.
The theory that the black and white pictures emerged when Pollock stopped relegating 
the memory images of the drip pictures to a Greenberg-imposed abstraction, now letting 
them emerge from behind the veil, is from Naifeh and Smith, pp. 667-668. Their notion 
of the drip technique as a form of “ unwinding images in three-dimensional space” above 
the canvases is on pp. 539-540, or, again, “ the great tangled knowledge of his past . . . 
unwinding onto canvas,” p. 567; their discussion of Pollock’s supposed restlessness with 
the lack of figuration in the drip technique by 1949 is on pp. 616-617 and 665.
The Indexical Mark
The discussion of the arche-trace is from Jacques Derrida, O f Grammatology,  trans. 
Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1974), pp. 62 and 132.
T. J. Clark’s interpretation of the indexical trace within Pollock’s work (the palm prints 
in Number 1, 1948,  for example) understands the mark as a manifestation of the artist’s 
own existential presence that can also be “ seen as” a representation of “ a hand, a hand 
out there, someone else’s,” through what Clark calls the metaphorical construal of the 
mark. He imagines Pollock as wanting to bring painting back to its own origins before  
metaphor in which the mark unequivocally instituted this kind of presence, thereby 
finding “ some other means of signifying experience [that] might put itself in a different 
sort of relation to the world” (Clark, “Jackson Pollock’s Abstraction,” p. 197). In the 
discussion after his presentation Clark speaks of the Heideggerian tone inherent in his 
conception of Pollock’s invocation of trace as presence (p. 240).
Rosenberg’s action painting account of the picture-event as a mirror, in the realm, 
therefore, of presence, is “ The American Action Painters,” Art News  Vol. 51 (De­
cember 1952), reprinted in The Tradition o f the New  (New York: Horizon Press, 1959), 
pp. 28-29.326

Figures Below the Web
William Rubin stresses the figurative “ underpicture” lying below both Shimmering Sub­
stance  and Eyes in the Heat  (both 1946) but does not speak of the continuing visibility 
of such underpictures in the beginning drip works (“Jackson Pollock and the Modern 
Tradition,” part I [February 1967], p. 18). That there are actually figures below the web 
in Number 1, 1948  is asserted by Serge Guilbaut, How New York Stole the Idea o f  
Modern Art,  trans. Arthur Goldhammer (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1983), 
pp. 197, 246. It is more subtly argued by Charles Stuckey in “Another Side of Jackson 
Pollock,” Art in America  (November 1977), pp. 81-91; and by Bernice Rose, Jackson  
Pollock: Drawing into Painting  (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1980), p. 9.
Thomas Benton’s structural analysis of old master paintings using geometrical schemata 
was published as “Mechanics of Form Organization in Painting,” The Arts,  10 (Novem­
ber and December 1926) and 11 (January, February, March 1927); the schemas most 
applicable to Pollock are in part I (November 1926), p. 288.
Warhol
Biographical information about Warhol comes from the following sources: Warhol’s 
confession about the Queen of England (Victor Bockris, The Life and Death o f Andy  
Warhol  [New York: Bantam Books, 1989], p. 102); his dress in imitation of Kowalski 
(Bockris, p. 52); his conversation with Larry Rivers about Pollock (Andy Warhol and 
Pat Hackett, POPism: The Warhol Sixties  [New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich,
1980], pp. 13-15); Kligman’s report on their friendship in 1962 (Bockris, p. 118); 
thinking about making Love Affair  into a film for Jack Nicholson (Bockris, p. 301); “ I 
always wanted Tab Hunter to play me in the story of my life” (Bockris, p. 135); 
dismissing Siqueiros and wishing he had a Pollock (Bob Colacello, Holy Terror  [New 
S S f  York: Harper Collins, 1990], p. 118); Schnabel’s boast (Colacello, p. 475); Colacello 
on the Oxidation Paintings  and Warhol’s art-historical references (Colacello, p. 339).
A somewhat different account of the Dance Diagram’s  relation to Pollock is given by 
Benjamin Buchloh in “ Andy Warhol’s One-Dimensional Art: 1956— 1966” ( Andy War­
hol: A Retrospective  [New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1989], pp. 4 5-46); infor­
mation about the “ piss paintings” from 1961 and the canvases outside his house comes 
from an interview with Warhol in The Unmuzzled Ox,  4, no. 2 (1976), p. 44, with a 
reproduction of one of the paintings (p. 45); on the Oxidation Paintings  in relation to 
a gay context, see Colacello, p. 339; on their relation to a gay thematics of urination, 
see Jonathan Weinberg, “ Urination and Its Discontents,” an unpublished lecture, 1990.
Peeing on the Fire and the “ Oceanic”
Freud introduces the “oceanic feeling” in “ Civilization and Its Discontents” (Standard  
Edition,  vol. 21, pp. 65, 72) and sets forth his theory about peeing on the fire (ibid., 
p. 90). Naifeh and Smith have recourse to an explanation by urination and repressed 
homosexuality as one aspect of their own account of the onset of the drip pictures 
(pp. 541-542); also see Jonathan Weinberg, “ Urination and Its Discontents.”
Leo Bersani’s chapter “ Theory and Violence” in The Freudian Body  (New York: Colum­
bia University Press, 1986) is a stunning analysis of the paradoxical logic of Civilization  
and Its Discontents  in which aggressiveness is both set in opposition to the oceanic 
feeling and made synonymous with it in an erotics of the indistinction between the self 
and the world.

In discussions with Yve-Alain Bois on the material of this chapter he completed my own 
thoughts about Pollock’s gesture by projecting the image of Morris Louis’s work as not 
only having restored the vertical but simultaneously having (re)constituted the image of 
the fire.
Triangular Desire, Mimetic Rivalry
Rene Girard, Deceit, Desire and the Novel,  trans. Yvonne Freccero (Baltimore: Johns 
Hopkins University Press, 1965): on “ latent homosexuality,” p. 47; on the disappearance 
of sexual pleasure in advanced stages of ontological sickness, pp. 85, 87; on the paralysis 
brought on by advanced stages, p. 87; on the rivalry over the body of the beloved, 
p. 105; on the increase of rivalry as external hierarchies diminish, p. 223.
Jacques Lacan, “ Aggressivity in Psychoanalysis,” Ecrits,  trans. Alan Sheridan (New York: 
Norton, 1977), p. 22. Denis Hollier’s important analysis of mimetic rivalry is “ On 
Equivocation,” October,  no. 55 (Winter 1990), p. 9.
The sense of proximity of the European artists who had arrived in New York, as 
expressed by the Americans, is reported by Naifeh and Smith, pp. 420— 421. The un­
folding of Greenberg’s conception of American painting’s rivalry with Europe can be 
tracked in his post-1945 criticism. It is the subject, in large part, of Serge Guilbaut’s 
How New York Stole the Idea o f Modern Art,  as it is of a whole literature on Greenberg’s 
relation to Cold War diplomacy. William Barnett describes it as well in his The Truants  
(New York: Doubleday, 1982), pp. 148— 152.
Jonathan Weinberg, in “ Pollock and Picasso: The Rivalry and the ‘Escape,’ ” Arts,  61 
(Summer 1987), pp. 42-48, analyzes Pollock’s work in terms of a rivalry with Picasso, 
although this analysis thematizes the rivalry in terms of an attempt to achieve a pictorial 
origin, emblematized by the fact that Pollock names three of his drip pictures “ One,” 
or “Number One.”
VerticalityIHorizontality
Leo Steinberg, in “ Other Criteria” ( Other Criteria  [New York: Oxford University Press, 
1972]), makes the important distinction between the horizontal dimension of culture 
and the vertical one of nature. For the purposes of art, he transcodes the first into what 
he terms “ the flatbed picture plane” and the second into “the diaphane.” Walter Benjamin 
has also contributed two texts to the phenomenology of the sign according to its vertical 
or horizontal orientation. See Benjamin, “ Peinture et graphisme” and “ De la peinture 
ou le signe et la marque,” La Part de VOeil,  no. 6 (1990), pp. 13-15, where they are 
presented by Yve-Alain Bois. Bois has made important use of the latter text in his own 
analyses (Bois, Painting as Model  [Cambridge: MIT Press, 1990], pp. 178ff.). Michael 
Fried, in his “ Realism, Writing, and Disfiguration in Thomas Eakins’s Gross Clinic”  
(Representations,  no. 9 [Winter 1985]), develops his own phenomenology of the dis­
tinction between what he calls the plane of writing (which he equates to the plane of 
perspective projection) and the plane of the visual (which he equates to the “pictorial” ). 
The first, he asserts, is the dimension of piecemeal, affective identification with elements 
of a given painting; the second is the dimension of a more distanced, formal experience. 
It is in the horizontal, identificatory plane that he elaborates a thematics of violence and 
Oedipality in Eakins’s Gross Clinic.  If his analysis and mine are in agreement about the 
dimension along which aggression is projected, this is the only place in which such 
agreement might be mapped.
Michel Foucault proposes the idea of a language game that connects— at the deepest 
epistemic level—image and text (legend) together on the same plane (what he calls a lieu3 2 7

SMOcommuti),  such that in the space of the “ common frontier” that binds the two systems 
together— “ these few millimeters of white, the calm sand of the page”—are indelibly 
“ established all the relations of designation, nomination, description, classification” : see 
This Is N ot a Pipe,  trans. Jam es Harkness (New York: Quantum, 1982), p. 28.
The extremely literary titles of the 1947 drip pictures were suggested to Pollock by the 
translator Ralph Mannheim in a naming session in preparation for their exhibition. But 
the plunging trajectory encoded in the names suggests that the experience of looking 
downward was apparent to Mannheim when he initially saw the works.
Horizontality has entered the Pollock literature primarily as a thematic issue (the expan­
ses of the American West or the openness of the Atlantic Ocean) or as an historical 
source, particularly with regard to Pollock’s interest in Navaho sand painting. See Hubert 
Damisch, “ Indians!!!,” in Jackson Pollock  (Paris: Centre Pompidou, 1982). The ex­
tremely representational nature of sand painting imagery gives it the same character of 
verticality within the phenomenological field that Roman mosaic images have.
Process
Robert Morris, “ Anti-Form,” Artforum,  6 (April 1968), p. 34; and Morris, “ Some Notes 
on the Phenomenology of M aking,” Artforum,  8 (April 1970), p. 63.
Namuth’s Pollock Film
Namuth’s contention that the idea to use glass came to him in a dream was reported by 
B. H. Friedman ( Energy Made Visible,  p. 163).
A still from Haesaerts’s Visite a Picasso  was reproduced in Art d’Aujourd’hui  (October 
3 2 8  1951), p. 27. A lavish spread of Gjon Mili’s photographs of the Space Drawings  was 
published in Life,  28 (January 30, 1950), pp. 10-12; they were also reproduced in Art 
Digest,  24 (February 1950), p. 15.
Gestalt Readings o f Pollock and Their Antithesis
The Gestalt psychological dismissal of Pollock is Rudolf Arnheim, “ Accident and the 
Necessity of Art,” Journal o f Aesthetics and Art Criticism,  16 (September 1957), pp. 18- 
31. The important attack on “ form-control” in the name of “ gestalt-free” depth vision 
is Anton Ehrenzweig, “ Unconscious Form-Creation in Art,” British Journal o f Medical  
Psychology,  no. 21 (1948), pp. 185-214, and no. 22 (1949), pp. 88-109. Robert Hobbes 
connects Ehrenzweig’s later notions of “ scanning vision” and “ scotopia” to abstract 
expressionism in “ Early Abstract Expressionism: A Concern with the Unknown Within,” 
Abstract-Expressionism: Formative Years  (New York: Whitney Museum of American 
Art, 1978), pp. 22— 25. A modernist reading of Pollock that employs the very terms of 
Gestalt psychology by projecting patterns onto the drip pictures is in Matthew Rohn, 
Visual Dynamics in Jackson Pollock’s Abstractions  (Ann Arbor: UMI Research Press, 
1987). That the labyrinth could possibly be classed as a gestalt (p. 46) is a peculiar 
view indeed.
Eva Hesse
In addition to Lucy Lippard’s monograph Eva Hesse  (New York: New York University 
Press, 1976), important documentation on Hesse has been published in “ Order and 
Chaos: From the Diaries of Eva Hesse,” selected by Ellen H. Johnson, Art in America,

71 (Summer 1983); and Cindy Nemser, “ An Interview with Eva Hesse,” Artforum,  8 
(May 1970). My first written appraisal of Hesse’s work was as a catalogue introduction 
to Eva Hesse: Sculpture  (London: Whitechapel Art Gallery, 1979), in which I analyze 
her work in relation to painting, particularly the problematic connected to anamorphosis. 
For a range of contemporary critical responses to Hesse, see Eva Hesse: A Retrospective  
(New Haven: Yale University Art Gallery, 1992).
Lippard’s early reaction to Hesse as “ ‘Tom’s wife’ rather than a serious artist” is in her 
monograph, p. 23; her account of Hesse’s raiding the thesaurus for titles, pp. 65, 204; 
of her writing down lists of authors, p. 12. Lippard publishes Hesse’s letter to Sol LeWitt 
describing one of the Kettwig reliefs as “ breast and penis” (p. 34); a letter to her friend 
Rosie Goldman describing the works as “machines” (p. 38); and the Life magazine 
quotation about Jackson Pollock and chaos disguised as non-chaos (p. 172).
Hesse’s discussion of H ang Up  is in the interview with Nemser (Lippard, p. 56), as is 
the statement about repetition heightening absurdity (Lippard, p. 5).
Hilton Kramer’s review of “ Eccentric Abstraction” appeared in the New York Times  
(September 25, 1966); it is quoted in Lippard (pp. 83, 188— 189) and her defense, from 
Sculpture o f the Sixties  (Los Angeles County Museum, 1967) follows (p. 189); her 
discussion of the pictorial aspects and Hesse as a sculptor “drawing in space” closes the 
book (pp. 190-192).
See Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari, Anti-Oedipus,  trans. Robert Hurley, Mark Seem, 
and Helen R. Lane (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1983), pp. 8, 12, 16.

Bibliography
Adcock, Craig. Marcel Duchamp’s Notes  
from the “Large G lass”: An n-Dimen-  
sional Analysis.  Ann Arbor: UMI Re­
search Press, 1981.
Adorno, Theodor. “ Looking Back at Sur­
realism.” In The Idea o f the Modern in  
Literature and the Arts,  ed. Irving Howe, 
pp. 220— 224. New York: Horizon, 1967.
Aragon, Louis. “ M ax Ernst, peintre des 
illusions” (1923). In Les collages,  pp. 27—  
33. Paris: Hermann, 1965.
Arnheim, Rudolf. “ Accident and the Ne­
cessity of Art.” Journal o f Aesthetics and  
Art Criticism,  16 (September 1957), 
pp. 18-31.
Bachelard, Gaston. La psychanalyse du  
feu. Paris: Gallimard, 1949.
Barbut, Marc. “ On the Meaning of the 
Word ‘Structure’ in Mathematics.” In In­
troduction to Strucutralism,  ed. Michael 
Lane, pp. 367-388. New York: Basic 
Books, 1970.
Barthes, Roland. Mythologies  (1957). 
Trans. Annette Lavers. New York: Hill 
and Wang, 1972.
Barthes, Roland. “ The Metaphor of the 
Eye” (1963). In Critical Essays,  trans. 
Richard Howard, pp. 239-248. Evans­
ton: Northwestern University Press, 1972.
Barthes, Roland. “ The Outcomes of the 
Text” (1973). In The Rustle o f Language,  
trans. Richard Howard, pp. 238— 249. 
New York: Hill and Wang, 1986.
Bataille, Georges. Visions o f Excess: Se­
lected Writings, 1927— 1939.  Ed. and 
trans. Allan Stoekl. Minneapolis: Univer­
sity of Minnesota Press, 1985.
Benjamin, Walter. Illuminations.  Trans. 
Harry Zohn. New York: Shocken Books,
1969.Benjamin, Walter. Reflections.  Trans. Ed­
mund Jephcott. New York: Harcourt 
Brace Jovanovich, 1978.
Benjamin, Walter. “ A Small History of 
Photography” (1931). In One Way Street,  
trans. Edmund Jephcott and Kingsley 
Shorter, pp. 240— 257. London: New Left 
Books, 1979.
Benjamin, Walter. “Peinture et graph- 
isme” and “ De la peinture ou le signe et 
la marque.” La Part de I’Oeil,  no. 6  
(1990), pp. 13-15.
Benton, Thomas Hart. “ Mechanics of 
Form Organization in Painting.” The Arts  
(November and December 1926; January, 
February, March 1927), pp. 285-289, 
340-342, 43 -4 4 , 95-96.
Bernadac, Marie-Laure. “ Picasso, 1953- 
1973: La peinture comme modele.” In Le 
dernier Picasso.  Paris: Musee National 
d’Art Moderne, 1988.
Bersani, Leo. The Freudian Body.  New 
York: Columbia University Press, 1986.
Bersani, Leo. The Culture o f Redemption.  
Cambridge: Harvard University Press,
1990.
Bockris, Victor. The Life and Death of  
Andy Warhol.  New York: Bantam Books, 
1989.
Bois, Yve-Alain. Painting as Model.  Cam­
bridge: M IT Press, 1990.
Breton, Andre. Nadja.  Paris: Editions 
Gallimard, 1929.
Breton, Andre. L ’amour fou.  Paris: Edi­
tions Gallimard, 1937.
Breton, Andre. Surrealism and Painting.  
New York: Harper &  Row, 1972.
Bryson, Norman. Vision and Painting.  
New Haven: Yale University Press, 1983.

332
BibliographyBuchloh, Benjamin H. D. “ Andy Warhol’s 
One-Dimensional Art: 1956— 1966.” In 
Andy Warhol: A Retrospective.  New 
York: Museum of Modern Art, 1989.
Buchloh, Benjamin H. D. “ The Andy 
Warhol Line.” In The Work o f Andy War­
hol, ed. Gary Garrels, pp. 52-69. Seattle: 
Bay Press and the Dia Foundation, 1989.
Buck-Morss, Susan. “ The Flaneur, the 
Sandwichman and the Whore. ” New Ger­
man Critique,  no. 39 (Fall 1986), pp. 9 9 -
141.
Buck-Morss, Susan. The Dialectics of  
Seeing: Walter Benjamin and the Arcades  
Project.  Cambridge: MIT Press, 1989.
Cabanne, Pierre. Dialogues with Marcel  
Duchamp.  Trans. Ron Padgett. New 
York: Viking Press, 1971.
Caillois, Roger. “ La mante religieuse.” 
Minotaure,  no. 5 (May 1934), pp. 23— 26.
Caillois, Roger. “Mimicry and Legendary 
Psychasthenia.” Trans. John Shepley. Oc­
tober,  no. 31 (Winter 1984), pp. 17-32.
Carmean, E. A., Jr. The Subjects o f the  
Artist,  pp. 124-153. Washington, D.C.: 
National Gallery of Art, 1978.
Clair, Jean. “Marcel Duchamp et la tra­
dition des perspecteurs.” In Marcel Du­
champ: Abecedaire,  pp. 124— 159. Paris: 
Musee National d’Art Moderne, 1977.
Clair, Jean. Duchamp et la photographie.  
Paris: Chene, 1977.
Clark, T. J. “Jackson Pollock’s Abstrac­
tion,” In Reconstructing Modernism,  ed. 
Serge Guilbaut, pp. 172-243. Cambridge: 
MIT Press, 1990.
Clement, Catherine. The Lives and Leg­
ends o f Jacques Lacan.  Trans. Arthur 
Goldhammer. New York: Columbia 
Univerity Press, 1983.
Colacello, Bob. Holy Terror.  New York: 
Harper Collins, 1990.
Cooper, Douglas. Pablo Picasso: Les De­
jeuners.  New York: Harry N. Abrams,
1963.
Copjec, Joan. “Favit et Dissipati Sunt.” 
October,  no. 18 (Fall 1981), pp. 21-40.Crary, Jonathan. Techniques o f the Ob­
server: On Vision and Modernity in the  
Nineteenth Century.  Cambridge: MIT 
Press, 1990.
Crow, Thomas. “ Modernism and Mass 
Culture in the Visual Arts.” In Modernism  
and Modernity,  ed. Benjamin H. D. Buch­
loh, pp. 215-264. Halifax: Press of the 
Nova Scotia College of Art  and Design, 
1983.
Curtis, William J. R. Le Corbusier: Ideas  
and Forms.  Oxford: Phaidon, 1986.
Dali, Salvador. “ Objets psycho-atmo- 
spheriques-anamorphiques.” Le Surreal-  
isme au service de la revolution,  no. 5 
(May 1933), pp. 45-48.
Damisch, Hubert. “ The Duchamp De­
fense.” October,  no. 10 (Fall 1979), 
pp. 5-28.
Damisch, Hubert. Fenetre jaune cad­
mium: ou les dessous de la peinture.  Paris: 
Seuil, 1984.
Damisch, Hubert. Le jugement de Paris.  
Paris: Flammarion, 1992.
de Duve, Thierry. Nominalisme Pictural.  
Paris: Editions de Minuit, 1984.
Delaunay, Robert. The New Art o f Color.  
Ed. Arthur Cohen. New York: Viking 
Press, 1978.
Deleuze, Gilles, and Felix Guattari. Anti-  
Oedipus  (1972). Trans. Robert Hurley, 
Mark Seem, and Helen R. Lane. Minne­
apolis: University of Minnesota Press,
1983.
Derrida, Jacques. Speech and Phenomena  
(1967). Trans. David B. Allison. Evan­
ston: Northwestern University Press, 
1973.
Derrida, Jacques. O f Grammatology  
(1967). Trans. Gayatri Chakravorty Spi- 
vak. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University 
Press, 1974.
Derrida, Jacques. “ Freud and the Scene of 
Writing.” Writing and Difference,  trans. 
Alan Bass, pp. 196-231. Chicago: Uni­
versity of Chicago Press, 1978.

Didi-Huberman, Georges. Ce que nous  
voyons, ce qui nous regard.  Paris: Minuit, 
1992.
Duchamp, Marcel. Salt Seller: The Writ­
ings o f Marcel Duchamp (Marchand du  
Sel). Ed. Michel Sanouillet and Elmer Pe­
terson. New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1973.
Eco, Umberto, and Thomas A. Sebeok, 
eds. The Sign o f Three.  Bloomington: In­
diana University Press, 1983.
Ehrenzweig, Anton. “ Unconscious Form- 
Creation in Art.” British Journal o f Med­
ical Psychology,  no. 21 (1948), pp. 185—  
214, and no. 22 (1949), pp. 88-109.
Ernst, M ax. Beyond Painting.  New York: 
Wittenborn, Schultz, 1948.
Felman, Shoshana. Jacques Lacan and the  
Adventure o f Insight.  Cambridge: Har­
vard University Press, 1987.
Foster, Hal. “ Armor Fou.” October,  no. 
56 (Spring 1991), pp. 65-98.
Foster, Hal. “ Convulsive Identity.” Oc­
tober,  no. 57 (Summer 1991), pp. 19-54.
Foucault, Michel. This Is N ot a Pipe.  
Trans. James Harkness. New York: 
Quantum, 1982.
Freud, Sigmund. “ Screen Memories” 
(1899). In The Standard Edition o f the  
Complete Psychological Works o f Sig­
mund Freud,  ed. Jam es Strachey. 24 vols. 
London: Hogarth Press and the Institute 
for Psycho-Analysis, 1953-1973. Vol. 3, 
pp. 301-322.
Freud, Sigmund. The Interpretation o f  
Dreams  (1900). Trans. James Strachey. 
New York: Avon Books, 1965.
Freud, Sigmund. “ Three Essays on the 
Theory of Sexuality” (1905). In Standard  
Edition,  vol. 7, pp. 156— 157.
Freud, Sigmund. “ Delusion and Dream” 
(1906). In Standard Edition,  vol. 9, 
pp. 3— 93.
Freud, Sigmund. “ Leonardo da Vinci and 
a Memory of His Childhood” (1910). In 
Standard Edition,  vol. 11, pp. 59— 137.Freud, Sigmund. “Psychogenic Visual 
Disturbance According to Psychoanalyti­
cal Conceptions” (1910). In Standard  
Edition,  vol. 11, pp. 211-218.
Freud, Sigmund. “ From the History of an 
Infantile Neurosis” (1918). In Standard  
Edition,  vol. 17, pp. 3— 122; Collier Books 
Edition: Three Case Histories.
Freud, Sigmund. “A Child Is Being 
Beaten” (1919). In Standard Edition,  vol. 
17, pp. 177-204.
Freud, Sigmund. “ The Uncanny” (1919). 
In Standard Edition,  vol. 17, pp. 2 3 4 - 
235.
Freud, Sigmund. “Beyond the Pleasure 
Principle” (1920). In Standard Edition,  
vol. 18, pp. 7-64.
Freud, Sigmund. “ A Note upon the ‘Mys­
tic Writing-Pad’” (1924). In Standard  
Edition,  vol. 19, pp. 227-234.
Freud, Sigmund. “ Fetishism” (1927). In 
Standard Edition,  vol. 21, pp. 152-153.
Freud, Sigmund. “ Civilization and Its Dis­
contents” (1930). In Standard Edition,  
vol. 21, pp. 99-100.
Fried, Michael. Three American Painters.  
Cambridge: The Fogg Art Museum, 1965.
Fried, Michael. “ Art and Objecthood.” 
Published in 1967 in Artforum.  Reprinted 
in Minimal Art,  ed. Gregory Battock, 
pp. 116— 147. New York: Dutton, 1968.
Fried, Michael. “ The Beholder in Cour­
bet: His Early Self-Portraits and Their 
Place in His Art.” Glyph,  no. 4 (1978), 
pp. 85-130.
Fried, Michael. “ Realism, Writing, and 
Disfiguration in Thomas Eakins’s Gross  
Clinic.” Representations,  no. 9 (Winter 
1985), pp. 33-104.
Friedman, B. H. Jackson Pollock: Energy  
Made Visible.  New York: McGraw-Hill,
1972.
Fry, Roger. Vision and Design.  New 
York: Brentano’s, n.d.
Gagnon, Fran^ois-Marc. “ The Work and 
Its Grip.” In Jackson Pollock: Questions,333
Bibliography

334
Bibliographypp. 15— 42. Montreal: Musee d’art con- 
temporain, 1979.
Gallop, Jane. Reading Lacan.  Ithaca: 
Cornell University Press, 1985.
Garnett, Angelica. Deceived with Kind­
ness.  London: Chatto &  Windus, 1984.
Garnett, David. The Flowers o f the For­
est. London: Chatto &  Windus, 1955.
Gateau, Jean-Charles. Paul Eluard et la  
peinture surrealiste.  Paris: Droz, 1982.
Gee, Malcolm. “ M ax Ernst, God, and the 
Revolution by Night.” Arts,  55 (March
1981), pp. 85-92.
Girard, Rene. Deceit, Desire and the  
Novel.  Trans. Yvonne Freccero. Balti­
more: Johns Hopkins University Press,
1965.
Graham, John. “ Primitive Art and Pi­
casso.” Magazine o f Art,  30 (April 1937), 
pp. 236-239, 260.
Greenberg, Clement. Art and Culture.  
Boston: Beacon Press, 1961.
Greenberg, Clement. “ Modernist Paint­
ing” (1965). Reprinted in The New Art,  
ed. Gregory Battcock, pp. 100— 110.  New 
York: Dutton, 1966.
Greenberg, Clement. Clement Greenberg:  
The Collected Essays and Criticism.  Vol. 
2. Ed. John O ’Brian. Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press, 1986.
Gregory, Richard. Eye and Brain.  New 
York: World University Library, 1978.
Greimas, A. J. “ The Interaction of Se­
miotic Constraints.” In On Meaning,  
pp. 48-62. Minneapolis: University of 
Minnesota Press, 1987.
Guilbaut, Serge. How New York Stole the  
Idea o f Modern Art.  Trans. Arthur Gold- 
hammer. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1983.
Hansen, Miriam. “ Benjamin, Cinema and 
Experience.” New German Critique,  no. 
40 (Winter 1987), pp. 179-224.
Helmholtz, Hermann von. Helmholtz on  
Perception.  Ed. Richard Warren and Ros- 
lyn Warren. New York: John Wiley & c 
Sons, 1968.Hinton, Geoffrey. “ M ax Ernst: ‘Les 
Hommes n’en Sauront Rien.’ ” Burlington  
Magazine,  117 (May 1975), pp. 292-299.
Hobbes, Robert. “ Early Abstract Expres­
sionism: A Concern with the Unknown 
Within.” In Abstract-Expressionism: For­
mative Years,  pp. 8-26. New York: Whit­
ney Museum of American Art, 1978.
Hollier, Denis. Against Architecture  
(1974). Trans. Betsy Wing. Cambridge: 
M IT Press, 1990.
Hollier, Denis. “ Mimesis and Castration, 
1937.” October,  no. 31 (Winter 1984), 
pp. 3-15.
Hollier, Denis. “ On Equivocation.” Oc­
tober,  no. 55 (Winter 1990), pp. 3— 21.
Hollier, Denis. “ The Use Value of the Im­
possible.” October,  no. 60 (Spring 1992).
Huot, Herve. D u sujet a I’image: Une his-  
toire de Voeil chez Freud.  Paris: Editions 
Universitaires, 1987.
Irigaray, Luce. This Sex which Is Not  
One.  Trans. Catherine Porter. Ithaca: 
Cornell University Press, 1985.
Jameson, Fredric. “ Imaginary and Sym­
bolic in Lacan: Marxism, Psychoanalytic 
Criticism, and the Problem of the Sub­
ject.” Yale French Studies,  nos. 55/56 
(1977), pp. 338-395.
Jameson, Fredric. The Political Uncon­
scious: Narrative as a Socially Symbolic  
Act. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 
1981.
Jay, Martin. “ In the Empire of the Gaze: 
Foucault and the Denigration of Vision in 
Twentieth-Century French Thought.” In 
Foucault: A Critical Reader,  ed. David 
Couzens Hoy, pp. 175— 204. London: 
Basil Blackwell, 1986.
Jay, Martin. “ Scopic Regimes of Modern­
ity.” In Vision and Visuality,  ed. Hal Fos­
ter, pp. 3-28. Seattle: Bay Press and Dia 
Art Foundation, 1988.
Jay Martin. Downcast Eyes.  Forthcoming 
from University of California Press.
Kaprow, Allan. “ The Legacy of Jackson 
Pollock.” Art News,  57 (October 1958), 
pp. 24-25, 55-57.

Kaprow, Allan. “ Should the Artist Be­
come a Man of the World.” Art News,
63 (October 1964).
Klein, Melanie. “ Psychogenesis of Manic 
Depressive States” (1935) and “ Notes on 
Some Schizoid Mechanisms” (1946). In 
Selected Melanie Klein,  ed. Juliet Mitchell. 
New York: The Free Press, 1986.
Kohler, Wolfgang. Gestalt Psychology.  
New York: New American Library, 1947.
Krauss, Rosalind. “ Corpus Delicti.” In 
L ’Amour Fou: Photography and Surreal­
ism. New York: Abbeville Press, 1986.
Krauss, Rosalind. The Originality o f the  
Avant-Garde and Other Modernist  
Myths.  Cambridge: M IT Press, 1986.
Kristeva, Julia. Revolution in Poetic Lan­
guage  (1974). Trans. M argaret Waller. 
New York: Columbia University Press,
1984.
Kristeva, Julia. The Powers o f Horror  
(1980). Trans. Leon Roudiez. New York: 
Columbia University Press, 1982.
Lacan, Jacques. Ecrits: A Selection.  Trans. 
Alan Sheridan. New York: Norton, 1977.
Lacan, Jacques. The Four Fundamental  
Concepts o f Psycho-Analysis.  Trans. Alan 
Sheridan. New York: Norton, 1977.
Landau, Ellen. Jackson Pollock.  New 
York: Abrams, 1989.
LaPlanche, Jean. Life and Death in Psy­
choanalysis.  Trans. Jeffrey Mehlman. Bal­
timore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 
1976.
LaPlanche, Jean, and J.-B. Pontalis. “ Fan­
tasy and the Origins of Sexuality.” The 
International Journal o f Psycho-Analysis,  
49 (1968). Reprinted in Formations o f  
Fantasy,  ed. Victor Burgin, Jam es Donald, 
and Cora Kaplan, pp. 5 -28. London: Me­
thuen, 1986.
Legge, Elisabeth. M ax Ernst: The Psycho­
analytic Sources.  Ann Arbor: UMI 
Research Press, 1989.
Leja, Michael, “ Art for Modern Man:  
New York School Painting and American 
Culture in the 1940s.” Ph.D. thesis, Har­
vard University, 1988.Leroi-Gourhan, Andre. “The Religion of 
the Caves: M agic or Metaphysics?” and 
“The Hands at Gargas: Toward a General 
Study.” October,  no. 37 (Summer 1986), 
pp. 6-17, 18-34.
Levi-Strauss, Claude. “ The Structural 
Analysis of Myth. ” In Structural Anthro­
pology.  New York: Basic Books, 1963.
Lewin, Bertram D. “ Sleep, the Mouth, 
and the Dream Screen.” Psychoanalytic  
Quarterly,  15 (1946), pp. 419— 434.
Lewin, Bertram D. “ Sleep, Narcissistic 
Neurosis, and the Analytic Situation.” 
Psychoanalytic Quarterly,  23 (1954), 
pp. 487-510.
Lippard, Lucy. Eva Hesse.  New York: 
New York University Press, 1976.
Lyotard, Jean-Fran^ois. Discours, Figure.  
Paris: Klincksieck, 1971.
Lyotard, Jean-Fran^ois. Les TRANSfor-  
mateurs DUchamp.  Paris, Galilee, 1977.
Macey, David. Lacan in Contexts.  Lon­
don: Verso, 1988.
Maurer, Evan. “Images of Dream and De­
sire: The Prints and Collage Novels of 
M ax Ernst.” In M ax Ernst, Beyond Sur­
realism,  ed. Robert Rainwater, pp. 5 4 - 
93. New York: New York Public Library 
and Oxford University Press, 1986.
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice. The Phenomen­
ology o f Perception  (1945). Trans. Colin 
Smith. London: Routledge & C Kegan Paul, 
1962.
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice. “ Eye and 
Mind.” Trans. Carleton Dallery. In The 
Primacy o f Perception,  ed. Jam es M. Edie. 
Evanston: Northwestern University Press,
1964.
Morris, Robert. “ Anti-Form.” Artforum,  
6 (April 1968), pp. 33-34.
Morris, Robert. “ Some Notes on the 
Phenomenology of M aking.” Artforum,  8 
(April 1970), pp. 62-66.
Naifeh, Steven, and Gregory White Smith. 
Jackson Pollock: An American Saga.  New 
York: Clarkson Potter, 1989.33S
Bibliography

33 6 
BibliographyNamuth, Hans. “ Photographier Pollock.” 
In L ’atelier de Jackson Pollock.  Paris: 
Editions Macula, 1978.
Nesbit, Molly. “ The Language of Indus­
try.” In The Definitively Unfinished Mar­
cel Duchamp,  ed. Thierry de Duve, 
pp. 351-398. Cambridge: MIT Press,
1991.
O ’Connor, Francis V. Jackson Pollock.  
New York: Museum of Modern Art, 
1967.
O ’Connor, Francis V., and Eugene Thaw, 
eds. Jackson Pollock: Catalogue Raisonne  
o f Paintings, Drawings, and Other  
Works.  New Haven: Yale University 
Press, 1978.
Ozenfant, Amedee, and Edouard Jean- 
neret. La peinture moderne.  Paris: Edi­
tions G. Cres, n.d.
Parmelin, Helene. The Artist and His  
Model.  New York: Abrams, 1965.
Parmelin, Helene. Picasso: Women,  
Mougins and Vauvenargues.  London: 
Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1965.
Parmelin, Helene. Intimate Secrets o f a  
Studio at Notre Dame de Vie.  New York: 
Abrams, 1966.
Parmelin, Helene. Picasso Says.  London: 
George Allen and Unwin, 1969.
Parmelin, Helene. Art et anartisme.  Paris: 
Christian Bourgois, 1969.
Parmelin, Helene. Voyage en Picasso.  
Paris: Robert Lafont, 1980.
Paz, Octavio. Marcel Duchamp: Appear­
ance Stripped Bare.  New York: Viking, 
1978.
Rohn, Matthew L. Visual Dynamics in  
Jackson Pollock’s Abstractions.  Ann Ar­
bor: UMI Research Press, 1987.
Rose, Bernice. Jackson Pollock: Drawing  
into Painting.  New York: Museum of 
Modern Art, 1980.
Rose, Jacqueline. Sexuality in the Field o f  
Vision.  London: Verso, 1986.
Rosenbaum, S. P., ed. The Bloomsbury  
Group.  Toronto: University of Toronto 
Press, 1975.Rosenberg, Harold. “ The American Ac­
tion Painters.” Art News,  51 (December 
1952). Reprinted in The Tradition o f the  
New,  pp. 28-29. New York: Horizon 
Press, 1959.
Rosenblum, Robert. “ Picasso and the 
Anatomy of Eroticism.” In Studies in  
Erotic Art,  ed. Theodore Bowie and Cor­
nelia V. Christenson. New York: Basic 
Books, 1970.
Roudinesco, Elisabeth. Histoire de la psy-  
chanalyse en France.  2 vols. Paris: Edi­
tions du Seuil, 1986.
Rubin, William. “Jackson Pollock and the 
Modern Tradition.” Artforum,  5 (Febru­
ary, March, April, and M ay 1967).
Rubin, William. “ Pollock as Jungian Il­
lustrator: The Limits of Psychological 
Criticism.” Art in America,  67 (Novem­
ber 1979), pp. 104-123, and (December 
1979), pp. 72-91.
Ruskin, John. Praeterita  (1885-1889). 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1979.
Sartre, Jean-Paul. Being and Nothingness  
(1943). Trans. Hazel E. Barnes. New 
York: Washington Square Press, 1966.
Sartre, Jean-Paul. Imagination, a Psycho­
logical Critique.  Trans. Forrest Williams. 
Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 
1962.
Schleifer, Ronald. A. J. Greimas and the  
Nature o f Meaning.  Lincoln: University 
of Nebraska Press, 1987.
Schwarz, Arturo. “The Alchemist 
Stripped Bare in the Bachelor, Even.” In 
Marcel Duchamp,  ed. Anne d’Harnon- 
court and Kynaston McShine, pp. 81-98. 
New York: Museum of Modern Art; Phil­
adelphia: Philadelphia Museum of Art,
1973.
Sedgewick, Eve Kosofsky. Between Men:  
English Literature and Male Homosocial  
Desire.  New York: Columbia University 
Press, 1985.
Spies, Werner. “ Une poetique du collage.” 
In Paul Eluard et ses amis peintres,  
pp. 45-69. Paris: Centre Georges Pom­
pidou, 1982.

Spies, Werner. M ax Ernst, Loplop: The  
Artist in the Third Person.  New York: 
George Braziller, 1983.
Spies, Werner. M ax Ernst: Les collages,  
inventaire et contradictions.  Paris: Galli­
mard, 1984.
Steinberg, Leo. Other Criteria.  New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1972.
Straus, Erwin. “ The Upright Posture” 
(1948). In Essays in Phenomenology,  ed. 
Maurice Natanson. The Hague: Martinus 
Nijhoff, 1966.
Straus, Erwin. “Born to See, Bound to 
Behold: Reflections on the Function of 
Upright Posture in the Aesthetic Attitude” 
(1963). In The Philosophy o f the Body,  
ed. Stuart Spicker, pp. 334-359. New 
York: Quadrangle, 1970.
Stuckey, Charles. “ Another Side of Jack­
son Pollock.” Art in America,  65 (No­
vember 1977), pp. 81-91.
Teuber, Dirk. “ M ax Ernsts Lehrmittel.” 
In M ax Ernst in Koln,  pp. 206— 240. Co­
logne: Kolnischer Kunstverein, 1980.
Tzara, Tristan. “D ’un certain automa- 
tisme du gout.” Minotaure,  no. 3 (1933), 
pp. 81— 85.
Waldberg, Patrick. M ax Ernst.  Paris: 
Jean-Jacques Pauvert, 1958.
Warhol, Andy, and Pat Hackett. POPism:  
The Warhol Sixties.  New York: Harcourt 
Brace Jovanovich, 1980.
Warlick, M. E. “ M ax Ernst’s Alchemical 
Novel: Une semaine de bonte.” Art Jour­
nal, 46 (Spring 1987), pp. 61-72.
Weinberg, Jonathan. “ Pollock and Pi­
casso: The Rivalry and the ‘Escape.’ ” 
Arts,  61 (Summer 1987), pp. 42-48.__________ 337
Bibliography

1

List o f Illustrations
Frank Stella, Louisiana Lottery Company,  
1962. Synthetic polymer with pencil 
underdrawing on canvas, 853 /a x 853 /s 
inches. The Hirshhorn Museum and 
Sculpture Garden, Smithsonian Institu­
tion, Washington, D.C., Gift of Joseph
H. Hirshhorn. Photo by John Tenant. 
© 1993 Frank Stella/A R S, New York. 
Page 3
Piet Mondrian, Dune III,  1909. Oil on 
canvas, l l 5 /s x 153 /s inches. Haags 
Gemeentemuseum, The Hague. Page 4
Piet Mondrian, Pier and Ocean,  1914. 
Charcoal and white watercolor on buff 
paper, 345 /s x 44 inches; oval composition 
33 x 40 inches. The Museum of Modern 
Art, New York, Mrs. Simon Guggenheim 
Fund. Page 9
Piet Mondrian, Pier and Ocean (Com­
position No, 10),  1915. Oil on canvas, 
33 Vi x 42 V S inches. Kroller-Miiller Sticht- 
ing, Otterlo. Photo by Tom Haartsen. 
Page 10
Piet Mondrian, Composition in Lines  
(Black and White),  1916-1917. Oil on 
canvas, 42V2 x 42V2 inches. Kroller- 
Miiller Stichting, Otterlo. Page 1 7
Piet Mondrian, Composition 1916,  1916. 
Oil on canvas, 46%  x 295 /s inches. 
Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, 
New York. Photo by Robert E. Mates. 
Page 18
Piet Mondrian, Composition with Gray  
Lines,  1918. Diagonal 47Vi inches. Haags 
Gemeentemuseum, The Hague. Page 25
Frank Stella, Hyena Stomp,  1962. Alkyd 
on canvas, 7 7 1 /* x 77'A inches. The Tate 
Gallery, London. © 1993 Frank Stella / 
ARS, New York. Page 26
M ax Ernst, La femme 100 tetes,  1929: 
“ Crime or wonder; a complete man.” 
© 1993 ARS, New Y ork/SPA D EM / 
AD AGP, Paris. Page 37M ax Ernst, La femme 100 tetes,  1929: 
“Continuation.” © 1993 ARS, New 
York / SPADEM / AD AGP, Paris. Page 38
M ax Ernst, La femme 100 tetes,  1929: 
“ Continuation of morning, twilight, and 
night games.” © 1993 ARS, New York/ 
SPADEM / AD AGP, Paris. Page 39
M ax Ernst, La femme 100 tetes,  1929: 
“ Here is the thirst that resembles me.” 
© 1993 ARS, New Y ork/SPA D EM / 
ADAGP, Paris. Page 40
M ax Ernst, La femme 100 tetes,  1929: 
“ And her phantom globe will track us 
down ...”  © 1993 ARS, New York/ 
SPADEM / ADAGP, Paris. Page 43
M ax Ernst, La puberte proche  . . . ,  1921. 
Overpainting, gouache on photograph, 
9Vs x 6V2 inches. Collection Werner Spies. 
© 1993 ARS, New Y ork/SPA D EM / 
ADAGP, Paris. Page 44
M ax Ernst, The Hat Makes the Man,  
1920. Cut and pasted paper, pencil, ink, 
and watercolor on paper, 14 x 18 inches. 
The Museum of Modern Art, New York. 
© 1993 ARS, New Y ork/SPA D EM / 
ADAGP, Paris. Page 49
M ax Ernst, The Horse, H e’s Sick,  1920. 
Pasted photoengraving and pencil on pa­
per, 53 A x  8V2 inches. The Museum of 
Modern Art, New York, Abby Aldrich 
Rockefeller Fund. © 1993 ARS, New 
York / SPADEM / ADAGP, Paris. Page SO
M ax Ernst, Demonstration hydrome-  
trique a tuer par la temperature,  1920. 
Overpainting, 9Vi x 65 /s inches. Collection 
Jacques Tronche, Paris. © 1993 ARS, 
New York / SPADEM / ADAGP, Paris. 
Page SI
Kolner Lehrmittelanstalt catalogue, p. 
756. Page 52
M ax Ernst, The Master’s Bedroom,  1920. 
Overpainting, 6V2 x 8Ys inches. Private

340
Illustrationscollection, Switzerland. © 1993 ARS, 
New York / SPADEM / AD AGP, Paris. 
Page 55
Kolner Lehrmittelanstalt catalogue, p.
142, detail. Page 56
M ax Ernst, D ada in usum delpbini,  1920. 
Present whereabouts unknown. © 1993 
ARS, New York / SPADEM / ADAGP, 
Paris. Page 59
M ax Ernst, Souvenir de dieu,  1923. Pres­
ent whereabouts unknown. © 1993 ARS, 
New York / SPADEM / ADAGP, Paris. 
Page 60
M ax Ernst, The Virgin Chastising the In­
fant Jesus in Front o f Three Witnesses:  
A. B., P. E., and the Artist,  1926. Oil on 
canvas, 77 x 51 inches. Collection M a­
dame Jean Krebs, Brussels. © 1993 ARS, 
New York / SPADEM / ADAGP, Paris. 
Page 61
Oskar Pfister, Picture Puzzle,  1919. Re­
produced in Freud, Leonardo da Vinci,  
p. 116. Page 62
M ax Ernst, At the First Clear Word,  
1923. 93 Vi x 653 A inches. Kunst- 
sammlung Nordrhein-Westfalen, Diissel- 
dorf. Photo by Walter Klein. © 1993 
ARS, New York / SPADEM / ADAGP, 
Paris. Page 69
“ Illusion of Touch,” La Nature  (1881), 
p. 584. Page 70
M ax Ernst, La femme 100 tetes,  1929: 
“ Truth will remain simple, and gigantic 
wheels will ride the bitter waves.” 
© 1993 ARS, New Y ork/SPA D EM / 
ADAGP, Paris. Page 77
M ax Ernst, L a femme 100 tetes,  1929: 
“ The might-have-been Immaculate Con­
ception.” © 1993 ARS, New York/ 
SPADEM / ADAGP, Paris. Page 78
M ax Ernst, La femme 100 tetes,  1929: 
“ . . . and the third time missed.” © 1993 
ARS, New York/SPA D EM /A D A G P, 
Paris. Page 79
M ax Ernst, The Garden o f France,  1962. 
Oil on canvas, 44%  x 6 6Vs inches. Musee 
National d’Art Moderne, Paris. © 1993 
ARS, New York / SPADEM / ADAGP, 
Paris. Page 80M ax Ernst, The Invention,  1922. Present 
whereabouts unknown. © 1993 ARS, 
New York / SPADEM / ADAGP, Paris. 
Page 83
“ Electrical Experiment, Carried Out on 
a Walnut,” La Nature  (1891), p. 272. 
© 1993 ARS, New Y ork/SPA D EM / 
ADAGP, Paris. Page 84
M ax Ernst, Repetitions  (cover collage), 
1922. Present whereabouts unknown. 
© 1993 ARS, New Y ork/SPA D EM / 
ADAGP, Paris. Page 85
“The Magic Ball,” La Nature  (1887), 
p. 144. Page 86
M ax Ernst, Magician,  1921. 5 Vs x 4 Vi 
inches. Galerie Dieter Brusberg, Hanover. 
© 1993 ARS, New Y ork/SPA D EM / 
ADAGP, Paris. Page 89
“The Multiplication of Eggs, the M agi­
cian Alber’s Trick,” La Nature  (1881). 
Page 90
Marcel Duchamp, Rotorelief  (“Montgol­
fier Balloon” ), 1935. Cardboard, printed 
by offset lithography, 7%  inches diameter. 
The Museum of Modern Art, New York, 
Gift of the Riklis Collection of The 
McCrory Corporation. © 1993 ARS, 
New York / ADAGP, Paris. Page 99
Marcel Duchamp, Rotorelief  (“ Gold­
fish” ), 1935. Cardboard, printed by offset 
lithography, 7%  inches diameter. The Mu­
seum of Modern Art, New York, Gift of 
the Riklis Collection of The McCrory 
Corporation. © 1993 ARS, New York / 
ADAGP, Paris. Page 100
Marcel Duchamp, Rotorelief  (“ Chinese 
Lantern” ), 1935. Cardboard, printed by 
offset lithography, 7%  inches diameter. 
The Museum of Modern Art, New York, 
Gift of the Riklis Collection of The 
McCrory Corporation. © 1993 ARS, 
New York / ADAGP, Paris. Page 101
Marcel Duchamp, Rotorelief  (“ Co- 
rolles” ), 1935. Cardboard, printed by off­
set lithography, 7% inches diameter. The 
Museum of Modern Art, New York, Gift 
of the Riklis Collection of The McCrory 
Corporation. © 1993 ARS, New York / 
ADAGP, Paris. Page 102

Earle Loran, diagram from Cezanne's  
Compositions. Page 105
Earle Loran, diagram from Cezanne’s  
Compositions. Page 106
The visual cone, from B. Taylor, New  
Principles o f Linear Perspective  (London, 
1715). Page 109
Marcel Duchamp, Etant donnes: 1° la  
chute d ’eau, 2 ° le gaz d ’eclairage,  1945-
1966, exterior view. Mixed-media assem­
blage, 9 5V2 x 70 inches. Philadelphia M u­
seum of Art, Gift of the Cassandra 
Foundation. © 1993 ARS, New York/ 
ADAGP, Paris. Page 110
Diagram of Duchamp’s Etant donnes,  
from Jean-Fran^ois Lyotard, Les TRANS-  
formateurs DUchamp  (Paris: Galilee, 
1977). Page 115
Marcel Duchamp, Etant donnes,  view 
through the door. © 1993 ARS, New 
York / ADAGP, Paris. Page 116
Marcel Duchamp, L a mariee mise a nu  
par ses celibataires, meme (Le grand  
verre),  1915-1923. Oil, varnish, lead foil, 
lead wire, and dust on two glass panels, 
109Vi x 69Vi inches. Philadelphia Mu­
seum of Art, Katherine S. Dreier Bequest. 
© 1993 ARS, New York / ADAGP, Paris. 
Page 121
Marcel Duchamp, Cols alites,  1959. Pen 
and pencil on paper, 12Vs  x 9Vs inches. 
Collection Jean-Jacques Lebel, Paris. 
© 1993 ARS, New York/ADAGP, Paris. 
Page 122
Marcel Duchamp, Rotary Demisphere  
(Precision Optics).  1925. Motor-driven 
construction, 58Vi x 25Vi x 24 inches. 
The Museum of Modern Art, New York, 
Gift of Mrs. William Sisler and Edward 
James Fund. © 1993 ARS, New York/ 
ADAGP, Paris. Page 129
Wheatstone stereoscope, 1830. Repro­
duced in Helmholtz on Perception. Page  
130
Marcel Duchamp, Handmade Stereopti-  
con Slide,  1918-1919. Pencil over pho­
tographic stereopticon slide, each image 
2 Vi x  2Vi inches. The Museum of M od­ern Art, New York, Katherine S. Dreier 
Bequest. © 1993 ARS, New York/ 
ADAGP, Paris. Page 131
The Miiller-Lyer illusion. Page 132
Jacques-Andre Boiffard, Gnostic Seal,  
photograph from Documents,  2, no. 1 
(1930). Page 153
Salvador Dali, Phenomenon o f Ecstasy,  
1933. Photocollage, 11 x 7 Vi inches. 
Manoukian Collection, Paris. © 1993 
Demart Pro Arte, Geneva/ARS, New 
York. Page 154
Man Ray, Anatomies,  c. 1930. Silver 
print, 9Vi x 7 inches. The Museum of 
Modern Art, New York. © 1993 ARS, 
New Y ork/ ADAGP, Paris. Page 159
Diagram of Salvador Dali’s Lugubrious  
Game  (1929), as published in Documents,
1, no. 7 (1929). Page 160
Man Ray, Hat,  1933. Silver print, 63 A x
5 Vi inches. Collection Rosabianca Skira, 
Geneva. © 1993 ARS, New York/ 
ADAGP, Paris. Page 163
Alberto Giacometti, Suspended Ball,  
1930-1931. Plaster and metal, 24 x 14Vi 
x 14 inches. Kunstmuseum Basel, Alberto 
Giacometti Foundation. © 1993 ARS, 
New York/ADAG P, Paris. Page 164
Alberto Giacometti, Project for a Pas­
sageway (Labyrinth),  1930-1931. Plaster,
6 x 50 x 17 inches. Kunsthaus, Zurich, 
Alberto Giacometti Foundation. Photo 
by Walter Drayer. © 1993 ARS, New 
York / ADAGP, Paris. Page 169
Hans Bellmer, Machine Gunneress in a  
State o f Grace,  1937. Paint over photo­
graph, 25 V 2 x 25 V 2 inches. San Francisco 
Museum of Modern Art. © 1993 ARS, 
New Y ork/ ADAGP, Paris. Page 170
Hans Bellmer, La Poupee,  1936/1949. 
Tinted silver print, 16Vs x 13 inches. 
Musee National d’Art Moderne, Paris. 
© 1993 ARS, New York / ADAGP, Paris. 
Page 173
Hans Bellmer, L a Poupee,  1938. Tinted 
silver print, 11 x 9Vi inches. Private col­
lection, Paris. © 1993 ARS, New York/ 
ADAGP, Paris. Page 174341
Illustrations

342
IllustrationsHans Bellmer, L a Poupee,  1938. Tinted 
silver print, 55 /s x 5J/s inches. Private col­
lection, Paris. © 1993 ARS, New York/ 
ADAGP, Paris. Page 175
Hans Bellmer, La Poupee (Idole),  1937. 
Tinted silver print, 5 Vi x 5 Vi inches. Pri­
vate collection, Paris. © 1993 ARS, New 
York/ADAGP, Paris. Page 176
Raoul Ubac, Portrait in a Mirror,  1938. 
Silver print, 9Vi x 7 inches. The Metro­
politan Museum of Art, New York. 
© 1993 ARS, New York / ADAGP, Paris. 
Page 181
Raoul Ubac, The Battle o f the Amazons  
(Group 111), 1939. Silver print, 1 0 3 /4  x 
15s /8 inches. Galerie Adrien Maeght, 
Paris. © 1993 ARS, New York / ADAGP, 
Paris. Page 182
Jacques-Andre Boiffard, Untitled,  1929. 
Silver print, 9 Vi x 77 /s inches. Musee N a­
tional d’Art Moderne, Paris. Page 187
Jacques-Andre Boiffard, Untitled,  1929. 
Silver print, 5 x 3  inches. Private collec­
tion, Paris. Page 188
Roberto Otero, photograph of Picasso’s 
living room at Notre Dame de Vie, M ou­
gins, from Forever Picasso  (New York: 
Abrams, 1982), p. 147. Page 199
Pablo Picasso, Bather with Beach Ball,  
Boisgeloup, 30 August 1932. Oil on can­
vas, 57%  x 45 Vi inches. Partial gift of an 
anonymous donor and promised gift of 
Ronald S. Lauder to the Museum of M od­
ern Art, New York. © 1993 ARS, New 
York / SPADEM, Paris. Page 200
Pablo Picasso, Three Musicians,  Fontaine­
bleau, summer 1921. Oil on canvas, 79 x 
873 /4 inches. The Museum of Modern Art, 
New York, Mrs. Simon Guggenheim 
Fund. © 1993 ARS, New Y ork/SPA ­
DEM, Paris. Page 203
M ax Ernst, A Little Girl Dreams o f Tak­
ing the Veil,  1930: “ Dans mon colom- 
bodrome.” © 1993 ARS, New York / 
SPADEM / ADAGP, Paris. Page 204
Zootrope, La Nature  (1888), p. 12. 
Page 207Bronze figures representing eleven succes­
sive positions of a pigeon in flight, La 
Nature  (1888), p. 12. Page 208
Stereoscopic projections, L a Nature  
(1891), p. 49. Page 211
Reynaud’s projective praxinoscope, La 
Nature,  (1882), p. 357. Page 212
Pablo Picasso, Dejeuner sur Vherbe  
d’apres Manet,  10 July 1961. Oil on can­
vas, 44 Vi x 57 inches. Staatsgalerie Stutt­
gart. © 1993 ARS, New York / SPADEM, 
Paris. Page 223
Pablo Picasso, Dejeuner sur Vherbe  
d’apres Manet,  13 July 1961. Oil on can­
vas, 235 /s x 283 /4 inches. Musee Picasso, 
Paris. © 1993 ARS, New Y ork/SPA ­
DEM, Paris. Page 224
Pablo Picasso, Dejeuner sur Vherbe  
d’apres Manet Sketchbook, 4  July 1961 I. 
lOVs x 16Vi inches. Private collection. 
© 1993 ARS, New York /SPADEM, 
Paris. Page 227
Pablo Picasso, Dejeuner sur Vherbe  
d’apres Manet Sketchbook,  4 July 1961
II. lOVs x 16Vi inches. Private collection. 
© 1993 ARS, New York /SPADEM, 
Paris. Page 228
Pablo Picasso, Raphael et la Fornarina, 4  
September 1968 I. Etching, 57 /s x 8 V s 
inches. Galerie Louise Leiris, Paris. 
© 1993  ARS, New York/SPADEM , 
Paris. Page 231
Pablo Picasso, Dejeuner sur Vherbe  
d’apres Manet Sketchbook,  2 August 
1962 I. Pencil and crayon, 9 x 125 /s 
inches. Private collection. © 1993 ARS, 
New York / SPADEM, Paris. Page 232
Pablo Picasso, Dejeuner sur Vherbe  
d’apres Manet Sketchbook,  2 August 
1962 II. Pencil and crayon, 9 x 125 /s 
inches. Private collection. © 1993  ARS, 
New York / SPADEM, Paris. Page 233
Pablo Picasso, Untitled,  15 November 
1966 VI. Aquatint and etching, 87 /s x 1 2 3 /4  
inches. Galerie Louise Leiris, Paris. 
© 1993 ARS, New York/SPADEM , 
Paris. Page 234

Pablo Picasso, Untitled,  14 August 1962. 
Ceramic tile, 6V2 x 7V2 inches. © 1993 
ARS, New York / SPADEM, Paris. Page  
237
Sketch made by the Wolf Man, from Sig­
mund Freud, “ From the History of an 
Infantile Neurosis,” p. 30. Page 238
Jackson Pollock, Out o f the Web: Num­
ber 7,  1949. Oil and Duco on masonite, 
47%  x 96 inches. Staatsgalerie, Stuttgart. 
© 1993 Pollock-Krasner Foundation/ 
ARS, New York. Page 249
Jackson Pollock, Echo: Number 25,
1951. Enamel on canvas, 91% x 8 6  
inches. Museum of Modern Art, New 
York, Acquired through the Lillie P. Bliss 
Bequest and the Mr. and Mrs. David 
Rockefeller Fund, 1969. © 1993 Pollock- 
Krasner Foundation / ARS, New York. 
Page 250
Cy Twombly, Untitled,  1956 (New York 
City). Oil and graphite on canvas, 46 x 
69 inches. Private collection. Photo by 
Rudolph Burckhardt. Page 257
Brassai', Graffiti,  1930. Silver print, 11% 
x 8V4 inches. Private Collection, Paris. 
Page 258
Jackson Pollock, Galaxy,  1947. Oil and 
aluminum on canvas, 4 3V2 x 34 inches. 
Jocelyn Museum, Omaha, Nebraska. 
© 1993 Pollock-Krasner Foundation / 
ARS, New York. Page 261
Jackson Pollock, Number 1, 1948,  1948. 
Oil on unprimed canvas, 6 8 x 104 inches. 
The Museum of Modern Art, New York. 
© 1993 Pollock-Krasner Foundation/ 
ARS, New York. Page 262
Thomas Hart Benton, diagrams, pub­
lished in “ Mechanics of Form Organiza­
tion in Painting,” The Arts  (November 
1926), p. 288. Page 263
Cy Twombly, Panorama,  1955 (New 
York City). House paint and crayon on 
canvas, 101 x 233 inches. Courtesy 
Thomas Ammann, Zurich. Photo by 
Geoffrey Clements. Page 264
Cy Twombly, The Italians,  1961. Oil, 
pencil, and crayon on canvas, 785 /s inchesx 1021 /, inches. The Museum of Modern 
Art, New York, Blanchette Rockefeller 
Fund. Photo by Rudolph Burckhardt. 
Page 267
Andy Warhol, Do It Yourself (Flowers),  
1962. Synthetic polymer paint and Pres- 
type on canvas, 69 x 59  inches. Courtesy 
Thomas Ammann, Zurich. Page 268
Installation view, Andy Warhol,  Institute 
of Contemporary Art, Philadelphia, 1965. 
Page 271
Andy Warhol, Piss Painting,  1961. Urine 
on canvas, 48 x 80 inches. Page 272
Hans Namuth, Jackson Pollock,  1950. 
Silver print. Estate of the artist. © 1991 
Hans Namuth Ltd. Page 273
Andy Warhol, Oxidation Painting,  1978. 
Mixed mediums on copper metallic paint 
on canvas, 78 x 204V2 inches. Courtesy 
Thomas Ammann, Zurich. Page 274
Pablo Picasso, Girl before a Mirror,  Bois- 
geloup, 14 March 1932. Oil on canvas,
64 x 5 1 V 4 inches. The Museum of Modern 
Art, New York, Gift of Mrs. Simon Gug­
genheim. © 1993 ARS, New Y ork/SPA ­
DEM, Paris. Page 279
Jackson Pollock, Masqued Image,  c. 
1938— 1941. Oil on canvas, 40 x 24'/« 
inches. The Modern Art Musum of Fort 
Worth, purchase through the Anne Bur­
nett and Charles Tandy Foundation. 
© 1993 Pollock-Krasner Foundation/ 
ARS, New York. Page 280
Jackson Pollock, Sea Change,  1947. Oil 
and pebbles on canvas, 57% x 44Vs  
inches. Seattle Museum of Art, gift of 
Peggy Guggenheim. Photo by Paul Ma- 
capia. © 1993 Pollock-Krasner Founda­
tion / ARS, New York. Page 285
Jackson Pollock, Stenographic Figure,  
1942. Oil on linen, 40 x  56 inches. The 
Museum of Modern Art, New York, Mr. 
and Mrs. Walter Bareiss Fund. Page 286
Illustration in Andre Breton’s “ Message 
Automatique,” Minotaure  (1933). 
Page 287
Jackson Pollock, The She Wolf,  1943. Oil, 
gouache, and plaster on canvas, 41% x343
Illustrations

344
Illustrations67 inches. The Museum of Modern Art, 
New York. Page 288
Morris Louis, Saraband,  1959. Acrylic 
resin on canvas, lOOVs inches x 149 
inches. The Solomon R. Guggenheim M u­
seum, New York. Page 291
Jackson Pollock, Full Fathom Five,  1947. 
Oil on canvas with nails, tacks, buttons, 
key, coins, cigarettes, matches, etc., 507 /s 
x 3O'/s inches. The Museum of Modern 
Art, New York. Page 292
Jackson Pollock, One (Number 31,  
1950),  1950. Oil and enamel on canvas, 
106 x 210 inches. The Museum of M od­
ern Art, New York. Page 295
Robert Morris, Untitled,  1968. Felt, 144 
x 114 inches. Collection of the artist. 
Photo by Rudolph Burckhardt. Page 296
Robert Morris, Untitled,  1967— 1968. 
Felt, 3 /8 inches thick. Collection Philip 
Johnson. Photo by Rudolph Burckhardt. 
Page 297
Hans Namuth, film strip from Jackson  
Pollock,  1950. Estate of the artist. Page
298
Gjon Mili, Picasso “Draw ing” with  
Flashlight, Vallauris,  1949. Silver print. 
Life Magazine, © Time Warner Inc. Page
299
Jackson Pollock, Number 7, 1951,  1951. 
Enamel on canvas, 56V2 x 6 6 inches. N a­
tional Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C., 
Gift of the Collectors Committee. 
Page 300
Jackson Pollock, Blue Poles,  1952. 
Enamel, aluminum paint, and glass frag­
ments on canvas, 83 x 192 inches. Aus­
tralian National Gallery, Canberra. 
Page 305
Jackson Pollock, Convergence,  1952. Oil 
on canvas, 93%  x 155 inches. Albright- 
Knox Art Gallery, Buffalo, The Martha 
Jackson Collection. Page 306
Diagram for Convergence,  from Matthew 
Rohm, Visual Dynamics in Jackson Pol­
lock (Ann Arbor: UMI Research Press, 
1987). Page 306Eva Hesse, Hang Up,  January 1966. 
Acrylic paint on cloth over wood; acrylic 
paint on cord over steel tube, 72 x 84 x 
78 inches. The Art Institue of Chicago, 
Gift of Arthur Keating and Mr. and Mrs. 
Edward Morris by exchange. Page 311
Eva Hess, Untitled,  1967. Ink wash and 
pencil on paper on board with nylon 
string, 147 /8 x 147 /s inches. Collection 
Mrs. Victor W. Ganz. Page 312
Eva Hesse, Untitled,  completed March
1970. Latex over rope, string, and wire, 
height of three units 144, 126, and 90 
inches; width varies with installation. 
Whitney Museum of American Art, New 
York. Photo by Geoffrey Clements. 
Page 317
Eva Hesse, Right After,  1969. Fiberglass, 
60 x 156 x 48 inches. Milwaukee Art 
Museum, Gift of Friends of Art. Photo by 
P. Richard Eells.
Page 318

Abduction, 252, 324 
Abstract expressionism, 270, 276, 282—  
284, 314, 328 
Abstraction, 7, 11, 13, 16, 108, 123,
282
and Duchamp, 108, 123 
and Pollock, 256, 290, 325 
Absurdity, 313, 316 
Acephale, 22
Action painting, 260-265, 325 
Adorno, Theodor, 8, 29, 33-35, 91 
Aesthetic experience, 98, 114, 117, 126, 
213. See also  Disinterestedness 
Aggression, 166, 278, 284, 293, 308,
326-327 
Albers, Josef, 309, 313 
Alchemy, 35, 91, 107, 123, 144 
All-over composition, 15, 20, 303 
Alteration, 152, 161, 166 
Althusser, Louis, 21, 29 
Amorphousness, 73, 138, 139, 149, 320 
Anaclisis, 140 
Anamorphosis, 91, 329 
Animation, 225, 226, 229 
Antiform, 294
Anti-Oedipus,  309, 315-316 
Antivision, 22 
Apollinaire, Guillaume, 46 
Apparatus, 202, 229 
Aragon, Louis, 42, 46, 58, 91 
Arnheim, Rudolf, 303, 307, 328 
Artaud, Antonin, 310, 323 
Art criticism, 98, 103, 117-118 
Art history, 35, 6 6, 119, 123, 226, 256, 
270, 326 
Art News,  245, 252
Associationist psychology, 136-137, 146 
Atget, Eugene, 192 
Austen, Jane, 310 
Authenticity, 265
Automatism, 53, 63, 162, 171, 282, 
284-289, 287,  323 
Automaton, 58, 71-75, 81-82, 8 8, 93 
Autonomy, 6, 8, 12, 124, 277, 320. See 
also Sensory field, autonomy ofBachelor machine, 314-315 
Bad encounter. See Encounter 
Baron, Jacques, 64 
Barr, Alfred, 265 
Barthes, Roland, 82 
on “ The Big Toe,” 185, 186-189, 194 
on Histoire de I’oeil,  167-168 
on wrestling, 197, 201, 239 
Base materialism. See Materialism 
Bassesse,  22, 150, 184, 194, 284 
Bataille, Georges, 22, 150-152, 166- 
168, 183, 192-194 
“The Big Toe,” 184-185, 186, 190- 
191
“ Dictionary,” 148, 156-157 
Documents,  152, 155-156, 158-162, 
180
Histoire de I’oeil,  166, 167-168 
“ M outh,” 156 
Bauhaus, 33 
Baziotes, William, 282 
Beat. See Pulse 
Beholder, 247, 324 
Bell, Clive, 114, 180 
Bell, Vanessa, 94, 117 
Bellmer, Hans, 22, 170,  171-172, 173-  
176
Benjamin, Walter, 33, 91, 144, 178-
179, 180, 192, 194 
Benton, Thomas Hart, 248, 263,  265, 
281, 303, 322, 323 
Berenson, Bernard, 103 
Bergman, Ingmar, 6 
Bersani, Leo, 326
Binary oppositions, 13-14, 104, 166, 
184-186, 219-220. See also  Para­
digm; Schema 
Blake, William, 34 
Blanc, Charles, 123 
Blind spot, 82, 87, 247-248, 255 
Blink of the eye, 213-215 
Bloom, Harold, 259 
Bloomsbury, 103, 117, 128, 141, 145, 
180
Chevreul, Eugene, 123, 145 
Chirico, Giorgio de, 63, 92 
Chronophotography, 209

IndexCinema, 206, 226, 230, 248, 254 
Clark, T. J., 247, 322, 325 
Clue, 252-253, 256-260, 308. See also  
Index 
Cogito,  19
Cognition, 12, 14-15, 162 
cognitive mastery, 12, 15, 24, 74-75, 
103 ( see also  Visual mastery) 
Colacello, Robert, 270 
Collage, 16, 42, 46, 48, 65, 67, 81 
Color, 11, 246 
Color-field painting, 15 
Color theory, 1 1, 123-124, 135, 145 
Combinatory, 151, 167-168. See also  
Paradigm; Schema 
Commodity, 97, 141, 161 
Complex axis, 19, 23, 191 
Concours Lepine, 96— 97, 205, 239 
Conditions of possibility, 13, 15-16, 48 
Conrad, Joseph, 2, 8-9, 29 
Constable, John, 180 
Convulsive beauty, 152-156, 193 
Cooper, Douglas, 226— 229, 240 
Crary, Jonathan, 134, 145 
Craven, Thomas, 323 
Cubism, 13, 123, 198, 321 
Culture
high, 202, 229, 244, 275, 289 
low, 35, 229, 244, 270 
mass, 46, 53, 97, 202, 215, 225, 229, 
277
popular, 35, 201, 205-206, 209
Dada, 13, 41-42, 48, 53, 205 
Dali, Salvador, 22, 149-150, 166, 193 
Lugubrious Game  158-162, 160 
Phenomenon o f Ecstasy, 154,  156 
Damisch, Hubert, 144, 328 
Dean, James, 244, 269-270 
Death drive, 178, 222, 240 
Deconstruction, 190-192, 194, 222, 225 
Deferred action ( Nachtraglichkeit ), 65, 
68
Deictic, 23-24, 74, 82, 87 
Deixic, 16, 23-24, 74, 76 
De Kooning, Willem, 251, 269, 270,
276, 281, 283, 284 
Delacroix, Eugene, 230 
Delaunay, Robert, 124, 145, 205 
Deleuze, Gilles, 309, 315-316, 329 
Derrida, Jacques, 190-191, 214-215, 
240, 325 
Descartes, Rene, 114, 128Desire, 47, 72, 73, 112, 114, 140, 218, 
219-220, 281-282 
desiring machines, 315-316, 320 
mediated, 277-284 
metaphysical or triangular, 277-283,
327
unconscious, 155, 161, 166, 172 
in vision, 48, 111, 135-137, 140, 216 
Desnos, Robert, 64, 93 
Desublimation, 142, 307 
Deterritorialization, 316 
Diagram, 103— 104, 275, 320. See also  
Combinatory; Klein Group;
L Schema; Schema 
diagrammatic, 111, 220, 265 
Dialectical image, 33, 97, 144 
Diaphane, 54, 72, 276, 319, 327. See 
also Transparency 
Diderot, Denis, 87 
Differance,  260 
Discourse, 12, 217 
Disembodied vision. See Vision 
Disinterestedness, 2, 118-119 
Distich. See Split 
Divisionism, 13, 183 
Documents,  ix, 165, 180. See also  Ba­
taille, Georges 
Don Quixote, 278 
Dostoevski, Fedor, 278, 301, 310 
Double, 152-156, 172, 177, 193 
Double mediation. See Mimetic rivalry 
Doyle, Tom, 314, 329 
Dream, 33, 58, 64, 67-68, 162, 172, 
177, 215, 218, 222 
dream work, 65, 6 8, 304 
Dubuffet, Jean, 251 
Duchamp, Marcel, 21, 95— 145, 202, 
206, 239, 314-315 
bachelor machine, 2 1  
The Bride Stripped Bare by Her Bach­
elors, Even,  107, 119-120, 121,  125, 
143
Cols alitees,  120, 122 
Etant donnes, 110,  111— 114, 115-116  
Pode Bal,  119, 123, 143 
Precision Optics, 21, 96-97, 123, 129,  
131,  135, 137, 140, 215 
readymades, 95, 142, 145 
Rotoreliefs,  27, 81, 96-97, 99-102,
123, 142, 143-144, 205, 215-216 
Duve, Thierry de, 145

Eakins, Thomas, 327 
Edwards, Jonathan, 6  
Ehrenzweig, Anton, 242, 303-304, 328 
Eluard, Gala, 36, 41, 45 -4 7 , 64, 67-68, 
91, 93
Eluard, Paul, 36, 41-42, 45, 47-48, 58, 
63, 67, 91-92 
Empirical field, 12, 113 
vision’s relation to, 11, 14, 16, 19— 20, 
217
Encounter. See also Tuche  
missed encounter, 71— 72, 76, 87, 93 
bad encounter, 73, 87 
Ernst, Louise, 41, 45 
Ernst, M ax, 21, 33-93, 206-209, 2 3 9 - 
240
At the First Clear Word,  6 8, 69, 93  
Beyond Painting, 66— 67,  92-93 
D ada in usum delphini, 59,  63 
L a femme 100 tetes,  34-36, 37— 40,
43, 47, 77-79,  81, 91-93 
frottage, 65-67, 93 
Garden o f France, 80,  82 
Histoire naturelle,  65, 91 
A Little Girl Dreams o f Taking the  
Veil, 204,  206-209, 215-216, 239 
The Master’s Bedroom, 27,  53— 58, 55,
65
overpainting, 21, 46, 48, 49-51,  53,
91
La puberte proche, 44,  45-47, 6 8, 82 
Repetitions,  46, 82, 86 
Souvenir de Dieu, 60,  63, 92 
“ Trois visions de demi-sommeil” (Wolf 
Man Dream), 63-65, 81, 92-93 
The Virgin Chastising the Infant Jesus  
before Three Witnesses, 61,  65, 93 
Une semaine de bonte,  91 
Eroticism, 4 5 -4 6 , 6 8, 96, 111-112,
137, 152, 156, 168, 215-216, 230, 
266
Esprit nouveau,  180
Ethics, modernism as an, 2, 6, 117-118, 
127-128, 138, 235
Faith, 6, 127-128 
Fame, 269-277
Fantasy, 47, 65-66, 218-219, 221 
Fascism, 179 
Fauvism, 13, 123 
Fechner, Gustav, 11 
Fetish, 162-165, 184Figure/ground, 13-14, 19-20, 54, 7 3 - 
74, 155, 157-158, 191, 202, 214, 
216
Film. See Cinema 
Flatness, 7, 11, 92, 245 
Flicker. See Pulse 
Flipbook, 225, 229-230 
Fontana, Lucio, 205
Form, 19, 158, 166, 180, 221-222, 260, 
2 7 5 ,3 1 0  
formal coherence, 6, 98, 103, 118,
138, 180, 206 (see also  Gestalt) 
formlessness, 157, 192, 284, 304 (see 
also Informe)
Formalism, 141, 191 
Foster, Hal, 92
Foucault, Michel, 284, 327-328 
Foundationalist argument, 13, 21, 22, 
157-158, 186, 191, 314 
Fourth dimension, 144 
Frame, 16, 19, 48, 134, 289, 313, 320 
frame-within-a-frame, 16 
ideological, 1 2, 2 1  
Frankenthaler, Helen, 247, 290 
Freedom, 8, 236
Freud, Sigmund, 22, 42, 65— 66, 68-71, 
73, 136-137, 146, 179, 218, 235, 
252, 278, 282, 304. See also  Death 
drive; Deferred action; Dream, 
dream work; Pleasure principle; 
Primal scene; Secondary revision 
Beyond the Pleasure Principle,  222 
“A Child Is Being Beaten,” 219-222 
Civilization and Its Discontents,  179, 
246, 276, 293, 308, 324, 326 
Delusion and Dream,  67, 93 
Dora, 91
The Interpretation o f Dreams,  58, 71 
Introductory Lectures,  63 
Judge Schreber, 63 
Leonardo da Vinci, 65— 66, 82, 93 
“ A Note on the Mystic Writing Pad,” 
54-57
psychogenic visual disturbance, 139—  
140
The Psychopathology o f Everyday  
Life, 58
Three Essays on the Theory o f Sexual­
ity, 247, 324 
“The Uncanny,” 177-178 
Wolf Man, 58, 63, 65, 92, 238 
Fried, Michael, 6 -7 , 29, 247-248, 255, 
322, 324, 32734 7

IndexFriedman, B. H., 323, 324 
Fronto-parallel alignment, 247, 302,
313, 319
Fry, Roger, 114-119, 126, 137-139,
141, 145 
Funk art, 315
Gap. See Split
Garnett, Angelica, 114-117, 138 
Gaze. See Vision
Gazette des Beaux-Arts,  180, 183 
Gender, 21, 6 8, 139, 165-166, 216 
Geometry, 16, 120, 156, 158, 161-162,
180, 186, 213 
Gestalt, 158, 171, 191-192, 209, 2 1 6 - 
218, 294, 303-308, 306,  320 
good form, 222, 266, 319 
Gestalt psychology, 13, 303-307, 324,
328
Giacometti, Alberto, ix, 22, 30, 171,
193
Project for a Passageway (Labyrinth),  
169
Suspended Ball,  27, 164,  165-167, 
191-192, 216 
Gide, Andre, 310 
Girard, Rene, 277-283, 301, 327 
Gnosticism, 150, 153 
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von, 124,
128, 145 
Gombrich, Ernst, 324 
Gonzalez, Julio, 320 
Gorky, Arshille, 276, 284 
Grace, 6, 8 
Gradiva, 67— 68, 93 
Graffiti, 192, 258,  259-266, 293 
Graham, John, 281-282, 284, 322-323 
Graph. See Schema 
Gravity, 276, 293-294, 302-303 
Greenberg, Clement, 7 -8 , 29, 309 
and Duchamp, 142 
friendship with Pollock, 243-244, 
266-269, 283-284 
and “ logical moment,” 98-107, 144 
on Pollock’s black and white paintings, 
255-256, 289-290 
on Pollock’s drip pictures, 243-251, 
294, 307-308 
Greimas, A. J., 14, 29, 189-190 
Grid, 12, 14, 16, 20, 54, 104, 158, 191- 
192, 255, 309, 313 
Guattari, Felix, 309, 315-316 
Guggenheim, Peggy, 282 
Guilbaut, Serge, 326, 327Haesaerts, Paul, 302, 328 
Hare, Denise, 269 
Heidegger, Martin, 325 
Helmholtz, Hermann von, 11, 120, 123, 
133, 137, 145 
Henderson, Joseph, 282 
Hesse, Eva, 309-320, 312,  328-329 
Contingent,  314 
Expanded Expansion,  314 
Hang Up,  310-313, 311 
Right After,  314, 318,  319 
Untitled (1970), 317  
Heterology, 167, 183 
History, 12, 20. See also  Art history 
Hoffman, Hans, 103, 309 
Hollier, Denis, 155, 193, 327 
Holmes, Sherlock, 252-253 
Homosexuality, 269, 276-278, 326, 327 
Horizontality, 156, 168, 275— 277, 2 8 4 - 
289, 293-301, 307, 322, 327-328 
Husserl, Edmund, 214-215, 240
Ideology, 8, 12, 21, 27 
Illusion, 135, 209, 246, 319 
optical illusion, 7, 96, 132,  135-136, 
145
Immobility, 5, 57-58, 210, 213, 225 
Impressionism, 11, 13, 123 
Index, 71, 119, 145, 151, 252-253, 
259-260, 277, 290-293, 307-308,
322, 325. See also  Clue 
Informe,  19, 22, 137, 150, 152, 156—  
157, 165-172, 191-192 
Instantaneity, 7, 98, 213— 214 
Instrumentality, 2, 8, 141, 145 
Intention, 107, 112, 253, 256, 322, 324 
Intentionality, 217, 236 
Inventory, 54. See also  Automaton
Jackson, Harry, 265, 303 
Jameson, Fredric, 11, 21, 27, 29 
Jeanneret, Charles Edouard. See Le 
Corbusier 
Joyce, James, 310 
Judd, Donald, 319 
Jung, Carl G., 282, 323-324
Kamrowski, Jerome, 282 
Kant, Immanuel, 113-114 
Kaprow, Allan, 323 
Keynes, John Maynard, 125— 128 
Klein, Melanie, 278, 316 
Klein Group, 14, 19, 22-23, 27, 29, 48, 
74, 104, 220, 320. See also  Schema

Kligman, Ruth, 270, 326 
Kline, Franz, 284 
Kramer, Hilton, 319, 329 
Krasner, Lee, 243, 255, 290, 301, 3 21- 
325
Kupka, Frantisieck, 205
Labyrinth, 22, 120, 171, 194 
Lacan, Jacques, 22— 24, 71— 75, 81, 87—  
88, 93, 161, 165, 183-184, 327. See 
also Automaton; L Schema; Objet  a; 
Subject effect 
imaginary relation, 23, 24, 75 
mirror stage, 22, 278, 319 
real, 73
symbolic, 22, 73, 74 
Language, 22, 255 
Laplanche, Jean, 93, 140 
Lassaw, Ibram, 290 
Lautreamont, 35, 42 
Lebel, Robert, 63-64 
Le Corbusier, 161, 185— 186 
Leger, Fernand, 168, 283 
Leiris, Michel, 22, 171 
Leja, Michael, 323
Leonardo da Vinci, 111, 134, 216, 284. 
See also  Freud, Sigmund, Leonardo 
da Vinci 
Leroi-Gourhan, Andre, 151 
Levi-Strauss, Claude, 14, 21, 29 
Life,  253, 269 
Lipchitz, Jacques, 283 
Lippard, Lucy, 310, 319— 320, 328 
Litterature,  41 
Locke, John, 128
Logic, 104, 127. See also  Abduction; 
Modernism, modernist visual logic 
deduction, 19 
induction, 252 
modernist, 16— 23, 320 
structuralist, 16, 48, 104, 184-185, 
186-192, 320 
Logical moment, 98-104, 107, 127, 
141, 144 
Loos, Adolf, 33
Loran, Earle, 98— 103, 105— 106  
Louis, Morris, 247, 290-293, 291,  327 
Lowness. See Bassesse  
L Schema, 2 3 -24, 27, 29, 74-75, 161,  
314, 320. See also  Deictic; Deixic 
Lukacs, Georg, 8, 29Lyotard, Jean-Frangois, 27, 124, 134- 
135
on Etattt donnes,  113, 119-120, 145 
on the “ m atrix” figure in “ A Child Is 
Being Beaten,” 217— 222, 240
Madonna, 277
Mallarme, Stephane, 117
Mannheim, Ralph, 328
Man Ray, 22, 157, 159,  162, 163,  165
Marey, Jules Etienne, 178, 207,  209
Marked/unmarked term, 189
Marxism, 283
M ass culture. See Culture, mass 
Masson, Andre, 165 
Materialism, 185 
base materialism, 150, 155 
Matisse, Henri, 16, 277 
Matrix, 192, 217-222, 240 
Matta Echaurren, Sebastian Antonio,
284
Mechanical reproduction, 202, 205,
225, 229-230. See also  Culture, 
mass
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice, 217-218 
Metaphysical desire. See Desire 
Michelangelo Buonarroti, 265 
Mili, Gjon, 299, 302, 328 
Mimetic rivalry, 277— 278, 281-284,
301, 303, 327. See also  Desire, meta­
physical or triangular 
Mimicry, 22, 155— 156 
Minimalism, 310, 319 
Minotaur, 22, 168 
Minotaure,  162
Mirror relation, 23, 73-74, 260. See 
also Deixic 
Mirror stage. See Lacan, Jacques, mirror 
stage 
Mise-en-abyme, 20
Modernism, 2, 7-8, 12— 13, 20, 27, 205, 
213, 328 
atemporality of, 217, 225 
modernist visual logic, 7, 11, 13— 19, 
20, 21, 27, 53, 74, 124, 191, 217 
{see also  Vision, models o f )  
Mondrian, Piet, 4, 7, 9, 11-12, 16, 18, 
25, 123, 255, 283 
Plus and Minus, 10,  11-12, 16, 17 
Monet, Claude, 2 
Monochrome, 20 
Moore, G. E., 125-127 
Morelli, Giovanni, 252, 324349

IndexMorris, Robert, 248, 293-294, 296—  
297,  315 
Motherwell, Robert, 282 
Motion, 206, 210, 216, 225, 239 
Miiller-Lyer illusion, 132,  136 
Museum, 97, 113-114, 143, 270 
Muybridge, Eadweard, 178
Nachtraglichkeit. See  Deferred action 
Nadeau, Maurice, 166 
Namuth, Hans, 254, 302 
Pollock film, 254, 294-301, 298,  328 
Pollock photographs, 244, 254, 273 
Narcissus, 168
Nature,  35, 6 8, 70, 84, 86, 90,  206, 209 
Neoimpressionism. See Divisionism 
Neoplatonism, 107, 144 
Nesbit, Molly, 95-97, 143 
Neurophysiology, 57, 120-123, 133,
215
Neutral axis, 19 
Neutralization, 189-192, 194 
Neutral term, 185, 190 
Newman, Barnett, 284 
Nietzsche, Friedrich, 152 
Noland, Kenneth, 243, 247, 248, 266,
289-290
Objective chance, 172-178 
Objet a,  23, 74, 82, 87, 93 
Oceanic feeling, 308, 326 
Oedipal fantasy, 34, 73, 327 
Oldenburg, Claus, 205 
Olitski, Jules, 247 
Onslow-Ford, Gordon, 282 
Optical devices, 206, 211-212  
Optical illusion. See Illusion 
Opticality, 7, 13, 216-217, 248, 256, 
294, 308, 314, 319, 321. See also  
Modernism, modernist visual logic 
Optical unconscious, 22, 24, 27, 53,
142, 206, 217, 225, 320 
Walter Benjamin’s conception of, 144, 
178-179, 194 
Optics, 11. See also  Color theory; Physi­
ological optics 
Origin, 42, 47, 140 
Ossorio, Alfonso, 254 
Otten, Karl, 58
Ozenfant, Amedee, 157-158, 161, 180, 
186
Packard, Vance, 283 
Paradigm, 184-185, 191. See also  Com­
binatory; Logic, structuralistParanoia, 218, 304, 316, 320 
Parmelin, Helene, 198-205, 209-213, 
216-217, 229-236, 239 
Part-object, 36, 76, 81, 87, 96, 137, 
315-316 
Partridge, Frances, 126, 137 
Passivity, 2, 229, 236, 240 
Pattern, 1, 6, 24, 35, 103, 118, 214 
Peeing. See Urination 
Peirce, C. S., 252, 324 
Perception, 14-16, 19-20, 73, 215, 303. 
See also  Empirical field, vision’s rela­
tion to
Perspective, 20, 43, 92, 111, 119, 134, 
144, 183, 214 
perspective projection, 53-54, 92, 327 
{see also  Visual projection) 
vanishing point, 54, 213 
viewing point, 54, 213, 216 
Pfister, Oskar, 62, 65, 93 
Phallus, 47, 65, 6 8, 139, 165, 168, 172, 
184, 221, 230, 276, 304, 308 
Phenomenology, 71, 214-215, 217-218, 
226, 324, 327, 328 
Photograph, 41, 4 6 -4 7 , 6 8, 114, 150, 
162, 192 
of Gala Eluard, 36— 41, 45, 6 8, 91 
of Pollock ( see Namuth, Hans, Pollock 
photographs) 
of Salpetriere hysterics, 152, 156 
Photography, 210, 225 
and Benjamin, 178-180, 194 
and Freud, 218-219, 235 
and Parmelin, 235, 239 
Physiological optics, 11, 119-124, 133,
135, 143. See also  Neurophysiology 
Picabia, Francis, 42, 48, 53 
Picasso, Pablo, 16, 180, 196-205, 2 0 9 - 
213, 216, 225-236, 234, 237, 279,  
281-282, 284, 301-302, 323, 327 
Bather with a Beach Ball,  198, 200 
Dejeuner sur I’herbe, 223— 224,  2 2 6 - 
230, 227-228, 232-233,  240 
Guernica,  281 
Space Drawings, 299,  302 
theme and variations, 225— 230, 231,  
236, 240 
Three Musicians,  201, 203 
“ Picture,” 24, 87, 104, 118, 183-184 
Picture plane, 7, 11, 103, 124, 245, 319 
Pleasure principle, 127, 222 
Pointillism. See Divisionism 
Pollock, Charles, 281

Pollock, Jackson, 243-329 
Autumn Rhythm,  254, 307 
black and white pictures, 250,  2 5 4 - 
256, 290, 300,  302, 321, 325 
Blue Poles,  303, 305,  307, 322 
Convergence, 306,  307 
drip pictures, 245-248, 251-252, 
254-255, 265-266, 276, 303, 3 0 6 - 
308, 322, 324-325, 328 
Pull Fathom Five, 292,  293 
Galaxy, 261,  265, 284 
Lavender Mist,  254, 256, 307, 325 
M asked Image, 280  
Number 1, 1948,  254, 255, 262, 2 65, 
303, 325, 326 
Number 32,  254 
Owe (W O J, 254, 256, 295 
o f the Web,  247-248, 249 
Reflection o f the Big Dipper,  284, 293 
Sea Change, 283  
She Wolf,  284-289, 288 
Stenographic Figure,  284-289, 286 
Pollock, Sande, 281, 282 
Poons, Larry, 247 
Pop Art, 270-275
Popular culture. See Culture, popular 
Positivism, 8, 11, 124, 245, 321 
Poussin, Nicolas, 118, 230, 239 
Prdgnanz,  186, 247, 266, 307, 319-320 
Praying mantis, 22, 171-172 
Presence, 260, 322, 325 
Presentness, 6, 7, 126-127, 214-215 
Primal scene, 42, 58, 6 6, 92 
Primitivism, ix, 152, 193, 304 
Process, 293, 315-316, 320, 325 
Proust, Marcel, 283
Psychoanalysis, 34, 136-137, 146, 172, 
179, 218, 281 
Pulse, 57, 96, 137, 144, 192, 202-205, 
209, 213-225, 230, 235, 239 
Purity, 2, 7, 21, 138, 246
Ranke, Otto, 253
Readymades, 46, 53-54, 6 6, 6 8, 71-72, 
82, 8 8, 93, 202 
Redemption, 97, 107, 142, 244 
Reflexiveness, 15, 48. See also  Self­
reflexiveness 
Rembrandt van Rijn, 118, 323 
Renaissance, 108, 213, 265, 303 
Renoir, Auguste, 235 
Repetition, 24, 47, 58, 219, 225, 255, 
310, 325Repetition compulsion, 71— 72, 222 
Repression, 137, 139-140, 218, 220,
252, 303
and modernist aesthetics, 27, 307-308 
Retention and protention, 215— 216 
Retina, 11, 19, 119-120, 124, 145, 303 
Revolution Surrealiste,  63, 64 
Riesman, David, 283 
Rimbaud, Arthur, 35, 42 
Rivalry. See Mimetic rivalry 
Rivers, Larry, 270, 326 
Roche, Henri-Pierre, 97 
Rohn, Matthew, 306,  307, 328 
Rood, Ogden N ., 123, 135 
Roque, Jacqueline, 198, 213, 235, 239 
Rorty, Richard, 128, 145 
Rosenberg, Harold, 260, 282, 323, 325 
Rothko, Mark, 284
Rubin, William, ix, 247, 322, 324, 326 
Ruskin, John, 1-6, 8, 29, 35, 118, 186
Sade, D. A. F. de, 35 
Sadism, 220-221
Sartre, Jean-Paul, 111-113, 136, 139, 
146, 277 
Saussure, Ferdinand de, 104, 151 
Schema, 265— 266. See also  Deictic; 
Deixic; Diagram; L Schema 
of Lugubrious Game,  158, 160 
of modernism, 16, 19-21, 20, 27 
of “ optical unconscious,” 74-75, 74, 
75
of “ vision,” 13, 14 
semiotic square, 189— 192  
structuralist, 2 2  
Schizophrenia, 155, 284, 316 
schizophrenic art, 63, 284 
Schnabel, Julian, 270, 326 
Screen, 67, 6 8, 82, 8 8, 165, 183-184 
screen memory, 47, 58, 65-68 
screen of projection, 6 6  
Secondary revision (secondary elabora­
tion), 6 8, 71, 93, 242, 304 
Self-criticism, 7
Self-reflexiveness, 7, 15, 19-20, 48, 294 
Semiotic square, 2 1, 189-192 
Sensory field, autonomy of, 6-8, 11,
124, 247-248 
Seriality, 75, 225-229, 313 
Seurat, Georges, 12, 111, 123 
Shape. See Gestalt 
Shifter, 23— 24

IndexSign, 12, 133, 151, 152, 155, 214, 219, 
259, 284, 316, 327. See also  Struc­
tural linguistics 
signified, 168
signifier, 6 6, 72, 81, 107, 168, 218, 
230
transcendental signified, 120, 320 
Simultaneity, 7, 15, 16, 19, 48, 140, 
213, 216 
Simultaneous contrast, 11, 124 
Siqueiros, David Alfaro, 270, 281, 289, 
323, 326 
Smith, David, 283, 320 
Smith, Tony, 254, 256, 322— 323 
Social field, 12— 13, 23, 27 
Soupault, Philippe, 41, 42 
Specific objects, 319 
Spender, Stephen, 125 
Spies, Werner, 92-93 
Split, 57 
distich, 87 
gap, 57, 72, 75 
schiz, 87 
Stable Gallery 
Stain, 87— 88 
Steinberg, Leo, 327 
Stella, Frank, 3, 7, 16, 21, 26, 248 
Stereoscope, 130,  133— 134, 145, 209, 
211
Still, Clyfford, 284 
Stillness. See Immobility 
Strachey, Julia, 126, 137 
Strachey, Lytton, 94 
Structuralism, 14, 21, 74, 151, 186, 
221, 240, 278, 282. See also  Binary 
oppositions; Klein Group; Logic, 
structuralist; Synchrony; 
Transparency 
Structural linguistics, 24, 104, 219, 259 
Subject effect, 23, 75 
Sublation, 15, 19, 107 
Sublimation, 54, 142, 244, 246— 248,
290-293, 307 
Substitution. See Automaton 
Successiveness, 15
Surrealism, 54, 34, 123, 166, 178, 284 
epoque des sommeils,  64, 93 
Synchrony, 74— 75, 104, 192
Tapie, Michel, 322 
Technology, 8, 33— 34, 53 
Television, 197-178, 199,  202, 217,
225, 239Temporality, 133, 142, 216-217, 2 2 5 -
226, 259, 308 
Text, 22
Third dimension, 7
Third term, 184-185, 190-192
Time,  256, 314
Timelessness, 98, 104, 210— 213. See 
also Instantaneity 
Tinguely, Jean, 205, 239 
Tintoretto (Jacopo Robusti), 265 
Trace. See Index 
Transcendence, 322 
Transcendental ego, 19, 20 
Transgression, 168, 218, 221-225, 276, 
314
Transparency, 11, 119, 276, 315 
conceptual, 12, 16, 24, 27, 74— 75,
119
visual, 16, 27, 125, 140, 320 
Tuche,  71, 73, 81, 87. See also  
Encounter 
Twombly, Cy, 248, 256-266, 257, 293 
The Italians,  266, 267 
Panorama, 264,  266 
Tzara, Tristan, 41— 42, 45, 91, 162
Ubac, Raoul, 157, 181-182  
Vbermahlung. See  Ernst, M ax, 
overpainting 
Uncanny, 22, 58, 72, 165, 171-178 
Unconscious, 23— 24, 34, 57, 67, 6 8, 74,
136, 138, 217-218, 221-222, 229,
253, 281-282, 284, 304, 323-324, 
328. See also  Matrix 
Unity, 6, 103, 126, 180, 225, 245, 260, 
266, 322, 324 
Urination, 248, 275, 276-277, 293,
323, 326 
Utopia, modernism as a, 8
Value, linguistic, 185-191. See also  
Structural linguistics 
Van Gogh, Vincent, 275, 323 
Veblen, Thorstein, 283 
Vermeer, Jan, 111, 134 
Verticality, 252, 276, 284-290, 293, 
301-303, 313-314, 319, 322, 324,
327-328 
of the human body, 156, 171, 184 
and modernist opticality, 245-248 
Viewer’s body, 98, 247, 276, 278, 303, 
324
Violence, 244, 256, 259-265, 277-278, 
283, 304, 322, 326, 327

Vision. See also  Diaphane; Opticality; 
Perception; Phenomenology;
Visuality
act of looking, 6, 48, 98, 118, 180,
245-248
cone of vision, field of vision, 16, 1 1 1, 
113, 276 (see also  Visual pyramid) 
disembodied, 5, 7, 21, 48, 82, 107,
111, 119, 124, 128, 138-139, 141,
246-247, 255
gaze, 24, 47, 87, 104, 165, 213-216 
incarnated, 98, 104, 112-114, 119, 
123, 125, 133-135, 137-140, 216 
models of, 15-16, 19-21, 27, 53, 54, 
119, 124, 128 
plane of vision, 54, 6 8, 284, 289, 294, 
327
spontaneity of, 54, 72 
vision itself, vision as such, 7, 15, 21, 
48, 158, 213, 216-217, 246 
Visual cortex, 119— 120 
Visuality, modernist, 2, 98, 118, 124, 
213, 244-248, 308, 319 
Visual mastery, 11-12, 15, 53, 124-
125, 183-184, 210 
Visual projection, 54, 67, 72, 184, 327 
Visual pyramid, 111, 113, 134, 213 
Voyeurism, 48, 111-113, 143
Warhol, Andy, 269-277, 293, 326 
car crashes, 275 
Dance Diagram, 271,  275, 326 
Do It Yourself, 268,  275 
Oxidation Paintings,  270, 274, 2 7 6 -
277, 326 
piss paintings, 272,  275, 326 
Weinberg, Jonathan, 326-327 
Wiederholungszwang,  22. See also  Repe­
tition compulsion 
Williams, Ted, 7, 21 
Wolf Man, 58, 63-66, 238 
Woolf, Leonard, 126 
Woolf, Virginia, 94, 117-118, 126, 138, 
141, 145 
Wrestling, 197-201, 239 
Writing, 284-289, 327 
'Wunderblock. See  Freud, Sigmund, “ A 
Note on the Mystic Writing Pad”
Zervos, Christian, 229
Zootrope, 206-209, 207,  215, 222, 239

