Informatics of Domination
This page intentionally left blank
Informatics of Domination
Edited by Zach Blas,  
Melody Jue, and Jennifer Rhee
With an afterword by Donna J. Haraway
Duke University Press
Durham and London
2025

xi Acknowl  edgments
1  Introduction: Chart of Transitions
 Zach Blas, Melody Jue, and Jennifer Rhee
33 1. Repre sen  ta tion —  Simulation —   
Generation
 Rita Raley
41 2. Bourgeois Novel, Realism —  Science 
Fiction, Post- modernism —  Visionary Fiction, 
Cataclysm
 Alexis Lothian
48 3. White Cap  i tal ist Patriarchy —  
Informatics of Domination
 Radha May (Elisa Giardina-  Papa, Nupur Mathur, 
and Bathsheba Okwenje )
52 4. Organism —  Biotic Component
 Leon J. Hilton
57 5. Depth, Integrity —  Surface,  
Boundary —  Circulation, Residence Time
 Eva Hayward and Stefan Helmreich
65 6. Heat —  Noise
 Ollie Zhang
71 7. White Cap  i tal ist Patriarchy —  
Informatics of Domination
 Hiʻilei Julia Kawehipuaakahaopulani Hobart
77 8. Biology as Clinical Practice —  Biology  
as Inscription —  Biological Transmutation-  
Adaptation
 Kathy High
83 9. Physiology —  Communications 
Engineering
 Esther Leslie
90 10.  Small Group —  Subsystem
 Lawrence Lek
99 11.  Perfection —  Optimization —  
Absolution
 Alexander R. Galloway
103 12.  Eugenics —  Population Control
 Ama Josephine Budge Johnstone
110 13.  De cadence, Magic Mountain  —  
Obsolescence,  Future Shock  —  Speculation, 
Cosmopolis
 Bahar Noorizadeh and Bassem Saad
118 14.  Hygiene —  Stress Management —  
Procrastination
 Mahan Moalemi
124 15.  White Cap  i tal ist Patriarchy —  
Informatics of Domination
 Larissa Lai
130 16.  Microbiology, Tuberculosis —  
Immunology, AIDS —  Epigenet  ics, Body 
Burdens
 Isadora Neves Marques
136 17.  Organic Division of  Labor —  
Ergonomics/Cybernetics of   
Labor —  Inorganic Division of  Labor
 Ranjodh Singh Dhaliwal
146 18.  Functional Specialization —  Modular 
Construction —  Object Orientation
 Jacob Gaboury
152 19.  Reproduction —  Replication
 Luciana Parisi
159 20.  White Cap  i tal ist Patriarchy —  
Informatics of Domination
 Ashkan Sepahvand
168 21.  Organic Sex Role Specialization —  
Optimal Ge  ne tic Strategies
 Heather Dewey-  Hagborg  
and Luiza Prado de O. Martins
176 22.  Biological Determinism —  Evolutionary 
Inertia, Constraints —   Future Folklore
 Ashley Ferro-  Murray  
and Justin T alplacido Shoulder
182 23.  Community Ecol  ogy —   
Ecosystem —  Automated Environments
 Jennifer Gabrys
189 24.  Racial Chain of Being —  Neo- 
imperialism, United Nations Humanism —  
the More  Things Change- the More  Things 
Change
 Shaka McGlotten
196 25.  White Cap  i tal ist Patriarchy —  
Informatics of Domination
 Jian Neo Chen
203 26.  Scientific Management in Home/
Factory —  Global Factory/Electronic Cottage
 Ho Rui An
211 27.  Family/Market/Factory —   Women  
in the Integrated Cir  cuit —  Feminist Corpus 
of Organismic Art
 Caroline A. Jones
218 28.   Family Wage —  Comparable Worth
 Dalida María Benfield
226 29.  Public/Private —  Cyborg Citizenship
 Amy Sara Carroll and Ricardo Dominguez,  
with contributions from micha cárdenas  
on behalf of Electronic Disturbance Theater 2.0
232 30.  Nature/Culture —  Fields of  
Difference —  Composting
 Jennifer Mae Hamilton and Astrida Neimanis
241 31.  Cooperation —  Communications 
Enhancement —  Algorithmic Care
 Stephanie Dinkins
249 32.  White Cap  i tal ist Patriarchy —  
Informatics of Domination
 madison moore
257 33.  Freud —  Lacan —  Bergson
 Homay King
264 34.  Sex —  Ge ne tic Engineering
 Shu Lea Cheang and Matthew Fuller
270 35.   Labor —  Robotics
 Lucy Suchman
276 36.  Mind —  Artificial Intelligence
 Ana Teixeira Pinto
282 37.  World War II —  Star Wars —   
War as Big Data
 Tung-  Hui Hu
288 38.  White Cap  i tal ist Patriarchy —  
Informatics of Domination
 Thao Phan
295  Afterword: Pandemics of Transformation 
for Livable Worlds
 Donna J. Haraway
297  Epilogue: Interpreting Information
 Patricia Reed
305  Bibliography
335  Contributors
349 Index
Acknowl  edgments
The idea for this collection originated from a 2017 lecture series titled 
Informatics of Domination that Zach Blas  organized for the Department 
of Visual Cultures public program at Goldsmiths, University of London. 
We are grateful and indebted to all speakers and respondents, as well as 
their lively audiences, for adventurous discussion and debate, and for 
inspiring us to expand this proj  ect into a book: Ramon Amaro, Erika 
Balsom, Rizvana Bradley, Simone Browne, Shu Lea Cheang, Heather 
Dewey- Hagborg, Ricardo Dominguez, Kodwo Eshun, Seb Franklin, 
Matthew Fuller, Metahaven, Nadja Millner- Larsen, Stefan Nowotny, 
Luciana Parisi, Irit Rogoff, Mohammad Salemy, Susan Schuppli, Nina 
Wakeford, and Joanna Zylinska. A special thanks to e- flux for publish -
ing proceedings from the series on their Conversations  platform.
At Duke University Press, we express heartfelt thanks to our 
editor Ken Wissoker, for his remarkable generosity, unwavering com -
mitment to the collection, and for championing the diagrammatic ex -
perimentation that structures this book. T o editorial associate Kate 
Mullen,  senior proj  ect editor Ihsan Taylor, copyeditor Karen Fisher, 
designer A. Mattson Gallagher, marketing assistant Chad Royal, and 
Joshua Gutterman Tranen, who was assistant editor during the early 
stages of the proj  ect, thank you for your care and scrupulous work in 
guiding the book through vari ous stages of editing and production. 
We are also appreciative of Talia Golland, for editorial assistance, and 
our anonymous reviewers, who provided valuable and encouraging 
feedback on the book proposal and manuscript.
This collection would not exist without its fifty contributors. 
We extend our deepest gratitude to you all. It has taken several years 
to complete this publication, and we are touched and humbled by your 
xii  Acknowl edgmentstrust and patience, your intellectual curiosity and artistic unruliness, 
your willingness to experiment, and your enduring commitment to 
the proj  ect.
Fi nally, we wish to acknowledge N. Katherine Hayles, whose 
extraordinary mentorship has marked each of our intellectual journeys.
Nano Power, gray goo syndrome, wetware, rhizomatics: such concepts 
populate artist Ricardo Dominguez’s Virtual Timeline  (1997), a con -
ceptual artwork cum hyperlinked chart that periodizes capitalism and 
its relations to science, technology, and power ( figure I.1 ).1 Headlined 
with directing arrows, “ >  >  >  >  > ,” the four columns embed a temporal 
and spatial argument. When read horizontally, the chart maps a multitude 
of transitions across four stages of capitalism (Entrepreneurial, Mono -
poly, Multinational, and Virtual), while its vertical dimension provides 
a nonexhaustive list of capitalism’s conditions at each par tic u lar stage. 
For example, conquest of nature  shifts to 3rd world conquest  to conquest of 
intelligence  to conquest of existence . V ertically, Multinational Capitalism  
includes Micro Power , aids , computer , postmodernism , plagiarism , and 
simulacra . Dominguez created the timeline as a website hyperlinking 
many of the cata  logued terms. Now, some  decades  later, most of the 
links are broken.
Virtual Timeline  responds to technological specificities of the 
1990s: namely, the rise of the personal computer and the World Wide 
Web. 2 Indeed, the “virtual” of the title recalls a then- popular catchall 
term for describing conditions and experiences enabled by digital, net -
worked computers. The artwork persists in this sense of the virtual, not 
only diagramming the qualities of four capitalisms but also materializ -
ing as a mode of experimental thought made pos  si ble through computers 
and the internet. Philosophically, the virtual signals potentiality— that 
which is real but not yet actualized. 3 Some of Dominguez’s terms are vir -
tual in this sense, like gray goo syndrome , a science fictional scenario in 
which nanomachines consume all biomass on Earth. 4 The virtual as po -
tentiality also manifests in the chart’s reading instructions: “ >  >  >  >  > .” Introduction:  
Chart of Transitions
Zach Blas, Melody Jue, and Jennifer Rhee
2 Informatics of DominationWhile  these directions contain five “ >”s, Dominguez only provides 
four stages of capitalism. What is the reader to make of the remaining 
“>”? Implicitly asking, “What stage might be next?” or “What aspects 
of capitalism remain unaccounted for?,” Virtual Timeline  engages in a 
practice of charting that is inherently unfinished, incomplete, and par -
tial, even at its inception.
Virtual Timeline  was inspired by an  earlier experimental chart. 
Dominguez explains that the timeline creatively builds upon the dia -
grammatic work begun in a previous chart that also maps capitalism 
and power: feminist science and technology studies scholar Donna Har -
away’s “chart of transitions,” which was published in her classic essay “A 
Manifesto for Cyborgs: Science, T echnology, and Socialist Feminism in 
the 1980s” (1985). Dominguez describes the influence of Haraway’s chart 
on Virtual Timeline  thusly: “I was responding to [Haraway’s chart] and 
adding my own drift.” 5 In this collection, we, the editors, also return to 
Haraway’s chart of transitions as a diagrammatic structure for thinking 
about power that invites modification and the addition of new drifts. 
We look for openings and borders in the chart, as well as latent possi -
bilities to add, divert, and start anew.
The informatics of domination, our title and  organizing con -
cept, emerges from Haraway’s “Manifesto for Cyborgs,” which defines 
I.1. Ricardo Dominguez, screenshot of Virtual Timeline , 1997, 
https:// www .  thing  . net / ~rdom / VRtime .html .
 Blas, Jue, and Rhee  3informatics of domination as “a world system of production/reproduc -
tion and communication.” 6 In an eponymous section that includes her 
chart of transitions, Haraway narrates a wide- ranging shift in the oper -
ations of power, marking a move from social relations predominantly 
structured by industrial capitalism to  those structured by information 
capitalism in the second half of the twentieth  century.  Here, Haraway 
also describes the informatics of domination in prose that teasingly 
evokes its meaning:
In this attempt at an epistemological and  political position, I 
would like to sketch a picture of a pos  si ble unity, a picture in -
debted to socialist and feminist princi ples of design. The frame 
for my sketch is set by the extent and importance of rearrange -
ments in world- wide social relations tied to science and technol -
ogy. I argue for a politics rooted in claims about fundamental 
changes in the nature of class, race, and gender in an emerg -
ing system of world order analogous in its novelty and scope 
to that created by industrial capitalism; we are living through a 
movement from an organic, industrial society to a polymorphous, 
information system— from all work to all play, a deadly game. 
Si mul ta neously material and ideological, the dichotomies may 
be expressed in the following chart of transitions from the com -
fortable old hierarchical dominations to the scary new networks 
I have called the informatics of domination: 7
Haraway’s conception of the informatics of domination comes 
into focus from this description rooted in visual language: sketches, 
pictures, frames, design. Haraway’s par tic u lar interest in sketching a 
picture primes the reader for what follows this passage (which notably 
ends in the typographic graft of a colon): a two-  column, thirty-  two-  row 
diagram that maps two modes of domination— the chart of transitions 
(figure I.2 ). As an ordering of late twentieth-  century scientific, tech -
nological, cultural, social, and  political worlds, Haraway’s informatics 
of domination begins as a technical image, theorized through visual 
description and the chart of transitions.
The chart of transitions is inextricable from a genealogy of au -
thoritative diagrams that comprises actuarial  tables, slave ledgers, train 
times, mortality bills, and other bureaucratic, cap  i tal ist, and mercantile 
forms. 8 In reference to charts that appear in her other writings, Haraway 
I.2. Donna J. Haraway, informatics of domination chart of 
 transitions, “A Manifesto for Cyborgs: Science, T echnology, 
and Socialist Feminism in the 1980s,” Socialist Review , no. 80 
(1985): 80.
 Blas, Jue, and Rhee  5states, “I like the idea of using a truly monological object like a chart, 
and not some timely fractal design, to figure nonlinear, dynamic rela -
tionships.” 9 Y et Haraway is also critical of charts, writing, “The chart 
itself is a traditional  little machine for making par tic u lar meanings. 
Not a description, it must be read as an argument, and one which re -
lies on a suspect technology for the production of meanings—  binary 
dichotomization.” 10 In this passage, she alludes to the kind of logic one 
is conditioned to expect from a chart, and to the varied statistical, eco -
nomic, cap  i tal ist, and medical contexts in which such forms are typically 
encountered. Undeniably, charts,  tables, and diagrams have too easily 
supported and strengthened oppressive power structures and colonial 
epistemologies of classification and ordering. This noninnocent his -
tory makes it tempting to read Haraway’s chart of transitions as a fixed 
snapshot of a period in time, a grid that locks down a set of character -
istics, an unredeemable artifact of dominant power structures. Drawing 
attention to the chart’s history as a compromised form, Haraway uses 
the chart to express a feminist position that si  mul ta neously refuses any 
simplistic separation from the informatics of domination while also 
opening up the chart’s  organizing borders and potential meanings. 11 
T o use another of Haraway’s terms, the chart of transitions could also 
be deemed a “compound eye,” enclosing, yet multiple. 12
Informatics of Domination  embodies Haraway’s critical position -
ing of the chart. In this collection, we take Haraway’s chart of transi -
tions as an  organizing structure and experimental form for examining 
the informatics of domination and its mutations into the twenty-  first 
 century. 13 Situating the chart within scholarly and artistic genealogies 
of domination, informatics, white cap  i tal ist patriarchy, and the dia -
grammatic, we ask, how does this chart of transitions offer par tic u lar 
structures for thinking about power in the twenty- first  century? And 
how does the reader’s orientation in the chart determine what modes 
and enactments of power can be thought?
Like all charts, the chart of transitions requires the reader to 
decide how they  will orient themselves and what vectors of reading 
they  will follow. 14 Artist and writer Patricia Reed describes such dia -
grammatic reading practices as “a  labour of navigation.” 15 The chart, 
as a spatiotemporal material apparatus, requires the reader to do this 
orienting work—to make interpretations about shifts, directionalities, 
movements, and embodiments. What kinds of relations exist between 
the left column and the right column, from a term like repre sen  ta tion  
6 Informatics of Dominationto simulation , from  labor  to robotics , from perfection  to optimization ? Is 
it a shift from one mode to another, as in a change in epistemes? Or is 
the relation between terms additive? Where one formerly talked about 
 labor, must one also now consider robotics? 16 Responding to  these ques -
tions involves apprehending how the chart diagrams multidirectional 
flows of power— through its terms and also the orientational relations 
of the reader. How does domination constrict and homogenize subjects? 
How do subjects act to reinforce or interrupt systems of power? Upon 
accepting the chart’s invitation to orient, the reader ultimately gener -
ates meaning with, against, and beyond its contours as they navigate. 
In this way, the chart is a formal apparatus for generating and asking 
questions about relations of domination. 17
While the cyborg—  a feminist figure imbricated in networks of 
techno- scientific patriarchy— has been, and continues to be, considered 
the major theoretical contribution of “A Manifesto for Cyborgs,” we as -
sert that the surprisingly overlooked informatics of domination concept 
is a remarkably capacious, generative, and vital theoretical tool for our 
historical pre sent.  After all, the cyborg is but one figure—  one myth— 
enduring in the world system that is the informatics of domination. 
What other figures, myths, stories, and concepts exist in its networks 
 today? T o begin answering this question, we define the informatics of 
domination as a concept that names and situates domination; as a form 
of power  shaped by (but not totalized by) white cap  i tal ist patriarchy 
that manifests through information systems, networks, and computers 
in the twenty- first  century; as a medium- specific analy sis of domina -
tion’s modalities; and as a diagrammatic form that is at once unfinished 
and inviting. 18
Domination
Haraway’s use of the term domination  focuses attention on the inflec -
tion and influence of patriarchal power on information technologies. 
Throughout the 1980s and into the 1990s, feminist theory frequently 
named patriarchal power as “domination.” Across a variety of so -
cial,  political,  legal, and philosophical approaches, feminist theorists 
utilized domination to broadly critique patriarchal power relations, 
which spanned gender-  based oppression, class exploitation, and other 
aspects of  women’s lived experiences. 19 Concurrently, feminist science 
and technology scholars in the 1980s also invoked domination in their 
 Blas, Jue, and Rhee  7critiques. In her 1982 essay “Feminism and Science,” Evelyn Fox Keller 
linked a “masculinist” impulse in science with the drive to dominate 
nature: domination mobilized through “male consciousness” not only 
extended to the subordination of  women’s participation in research, but 
to the feminization of nature. 20 Sandra Harding, another key interlocu -
tor of Haraway (whose formulations of feminist standpoint theory and 
strong objectivity influenced Haraway’s theory of situated knowledges), 
refers to similar prob  lems of “masculine dominance” in science, in The 
Science Question in Feminism  (1986). 21 Domination, in the context of 
feminist science and technology studies at this time, crucially demon -
strated that patriarchal power is not only located in the male subject but 
also embedded in the techno- scientific and nonhuman. In this sense, 
domination can be considered an antecedent to con  temporary discus -
sions of algorithmic bias, extraction, and other computational means 
of enacting oppression.
Throughout the sex wars of the 1970s and 1980s, feminists de -
bated another kind of domination, namely, that which is practiced in 
bdsm , including sexual acts of bondage, discipline, dominance, submis -
sion, and sadism. Feminists  were deeply polarized regarding the ways 
in which sex impacted  women’s emancipation. Luminaries in feminist 
theory, including Andrea Dworkin, viewed bdsm  as a form of gender- 
based vio  lence against  women, akin to pornography and rape, that erot -
icized the unequal power structure between men and  women. 22 Gayle 
Rubin, active in lesbian bdsm  groups, argued against such criticisms 
and insisted that sadomasochism is not inherently patriarchal, cannot 
be reduced to gender oppression, and can be enjoyed by feminists. 23 Ru-
bin’s proto-  queer theory of sex demonstrates that desire and  pleasure 
complicate feminist understandings of domination as purely oppres -
sive. We include feminist theoretical engagements with bdsm  in our 
genealogy of domination, not  because we seek to answer, once and for 
all,  whether the submissive and dominatrix are oppressed or liberated. 
Rather, we take a di ff  er ent conclusion: desire and  pleasure can be found 
and enjoyed while being dominated, in sex and in other aspects of life. 
Consider the  pleasurable rush of dopamine someone may experience 
when posting and interacting on a corporate social media platform, all 
the while aware that information generated submits them to dynamics of 
domination, including surveillance, extraction, and commodification. 24
Many frameworks for naming patriarchal power as domina -
tion during the sex wars relied on essentialist, cisgender interpretations 
8 Informatics of Dominationof men and  women, as well as the invisibility of whiteness. One nota -
ble exception is social theorist Patricia Hill Collins, whose 1990 book 
Black Feminist Thought  expanded feminist theorizations of domination 
through the concept “matrix of domination.” 25 Writing to account 
for the specificity of American Black  women’s experiences, Collins 
argues that oppression converges across structural, disciplinary, hege -
monic, and interpersonal domains. Fastidious in its analy sis of domina -
tion as working across not only gender but also race, class, nation, and 
sexuality, Collins reframes domination through interlocking structures 
of oppression. We bring Collins’s matrix of domination to our engage -
ment with the informatics of domination to more thoroughly account 
for overlapping forms of domination extending through informatic 
technologies.
Informatics
Informatics is a concept that, when left to its own devices, likes to give 
the impression that domination is not part of the picture. The word 
emerged in the mid- twentieth  century from three  European terms ( In-
formatik  [German], informatique  [French], and informatika  [ Russian]) 
that name the study of information pro  cessing. 26 In the twenty- first 
 century, informatics overlaps with the field of computer science in 
 Europe, while in the United States, the discipline encompasses a range 
of theoretical and applied approaches to the study, design, and use of 
information technologies, including—  but not  limited to—  bio-  , health, 
climate, and museum informatics. Across its varied contexts, informat -
ics names the tendency to see the world as data and information: in the 
medicalized body, the weather, and in the large- scale surveillance of 
 people’s movements and interactions with technologies. 27 For exam -
ple, the School of Informatics at the University of Edinburgh defines 
informatics as the “study of the structure, behaviour, and interactions of 
natu  ral and engineered computational systems [where] information is 
carried at many levels, ranging, for example, from biological molecules 
and electronic devices through  nervous systems and computers and 
on to socie ties and large- scale distributed systems.” 28 The University 
of Edinburgh asks  whether it  will remain “helpful to maintain the dis -
tinction between natu  ral and engineered systems,” suggesting a world 
redefined as information. 29 Institutions often pre sent informatics as a 
“solutionist” technology, in which the informationalization of the world 
 Blas, Jue, and Rhee  9 will inherently make it a better place. 30 The Information School at the 
University of Washington exemplifies this attitude with their mission 
statement that informatics is “for the good of  people,  organizations, and 
society.” 31 Y et, for all their promise, such understandings of informatics 
fall short in considering the ways in which culture, politics, materiality, 
and relationality mark and shape information technologies.
Departing from such conceptions, media theorist N. Kather -
ine Hayles describes informatics as the co- shaping  process of informa -
tion technologies and  those who use them— which, in  later work, she 
calls technogenesis .32 Drawing on Haraway’s informatics of domination, 
Hayles defines informatics as “the technologies of information as well 
as the biological, social, linguistic, and cultural changes that initiate, 
accompany, and complicate their development.” 33  Here, Hayles em -
phasizes informatics as a set of conditions that comprises:
the material, technological, economic, and social structures that 
make the information age pos  si ble. Informatics includes the fol -
lowing: the late cap  i tal ist mode of flexible accumulation; the 
hardware and software that have merged telecommunications 
with computer technology; the patterns of living that emerge 
from and depend on access to large data banks and instanta -
neous transmission of messages; and the physical habits of 
posture, eye focus, hand motions, and neural connections that 
are reconfiguring the  human body in conjunction with infor -
mation technologies. 34
Each of Hayles’s examples shares an understanding of informatics as 
a term that capaciously and insistently asserts the inextricability of 
information technologies from their  political, material, cultural, and 
social contexts, that is, a co- shaping connection between embodiment 
and information. Her sense of informatics as focused on relations be -
tween technologies and  humans differs from  those offered by infor -
matics departments that center information as a universal ontology 
in the  service of social pro  gress. Informatics, for Hayles and Haraway, 
also brings  political questions of address, access, privacy, and consent. 
T ogether, they argue that the study of informatics must also ask: T o 
whom is information intelligible, whom and what does it capture and 
render/represent as information, and who determines the contours of 
its legibility?  These are  political questions about distributions of power, 
10  Informatics of Dominationquestions that bring us back to the power relations—of  humans, world 
systems, and information technologies— that enact domination.
White Cap i  tal ist Patriarchy —  Informatics 
of Domination
In the final row of Haraway’s chart of transitions, informatics of dom -
ination  appears to the right of white cap  i tal ist patriarchy . Given that 
informatics of domination also names the section of the essay in which 
the chart first appears,  these two terms can be understood as structur -
ing the entire chart. The positioning of white cap  i tal ist patriarchy  and 
informatics of domination  together in this final row upends expected 
modes of reading charts, in which  organizing concepts typically ap -
pear in the first row or as superintending titles. The chart’s final row, 
by contrast, pre sents an exercise in back- reading. The two terms si  mul-
ta neously have the final word while inviting a reencounter with the 
previous rows in the chart, which can be considered anew in light of 
the structuring role of the dyad white cap  i tal ist patriarchy —  infor -
matics of domination. We read Haraway’s placement of white cap  i tal ist 
patriarchy next to informatics of domination as marking the intimacy 
between  these two terms, rather than indicating an epistemic shift or 
a conceptual separation. 35 White cap  i tal ist patriarchy is not rendered 
obsolete or replaced, but is instead reproduced in informatic forms of 
domination. This  diagrammatic pairing, then, conveys that white cap -
i tal ist patriarchy is no less technical or scientific than the informatics 
of domination (indeed, race and racial capitalism have long been un -
derstood as technologies of domination). 36 Likewise, the informatics 
of domination is no less  political than white cap  i tal ist patriarchy, given 
that the informatics of domination emerges from and enacts white cap -
i tal ist patriarchal power.
Y et white cap  i tal ist patriarchy alone does not encompass the full 
range of modes of power extended by the informatics of domination. 
Black feminist theorist bell hooks characterized the dominant system of 
oppression within the United States as “imperialist white- supremacist 
cap i tal ist patriarchy.” 37 hooks’s impor tant expansion of white cap  i tal-
ist patriarchy to include imperialism and white supremacy further enu -
merates interconnected power structures in a way that resonates with 
the theory of intersectionality; this theory was first conceptualized by 
critical race and  legal scholar Kimberl é Crenshaw to name the multiple 
 Blas, Jue, and Rhee  11forms of oppression experienced by Black  women. 38 Intersectional 
analy sis also corresponds with the matrix of domination, which Col -
lins describes as systems of “heteropatriarchy,  neocolonialism, capital -
ism, racism, and imperialism [that] constitute forms of oppression that 
characterize global geopolitics [and that] take di ff  er ent forms across 
nation-  states, and catalyze social  inequality.” 39 Indeed, Collins has sub -
sequently framed the matrix of domination through intersectionality: 
“Intersectionality’s emphasis on intersecting systems of power suggests 
that distinctive forms of oppression  will each have its own power grid, 
a distinctive ‘matrix’ of intersecting power dynamics.” 40 Informatics of 
Domination  takes seriously the limits of white cap  i tal ist patriarchy as an 
 organizing concept, attending to the ways in which informatic technolo -
gies, while structured and bound to white cap  i tal ist patriarchy, produce 
novel modes of domination. 41
Consider code, in all of its informatic as well as noncompu -
tational manifestations. Haraway connects the informatics of domi -
nation to the authority given to code: “communications sciences and 
modern biologies are constructed by a common move— the translation 
of the world into a prob  lem of coding , a search for a common language 
in which all  resistance to instrumental control dis appears and all het -
erogeneity can be submitted to disassembly, reassembly, investment, 
and exchange.” 42  Counter to many interpretations of this passage as a 
periodizing diagnosis (the world is now code!), the full context of the 
original passage is, by our interpretation, satirical. It parrots the perspec -
tive of  those who, in a “common move,” celebrate reductive fantasies 
of “the world” as singular and homogenous, and who desire a mode of 
control that is absolute and totalizing. The “common move” manifests 
in the imagination of a “common language” that would eradicate all 
 resistance and difference—  code as a means of total control. 43 However, 
despite this desire for total control and absolute translatability,  there 
is not a singular world, but multiple worlds with much therein that is 
untranslatable by computer code. 44
Coding’s history reflects this dynamic between a desire for to -
talizing control and the impossibility of totalization. Coding has been 
a prevalent mode of ordering worlds long before the emergence of con-
temporary informatic technologies. This history illuminates that code 
has functioned as a tool for both control and domination, as well as for 
 resistance, subversion, and dissent. For example, scholars Safiya Noble, 
Jessica Marie Johnson, and Mark Anthony Neal link computer code to 
12  Informatics of DominationBlack codes, highlighting connections between racist Google algorithms 
and slave codes. 45 Johnson writes,
Slave codes  were once used to subjugate and control movement, 
identities, expressions, and access to resources. Placing Black 
codes in historical context, opens us up to an interrogation of the 
notion of “codes” as a means of control that apply in multiple 
material contexts— from the use of public facilities, to unequal 
education and healthcare, to digital life on the internet. How 
Black codes, in existence from the eighteenth-  century and 
 earlier, re-  emerge in every thing from slave trade databases 
to Google algorithms to the appearance of the color black on 
computer screens impacts what kind of programs, operating 
systems, and work is created. 46
In her work on con  temporary technologies’ reproduction of historic racial 
discrimination and inequalities through pro  cesses of coding, sociologist 
Ruha Benjamin describes codes as “operat[ing] within power  ful systems 
of meaning that render some  things vis  i ble,  others invisible, and create a 
vast array of distortions and dangers.” 47 Highlighting  these dangers, her 
concept of the New Jim Code describes how con  temporary technologies 
reproduce older forms of racial discrimination  under the guise of objec -
tivity.  These considerations of code and its Black histories also under -
score that code takes on di ff  er ent material instantiations. For instance, 
code can be a series of embodied gestures, such as the look a face gives 
to say “ ‘ Don’t walk all over me,’ ” or it can materialize as a complex craft 
practice, as in the case of Hawaiian flag quilts as coded  political symbols of 
sovereignty. 48 Code depends mutually on pro  cesses of writing and read -
ing code, as well as interpreting context. Take code- switching, in which 
minoritized  people shift their modes of sociality in di ff  er ent situations. 
For example, Black  people may speak differently in Black spaces than in 
predominantly white spaces, and queer, trans, and nonbinary persons 
may alter their voice, gender  presentation, and mannerisms as survival 
strategies to pass in airports, classrooms, and hospitals.
Code can also grant agency and aid in strug  gles for the liber -
ation of oppressed  peoples. For example, handkerchief codes, pop u-
lar ized in the 1970s,  were predominantly used by gay and queer men to 
signal sexual preferences and fetishes, enabling the existence of sexual 
subcultures. In artist and theorist micha c árdenas’s work, “algorithmic 
 Blas, Jue, and Rhee  13analy sis” is a practice-  based theoretical tool that includes “the cre -
ation of new algorithms, in functional computer programming lan -
guages, pseudocode, or code poetry” in art and poetics, with the aim to 
empower as well as protect queer and trans  people of color. 49 In this 
spirit, artist Zach Blas created transCoder: Queer Programming Anti-  
Language  (2008), an artwork that crosses a software development kit 
with code poetry and queer theory, in order to conjure a computational 
queerness that can be used to construct new worlds. 50 T ogether,  these ex -
amples evidence that the stakes of attending to code are enmeshed with 
profound considerations of power. Geographer Sarah Elwood’s intersec -
tional feminist engagement with code makes this clear: “Much Black, 
queer/trans, and feminist code studies starts from the proposition that 
in spite of structural conditions aligned to ensure exclusion and death, 
 these subjects are always also surviving and creatively intervening to 
catalyze possibilities for life and liberation.” 51 Indeed, prob  lems and 
potentialities of coding abound. For whom is the world a prob  lem to be 
solved through coding? 52 Whose worlds are construed as a prob  lem to 
be solved through the eradication of  resistance and difference? Whose 
worlds, by their mere existence, attest to the impossibility of computer 
code as “a common language in which all  resistance to instrumental con -
trol dis appears and all heterogeneity can be submitted to disassembly, 
reassembly, investment, and exchange”?  These questions animate our 
engagement with Haraway’s chart and its diagrammatic form.
Situating the Diagram
We connect the chart of transitions to a genealogy of practices that use 
diagrams to understand power relations. 53 In this genealogy, we find 
par tic u lar promise in diagrams that hold openness—of thought, of the 
 future, and of the potential for di ff  er ent configurations of power—as a 
guiding princi ple.  Here, the diagram is not a mode of capture or con -
tainment, but always a starting point for something beyond itself. 54 
Reed, for example, imagines diagramming as
the navigation of what could be  in the face of what is , for what 
is demarcates a zone of epistemic certainty that supports a par -
tic u lar logic of the world, foreclosing on alternative structural 
possibilities. Navigating the could be  requires the creation of 
a diagramme for the inexistent, it is the articulation of a new 
14  Informatics of Dominationterritory of logic unbound to the  actual imperatives of the cur -
rent landscape whose coordinates seem to have calcified our 
very imaginations, to the exception of cataclysmic narratives. 55
The chart of transitions evokes Reed’s sense of the could be . Even 
though the chart may appear to focus only on the what is , the chart’s 
attentiveness to transitions accentuates the forces of change that are 
inherent to each of its terms, within and beyond the informatics of 
domination. Thus, the chart finds common cause with other diagram -
matic engagements steeped in resistant histories, struggling for the 
inexistent and the yet-  to-be. For example, sociologist and civil rights 
leader W. E. B. Du Bois’s data visualizations from the turn of the twen -
tieth  century use bold contrasting colors and unusual bends or swirls 
of lines to animate a body of African American socioeconomic data, 
to expose racial  inequality but also to spur equal rights and end racial 
segregation. 56 In 2020, the  organization Stop lapd  Spying Co  ali tion 
and the Free Radicals collective introduced their Algorithmic Ecol  ogy, 
an abolitionist tool for diagrammatically analyzing con  temporary algo -
rithms’ broader ecologies of power. They used this tool to analyze the 
Los Angeles Police Department’s use of predictive policing software, 
which disproportionately targeted Black and Indigenous communities, 
and to envision a world without police surveillance. 57
We consider the chart of transitions to be a “feminist dia -
gram,” as defined by queer and feminist studies scholar Sam McBean. 
McBean’s concept articulates charts and diagrams as theorizations of 
patriarchal power relations that si  mul ta neously hold open the potenti -
ality of reconfiguration:
Diagrams seem to attempt to bridge  these two temporalities—
on the one hand they seem to be about explaining  things as they 
are. Y et, on the other hand, feminist theory’s diagrams and di -
agrammatic imaginaries are not just about observing the state 
of  things. Feminist theory’s diagrams aim to shift and challenge 
power relations; they straddle “the way  things are” and a  future 
that might be di ff  er ent.58
This work of observing, explaining, and worlding as straddling, rather 
than contradicting, echoes throughout the genealogy of diagrams in 
feminist theory McBean traces: feminist activist and writer Ti-  Grace 
 Blas, Jue, and Rhee  15Atkinson’s charts map patriarchal power relations while also strat -
egizing a feminist revolution that would radically overthrow  these 
relations; queer Chicana feminist Gloria Anzald úa’s pedagogical draw -
ings explain, for example, the relation between colonized  peoples and 
colonizers; and feminist writer and activist Shulamith Firestone’s dia -
gram plots ave  nues  toward cultural, economic, and sexual revolutions. 59 
Across  these instances, McBean frequently uses “mapping” to describe 
the work of feminist diagrams. Given that maps are intimately tied to 
colonial conquest, McBean aligns  here with Haraway’s feminist insis -
tence on using noninnocent tools to chart  toward the could be .
McBean also includes in this feminist genealogy a “diagram -
matic imaginary,” which includes visual  metaphors and imagery that 
conceptually invoke diagrams, as in the work of Crenshaw (intersec -
tionality), feminist writer and poet Adrienne Rich (lesbian continuum), 
and gender studies scholar Judith Butler (heterosexual matrix). 60 The 
informatics of domination can also be understood as a diagrammatic 
imaginary in this sense, through Haraway’s use of diagrammatic lan -
guage to describe the concept as “scary new networks.” 61 While the 
diagrams and imaginaries in McBean’s genealogy of feminist theory 
vary widely in form and style, they share with the chart of transitions a 
commitment to mapping power and to affirming openness.
The varied publication history of the chart of transitions exhib -
its princi ples of diagrammatic practices we have considered through -
out this introduction: navigation, orientation, and openness. Di ff  er ent 
versions of the chart have been published since its first printing in 
1985: its reprinting as “A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, T echnology, and 
Socialist- Feminism in the Late Twentieth  Century,” as well as a modi -
fied  presentation with di ff  er ent entries in its rows in the chapter “The 
Biopolitics of Postmodern Bodies: Constitutions of Self in Immune 
System Discourse,” both in Simians, Cyborgs, and  Women: The Reinven -
tion of Nature  (1991); to an altered diagrammatic display in the 2016 
republication of “A Cyborg Manifesto” in Manifestly Haraway .62  There 
are minute but significant formal differences across  these versions. 63 In 
the original 1985 printing, two columns and thirty- two lines separated by 
negative, white space are displayed on one page ( figure I.2 ). In the 2016 
edition of “A Cyborg Manifesto,” the overall spacing changes, where 
the chart sprawls across three pages instead of two ( figures I.3 – I.5). 
This publication also introduces two column headings, “Organics of 
Domination” and “Informatics of Domination,” which are separated 
16  Informatics of Dominationby arrows ( >) that move the reader from a term in the left column to 
its corresponding term in the right column— perhaps an unintentional 
echo of Dominguez’s use of “ >” in Virtual Timeline . Such variations to 
the chart of transitions demonstrate its openness to modification, that 
it was never sedimented in a fixed form.
Haraway’s and Dominguez’s charts employ “ >” to articulate re -
lationality, but in this collection, we have created the symbol: “ — .” 
Not to be confused with the em dash, the “ — ” can be understood as 
an edge in graph theory, which is a mathematical approach used in net -
work science to diagram networks.  Here, an edge is a link or connection 
between two points. (Points are also referred to as nodes or vertices.) 
Given Haraway’s description of the informatics of domination as “scary 
new networks,” we approach the chart of transitions as a diagram of 
networks. Like the monological chart, diagrams of networks based 
on graph theory are another “suspect technology for the production 
of meanings” and can exclude agency, diachronicity, complexity, and 
materiality in the formation and functioning of networks. 64 Aware of 
 these limitations, we employ edges, represented by “ — ,” to think with 
and add to the chart of transitions. From our point of view, “ — ” is 
a symbol that holds diagrammatic space for openness, navigation, and 
orientation, not only for the authors in the collection but also for its 
readers. “ — ” indicates that terms have relationality, but it does not 
overdetermine the nature of relation.

18  Informatics of DominationWe also consider the chart’s background: a blank, white, un -
marked page. Network science attends only to edges and vertices, links 
and nodes. But space around edges and vertices is not empty; rather, it is 
all that is not accounted for by the network form. Media theorist Ulises Ali 
Mejias describes this as the “paranodal . . .  the space that lies beyond the 
topological and conceptual limits of the node. This space is not empty but 
inhabited by multitudes that do not conform to the  organizing logic of the 
network.” 65 Paranodal space may be outside of networks, but it directly 
impacts the relationalities of nodes (terms in the chart), as well as the 
ways in which they link. The paranodal is all that surrounds them. Sim -
ilarly, a feminist ecological perspective might insist that environments 
are not neutral backgrounds, yet channel a variety of nonhuman agen -
cies. What kind of milieu makes a par tic u lar interpretation of the chart 
pos si ble? Or, put differently, what kind of environmental imaginaries 
make their ways into feminist diagramming practices? 66 Informatics of 
Domination  engages with the chart’s background— its paranodal space, 
its environment—  across the written entries, many of which account for 
that which exceeds being diagrammable by the network form.
I.3–  I.5. Donna J. Haraway, informatics of domination chart of 
transitions, “A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, T echnology, 
and Socialist- Feminism in the Late Twentieth  Century,” in 
Manifestly Haraway  (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota 
Press, 2016), 28–30.
 Blas, Jue, and Rhee  19We approach the chart of transitions— its columns, rows, para -
nodal space, and milieu—as a feminist diagram committed to situated -
ness.  After all, in Haraway’s Simians, Cyborgs, and  Women , “A Cyborg 
Manifesto” sits right next to the essay “Situated Knowledges: The 
Science Question in Feminism and the Privilege of the Partial Per -
spective.” Situated knowledges are embodied forms of objectivity, 
anathema to conceptions of scientific objectivity that are defined by 
their unlocatability, other  wise known as “the view from . . .  nowhere” 
or “the god trick.” 67 Haraway describes situated knowledges as feminist 
objectivity— modes of noninnocent, “power- sensitive” conversation be -
tween embodied, agential subjects and objects of knowledge. 68 This ap -
proach to the production, meaning, and reception of knowledge accounts 
for how one’s positionality and orientation shape questions of power and 
access, as well as the value forms and sources of knowledge take. Situat -
edness is a feminist practice of being responsible for one’s point of view 
and accepting that one’s position is always partial, never omniscient. In 
“Situated Knowledges,” Haraway pre sents another two-  column chart:
But a dichotomous chart misrepresents in a critical way the 
positions of embodied objectivity which I am trying to sketch. 
The primary distortion is the illusion of symmetry in the chart’s 
dichotomy, making any position appear, first, simply alternative 
and, second, mutually exclusive. A map of tensions and reso -
nances between the fixed ends of a charged dichotomy better 
represents the potent politics and epistemologies of embodied, 
therefore accountable, objectivity. 69
Although this passage may seem to suggest that Haraway is, in fact, ar -
guing against thinking with dichotomous charts (recall that Haraway 
also refers to the terms in the chart of transitions as “dichotomies”), 
we see her as suggesting something  else. Haraway claims that “a map 
of tensions and resonances”— more complex, embodied, and objective 
than dichotomies—  emerges from the chart precisely through the care -
ful practice of situating, that is, orienting one’s thinking with the chart 
in relation to one’s positionality and partiality.  Here, situated engage -
ments with charts are ultimately about learning how to establish and 
reflect upon one’s point of view through the individual reader’s efforts 
and  pleasures in constructing connections between ele  ments. Situated -
ness, then, is necessary to read feminist diagrams.
20  Informatics of DominationHaraway writes that any situated engagement with charting 
must come to terms with the imbrications of the subject and object of 
knowledge, what she terms “the apparatus of bodily production.” 70 A 
subject does not maintain a dispassionate, neutral relation to its object 
of analy sis; it affects the object directly. Thus, an object of knowledge 
is not passive but also has agency that impacts the subject  doing the 
studying. T ogether, subject and object exist in a coagential, embodied 
meaning- making  process. Feminist theorist and physicist Karen Barad 
expands on Haraway’s apparatus of bodily production with the power -
ful articulation—  based on her practice as a quantum physicist— that we 
are all entangled with our apparatuses of knowing, but to distinguish 
self from apparatus or other is to enact what Barad calls an “agential 
cut,” a linguistic and cognitive/epistemological separation that creates 
a boundary. 71 The positionality of the observer always  matters in rela -
tion to the apparatus, where both belong to a par tic u lar phenomenon—  a 
phenomenon that demands a certain delicacy. In a way, Haraway’s chart 
of transitions creates a series of agential cuts across the informatics of 
domination.  These agential cuts enacted by the chart invite readers to 
examine their own situatedness— their own points of view—in relation 
to the informatics of domination and to the vari ous terms that constitute 
the chart. At the same time, the chart also invites readers to make new 
agential cuts.
The Oxford  English Dictionary  instructs that the etymology of 
the word “diagram” is of multiple origins, spanning French, Latin, and 
Greek, with meanings that include “that which is marked out by lines, 
a geometrical figure, written list” and “draw, draw out, write in a regis -
ter, . . .  to write.” 72 This etymological definition crucially highlights that 
diagrams span text as well as nonlinguistic visual marks. 73 As such, we 
situate the chart of transitions within a context of visual art, in addition 
to theory and scholarship. Across di ff  er ent art historical periods, move -
ments, and styles, an abundance of diagrammatic visual artworks aim to 
understand power relations, like feminist theory’s diagrams. Visual art, 
however, draws attention to the ways in which diagrams can be com -
posed not only of words but also shapes, lines, and marks via a range of 
compositional techniques, including drawing, painting, collage, graphic 
design, and 3 d modeling. It is no surprise that Dominguez—an artist—  
experimented with Haraway’s chart, as the diagrammatic is not only a 
conceptual or intellectual engagement but a  process of formalization 
that is also aesthetic, which we understand as modalities that enable 
 Blas, Jue, and Rhee  21perceptions of the sensible. 74 In diagrammatic visual art, making and 
interpreting diagrams requires an aesthetic attunement beyond the lin -
guistic, an awareness that diagrammatic forms make meaning sensible 
through visual, spatial, and temporal logics, as well as through language.
For instance, in the 1990s, neo-  conceptual artist Mark Lom -
bardi drew a series of diagrams in pencil named Narrative Structures  
(1994–2000). 75 Employing link analy sis, a technique from network the -
ory that assesses relationships between nodes, Lombardi traced spheres 
of  political power and influence that accumulated in drawings featuring 
lines with arrows (edges) that made apparent corruptions and abuses of 
power, including connections between former US president George W. 
Bush and  founder of Al-  Qaeda Osama bin Laden (nodes). Importantly, 
it is not the names of  peoples, companies, and governments written 
on Lombardi’s diagrams that tell his stories of power; rather, it is the 
penciled lines and circles, edges and nodes, that visualize relations and 
make narratives. Diagrams in visual art can also be three-  dimensional. 
American Artist’s sculpture Veillance Caliper (Annotated)  (2021) uses 
wood and other materials to spatialize vectors of surveillance and Black 
 resistance. 76 The artwork takes up surveillance studies scholar  Simone 
Browne’s “dark sousveillance,” a Black mode of not being seen. 77 Dark 
sousveillance is a diagrammatic concept that trou bles computer science 
engineer Steve Mann’s “V eillance Plane,” a diagram that maps modes 
of looking. 78 In his diagram, Mann introduces “sousveillance,” which 
names acts of looking by  those in subjugated positions. 79 Artist high -
lights that “Browne critiques Mann’s model of veillance saying that 
the tactics of remaining ‘out of sight’ employed by enslaved Africans 
engineered a truly unique form of sousveillance. A form that she calls 
‘dark sousveillance’ that blows Mann’s plane apart,  because it requires 
at least a third dimension to become legible.” 80 T o inhabit this third 
dimension, Veillance Caliper (Annotated)  takes shape as a hybrid of 
wooden planks and a human- sized caliper, which is an instrument for 
 measuring the dimensions of an object (or  here, a subject). On its dia -
grammatic axes, handwritten labels are featured, including indicators 
for “dark sousveillance,” “racially saturated,” “ cctv ,” and “copwatch,” 
which tag and situate the three-  dimensional veillance vectors in rela -
tion to Black oppression and  resistance. Artist, through sculpture and 
scale, heightens the embodied encounter with diagrammatics of veil -
lance, in order to make dark sousveillance take up space and be felt. 
Artworks like Narrative Structures  and Veillance Caliper (Annotated)  
22  Informatics of Dominationestablish that thinking and experimenting diagrammatically encour -
ages relations between art and theory, which we actively cultivated in 
our editorial approach to the chart of transitions.
The Chart as Invitation
We have taken the chart of transitions—  open and inviting—as a  table 
of contents for this collection in order to generate a set of new writings. 
We offered the rows of the chart as prompts to a range of contributors—  
artists, scholars, curators, and creative writers— welcoming them to 
explore how the concepts in their given row resonate in the historical pre -
sent. We gave contributors the opportunity to interpret the relationship 
between the terms in their row as they saw fit. As a result, some entries 
periodize, some speculate, and some offer sustained experimentations 
with form. Some entries interrogate the pre sent through the lens of a sin -
gle term, while  others chart an epistemic shift between the original two 
terms or examine their dialectical relationship. Other entries introduce a 
third term that better addresses some aspect of the twenty- first  century. 
Still other entries use the conceptual tension of their row as an occasion to 
trace the pos  si ble, the dystopic, and the desirable. For this collection, the 
chart exists as both an  organizing structure and conceptual architecture 
to think with, to test, multiply inhabited and transformed by a variety of 
expressive forms—  essays, fictions, poetry, conversations.
T o emphasize the malleability of the chart and its co-  constitutive 
outside, we have added additional ele  ments to the structure of our 
collection. As a formal transition between the physical outside of the 
book covers and its contents, we commissioned a series of diagrams by 
Patricia Reed that plots epistemologies of information and explores 
their relations. We have also multiplied the final row of the chart—  
“white cap  i tal ist patriarchy —  informatics of domination”—  seven 
times and dispersed  these entries across the collection. We hope that 
this intentional proliferation of the final row has the effect of diffusing 
and refracting white cap  i tal ist patriarchy and the informatics of domi -
nation throughout the collection, rather than carry  ing a kind of struc -
tural weight at the end of the collection. The volume concludes with 
an afterword by Donna Haraway, in which she considers her chart of 
transitions  decades  after its original conception.
We encourage you to orient yourself within the collection as you 
would within the chart—to enjoy the  pleasures and navigational  labors 
 Blas, Jue, and Rhee  23of flipping through the pages, jumping across entries, tracing unau -
thorized relations, envisioning the could be . Our chart of transitions, 
in its diagrammatic theorization of the informatics of domination, is 
activated by your very reading. The chart is useful but nonteleolog -
ical, informative but nonprescriptive, remaining steadfastly open to 
uncharted iterations of domination and informatics structuring the 
pre sent, to  future mutations yet to come, and to strug  gles against the 
informatics of domination.
Notes
 1. Ricardo Dominguez, Virtual Timeline , 1997, https:// www . thing  . net / ~rdom  
/ VRtime .html .
 2. On Rhizome’s ArtBase archive, Dominguez states, “Use the timeline as a launch 
pad for surfing the web. . . .  VRTimeline  was an attempt to teach myself  tables and Ja -
vaScript in 1996. It was also an attempt to push a post-(e)- pedagogy that would map our 
current condition in view of the past and some pos  si ble  futures. ” See Ricardo Dominguez, 
Virtual Timeline , 1997, Rhizome / ArtBase, accessed March 10, 2024, https:// artbase  
. rhizome . org / wiki /Q4149 .
 3.  Philosopher Gilles Deleuze theorizes the virtual as “opposed not to the real 
but to the  actual. The virtual is fully real in so far as it is virtual . Exactly what Proust 
said of states of resonance must be said of the virtual: ‘Real without being  actual, ideal 
without being abstract. ’  ” Thus, the virtual can be understood as the real potentialities of 
the  actual. See Gilles Deleuze, Difference and Repetition  (New Y ork: Columbia Univer -
sity Press, 1994), 208. “Rhizomatics” in Virtual Timeline  also comes from Deleuze. The 
“rhizome” is a term he developed with psychoanalyst and  philosopher Félix Guattari to 
conceptualize a structure of multiplicities. See Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari, “Intro -
duction: Rhizome,” in A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and  Schizophrenia  (Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press, 1987), 3–25.
 4. See Colin Milburn, “The Horrors of Goo,” in Nanovision: Engineering the  Future  
(Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2008), 111–60.
 5. Ricardo Dominguez, email to Zach Blas, November 6, 2023. Dominguez also 
revealed that he created variations of Virtual Timeline : “The first version I did was part 
of a cae  [Critical Art Ensemble] and x-  communication proj ect where we printed a hand -
made booklet entitled Total Disaster  in the  middle of a very cold winter in an anarchist 
village named Dream Time Village . . .  in about 1989 I think. . . .  Then I made . . .  an 
on- line gesture, was in an early online show that Alex Galloway and Mark Amer  i ca cu -
rated back around ’97 or so ( HTMLConceptualism ). ” On the Rhizome / ArtBase archive, 
Dominguez identifies yet another version of his chart, which he describes as “presented 
as a very large wall drawing (1993)  under which I would stand, point, and discuss with 
whomever drifted by and asked a question about it. ” See Dominguez, Virtual Timeline , 
Rhizome / ArtBase.
 6. Donna J. Haraway, “A Manifesto for Cyborgs: Science, T echnology, and So -
cialist Feminism in the 1980s,” Socialist Review , no. 80 (1985): 82.
 7. Haraway, “A Manifesto for Cyborgs” (1985), 79–80.
24  Informatics of Domination 8. On slave ledgers, see Jessica Marie Johnson, “Markup Bodies: Black [Life] Stud -
ies and Slavery [Death] Studies at the Digital Crossroads,” Social Text , no. 137 (2018): 
57–79. On mortality bills, see Jacqueline Wernimont, Numbered Lives: Life and Death 
in Quantum Media  (Cambridge, MA: mit  Press, 2018). The chart also evokes a related 
genealogy of the grid. In the writings of  philosopher Michel Foucault, lush diagram -
matic language prioritizes the grid as a diagrammatic conceptualization for classifica -
tion and order: grids of identities, language grids, grids of analy  sis, grids of kinship, 
thought grids, perceptual grids, and grids of specification. For instance, in The History of 
Sexuality , vol. 1, Foucault describes “a  whole grid of observations regarding sex” coming 
into discourse during the seventeenth  century. Michel Foucault, The History of Sexual -
ity, vol. 1: The  Will to Knowledge  (London: Penguin, 1998), 26. See also Michel Foucault, 
The Order of  Things: An Archaeology of the  Human Sciences  (New Y ork: Vintage, 1994); 
and Michel Foucault, The Archaeology of Knowledge and the Discourse on Language  (New 
Y ork: Pantheon, 1972). Art historian Rosalind Krauss explains that the grid is the form 
that declares “the modernity of [western] modern art” (50). Krauss argues that while 
the grid is ubiquitous in art of the twentieth  century, it appears “nowhere, nowhere at 
all” (52) in artworks of the previous  century. The grid in modern art is viewed as “anti -
natural, antimimetic, antireal” (50), according to Krauss, as its  organization is not one 
of imitation but of its own “aesthetic decree” (50). Krauss continues, “although the grid 
is certainly not a story, it is a structure, and one, moreover, that allows a contradiction 
between the values of science and  those of spiritualism to maintain themselves within 
the consciousness of modernism, or rather its unconscious, as something repressed” (55). 
Rosalind Krauss, “Grids,” October  9 (Summer 1979): 50–64. In this collection, we do not 
regard the grid, or other diagrammatic forms, as autonomous from broader histories and 
contexts (in the West and beyond) of power.
 9. Donna J. Haraway, “Universal V ampires in a Donor Culture,” in Modest_Witness@
Second_Millenium.FemaleMan©_Meets_Oncomouse™  (New Y ork: Routledge, 1996), 231.
 10. Donna J. Haraway, “The Biopolitics of Postmodern Bodies: Constitutions of 
Self in Immune System Discourse,” in Simians, Cyborgs, and  Women: The Reinvention of 
Nature  (New Y ork: Routledge, 1991), 209.
 11. In “A Manifesto for Cyborgs,” Haraway gives the figure of the cyborg a simi -
lar feminist recasting: “The main trou ble with cyborgs, of course, is that they are the 
illegitimate offspring of militarism and patriarchal capitalism, not to mention state 
socialism. But illegitimate offspring are often exceedingly unfaithful to their origins. ” 
See Haraway, “A Manifesto for Cyborgs” (1985), 68.
 12. On “compound eyes,” see Donna J. Haraway, “Crittercam: Compounding Eyes in 
Naturecultures,” in When Species Meet  (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2008), 
249–66; Donna J. Haraway, “Situated Knowledges: The Science Question in Feminism and 
the Privilege of the Partial Perspective,” Feminist Studies  14, no. 3 (Autumn 1988): 538.
 13. See Zach Blas, “Informatics of Domination: A Lecture Series  Organized and 
Introduced by Zach Blas,” e- flux Conversations , January 18, 2017, https:// conversations  
. e - flux  . com / t / informatics - of - domination - a - lecture  - series - organized - and - introduced - by 
- zach -  blas /5890 .
 14. On oriented knowledge, see Sara Ahmed, Queer Phenomenology: Orientations, 
Objects,  Others  (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2006); Melody Jue, Wild Blue Media: 
Thinking through Seawater  (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2020), 1–11, 80–87 .
 15. Patricia Reed, “Diagramming the Common,” April 23, 2014, https:// www  
. aestheticmanagement  . com / wp  - content / uploads / 2014 / 05 / reed _ diagramming _ the  
_ common  .pdf . A lecture with diagrams given at the KunstAllmend (Artistic Commons) 
Symposium at Dampfzentrale, Bern, Switzerland; quoted with Reed’s permission.
 Blas, Jue, and Rhee  25 16. For an argument about the formative links between labor and robotics, see 
Jennifer Rhee, The Robotic Imaginary: The  Human and the Price of Dehumanized  Labor  
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2018).
 17. Periodization is yet another way to read the chart of transitions. In Protocol: 
How Control Exists  after Decentralization , media theorist Alexander R. Galloway describes 
this method as “theorizing the pre sent historical moment and . . .  offering periodizations 
to explain its historical trajectory” (3). Citing  political  philosopher Michael Hardt and 
feminist theorist Kathy Weeks, Galloway further notes that “ ‘periodization is an initial 
technique that opens the path and allows us to gain access to history and historical differ -
ences ’ ” (20). Galloway points out numerous theoretical concepts that can be deemed acts 
of periodization: Michel Foucault’s “disciplinary socie ties” as the historical shift  after 
sovereignty; Deleuze’s “control socie ties” as that which follows disciplinary socie ties; 
media theorist Friedrich Kittler’s articulation of the years 1800 and 1900 as marking 
dif fer ent “discourse networks”; Marxist economist and theorist Ernest Mandel’s “late 
capitalism” as economic expansion post–  World War II; sociologist Manuel Castells’s 
“network society” as signaling transformations wrought by globalization and the inter -
net; and Hardt and  political  philosopher Antonio Negri’s “Empire” as world order at the 
start of the twenty- first  century. Galloway continues, “Periodization theory is a loose art 
at best and must take into account that, when history changes, it changes slowly and in an 
overlapping, multilayered way, such that one historical moment may extend well into an -
other, or two moments may happily coexist for  decades or longer. For instance, in much 
of the last hundred years, all three social phases described  earlier [classical, modern, and 
postmodern eras] existed at the same time  in the United States and elsewhere. T o paraphrase 
William Gibson: The  future is already  here, but it is not uniformly distributed across all 
points in society. At best, periodization theory is an analytical mindgame, yet one that 
breathes life into the structural analyses offered to explain certain tectonic shifts in the 
foundations of social and  political life” (27). See Alexander R. Galloway, Protocol: How 
Control Exists  after Decentralization  (Cambridge, MA: mit  Press, 2006). Galloway has 
also created charts of transitions, based on periodization, inspired by Donna Haraway. 
See “Periodization Map” (27) and “Control Matrix” (114–15) in Protocol . With theorist 
Eugene Thacker, see “the transition from the pre sent day into the  future” chart (100–101); 
Alexander R. Galloway and Eugene Thacker, The Exploit: A Theory of Networks  (Min -
neapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2007). Marxist  political theorist and literary 
scholar Fredric Jameson, an adherent of periodization, puts it plainly: “We cannot not 
periodize. ” Fredric Jameson, A Singular Modernity: Essay on the Ontology of the Pre  sent  
(London: V erso, 2012), 29. Notably, periodization differs from our editorial approach 
to the chart of transitions, as it is a methodology that does not adequately account for 
how the reader’s orientation produces meaning.
 18. On medium- specific analy sis, see N. Katherine Hayes, Writing Machines  (Cam -
bridge, MA: mit  Press, 2002).
 19. Feminist  philosopher Amy Allen argues that feminist conceptions of domina -
tion pop u lar ized during second- wave feminism described male forms of oppression, or 
“male supremacy,” and enabled  women to focus on “power-  over relations,” that is, the 
domination of men over  women. See Amy Allen, “Feminist Perspectives on Power,” in 
The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , October 28, 2021 (substantive revision), https://  
plato  . stanford  . edu /  archives / fall2022 /  entries / feminist  - power /. Scholar Jennifer Einspahr 
also explains that second- wave feminists “place patriarchal power relations— the system 
of male domination and  women’s subordination—at the centre of analy  sis” (2). Einspahr 
highlights that domination is a mode of structural critique, “understanding patriarchy 
as a structure of male domination” (1). See Jennifer Einspahr, “Structural Domination 
and Structural Freedom: A Feminist Perspective,” Feminist Review  94 (2010): 1–19. Red -
26  Informatics of Dominationstockings, a radical feminist nonprofit  organization, further clarifies this feminist 
definition of domination: “We identify the agents of our oppression as men. Male 
supremacy is the oldest, most basic form of domination. ” See Redstockings Collec -
tive, “Redstockings Manifesto,” Redstockings , July 7, 1969, https://  www  . redstockings  
. org / index  . php / rs -manifesto . Notably, for much of second- wave feminist thought, the 
category of “ woman” only pertained to cisgender  women. Einspahr points out that with 
the emergence of third- wave feminism in the 1990s, the appeal of domination as a term 
of critique waned, citing a growing disinterest in structural critiques of power: “When 
power relations are understood to function in subtle and insidious ways, the usefulness 
of such a blunt concept of ‘domination’ is called into doubt. ” Einspahr, “Structural Dom -
ination and Structural Freedom,” 2.
 20. Evelyn Fox Keller, “Feminism and Science,” Feminist Theory  7, no. 3 (Spring 
1982): 589–602. Similar to other second- wave feminists, Keller utilizes essentialist for -
mulations of gender. She defines masculinity as a “gender trait” (595) and posits its cul -
tural definition as “that which can never appear feminine” (595). As such, the qualities of 
masculinity can only be found in cisgender men, and this par tic u lar gender trait supports 
an “impulse  towards domination” (596), further exacerbated by cultural understandings 
of nature as feminine.
 21. Sandra Harding, The Science Question in Feminism  (Ithaca, NY: Cornell Uni -
versity Press, 1986), 80.
 22. See Andrea Dworkin,  Women Hating  (New Y ork: E. P. Dutton, 1974); and Robin 
Ruth Linden, Darlene R. Pagano, Diana E. H. Russell, and Susan Leigh Star, eds., Against 
Sadomasochism: A Radical Feminist Analy  sis (San Francisco: Frog in the Well, 1982).
 23. See Gayle S. Rubin, “Thinking Sex: Notes for a Radical Theory of the Politics 
of Sexuality,” in The Gay and Lesbian Studies Reader , ed. Henry Abelove, Michele Aina 
Barale, and David M. Halperin (New Y ork: Routledge, 1993), 31–79. Rubin cofounded a 
lesbian feminist bdsm   organization named Samois, which takes its name from Samois-  
sur-  Seine, the estate of Anne-  Marie, who is a lesbian dominatrix in the novel The Story 
of O  (1954). Samois was located in San Francisco and active between 1978 and 1983.
 24. See Zach Blas, sanctum , 2018, https:// zachblas . info / works / sanctum /. The 
immersive media installation “identifies a distorted reimagining of the power dynam -
ics of bdsm  at the heart of con  temporary surveillance: an opulent display of desire and 
capture, exposure and punishment, dominance and submission. ”
 25. See Patricia Hill Collins, Black Feminist Thought: Knowledge, Consciousness, 
and the Politics of Empowerment  (New Y ork: Routledge, 1990).
 26. Oxford  English Dictionary , s.v. “information,” accessed March 10, 2024, https://  
www . oed  . com / dictionary / information _n .
 27. As scholar of lit er a ture and science Bruce Clarke helpfully historicizes, “The ‘de -
coding’ of dna  happened to coincide historically with the unfolding of information theory, 
and the  metaphor of ‘ge  ne tic information’ promoted the conviction that information was the 
skeleton key with which to open up the remaining secrets of  matter, energy, and life. ” Bruce 
Clarke, “Information,” in Critical Terms for Media Studies , ed. W. J. T. Mitchell and Mark B. N. 
Hansen (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2010), 137 .
 28. School of Informatics, “What Is Informatics?,” University of Edinburgh, accessed 
March 10, 2024, https:// www . ed  . ac . uk / sites / default / files / atoms/ files// what20is20infor
matics .pdf .
 29. School of Informatics, “What Is Informatics?”
 Blas, Jue, and Rhee  27 30. See Evgeny Morozov, To Save Every  thing, Click  Here: The Folly of Technological 
Solutionism  (New Y ork: PublicAffairs, 2013).
 31. Information School, “Informatics,” University of Washington, accessed 
March 10, 2024, https:// ischool  . uw . edu / programs /informatics .
 32. See N. Katherine Hayles, How We Think: Digital Media and Con  temporary 
Technogenesis  (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2012).
 33. N. Katherine Hayles, How We Became Posthuman: Virtual Bodies in Cybernetics, 
Lit er a ture, and Informatics  (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999), 29. This defi -
nition bypasses the sense of automation pre sent in the French and German definitions 
of informatics through folding in an accounting of social forces.
 34. Hayles, How We Became Posthuman , 313n4.
 35. In Haraway’s 1988 essay “Situated Knowledges: The Science Question in Fem -
inism and the Privilege of Partial Perspective,” she writes, “ ‘White Cap  i tal ist Patriarchy’ 
(how may we name this scandalous  Thing?)” Published three years  after “A Manifesto 
for Cyborgs,” “Situated Knowledges” exhibits Haraway continuing to think with white 
cap i tal ist patriarchy, questioning how to name it  after she had already reconceptualized 
it as the informatics of domination. This instance further illustrates that the informatics 
of domination is not simply that which comes  after white cap  i tal ist patriarchy. Donna J. 
Haraway, “Situated Knowledges: The Science Question in Feminism and the Privilege 
of Partial Perspective,” in Simians, Cyborgs, and  Women: The Reinvention of Nature  (New 
Y ork: Routledge, 1991), 197 .
 36. For example, see Ruha Benjamin, Race  after Technology: Abolitionist Tools for 
the New Jim Code  (New Y ork: Polity Press, 2019); and Wendy Hui Kyong Chun, “Race 
and/as T echnology; or, How to Do  Things with Race,” Camera Obscura  24, no. 1 (2009): 
7–35.
 37. bell hooks, The  Will to Change: Men, Masculinity, and Love  (New Y ork: Wash -
ington Square Press, 2004), 17 .
 38. See Kimberlé Crenshaw, “Demarginalizing the Intersection of Race and Sex: A 
Black Feminist Critique of Antidiscrimination Doctrine, Feminist Theory and Antiracist 
Politics,” University of Chicago  Legal Forum  1 (1989): 139–67; and Kimberlé Crenshaw, 
“Mapping the Margins: Intersectionality, Identity Politics, and Vio  lence against  Women 
of Color,” Stanford Law Review  43, no. 6 (July 1991): 1241–99.
 39. Patricia Hill Collins, Intersectionality as Critical Social Theory  (Durham, NC: 
Duke University Press, 2019), 239.
 40. Collins, Intersectionality as Critical Social Theory , 239.
 41. The enmeshment of white cap  i tal ist patriarchy with informatics of domina -
tion, as well as with wider ranges of interlocking structures of oppression, is reflected 
throughout the entries, including the seven entries titled “White Cap  i tal ist Patriarchy 
—  Informatics of Domination. ”
 42. Haraway, “A Manifesto for Cyborgs,” (1985), 83.
 43. The “common move” Haraway describes conceives of translation as a totalizing 
and automatable  process rather than an artistic and poetic practice. While some scientists 
are cautious about the incommensurability of datasets, given the nonfungibility of data 
across dif  fer ent contexts, the fantasy of code as a universal language broadly persists. 
For example, the School of Information Sciences at the University of Illinois at Urbana-  
Champaign writes that informatics, itself a science of coding, “uses computation as a 
28  Informatics of Dominationuniversal  tool to solve prob  lems in other fields. ” School of Information Sciences, “What 
Is Informatics?” University of Illinois at Urbana-  Champaign, accessed March 10, 2024, 
https:// informatics .  ischool  . illinois . edu / home / what  - is - informatics / .
 44. The tension between translatability and untranslatability of code in Har -
away’s formulation relates to debates on the uncomputable. Mathematician and com -
puter scientist Alan Turing’s theorization of computable numbers is a  popular—if not 
the dominant— model for defining computability in the twentieth  century. According 
to Turing, “The ‘computable’ numbers may be described briefly as the real numbers 
whose expressions as a decimal are calculable by finite means. ” A. M. Turing, “On Com -
puter Numbers, with an Application to the Entscheidungsproblem,” Proceedings of the 
London Mathematical Society  2, no. 42 (1936): 230. Pointing to the limits of Turing’s 
theory of computability, media scholar Jacob Gaboury argues that queerness, when 
thought of as a methodology to engage the computational, is external to it: “we might 
identify a queer computing—  outside the imperative of successful communication. It is 
 those forms of computation that fail, break down, recur, and run forever, and models 
of computing that are outside of or beyond so-  called ‘universal’ Turing computation—  
that is,  those pro  cesses which dis appear or recede from computational forms of know -
ing. ” Jacob  Gaboury, “On Uncomputable Numbers: The Origins of Queer Computing,” 
Media-  N 9, no. 2 (Summer 2013), https:// median  . newmediacaucus . org / caa  - conference  
- edition -  2013 / on - uncomputable  - numbers - the - origins -  of - a - queer  - computing / . In a blog 
post discussing the work of media  philosopher Luciana Parisi, Alexander R. Galloway 
explains her  position on the uncomputable: “Part of the story involves incorporating  the 
indiscernible and the indeterminate into the very heart of computation. According to 
Parisi, ‘error, indeterminacy, randomness, and unknowns in general have become part of 
technoscientific knowledge and the reasoning of machines. ’ Indeed part of the history 
of computation is the history of the uncomputable being colonized by the computable. ” 
Alexander R. Galloway, “Uncomputer,” nyu  Department of Media, Culture, and Commu -
nication, February 9, 2020, http:// cultureandcommunication  . org / galloway /uncomputer . 
See also Luciana Parisi, “Reprogramming Decisionism,” e- flux Journal  85 (October 2017), 
https:// www . e - flux  . com / journal / 85 / 155472 / reprogramming -  decisionism / ; Luciana Pa -
risi, Contagious Architecture: Computation, Aesthetics, and Space  (Cambridge, MA: mit  
Press, 2022); and M. Beatrice Fazi, Contingent Computation: Abstraction, Experience, and 
Indeterminacy in Computational Aesthetics  (Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 2018).
 45. Black codes refer to US laws passed  after 1865 that restricted Black  people’s 
mobility, freedoms, rights, and economic and  political participation;  these laws  were 
extensions of the white supremacist oppression enacted by slave codes.
 46. Safiya Noble, Jessica Marie Johnson, and Mark Anthony Neal, “Week 3: 
Race and Black Codes (Main Thread),” CCS  Working Group, January 2018, https:// wg  
. criticalcodestudies . com / index  . php ? p =  / discussion / 42 / week  - 3 - race  - and - black  - codes  
- main -thread .
 47. Benjamin, Race  after Technology ,  7.
 48. See Martine Syms, Notes on Gesture , 2015, video, 10:30; Gloria Anzaldúa, “Ha -
ciendo caras, una entrada,” in Making Face, Making Soul / Haciendo Caras: Creative and 
Critical Perspectives by Feminists of Color , ed. Gloria Anzaldúa (San Francisco: Aunt Lute, 
1990), xv; Joyce D. Hammond, “Hawaiian Flag Quilts: Multivalent Symbols of a Hawai -
ian Quilt Tradition,” Hawaiian Journal of History  27 (1993): 1–26.
 49. micha cárdenas, Poetic Operations: Trans of Color Art in Digital Media  (Durham, 
NC: Duke University Press, 2022), 7 . Clarifying algorithmic analy sis’s relation to codes 
and coding, cárdenas writes, “When I speak of algorithms, I am talking about code” 
 Blas, Jue, and Rhee  29(7). cárdenas considers her algorithmic analy sis to be an addition to both Crenshaw’s 
intersectionality and queer and decolonial studies scholar Jasbir Puar’s extension of 
intersectionality through Deleuzian assemblage theory. See Jasbir K. Puar, “  ‘I Would 
Rather Be a Cyborg Than a Goddess’: Becoming- Intersectional in Assemblage Theory,” 
philoSOPHIA: A Journal of Continental Feminism  2, no. 1 (2012): 49–66.
 50. transCoder  is part of Blas’s Queer Technologies  series. See Zach Blas, Queer Tech -
nologies  (2008–12), https:// zachblas .  info / works / queer  - technologies / .
 51. Sarah Elwood, “Digital Geographies, Feminist Relationality, Black and Queer 
Code Studies: Thriving Other  wise,” Pro gress in  Human Geography  45, no. 2 (2020): 212.
 52. This question resonates with W. E. B. Du Bois’s famous question examining 
the African American experience, “How does it feel to be a prob  lem?” (“Of Our Spiri -
tual Strivings,” in The Souls of Black Folk , Proj ect Gutenberg, [1903] 1996, https:// www  
. gutenberg  . org / files / 408 / 408  - h / 408  - h .htm ).
 53. We acknowledge another genealogy of diagrammatic thought, emerging from 
Foucault and Deleuze, that addresses power relations. Deleuze states that “  every society 
has its diagram(s)” (35) and qualifies this with a definition of the diagram: “a display of 
relations between forces which constitute power” (36). Gilles Deleuze, Foucault  (Minne -
apolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1986). Foucault supports this claim when he the -
orizes the Panopticon as a diagram inherent to disciplinary socie ties. When theorizing 
the Panopticon, Foucault introduces the diagram specifically in relation to power: “it 
is the diagram of a mechanism of power [discipline] reduced to its ideal form . . .  not a 
dream building but a diagram” (205). Michel Foucault, Discipline and Punish: The Birth 
of the Prison  (New Y ork: Vintage, 1995). Foucault and Deleuze also theorize the diagram 
in relation to  resistance. Foucault writes that  there are “points of  resistance everywhere 
in the power network” (95), “matrices of transformation” (99). Foucault, The History of 
Sexuality . Deleuze expands Foucault’s sense of diagrammatic  resistance, further defin -
ing the diagram as unstable  because it is constituted by an “irreducible outside”— forces 
not captured by the diagram— that bears directly on the formation of the diagram it -
self. Deleuze elaborates further on the diagram in relation to force, the outside, and 
 resistance: “The diagram, as the fixed form of a set of relations between forces, never 
exhausts force, which can enter into other relations and compositions. The diagram 
stems from the outside but the outside does not merge with any diagram, and continues 
instead to ‘draw’ new ones. In this way the outside is always an opening on to a  future: 
nothing ends, since nothing has begun, but every thing is transformed. In this sense force 
displays potentiality with re spect to the diagram containing it, or possesses a third power 
which pre sents itself as the possibility of ‘  resistance. ’ [. . .   Resistance is] ‘points, knots 
or focuses’ which act in turn on the strata, but in such a way as to make change pos  si ble. 
Moreover, the final word on power is that  resistance comes first , or to the extent that power 
relations operate completely within the diagram, while  resistances necessarily operate 
in a direct relation with the outside from which the diagrams emerge. This means that 
a social field offers more  resistance than strategies, and the thought of the outside is a 
thought of  resistance. ” Deleuze, Foucault , 89–90.
 54. The chart’s evocation of openness and change resonates with what Uncertain 
Commons, a group of scholars, mediaphiles, and activists, calls “affirmative speculation,” 
the proliferation of pos  si ble futurities, which can channel potential for worlding other -
wise. See Uncertain Commons, Speculate This!  (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2013).
 55. Reed, “Diagramming the Common. ”
 56. See Whitney Battle- Baptiste and Britt Rusert, eds., W. E. B. Du Bois’s Data 
Portraits Visualizing Black Amer  i ca (New Y ork: Prince ton Architectural Press, 2018).
30  Informatics of Domination 57. Stop lapd  Spying Co  ali tion and  Free Radicals, “The Algorithmic Ecol ogy: 
An Abolitionist T ool for  Organizing against Algorithms,” Medium , March 2, 2020, 
https:// stoplapdspying  . medium  . com / the  - algorithmic  - ecology - an - abolitionist  - tool - for  
- organizing -  against  - algorithms -14fcbd0e64d0 .
 58. Sam McBean, “Feminist Diagrams,” Feminist Theory  22, no. 2 (April 2021): 223.
 59. See Ti-  Grace Atkinson, Amazon Odyssey  (New Y ork: Links, 1974). Anzaldúa’s 
diagrammatic drawings are available for viewing in “Gloria Evangelina Anzaldúa Papers,” 
part of the Nettie Lee Benson Latin American Collection at the University of T exas at 
Austin. See Shulamith Firestone, The Dialectic of Sex: The Case for a Feminist Revolu -
tion  (London: V erso, 2015). We add to this list of feminist diagrams Catherine D’Ig -
nazio and Lauren F. Klein’s  table that juxtaposes concepts of data ethics, which secure 
power, and concepts of data justice, which challenge power. See Catherine D’Ignazio and 
 Lauren F. Klein, Data Feminism  (Cambridge, MA: mit  Press, 2020), 60.
 60. McBean, “Feminist Diagrams,” 210, 219–20.
 61. Haraway, “A Manifesto for Cyborgs” (1985), 82.
 62. In the 1991 reprinting of “A Cyborg Manifesto” in Simians, Cyborgs, and 
 Women , the chart splits across two pages, appearing on pp. 161–62. In “The Biopolitics 
of  Postmodern Bodies,” entries are added, deleted, and edited to the chart: “Work —  
T ext,” “Mimesis —  Play of Signifiers,” “Individual —  Replicon,” and “Colonialism 
—  Transnational Capitalism” are new; “Science management in home/factory —  
Global factory/Electronic cottage,” “Family/Market/Factory —   Women in the Inte -
grated Cir  cuit,” “  Family wage —  Comparable Worth,” and “Public/Private —  Cyborg 
citizenship” have been removed; and other entries have been adjusted. For instance, 
“Organism —  Biotic component, code” now contains “code,” “Sex —  Surrogacy” 
is a reconfiguration of “Sex —  Ge ne tic Engineering,” and “De cadence —  Obsoles -
cence” no longer includes its literary interlocutors Magic Mountain  and  Future Shock . 
This chart appears on pp. 209–10 in Simians, Cyborgs, and  Women . Given that this altered 
 presentation of the chart appears in a publication that is not “A Manifesto for Cyborgs,” 
we did not include its additional entries and edits in our editorial approach to working 
with the chart for this publication. We committed to staying with the chart as presented 
in the manifesto, which explic  itly frames the chart of transitions through the informatics 
of domination.
 63. “A Manifesto for Cyborgs” has been widely reprinted in journals and edited 
collections, as well as translated and printed in numerous languages. Many of  these publi -
cations display the chart of transitions like the original 1985 layout on a single page, as in 
Australian Feminist Studies  4 (Autumn 1987), 16, or the chart from Simians, Cyborgs, and 
 Women , which spans two pages, as in Linda J. Nicholson, ed., Feminism/Postmodernism  
(New Y ork: Routledge, 1990), 203–4; and The Haraway Reader  (New Y ork: Routledge, 
2004), 20–21.
 64. On limitations of graph theory in network science, see Galloway and Thacker, 
The Exploit , 33–34. Media theorist Nicole Starosielski points out that graph theory leaves 
 behind materiality in The Undersea Network  (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2015), 
xiii–  xiv.
 65. Ulises Ali Mejias, Off the Network: Disrupting the Digital World  (Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press, 2013), 153.
 66. For example, in Ti-  Grace Atkinson’s diagrams, geologic strata-  like abstractions 
portray patriarchal domination and oppression as a sedimentary weight sitting on the 
oppressed. Y et both oppressor and oppressed are composed of multiple strata—  dotted, 
 Blas, Jue, and Rhee  31hashed, filled with wavy lines— that encompass factions that are pro- rebellion, antire -
bellion, and neutral. It takes an environmentally inflected point of reference to interpret 
Atkinson’s diagrams, where gravity (and power) flow from top to bottom. See “Tactical-  
Strategy Chart” #1–22 in Atkinson, Amazon Odyssey , 161–89.
 67. Haraway, “Situated Knowledges” (1991), 189.
 68. Haraway, “Situated Knowledges” (1991), 195.
 69. Haraway, “Situated Knowledges” (1991), 194.
 70. Haraway, “Situated Knowledges” (1991), 197–201.
 71. Karen Barad, Meeting the Universe Halfway: Quantum Physics and the Entan -
glement of  Matter and Meaning  (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2007), 337 .
 72. Oxford  English Dictionary , s.v. “diagram,” accessed March 10, 2024, https://  
www . oed  . com / dictionary / diagram _ n  ? tab =etymology#6917294 .
 73. McBean’s genealogy of feminist diagrams also reflects this definition.
 74. Our approach to aesthetics stems from Jacques Rancière, who theorizes an aes -
thetic dimension to politics. With the introduction of his concept “the distribution of 
sensible,” Rancière explains that, in any given era or regime,  there is a par tic u lar order -
ing of what can be sensed and perceived. This ordering, or distribution, of the sensible 
is aesthetic  because it demarcates what can be sensually experienced. For Rancière, this 
means that aesthetics are inextricable from politics, as social  orders,  political systems, 
and worlds emerge out of distributions of the sensible. Politics, then, can be understood 
as efforts to reconfigure (aesthetic) distributions of the sensible. See Jacques Rancière, 
The Politics of Aesthetics  (London: Bloomsbury Academic, 2006). Similarly, Thomas 
Keenan and Eyal Weizman have defined “aesthetic operations” as “the way and order by 
which  things and events appear to us. ” See Thomas Keenan and Eyal Weizman, Mengele’s 
Skull: The Advent of a Forensic Aesthetics  (Berlin: Sternberg Press/Portikus, 2012), 23.
 75. See Robert Hobbs and Mark Lombardi, Mark Lombardi: Global Networks  (New 
Y ork:  Independent Curators International, 2003).
 76. American Artist, Veillance Caliper (Annotated) , 2021, https:// americanartist  
. us / works / veillance  - caliper  -annotated .
 77. Simone Browne, Dark  Matters: On the Surveillance of Blackness  (Durham, NC: 
Duke University Press, 2015), 21.
 78. Steve Mann, “V eillance and Reciprocal Transparency: Surveillance versus 
Sousveillance, ar Glass, Lifelogging and Wearable Computing,” 2013  ieee  International 
Symposium on Technology and Society ( istas ) (T oronto: ieee , 2013), 6.
 79. Mann, “V eillance and Reciprocal Transparency,” 3.
 80. American Artist (@a_____rtist), Instagram post, June 25, 2021, https:// www  
. instagram  . com / a _  _  _  _  _ rtist / p / CQjPZr2lQ7O /  ? img _ index  =6.
This page intentionally left blank
It is not incidental that simulation  would be the first term in Donna 
Haraway’s sketch of the epistemic shift from industrial to information 
society. The sine qua non of her “deadly game,” simulation engenders 
the complex media- technological apparatus that both expresses and 
subtends the informatics of domination. 1 It is  there in the modeling of 
organic and technical systems, in the development of new techniques of 
control and communication, and of course in the design of games them -
selves. Not reducible to the play of signs, the simulacrum wields deter -
minative, performative power— scary then  because of its capacity to 
actualize the virtual, to overcode the copy or replica and enact it as real. 
Hence the insistent drive in dystopian fables to mark a line between 
the world-  as- territory and the world-  as- matrix, most visibly in The 
Matrix  films themselves. Deploying “virtual” as the index of a discrete 
condition and situation, located elsewhere and distinct from “real,” 
even as it always threatened to eclipse it, is in this sense a containment 
strategy. But if the implicit promise  behind Linden Lab’s Second Life 
when it launched in 2003 was that a virtual environment could indeed 
be upheld as secondary (as the naming itself indicates), new technol -
ogies of augmented real  ity instead promise extension, continuity, and 
supplementation, with metaverses and mirror worlds not necessarily 
dependent on an articulation of the simulacra as detached and bounded 
by platform or device. In other words, it is now Unreal Engine, design 
software, all the way down.
As the pre sent volume suggests, it is now pos  si ble, and indeed 
time, to consider  whether we are living through another epistemic tran -
sition, or on another level in the deadly game. If the question has to 1. Repre sen  ta tion — 
Simulation —  Generation
Rita Raley
34  Informatics of Dominationdo not only with  actual socio-  technical arrangements, but also with a 
shared, if tacit, apprehension of the changes underway, one answer can 
be found in the defeat of Go master Lee Sedol by DeepMind’s  Alpha  Go 
program (alternatively, when Lee Sedol won one game against Alpha -
 Go). The global media spectacle that unfolded over the course of a 
week in March 2016 introduced a new situation, and a new way of liv -
ing, with a di ff  er ent order of autonomous machine, one that can not 
only perform brute probabilistic calculations but also learn, on its own, 
to make good strategic decisions. For this order, and this moment,  there 
is a new fable: not simulation, but generation, cued by the fast- moving 
research domain of generative ai. Both as technique and as concept, 
generation opens up questions about how power may now be adopting 
a diff  er ent informatic, and epistemic, form.
The cognate of the first term in the name of the still- ubiquitous 
machine learning model, the generative adversarial network, or gan , 
generation  suggests at once a practice of creation and of taxonomic 
categorization. How this is both continuous and discontinuous with 
modern biological schemata for the classification of organisms can be 
elucidated with a brief and nontechnical foray into the architecture of 
the gan . The network consists of two neural networks: one, a gen -
erator, is given training data and tasked with producing output that 
mimics that data; the other, a discriminator, determines  whether 
the output is real or fake by comparing it to the training examples. 2 
Adversarial training, often likened to a minimax game in which one 
player tries to maximize their score while the other tries to minimize 
it, uses the discriminator’s judgments as feedback to push the gener -
ator to create increasingly convincing outputs that are indistinguish -
able enough to fool the discriminator, resulting in images of  people, 
cats, fantasy characters (like “waifu”), and even rental properties—  all 
completely artificial. Generative adversarial networks represent a shift 
 toward unsupervised learning techniques. Unlike supervised methods 
that rely on labeled data, gan s learn from the under lying patterns and 
distributions within unlabeled datasets. While their outputs, such as 
images of cats, may appear to reflect an understanding of categories 
or concepts and may appear to recognize and differentiate individual 
species, gan s are actually operating based on complex mathematical 
pro cesses involving high-  dimensional vectors, loss functions, and prob -
ability distributions. From the perspective of the gan , it is generating 
data that approximates the patterns learned during training. But from 
 Rita Raley  35the perspective of a  human, or animal, gan s are producing pictures of 
cats that pre sent, and operate, as real.
Heralded by industry at one point as the “coolest idea in deep 
learning,” gan s are ready to hand for both scientific and  political de -
ployment, for both work and the lulz. They have significant applications 
for the domains of medical imaging, astronomy, and physics  because 
they make it pos  si ble for researchers to create large datasets without 
privacy violations and the exorbitant costs of simulations. 3 But at the 
same time the use of gan s for the production of nonconsensual por -
nography, deceptive speech, and computational propaganda inextrica -
bly links them with the so- termed deepfake, a form of synthetic media 
in which one face is substituted for another—  a well- known example 
1.1. a cgi  image of an oil painting of a high- performance gpu  graph -
ics card in the style of René Magritte. Midjourney and Rita Raley.
36  Informatics of Dominationof which is Jordan Peele speaking as President Obama and cautioning 
against deepfakes. 4 The availability of this par tic u lar model architecture 
for diverse implementations is not itself surprising nor the basis for a 
paradigm shift, although the speed, scale, and scope of its operations 
would arguably help make the case. What is di ff  er ent is the cultural re -
orientation around machine learning models themselves, around “rel -
atively inert, sequential, and/or recurrent structure[s] of matrices and 
vectors” rather than programmed algorithms. 5 More broadly, the tools 
of generative ai writ large, in their paradoxical production of media 
that is both original and fake, initiate ontological and epistemological 
anx i eties that differ, if not in kind, then certainly in degree, from  those 
of prior eras. How generation is positioned as a technocultural para -
digm is best illustrated by the training of gan s themselves, with some 
trained on simulations and  others used to generate data for the pur -
pose of training other gan s— just as simulation was made pos  si ble by 
repre sen ta tional objects and techniques. Generation, in other words, 
both enfolds and supersedes simulation.
Unlike repre sen ta tion and simulation, which preserve the no -
tion of an original, even if distorted with an ideological lens or con -
stituted retroactively, generation goes beyond the severing of the link 
between source and image, even beyond the evacuation of source, and 
rather pre sents the phenomenon of its  wholesale elimination. 6 This is 
the conceptual princi ple  behind the StyleGAN proj  ect, This Person Does 
Not Exist :  there is no referent for the image, which results from the 
calculation of a probability distribution, rather than figural imita -
tion. 7 While nomenclature and model be  hav ior foreground the ques -
tion of the fake, the designation of an image or a word as counterfeit 
can only ever be operational, a  matter of differential relation. Even if 
the simulacrum was said to cancel the distinction between true and 
false— “ there is no spoon,” as The Matrix  lore would have it,  because 
what is floating in the air has no counterpart in the real world—it 
nonetheless holds to the idea of an original, and a real, manifest in 
the deictic  there .8
The tell in the most prominent fictions of simulation has been 
the link to the puppet master in the background: an agent,  whether 
 human or nonhuman, situated as a kind of wizard  behind the curtain 
and propping up the scene or stage. And for all of the data scientists and 
engineers working on and with machine learning systems, and for all 
 Rita Raley  37of the romance of the singular inventive genius (the patrilineal “GAN -
father” of a par tic u lar model architecture), that link to a generative 
agent is severed through unsupervised training.  Whether  these par tic-
u lar aspects of a- referentiality and autonomous functioning constitute 
quantitative or qualitative differences from the order of the simulacrum 
cannot yet be definitively determined, but accelerative forces, in di ff  er-
ent contexts and with di ff  er ent motivations, have already mobilized the 
fake to provoke an epistemological crisis that is unresolved. Simulation 
provokes its own crises, to be sure, and the material effects, and indeed 
 political and psychosocial stakes, are nowhere more clearly manifest 
than in a racialized murder putatively motivated by a perceived threat 
of a toy gun. Such is the power of the fable of simulation that it grants 
license to this kind of overcoding and masks the brutality of vio  lence 
with fiction. What horrors the fable of generation  will mask, facilitate, 
and indeed prompt are as yet speculative, even if their eventual arrival 
is predictable.
But while collective affects might intensify, for example, in re -
lation to a new ai- generated video, they soon dissipate in accord with 
the rhythms of mediated life and  settle in clusters around the banal 
mean: tepid amusement with images of avocado chairs or puppies on 
the moon. A sense of won  der and even dire alarm may be momentarily 
rekindled, as when Carrie Fisher is brought back to life for a Star Wars  
film, but the pervasiveness and availability of synthetic images and video 
might be said to have stripped it of its necessarily marvelous quality. In 
contrast, simulation as a media practice has inclined  toward spectacle 
and the crafting of scenes for immersive, embodied experience and 
sensory response. In its apparent distance from the ordinary, the simu -
lacrum strikingly differs from the becoming-  common of generation— 
evinced by the endless supply of nondescript  faces and felines that are 
exceptional for being not exceptional, the products of machine learning 
techniques that detect patterns, clusters, and segments at the expense 
of the anomalous and weird.
Thus generation has not only enfolded and superseded sim -
ulation but has also, in the language of serial media, retconned it 
such that simulation itself seems always to have been commonplace, 
something to live with rather than pay attention to. Its function is 
to populate everyday media environments and lifeworlds with more 
images, more video, more words, more datasets—to churn out stock 
38  Informatics of Dominationimages, to fill in the gaps of pictures with inpainting or to extend their 
 parameters with the technique of outpainting, and to autocomplete 
and autocompose documents that no  human  will ever read, and, soon 
enough, to produce scripts for films in which the ai- generated actor 
is the rule and not the exception. Generation, then, almost necessarily 
gives rise to a wide range of tools and techniques to detect and combat 
its own functioning, to affirm and attest to  measurable distinctions be -
tween real and fake.
 Because the logic of generation is iterative and accumulative— the 
purpose of generative models  after all is to continually produce output—  
one might expect to see in its applications an opening to the  future, just 
as the anticipatory and predictive logic of simulation manifests in war 
gaming and disease modeling. But  here too a difference can be discerned 
between a model projecting  future states and a model whose iterations 
are constrained by class or category and is thus functionally more suc -
cessive than diachronic. And while  there is no prescribed end point for 
disease modeling—  absent external interventions, one has to assume 
continual evolution and transmission—  adversarial training means that 
the game  will come to an end when the discriminator can no longer dif -
ferentiate between samples and data. So too in the  popular imaginary, 
ai seems only thinkable in terms of the technological singularity, itself 
a kind of horizon. In this re spect, generation perfectly emblematizes a 
moment in which the imagination of the  future has been short-  circuited 
by pessimism or even fantasies of accelerative destruction, when mythol -
ogies of hope, aspiration, and utopian becoming can only be regarded 
skeptically, as insufficient bulwark against the catastrophic storms that 
blow ever closer to the pre sent. 9
This account of generation  as both order word and technical 
object is also an argument for a politics grounded in some degree of 
technological literacy. As ai/machine learning systems continue to im -
prove, as datasets grow, models scale up, and computational resources 
become more available and at the same time more extractive,  human 
systems  will themselves need to transform—  not to acquiesce or accom -
modate but rather to adapt and forge new alliances. This  will require 
both critical and empirical engagement with all aspects of ai, from the 
gathering of data and the specificity of model architectures to the imple -
mentation of  these systems across di ff  er ent domains. The proliferation 
of application programming interfaces ( apis) for content generation, as 
well as the widespread availability of ai features on social media plat -
 Rita Raley  39forms, facilitates the authority of common use, but a better path turns 
away from enclosure and centralization, and arcs instead  toward open 
source models, GitHub repositories, and training datasets, and  toward 
the many enthusiastic hobbyists who make, teach, and share.
Generation, like simulation, can and  will be weaponized.  After 
all, gan s can intensify the fog of disinformation, but they can also help 
with environmental monitoring; just as large language models can be 
used for hate speech but also to relieve the tedium of templated writing 
or debugging code. A politics for the  future thus depends on our accept -
ing the modest role of partner with our lively machines, while retaining 
some aspect of the steering function, so that we might decide—on the 
basis of some knowledge of their operational principles—  where, when, 
and how best to put them to use.
Notes
 1. Donna J. Haraway, “A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, T echnology, and Social -
ist-Feminism in the Late Twentieth Century,” in Simians, Cyborgs, and  Women: The Re -
invention of Nature  (New Y ork: Routledge, 1991), 161.
 2. On the framework of the gan , see Ian J. Goodfellow et al., “Generative Ad -
versarial Nets,” in Advances in Neural Information Pro  cessing Systems 27 , ed. Z. Ghahra -
mani et al. (NeurIPS Proceedings, 2014), 2672–80, http:// papers . nips . cc / paper / 5423  
- generative  - adversarial -nets .
 3. Y ann LeCun, cited in Martin Giles, “The GANfather: The Man Who’s Given 
Machines the Gift of Imagination,” mit  Technology Review , February 21, 2018, https://  
www . technologyreview . com / 2018 / 02 / 21 / 145289 / the  - ganfather  - the  - man - whos - given  
- machines - the  - gift - of - imagination / .
 4. “Jordan Peele’s ‘Deepfake’ President Obama Video,” c- span,  June 7, 2019, 
https:// www . c  - span  . org / classroom / document /  ?9544 .
 5. Jonathan Roberge and Michael Castelle, “  T oward an End- to- End Sociology of 
21st-  Century Machine Learning,” in The Cultural Life of Machine Learning: An Incursion 
into Critical AI Studies , ed. Jonathan Roberge and Michael Castelle (London: Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2021), 5.
 6. That Goodfellow et al. should have recourse to the attempted detection of 
counterfeit currency as their explanatory analogy for the proposed gan  framework is 
in this regard more suggestive than perhaps intended. It is not only that the paper form 
of money circulates in abstract symbolic relation to other monetary forms, its value 
unsupported by gold or other raw materials, but also that the currency exists only as 
fiction.
 7. Phillip Wang, This Person Does Not Exist , December 2019, https://  
thispersondoesnotexist  .com .
 8. Thanks to Colin Milburn for brainstorming with me about spoons and all  else 
besides.
40  Informatics of Domination 9. Some of  these storms  will be literal, and  here it must be emphasized that the 
environmental and infrastructural resources supporting generation are exponentially 
larger than is required for  running simulation tools. See Emily Bender et al., “On the 
Dangers of Stochastic Parrots: Can Language Models Be T oo Big? 🦜,” FAccT ’21: Pro -
ceedings of the 2021  acm  Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency  (New 
Y ork: Association for Computing Machinery, March 2021), 610–23; and Kate Crawford, 
Atlas of  ai: Power, Politics, and the Planetary Costs of Artificial Intelligence  (New Haven, 
CT: Y ale University Press, 2021).
 “Another end of the world is pos  si ble.”1
So read a line of graffiti, black spray paint on a white tile wall, 
inscribed and photographed in Minneapolis in June 2020. It marked a 
moment in time and place experienced as an American cataclysm: when 
the old order of  things seemed as if it might be swept away, borne off on 
a wave of uprisings sparked by George Floyd’s murder at the hands of 
police and fueled by the global and local unrest of the covid- 19 pan -
demic. 2 Spoiler warning: that  didn’t happen. Instead, Floyd’s cruel but 
far from unusual death drove home the ways in which the shattering 
of the pandemic was undergirded by long- standing, epochal inequity. 
Worlds end  every day, as the author of the Minneapolis graffiti knew— 
and yet to name the possibility of “another end” speculates on the 
potentiality for new beginnings amid the apocalyptic.
Speculation is racial capitalism’s dominant logic in the early 
twenty- first  century: amid ongoing climatic and biological cataclysm, 
it marks a world order of algorithmic risk calculations in which corpo -
rations place computationally assisted bets on the likelihood of  futures 
whose arrival is irrelevant, distributing risk downward and profit up -
ward. Y et, as a narrative mode, speculation is also an aesthetic form with 
the capacity to imagine possibilities beyond, outside of, beneath, and 
in spite of domination. In the 2015 anthology Octavia’s Brood , Walidah 
Imarisha and adrienne maree brown develop a genre term for the kind 
of speculative imagining that “has relevance  toward building new, freer 
worlds”: “visionary fiction.” 3 I take up this term, and its urgent appli -
cability to a world undergoing ongoing cataclysm, as a successor to the 
cultural logics and narrative modes named by Donna Haraway.2. Bourgeois Novel, Realism —  
Science Fiction, Post- modernism —  
Visionary Fiction, Cataclysm
Alexis Lothian
42  Informatics of DominationThe stakes of fictional genre have never been purely aesthetic; 
Haraway’s taxonomy demonstrates their  political stakes. In the nine -
teenth and early twentieth centuries, the bourgeois novel perpetuated 
the lie that realism was coextensive with real  ity, white supremacist het -
eropatriarchal domination with personhood, empire and capital with 
the history of the world. In the late twentieth  century, science fiction 
mapped the pre sent onto the  future, through radical transformation 
and/or perpetual reproduction of oppressive hegemonies; the com -
modifying logics of postmodern capital made it difficult to tell the two 
apart. Brian McHale argues that literary postmodernism marks a shift  
from “cognitive questions” (“How can I interpret this world of which I 
am a part? And what am I in it?”) to “postcognitive questions” (“Which 
world is this? What is to be done in it? Which of my selves is to do it?”). 4 
The bourgeois novel and realism ask about a protagonist’s place in a 
presumed-  to- be- coherent world; science fiction and postmodernism 
uncover the multiplicity of selves, worlds, and the actions that they can 
take. Y et, even as the dividing lines between them might wither away, 
both the realism epitomized by the bourgeois novel and the science fic -
tion epitomized by postmodernism make sense as modes of narrative 
and genre only through the assumed presence of a world built by colo -
nial modernity and Enlightenment rationalism. Visionary speculative 
fictions grounded in Black, queer, and decolonial imaginaries inspire 
a diff  er ent set of questions: How was this world (and the selves that 
occupy it) constructed? Off whose back and with whose  labor? What 
worlds might be pos  si ble if and when that world ends?
Imarisha writes that “all  organizing is science fiction”: to chal -
lenge the world as it is, one must do the work of imagining a di ff  er ent 
world. 5 All  organizing may be science fiction, but not all science fiction 
is  organizing; speculative works of lit er a ture and media often map im -
perial logics and the informatics of domination onto extended temporal 
and spatial scales. As David Higgins has elaborated, many of the most 
 popular speculative imaginaries of the twentieth and twenty- first cen -
turies thematize imagining white  people on the receiving end of what 
they have done to  others. 6 Lands falsely  imagined empty by settlers 
speculating on the prospect of exploitation become empty planets that 
can be colonized without guilt; plucky white heroes stand against ra -
cialized empires in  futures designed to invert history to give white read -
ers a guilt- free chance at identifying with the oppressed. 7 With climate 
change and its many analogies most often presumed to be the source 
 Alexis Lothian  43
of violent upheaval, the unevenly distributed cataclysms of history re -
main unspoken. In contrast, the other  wise imaginaries Imarisha calls 
“visionary” reckon with the damage that settler colonialism and chattel 
slavery continue to unleash, finding other ends for the worlds turned 
upside down by colonial and cap  i tal ist domination.
The crafting of speculative fiction can be a  process of imagin -
ing other  wise with intensive attention, rigor, and care—on page and 
screen or in embodied practice. T o live through worlds’ ends and re -
build other  wise is not only a literary activity, but fiction is a pedagogical 
ground for this theory and practice. Haraway learned this from Octavia 
Butler, among  others. Choosing one of many possibilities from creators 
producing visionary fiction  today, I offer the example of N. K. Jemisin’s 
monumental trilogy The Broken Earth  as a showcase for how the complex 
possibilities of speculative narrative can become an urgent, necessary 
mode of visionary practice for cataclysmic times.
 “Let’s start with the end of the world, why  don’t we? Get it over with and 
move on to more in  ter est ing  things.” 8
Jemisin’s novels build a world that ends over and over and must 
be rebuilt, like and unlike our own. The earth revolts against its inhab -
itants with quakes and volcanoes, named “fifth seasons”: cataclysms 
that arise unpredictably and with a frequency that requires constant 
preparation for and rebuilding from catastrophe. In the beginning of 
the trilogy, this seems to simply be how  things are; worlds end routinely, 
and  those who would survive must orient themselves constantly to the 
possibility of disaster. As we go on, we slowly learn that the natu  ral 
disasters are anything but. In this world as in ours, physical and social 
cataclysm is directly related to exploitation. The backstory revealed in 
The Fifth Season  and its sequels is that the peace of the planet was shat -
tered by a now-  dead civilization who settled and colonized its entirety, 
stealing the sacred practices of an Indigenous  people they all but wiped 
out and transforming the tangible essence of life, magic, into a resource 
to be exploited. T o harness the power and magic of the earth itself to 
fuel their technology,  those with power created techno-  biological en -
tities whom they trained to see themselves as less than  people. As in 
many other speculative analogues for oppression, enslavement, and 
racialization,  these created beings brought down the world when they 
understood the extent of their exploitation. In the aftermath of that 
cataclysm, the planet and its inhabitants live at odds.
44  Informatics of DominationResisting a straightforward logic of analogy, Jemisin disarticu -
lates race into component parts: phenotypes of skin, body, and hair are 
associated with some forms of social power, but it is her newly  imagined 
version of embodied alterity that marks the bound  aries of the  human. 
In one dimension of this visionary racial proj  ect, the orogenes,  those 
whose  will and emotion moves the earth, hold a structural position 
akin to Blackness in the postslavery world. 9 Orogenes’ exploited, sto -
len  labor is the foundation of the empire that, at the start of The Fifth 
Season , holds sway over most of the planet; their existence is held as an 
inherent threat by  those who would not easily survive without them. 
The series’ protagonist, Essun, shows the creative urgency that living in 
that impossible position demands. Systematically traumatized that she 
might learn to instrumentalize her own life in the guise of controlling 
dangerous powers, she escapes and destroys her own world rather than 
be captured again—  but, even ostensibly  free, she finds no choice but to 
perpetuate the harm done to her on her own  daughter,  until the world 
ends and opens other possibilities.
The series’ opening cataclysm, the “end of the world” with which 
Jemisin begins, is a transformative reckoning in which the same dynamic 
repeats. When violent exploitation teaches  people to see themselves as less 
than  human, they learn the truth and get retribution; provoking cataclysm 
 because of the cataclysms they have survived, they yearn to live other  wise. 
The most power  ful orogene catalyzes his rage to open a rift, breaking the 
world apart to ensure that the old way can no longer endure. But the how  
of that living still has to be painstakingly built and lived.
Every  one knows how to survive the end of the world in Jemisin’s 
narrative, or they think they do. Their methods for survival are handed 
down on stone tablets that seem abstract and unimpeachable, unbiased 
and unarguable—  and, indeed, this stonelore is full of pragmatic advice 
for cooperative survival that we in our world would do well to heed. Y et 
stonelore’s inheritance is also laced with methods for the oppression 
and enslavement of orogenes and the perpetuation of colonial power. 
It becomes necessary for radicalized orogenes—of whom  there are few, 
given the enforcement of their complicity in their own oppression—to 
call down cataclysm upon themselves and their enslavers alike. So they 
end the world in which stonelore served as law,  because they could not 
convince its power  ful adherents that the world needed to change.
T o remake the ending world, Essun must learn to attend to the 
lessons of  others who have survived, standing ready to break the stones 
 Alexis Lothian  45
and the rules when the time comes. She joins with an orogene who has 
not been trained in the discipline wrought by enslavement and instead 
charts a new path centered in collective collaboration. The community 
Essun joins, Castrima, is building itself other  wise through co  ali tion 
across difference, reimagining  human sociality with the formerly ex -
cluded at the center. Nevertheless, when it is attacked by the vestiges 
of the formerly power  ful empire, Castrima survives only  because Essun 
wipes out a city’s entire population.
Jemisin  will not let readers think that speculative world building 
 toward radical ends is ever innocent or easy.  Here and throughout her 
work, she refuses the liberal dream of a world without vio  lence (which 
ignores the vio  lence silently upholding the lives of  those dreaming 
it) alongside the  popular fantasy that some  people are more worthy 
of life than  others. 10 The unrelenting cataclysms in The Broken Earth  
show us that prior order  will resist its threatened end, asserting itself 
vigorously through the logics of the white supremacist carceral state, 
eugenics, and ableist, racist social cleansing. But nor does Jemisin let 
us forget that the dominant order has never been all of the world, even 
as it has sought to perpetuate that myth through false education and 
violent suppression. Cataclysm opens into worlds transfigured and re -
conceptualized, where hopeful visions are pos  si ble and real, if not per -
manent or durable.
What can Jemisin teach us about the ends and beginnings of the 
worlds that might be pos  si ble in the United States of Amer i ca in the 
early twenty- first  century? American stonelore says that the only way 
to live, through disaster or catastrophic normality, is by following the 
edicts of capitalism. As the pandemic-  era graffiti with which I opened 
demonstrates, moments of cataclysm illustrate stonelore’s power and 
weakness. In Minneapolis in 2020, a world broken open made vis  i ble 
unending oppression in the shape of settler colonialism and enslave -
ment from past to pre sent, briefly upsetting the hegemony of a na -
tional virtue that rests on denial of underpinning vio  lence. In response, 
recalibrating to ensure a return to denial, the state bailed out the stock 
market for the speculative enrichment of  those who owned the most, 
abandoning the rest of the population to unevenly distributed infection 
and death. But another end of the world remained— remains— pos si ble.
Fiction like Jemisin’s has real- world collaborators in vision -
ary Indigenous, Black, and trans feminist thinkers like Grace Dillon, 
46  Informatics of Dominationadrienne maree brown, and micha c árdenas, who imagine and practice 
research, study, and experimentation untethered from the reproduc -
tion of colonial domination. 11 They view the end of the world not as a 
fearsome  future but something that has happened many times to the 
oppressed, who live on in the face of vio  lence and sometimes gain the 
power to end the worlds that subjugate them. Floyd’s death marked a 
time and place in which years and  decades of grassroots  organizing be -
came a moment of visionary potentiality through the amplification of 
Black strug  gle, transformative mourning, and the building of alternative 
physical and social formations. If only for a moment, the conjuncture 
of vision and upheaval brought into being a rift— where ending worlds 
open the possibility of new ones wider than they can be when privilege 
grants stability. Amid cataclysm and the debris it creates, visionary fic -
tion begins to build other  wise worlds. 12
Notes
 1. Photographed by Aren Aizura and shared as a header for an abolitionist reading 
list, “Reading List: Resources for  Resistance,” Ta nk , June 2020, https:// tankmagazine  
. com / tank / 2020 / 06 / resources - for  -resistance .
 2. Oxford English Dictionary , s.v. “cataclysm,” Oxford University Press, accessed 
June 29, 2023, https:// www . oed  . com / view / Entry /28673 .
 3. Walidah Imarisha, “Introduction,” in Octavia’s Brood: Science Fiction Stories 
from Social Justice Movements , ed. Walidah Imarisha and adrienne maree brown (Oak -
land, CA: ak Press, 2015), 3.
 4. Brian McHale, Constructing Postmodernism  (New Y ork: Routledge, 1992), 146.
 5. Imarisha, “Introduction,” 3.
 6. David Higgins, Reverse Colonization: Science Fiction, Imperial Fantasy, and Alt-  
Victimhood  (Iowa City: University of Iowa Press, 2021).
 7. See John Rieder, Colonialism and the Emergence of Science Fiction  (Middletown, 
CT: Wesleyan University Press, 2008); Mark C. Jerng, Racial Worldmaking: The Power 
of  Popular Fiction  (New Y ork: Fordham University Press, 2017).
 8. N. K. Jemisin, The Fifth Season  (New Y ork: Orbit, 2015), 1.
 9. Other aspects of the orogenes’ experience map onto dif  fer ent dynamics, includ -
ing queerness. However, in Jemisin’s work, Ruth Wilson Gilmore’s definition of racism 
as “group-  differentiated vulnerability to premature death” is in full operation even as 
physical appearance structures intersecting but not fully overlapping hierarchies through 
the colonial power of the Sanzed nation. Ruth Wilson Gilmore, Golden Gulag: Prisons, 
Surplus, Crisis, and Opposition in Globalizing California  (Berkeley: University of Califor -
nia Press, 2007), 28. Jemisin’s use of the orogenes as  metaphor for Blackness, trauma, 
and worlding in and  after enslavement would be productively read in conversation with 
Christina Sharpe, In the Wake: On Blackness and Being  (Durham, NC: Duke University 
Press, 2016).
 Alexis Lothian  47
 10. Jemisin builds the world of The Broken Earth  on a princi ple explained in the 
short story “The Ones Who Stay and Fight,” which imagines what kinds of disciplinary 
vio lence (personal and swift) would be demanded by a society that truly refused to up -
hold some lives at the cost of  others. N. K. Jemisin, “The Ones Who Stay and Fight,” in 
How Long ’til Black  Future Month? Stories  (New Y ork: Orbit, 2018), 1–13.
 11. Grace L. Dillon, “Introduction: Indigenous Futurisms, Bimaashi Biidaas Mose, 
Flying, and Walking  towards Y ou,” Extrapolation  57, no. 1–2 (January 1, 2016): 1–6; adri -
enne maree brown, Emergent Strategy: Shaping Change, Changing Worlds  (Chico, CA: 
ak Press, 2017); micha cárdenas, Poetic Operations: Trans of Color Art in Digital Media  
(Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2021).
 12. The phrasing of my closing sentence echoes a sentence in the opening of my 
2018 book: “We live in the debris of many ended worlds, whose inhabitants continue to 
live on. ” Alexis Lothian, Old  Futures: Speculative Fiction and Queer Possibility  (New Y ork: 
nyu  Press, 2018), 2.
The informatics of domination can stay, can go. The debt is still  there, 
and I’ll cash that check. But the vibrancy of my life has always danced 
to a tune where directions are pointed with the mouth, necessity is re -
thought with the monsteras, and the salty mud remains boundless amid 
your limits of land and sea.
Once again coded as feminine, she is a worker without wage; she is 
work without the worker. She is naked- technolife. She is a disembod -
ied packet of time— flexible, changeable, mobile, and precarious. She 
is a PeoplePerHour, body per hour, nimble fin  gers per hour. She can be 
activated on demand  because she’s granted no demands, nor any work -
ers’ rights. She is a face that chats, a voice that answers your calls, fin  gers 
that burst  bubble wrap to tingle your low-  grade asmr  euphoria. She can 
ease your exhaustion, clean your data, optimize your life. She is one of 
Kracauer’s Tiller Girls of post- Fordism and ai capitalism. She is the 
artificial  artificial intelligence that fuels up the forever “new” new econ -
omy, her disappearance recursively programmed to become one with 
the informatics of domination.
Globally dispersed but reconnected through the rules of  labor 
arbitrage, she works at the tempo of platform capitalism. Her manners 
are standardized according to emotional quotient tests, her accents 
trained according to Pretty  Little Liars  Standard American  English and 
“deep voice” standard ai  English. If you are not satisfied with her accent, 
tone, and courteousness, you can always speak with a more au  then  tic 
 human. Her call might be recorded for quality and training purposes. 
Her name is Alexa, Siri, Cortana, M, ChatGPT, carla99, apurba23, 
aneela14, and verablue2000. She is  human and nonhuman, a captcha 3. White Cap  i tal ist Patriarchy —  
Informatics of Domination
Radha May (Elisa Giardina-  Papa, Nupur Mathur, 
and Bathsheba Okwenje )
 Radha May (Giardina-Papa, Mathur, and Okwenje)  49
worker who continually needs to prove she’s  human by working. She is 
 human powered so that you can power up your humanity.
She’s always available  because you always need to be on. If 
carla99 is not online, you can scroll down to verablue2000 instead. She is 
programmed patience; she listens to your complaints and finds solutions 
for you. When her  service is complete, you can rate her with stars. She 
intensely clicks and intensely likes your social media posts  because she’s 
a  convenient parcel of social capital on demand. The buoy that allows 
you to work more and sleep less, burn out while feeling at ease. She works 
herself to death so that you can work yourself to death.
She is a virtual farmer who informally sells virtual goods, virtual 
weapons, virtual animals, and her own leveled-up avatarial body. She 
is a worker player so that you can be a player player; she’s a worker on 
socials so that you can be social on socials. Her  labor resembles that of 
other economic mi  grants, but unlike other types of mi  grant workers, her 
body  doesn’t cross what you have defined as borders. She’s tethered to 
the con  vey or  belt of global  labor without ever leaving her home. With -
out ever having set foot in your country, she embodies your moral codes, 
cultural values, and epistemic certitude, so as to effectively moderate 
your social media feed and remove the lewd and disturbing content you 
first produced and then  wouldn’t want to see.
She’s an expert in data intimacy: she transcribes your shopping 
receipts and business meetings, edits your kids’ homework, sieves the 
quantitative data of your yet to be published academic paper, translates 
your  English text into hundreds of di ff  er ent languages. She “data entries” 
all of your data and “data exits” all of her energy. She has become an 
expert in deep learning by being asked to be deeply dull. Contracted to 
become a  service to the machine, she intimately knows the algorithms 
that govern your life; she in fact trains them and cleanses all the dissen -
sual epistemic, bodily, and cognitive excess that might upset your neat 
taxonomic inscriptions.
She sifts through billions of socially produced yet privately 
cashed images. Segmenting, tracing, patterning, bounding-  boxing, 
and labeling according to all the binary, unqueered categories you have 
historically produced to separate Data from data, signal from noise, 
sovereign speech from unintelligible speech, the soloist from the ensem -
ble, the orderly  things from the disorder of  things. Y et, while laboring 
to teach ais to properly see and properly name, she reminds the ma -
chine that all that is opaque and promiscuous, heretical and unfaithful, 
50  Informatics of Dominationin movement and on the run,  will always exceed any idealized, trans -
parent, and universal category. That’s why the only  thing the machine 
should do, she hums, is to unlearn how to know the world, to unlearn 
how to know the other.
Laboring in the crevices of machine- to- machine automation, 
she has in fact witnessed how the most ruinous gendered and racialized 
physiognomic proj  ects of the nineteenth  century are still  embedded in 
the biometric analy sis of her captured digital face and your  released dig -
ital code. How algorithmic- fueled revivals of Galtonian and Duchenne-  
ian metrics keep mining for the most treacherous eyes and the most 
wicked smiles. How the modern colonial scientific discourse, which 
describes and divides, identifies and hierarchizes, never  really  stopped 
chasing for the criminal, the mad, the sick, the emotionally  silent, the hys -
terical, the perverse, the illegal, and the bad citizen. How it never  stopped 
producing the not- yet, not-  quite, not —  human other. Only  today, it 
is done via machines that do not see, do not mind, and do not body.
If you fear that the  human  will be progressively excluded from 
the loop of machine-  to- machine communication, she might just ask: 
Maybe, but which  human? If you promise her that ai capitalism  will 
grant a  future in which artificially intelligent machines  will take over 
the dull, dirty, repetitive  labor historically forced on pauperized 
workers, she might remind you that ai capitalism also needs to keep 
reproducing pauperized  labor in order to fulfill its initial promise. ai 
capitalism, and all capitalisms before this, have a murderous charac -
ter, and the most violent aspects of dispossession have accompanied 
 every phase of it.
She has been at the forefront of all stages of capitalisms and as 
close as you can get to any technology of exploitation. She was bought to 
give birth; she was sold to pick cotton. She was the first to pack sardines 
on an assembly line, to catch the flying shut tle in the textile industry, 
to assem ble duty- free goods in the maquiladoras, to solder chips and 
electronic cir  cuits for tech companies, to wear plastic gloves while scan -
ning pages for Google Books. While reproducing  labor power, cooking, 
cleaning, smiling, fucking, and caring, she always knew that her work 
has been the hidden source of support for your Promethean dreams of 
autonomy, self, and world mastery.
T o your gift of a fire stolen from the gods, she might just say: cute, but 
no thanks.
 Radha May (Giardina-Papa, Mathur, and Okwenje)  51
This text is part of an ongoing conversation between Elisa, Nupur, and 
Bathsheba that started many years ago across time zones and continents. 
This text is enriched by Radha May’s ongoing engagement with the thinking 
and laboring of many scholars and artists— some are friends, some we have 
met, some we have just read.  Here, we are expressing our gratitude  because 
sometimes appreciation gets lost in the footnotes. Thank you to Neda Atana -
soski and Kalindi Vora, Wendy Hui Kyong Chun, Anuradha Mathur and 
Dilip da Cunha, Ezekiel Dixon-  Román, Jack Halberstam, Stefano Harney 
and Fred Moten, Mimi Ọnụọha, Tung-  Hui Hu, Lisa Nakamura, Luciana 
Parisi, and Tiziana Terranova .
A photo  graph published in the Los Angeles Times  in June 2017 shows an 
unnamed disability activist being carried horizontally, her arms and legs 
held by two police officers who are, conspicuously, wearing white med -
ical gloves. This image is part of a series of widely circulated journalistic 
photo  graphs documenting direct-  action protests and “die- ins” staged 4. Organism —  Biotic Component
Leon J. Hilton
4.1. Police remove protesters from the disability rights group 
adapt  from Senator Mitch McConnell’s office on June 22, 
2017 . Photo: Mark Wilson.
 Leon J. Hilton  53
by disability and health activists in the summer of 2017 in response 
to attempts by the Republican-  controlled US Congress to repeal the 
Affordable Care Act (other  wise known as Obamacare). The scenes of 
bodily torsion  these photos bring into view might also offer a glimpse 
of a kind of historical torsion: the one by which the organism (  human, 
in this case) has come to be reframed as a biotic component within a 
larger dynamic system.
How do we make sense of such photo  graphs, in which the re -
pressive apparatuses of state security forces are shown roughly  handling, 
detaining, and in many cases arresting disabled  people whose bodies 
have other  wise been deemed vulnerable enough to merit state and fed -
eral protections, social welfare benefits, and publicly financed health 
care? T o be sure,  these images are notable for their very “constructed -
ness”: it might be said that the protests  were staged precisely in order 
to produce  these photo  graphs, to elicit the gaze of a mass public by 
demanding not sympathy but solidarity. One activist involved in the 
2017 protests, Dominick Evans, told a reporter that the carefully plotted 
choreographies carried out in his group’s demonstrations  were modeled 
 after  those deployed by the civil rights movement. “It’s very effective 
at getting the message out,” Evans explained. “They  can’t ignore it if 
 they’re constantly arresting disabled bodies.” 1
Within the dramaturgy of  these tableau- like scenes, the brightly 
colored latex medical gloves worn by police function as a kind of pho -
tographic punctum, drawing the eye of the viewer precisely where 
 those being forcibly handled and arrested mean for the viewer to look. 
The appearance of  these medical gloves allows us to locate their ac -
tions within longer genealogies of health activism and prompt us to 
ask how  these disability protests surrounding the Affordable Care Act 
built upon insurgent traditions of biopo  liti cal dissent. The embodied 
tactics— indeed, the deliberate staging— that  these activists deployed 
in order to capture attention and get their message across reveal a pre -
cise and highly conceptualized sense of theatricality in which the police 
and news media documentation are implicated in playing a role.
The vital spark of the organism is no longer the main driver of 
biological wonderment that it had been in the nineteenth  century. The 
regulation of life itself is now understood in terms of biotic components 
whose functions are determined by their relationship to other nodes 
within a larger system. The shift from organism to biotic component can 
be understood as an aspect of the communications revolution that took 
54  Informatics of Dominationshape in the face of the crises of postindustrial capitalism  after World 
War II, which generated a “range of intermediate structures between 
extraction of surplus value and realization of profit” that required the 
development of “a  whole set of discourses and technologies.” 2 Biology 
came to be recast as merely one more component of the world that can 
be translated into code, sutured into the integrated cir  cuit, engineered 
and optimized to maximize profit.
The die-in as a technique of public protest has been taken up in 
diff  er ent forms across a range of social and  political movements— from 
Ghandian, Quaker, and abolitionist practices of nonviolence and civil 
disobedience that  were variously reanimated within anticolonial and 
civil rights strug  gles to more recent demonstrations against war, mili -
tarization, and racialized policing in Black Lives  Matter protests. Die- 
ins consist of carefully choreographed and studiously rehearsed acts of 
physical noncooperation and noncompliance; they call upon the body’s 
capacity for “obstinate recalcitrance” and make use of that recalcitrance 
to at once occupy space and amplify a message (“They  can’t ignore it if 
 they’re constantly arresting disabled bodies”). 3 More than a withhold -
ing of one’s  labor effectuated through the absence of the laboring body, 
as in a strike, the die-in is a mode of biological  resistance that is at once 
symbolic and deeply phenomenal. Thus the die-in also might be tracked 
historically as a response to par tic u lar historical transformations in the 
treatment of the body as a strategy of accumulation. Forcing police to 
arrest visibly disabled activist bodies, the 2017 die- ins did not aim to 
rehabilitate or recapacitate disability by eradicating the stigma that 
attaches to the disabled body or restoring dignity to the disabled sub -
ject. Rather,  these photos document activists strategically making use 
of— indeed, spectacularizing— the vulnerability of their own bodies. 
By positioning themselves in place in order to produce the spectacle 
of their own forcible detainments, they craft a power  ful rhe toric of the 
image with the unwitting (or at least unacknowledged) assistance of 
the security agents deployed against them.
Disability is the site of intense social conflict and antagonism 
 because in liberal social welfare states, as Deborah Stone suggests, it 
is tasked with mediating between  those who are and  those who are 
not eligible to receive social protections and benefits that are other -
wise distributed on the basis of an individual’s capacity to earn them; 
the concept of disability is burdened with an impossible task, asked to 
“resolve the issue of distributive justice.” 4 Disability is thus the place 
 Leon J. Hilton  55
that is occupied by  those “nonproductive bodies” that are “not merely 
excluded from—  but also resistant to standardized  labor demands of 
 human value.” 5 The administrative definition of disability is closely 
related to the bureaucratic consolidation of medical expertise at the 
point of conjuncture between the state and the market, and thus a key 
linchpin to what historians and sociologists have characterized as the 
increasing medicalization of American society beginning in the post– 
World War II  decades. What happens when the  human body starts to be 
reconceived as a cybernetic system made up of interconnected feedback 
loops, buzzing with the flow of information, communicating with itself 
through its self-  generating, self- regulating, and reproductive capacities?
The private health care system can be understood as a massive 
proj  ect of offloading the prob  lem of distributive justice that disability 
poses to the market. Even neoliberal health care reforms, such as the Af -
fordable Care Act, “deal with health care as a commodity to be bought 
and sold in the marketplace, rather than as a fundamental  human right 
to be guaranteed according to princi ples of social solidarity.” 6 If the 
die-in emerges as a technique of bodily  resistance in response to larger 
transitions in the mode of cap  i tal ist production,  these photo  graphs at 
once document and perform a vital, active function in a resurgent 
disability activism that can work in and against the informatics of 
domination. On one hand, the gloves remedicalize the body of the ac -
tivist: latex medical gloves emerged as a tool for the forensic science of 
policing in the 1990s in response to the biological threat that the aids  
epidemic was deemed to pose  toward police officers charged with deal -
ing with aids  activists (one account of a 1987 act up  demonstration 
in front of the White  House describes how the protesters incorporated 
the yellow medical latex gloves worn by the police arresting members of 
the group into their chants: “Y our gloves  don’t match your shoes, you’ll 
see it on the news” 7). Y et as the antecedent of act up  would suggest, 
tools can always be retrofitted and resignified, made to work against 
the aim they  were deployed to accomplish or secure. In this sense, the 
gloves offer an invitation to enter into a mode of counterviewing, to read 
 these photo  graphs as part of an activism that emerges from moments 
of circumventing and even simply refusing to accede to medical sover -
eignty and the violent tactics that it takes to secure the population. This 
reading need not distract from the urgent material needs of disabled 
 people and communities in the  here and now. 8 Rather, it suggests the 
ongoing relevance of die- ins and other tactics of disability and health 
56  Informatics of Dominationactivism for attempts to transform the typically atomizing experience 
of illness, impairment, and debilitation into the grounds for new forms 
of  political solidarity,  resistance, subterfuge, and dissension.
Notes
 1. Quoted in Sarah Jones, “Arresting Disabled Bodies,” New Republic , Septem -
ber 28, 2017, https:// newrepublic . com / article / 145072 / arresting -  disabled -bodies .
 2. Donna J. Haraway, “The Biological Enterprise: Sex, Mind, and Profit from 
 Human Engineering to Sociobiology,” in Simians, Cyborgs, and  Women: The Reinvention 
of Nature  (New Y ork: Routledge, 1991), 58–59.
 3. See Susan Lee Foster, “Choreographies of Protest,” Theatre Journal  55, no. 3 
(October 2003): 395–412.
 4. Deborah A. Stone, The Disabled State  (Philadelphia:  T emple University Press, 
1984), 12–13.
 5. David Mitchell and Sharon Snyder, “Disability as Multitude: Reworking Non -
productive  Labor Power,” Journal of Literary and Cultural Studies  4, no. 2 (2010): 184.
 6. Howard Waitzkin and Ida Hellander, “The History and  Future of Neoliberal 
Health Reform: Obamacare and Its  Predecessors,” International Journal of Health  Services  
46, no. 4 (2016): 747–66.
 7. Susan Maizel Chambré, Fighting for Our Lives: New York’s  aids  Community and 
the Politics of Disease  (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 2006), 125. See also 
Mark Lipton, “The Condom in History: Shame and Fear,” in Culture and the Condom , 
ed. Karen Anijar and Thuy DaoJensen (Lausanne: Peter Lang, 2005).
 8. This discussion builds upon Alison Kafer’s attention to the multiple and some -
times contradictory repre sen ta tions of disability and disabled bodies within Haraway’s 
manifesto, which draws on impor tant critiques from queer, feminist, and critical race 
studies perspectives. See Alison Kafer, Feminist Queer Crip  (Bloomington: Indiana Uni -
versity Press, 2013), 103–28.
Turn to ocean depth and surface in 1985. In that year a French Amer -
ican team of oceanographers and engineers found, 375 miles south of 
Newfoundland and twelve thousand feet down, the rusting wreck of 
the rms  Titanic , that ocean liner that had in 1912 famously sunk to the 
sea floor  after its hull was torn through by an iceberg. The find came as 
part of a classified US Navy expedition to look for the remains of two 
US nuclear submarines—  a high- tech Cold War enterprise if ever  there 
was one, aimed at depth, integrity: the integrity of the deep sea as a 
site of state secrets. 1 In the following years, as Titanic  was explored by 
cybernetic technologies like camera-  outfitted remotely operated ro -
bots, images of the ship brought the vessel and its marine mystique 
virtually to the surface, transforming it, too, from military secret to 
public entertainment object. In the  process (a kind of fantasy sinking 
in reverse), the ship seemed to become all surface — a rendering most 
canonically realized in James Cameron’s 1997 film, Titanic , which, cour -
tesy of computer graphics, reanimated the vessel with a smooth white 
cinematic skin, folded lovingly around a now- mapped skeleton. 2 The 
information technologies of camera, cinema, and code made of the ship 
(and the sea around it) a species of deep secret that could be unfolded, 
turned into surface.
In 2012, an image of the wreck of the Titanic — sited at 
41.7325°N, 49.9469°W—  became available for viewing in Google Earth. 3 
What was notable about this representation— which one can still visit 
by surfing the Internet— was that, in order to make the vessel vis  i ble, 
image engineers and programmers judged it necessary that all the  water 
around the ship be made invisible, completely see- through. 4 At the bot -
tom of the Google ocean, the virtual Titanic  sits on a stylized blue ocean 5. Depth, Integrity —  Surface, 
Boundary —  Circulation, Residence Time
Eva Hayward and Stefan Helmreich
58  Informatics of Dominationfloor, settled beneath the light of what looks like an enormous, vaulted 
sea-  blue ceiling (perhaps #006994 html  Color [Sea Blue]). This is a 
space where  water has no index of refraction, no viscosity, no currents, 
no temperature gradients, no organisms, no swirling radioactive iso -
topes, no pollution.  There is  really no ocean  here at all. Ocean depth has 
been hollowed out  until all that is left is surface. Google Earth Titanic  
resides, then, in a mythic realm of ocean transparency. This is not at all 
what Donna Haraway named as the “unfriendly and drowning depths” 
of an experiential whorl of imperiled subjectivity. 5 If Cold War subma -
rine secrecy and opacity  were secured through operations of domination 
that depended not so much upon vision as upon sonar sounding and 
its incompleteness,  today’s informatics of ocean domination, vis  i ble in 
nascent form with the 1985 Titanic  tale, work through an iconography 
and fantasy of sheer visibility and code-  ability. All can be seen. 6
With Google Titanic , the trope of the deep blue sea, which 
suggests both a unified and bottomless blueness as well as an imaginary 
line dividing a sky- reflecting cerulean surface from a thickening blue- 
to- black fade, is offered up as surface all the way down. Blue indexes 
5.1. Titanic  wreck in Google Earth, created using data from the 
Scripps Institution of Oceanography, noaa , the US Navy, nga , 
and gebco . © 2012 Google.
 Hayward and Helmreich  59
the flattening of depth into surface.  There are no unseeable, no unrep -
resentable fathoms, just deepening blue—  blue as a promise that, like 
the sea’s cerulean skin, the deeps may also be a seeable color, however 
cobalt-ed and navy-ed. This is not the blue of Blue , that 1993 film made 
by director Derek Jarman, who, his vision failing as he neared the end of 
his life, offered a pulsing still screen of International Klein Blue  running 
for seventy- nine minutes. 7 Blue for Blue  was the loss of repre sen ta tion, 
seeking to materialize, on the one hand, what it looked like to go blind 
from complications associated with aids , and on the other, what it 
meant visually to represent that which could not be represented by sight. 
The bluing of the ocean has worked differently, as the hypervisible, 
coded ocean becomes more than simply a humanistic projection— the 
ocean we see is the ocean we know—  but is also revealed as that which 
subtended the very order of depth/surface at all, as that which defended 
against “drowning depths.” 8 The technology of sight— light bouncing 
from the skin of the world into ocular orbs—  becomes depth. Depth, 
then, is rendered as a darkened, breathless, cold effect that needs no 
translation. Depth becomes, in fact, a surface fantasy, a wet negative.
In 1997, as Cameron reanimated the oneiric Titanic , the Monte -
rey Bay Aquar ium in California was building its own depth-  as- surface- 
effect with its Outer Bay display, its placarded imperative to visitors 
telling them to “Come closer and see.” Immersion was the gimmick 
of the spectacle—an invitation to viewers to turn and tune their at -
tention to curving walls of aquar iums containing creatures from Mon -
terey Bay’s outer bay—  but what was delivered was a flattening of depth 
into the promise of seeable surface. 9 Dark chambers, dappling pools of 
blue light, and a moist cool controlled indoor climate hushed millions 
of aquar ium goers. In the Drifters gallery, radiant blue Kreisel tanks— 
transparent acrylic cylinders offering, through their circle sides, views of 
jellies drifting in circulating motion— were the blue irises looking back 
out into the darkness into which visitors  were folded. Depth was an eye 
looking back, confusing the rhe toric of contact. The visitor might touch 
the unblinking eye— filled with pellucid cataracts and other mesmeriz -
ing visual phenomena, not least of which might be drifting plankton, 
reminiscent of  those floaters that drift across  human eyes—  only to 
leave fingerprints, the greasy print on the acrylic win  dow as a tell of 
the surfacing at work in this depth. But then, might  those Truvada blue, 
Yves Klein blue tanks of  water have themselves been seeing the shal -
low dark theater in which they  were  housed? Might the blurred eyes of 
60  Informatics of Domination these aquar iums be themselves seeing the surface effect of we viewers? 
What the Monterey Bay Aquar ium captured in its blue-  eyed address was 
a depth revealed as a surface all along. The logic of the surface performs 
depth— reminding us that the informatics of domination may pose the 
depth/surface opposition without, in the  process, sorting or settling it.
In surfaces that promise depth— what was seen was already 
what cannot be seen— the ordering of volume may be apprehended 
as also inheriting a racial technology of vision and visibility. As Anne 
Cheng argues in Second Skin , her analy sis of the making of the modern 
surface in coordination with the epidermalization of race— the making, 
that is, of  human fleshy surfaces as markers of, revealers of, race— skin 
has come to be employed as a disclosure of essence, of hidden truths. 10 
Racism, in this regime, relies on the presumption of seeing race. Col -
orism is a symptom that at once reveals and conceals the metaphysics 
of surface and depth as racializing operations. 11 As such, surfaces (in -
cluding, now, depths) beyond  human skin thus also come to be racial -
ized. Recall that the Titanic  was part of the White Star Line, a British 
shipping com  pany, and that a gleaming whiteness was its aesthetic, as 
it was for Cameron’s cinematically resurrected Olympic-  class ocean 
liner—  along with the film’s white movie stars. 12 Marcus Garvey’s Black 
Star Line (1919–22) was a direct commentary on the whitewashed racial -
ization of the Atlantic as a site of pure leisure and a call to think about 
the many depths, surfaces, and routes of what Paul Gilroy would  later 
call the Black Atlantic. 13 Contestations about the aesthetics of color and 
their meaning only shored up the certainty of the surface, confirmed 
that the surface was indeed deep. 14
If the photographic and digital surface has come to unfold 
depths, then Christina Sharpe, in In the Wake: On Blackness and Being , 
urges readers to newly understand the deeps of African dispossession 
through transatlantic slavery by directing our attention differently back 
to the sea surface: to the wake— “the transverse waves of the wake” of 
Atlantic slave ships. 15 The wake, she argues, marks the surface trace of 
“residence time”— “the amount of time it takes for a substance [like a 
body, decomposing, disaggregating into its chemical constituents] to 
enter the ocean and then leave the ocean,” which, for  those who drowned 
in the  Middle Passage, is still now. 16 The surface mark of the wake is an 
unfolding pointer, not to a nothing- to- see- here clean- room revelation 
of mystery dispelled, but is rather an index of still unstill depths, still 
unmarked graves.
 Hayward and Helmreich  61
The point, then, cannot be to champion depth (or verticality) 
over surface (or horizontality) or vice versa, but rather to ask about 
the ideologies or  political resonances they carry and for whom. What 
knowledge was forged in the ordering (and subsequent dissolving) of 
surfaces in relation to depths? If the divide between depth, integrity 
—  surface, boundary is an effect of vio  lence and forgetting, what 
diff  er ent poetics might now be charted?
A third term comes to mind, keyed to our oceanic example 
and inspired by Sharpe: circulation, residence time , a mode of thinking 
about embodiment and memory in the sea, understood as a medium 
that never fully conceals, erases, or, for that  matter, for-  all- time-  
reveals, history, but rather circulates histories that keep them resident 
in the ocean, and in ways that may press for their further or constant 
reexamination.
Return to the Titanic  and consider the more than one thousand 
 people who did not survive. Recovery ships arriving several days  after 
the sinking found 337 drowned bodies afloat.  Those who  were identi -
fiable as first-  and second-  class passengers had their bodies retrieved 
for land burial and (therefore) for life insurance payouts. Third-  class 
passengers  were collected but then buried at sea. As Jess Bier writes in 
her “Bodily Circulation and the  Measure of a Life: Forensic Identifica -
tion and V aluation  after the Titanic  Disaster”: “Burial at sea served as 
a means of selecting and, through contact with the circulating ocean 
 water, materially transforming the bodies that  were sent into the deep. 
Underwater decomposition was crucial to this transformation.” 17 The 
implication, argues Bier, was that “in addition to notions of class iden -
tity informing bodily identification, they also figured into decisions 
about which bodies  were worthy enough to continue to exist as  human 
bodies.” 18 Third-  class passengers—as well as  those who  were entombed 
by the sinking ship itself—  came eventually to exist in residence time, 
that nonlinear time of decomposition that sees corporeal substance as -
similated and circulated into the sea.
What axes of  human difference and  inequality  shaped  these 
dynamics? First-  class passengers included members of the British 
aristocracy and American social elite. Second-  class passengers  were 
largely  English, Scottish, and American. Third-  class passengers— for 
whom no lifeboats  were supplied and who  were gated off from other 
passengers— included British, Irish, and Scandinavian immigrants 
as well as  people from Central and Eastern  Europe, Syria, and Hong 
62  Informatics of DominationKong. 19 In the  immediate aftermath of the sinking,  there was, as it 
happened,  little press or institutional outrage about class disparities in 
mortality. 20 Third-  class survivors  were rarely interviewed. Even the per -
son representing third-  class passengers at the British Court of Inquiry 
suggested that  there had been no discrimination against them. More 
common  were public judgments about gender. With a wide common 
sense holding to a “ women and  children first” norm, many men who 
survived  were viewed with suspicion. Some Anglo- Saxon commentators 
piled ethnic prejudices on top of their opinions about men whom they 
suspected of failing to rise to patriarchal duty: “ ‘ There  were vari ous 
men passengers,’ declared Steward Crowe at the U.S. Inquiry, ‘prob  ably 
Italians, or some foreign nationality other than  English or American, 
who attempted to rush the boats.’ . . .  At the Inquiry  things fi  nally grew 
so bad that the Italian Ambassador demanded and got an apology from 
Fifth Officer Lowe for using ‘Italian’ as a sort of synonym for ‘coward.’ ”21 
Meanwhile, newspaper stories about a stoker who came up from below 
decks and sought to purloin a life jacket from a telegraph operator often 
embellished the tale, declaring the stoker a “Negro.” That designation 
may  later have been appropriated in a work of African American song 
about a stoker who warns Titanic ’s white captain, to no avail, about the 
imminent sinking of the liner—  a commentary about the unreason of 
white supremacy. 22
Evaluations emerging in the  decades  after Titanic ’s sinking 
shifted definitively to outrage about the stark class differences in sur -
vival and sought, at times, to dig into national or ethnic divisions on -
board the ship, particularly as  these might have been inflected by the 
run-up to World War I. And in place of the apocryphal “Negro stoker,” 
 there is now a thick account (coming into public view only in 2000) of 
the one known Black passenger on Titanic , Joseph Laroche, a Haitian 
man who traveled in second class with his French wife and  children. 23
The kinds of stories sought from the depths change as histor -
ical preoccupations shift— with con  temporary attention to class and 
race  matters now circulating into how questions might be asked about 
what untold histories are still resident in the  water. Circulation and 
residence time, then, unlike depth, integrity and surface, boundary, 
suggest not so much the inputs and outputs of cybernetic feedback, 
but rather motions tracing paths  toward ever-  churned- together histo -
ries and  futures.
 Hayward and Helmreich  63
Notes
 1. Robert D. Ballard, The Discovery of the Titanic  (New Y ork: Warner Books, 
1987).
 2. James Cameron, dir., Titanic  (Paramount Pictures/Twentieth  Century Fox, 
1997).
 3. Google Earth, “T our the Titanic in Google Earth,” posted on Y ouTube, April 13, 
2012, https:// www .  youtube . com / watch  ? v =2qT5fddzELU .
 4. “Surfing the internet,” according to the Oxford English Dictionary , arrived in 
 English in 1992, though its first recorded usage offered that the practice of surfing, de -
fined as “to visit successively (a series of internet sites),” might be accomplished using 
“gopher,” a search and communications protocol named for its association with burrow -
ing animals: “1992 Re: Size Limits for Text Files?  in alt.gopher  (Usenet newsgroup) 25 Feb. 
 There is a lot to be said for . . .  surfing the internet with gopher from anywhere that you 
can find a phone jack. ” The internet was at that time still partially  imagined as a kind of 
under ground network rather than as an open ocean; that would surface in 1994 with the 
Netscape Navigator browser.
 5. Donna J. Haraway, “A Manifesto for Cyborgs: Science, T echnology, and So -
cialist Feminism in the 1980s,” Socialist Review , no. 80 (1985): 69n.
 6. In ideology if not practice. The 2014 disappearance of Malaysia Airlines Flight 
370 in the Indian Ocean and the failure of national governments and international 
 organizations to find its wreckage in the sea suggests the enduring force of depth as fig -
ured in pre- twentieth-  century knowledge regimes.
 7. Derek Jarman, dir., Blue  (Basilisk Communications Ltd., 1993).
 8. See Melody Jue, Wild Blue Media: Thinking through Seawater  (Durham, NC: 
Duke University Press, 2020), in which Jue argues that “blueness is not an abstract fea -
ture of the ocean, but an experience that comes into being through the particularities of 
embodiment and positionality” (x).
 9. Eva Hayward, “Sensational Jellyfish: Aquar ium Affects and the  Matter of Im -
mersion,” differences: A Journal of Feminist Cultural Studies  23, no. 3 (2012): 161–96.
 10. Anne Cheng, Second Skin: Josephine Baker and the Modern Surface  (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2013).
 11. See Michael Rossi, The Republic of Color: Science, Perception, and the Making 
of Modern Amer  i ca (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2019), on eugenicist Charles 
Davenport’s aspiration, in his 1913 book, Heredity of Skin Color , to use skin color to place 
 people in the American social order, as he put it, “optically, socially, and po  liti cally” 
(quoted on 229).
 12. Sean Redmond, “ Titanic : Whiteness on the High Seas of Meaning,” in The  Ti-
tanic in Myth and Memory: Repre  sen ta tions in Visual and Literary Culture , ed. Tim Berg -
felder and Sarah Street (London: I. B. Tauris, 2004), 197–204. And see Vivian Sobchack, 
“Bathos and Bathysphere: On Submersion, History and Longing in Titanic ,” in “Titanic”: 
Anatomy of a Blockbuster , ed. Kevin Sandler and Gaylyn Studlar (New Brunswick, NJ: 
Rutgers University Press, 1999), 189–204, on how Titanic  offers viewers a simulation of 
emotion, a surface imitation of deep trauma, kept at a distance through the obvious ar -
tifice of the cinema of historical reconstruction.
 13. Paul Gilroy, The Black Atlantic: Modernity and Double Consciousness  (Cam -
bridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1993).
64  Informatics of Domination 14. James Cameron’s Avatar , with its blue- skinned extraterrestrial natives, depends 
upon the science fiction racialization of blue as both a fantastical stand-in for nonwhite -
ness and as a marker of the arbitrariness of colorism (blue is just a color), which pretends 
that racism is merely conventional rather than historical, a surface effect rather than a 
marker of deep histories of naturalized discrimination and domination (though also 
of  resistance and appropriation). No won  der, then, that Cameron’s white protagonist, 
his consciousness ported into a blue body double, is able to go native and remain white 
at the same time. See Annalee Newitz, “When  Will White  People Stop Making Movies 
Like Avatar ?,” Gizmodo , December 18, 2009, https:// io9 . gizmodo  . com / when - will - white  
- people  - stop  - making - movies - like  - avatar  -5422666 .
 15. Christina Sharpe, In the Wake: On Blackness and Being  (Durham, NC: Duke 
University Press, 2016), 57 .
 16. Sharpe, In the Wake , 41.
 17. Jess Bier, “Bodily Circulation and the  Measure of a Life: Forensic Identification 
and V aluation  after the Titanic  Disaster,” Social Studies of Science  48, no. 5 (2018): 650.
 18. Bier, “Bodily Circulation,” 651, emphasis added.
 19. See “Passengers of the Titanic ,” Wikipedia, accessed May 28, 2024, https:// en  
. wikipedia  . org / wiki / Passengers _ of _ the _Titanic , much of which is sourced from the En -
cyclopedia Titanica, https:// www . encyclopedia  - titanica  . org / .
 20. See Walter Lord, A Night to Remember  (New Y ork: r&w  Holt, 1955).
 21. Lord, A Night to Remember , 94.
 22. Chris Smith, “The Titanic : A Case Study of Religious and Secular Attitudes 
in African American Song,” in Saints and Sinners: Religion, Blues and (D)evil in African-  
American  Music and Lit  er a ture , ed. Robert Sacré (Liège: Société Liégeoise de Musicolo -
gie, 1996), 213–27 .
 23. Zondra Hughes, “What Happened to the Only Black  Family on the Titanic ?,” 
Ebony , June 2000, 148–54.
Perhaps this sounds familiar: a wave of  righteous rage or a  ripple of 
despair— likely prompted by another shooting, another crowdfunder, 
another death, another Sad  Thing—is promptly displaced, by a clamor -
ing, cute animal; a virtue post; a  humble self- promo post; a meme. Mo -
mentum is sequestered and nullified. Sisyphus pants, sweats, and falters 
on the never-  ending content treadmill. Maybe a droplet of feeling lin -
gers, yet you, dear cuck, are unable to feel the  thing in full, to a point 
of release, to closure, resigned to spectating on the lives, feelings, and 
content of  others.
Heat, once upon a time, might have accounted for libido. It was 
both meta  phorical and literal; it signaled energy, excitement, and motion, 
escalating in temperature before reaching a boiling point. Noise signifies 
the addition of other sensory dimensions to arousal, folding in ques -
tions of frequencies, colors, timbres, temporalities—  energy, but less 
hierarchical and multidimensional, and harder to  measure and account 
for. Connoting sensory assault in which navigation and orientation be -
come difficult, if not impossible, noise is a dynamic that confuses and 
envelops heat. An imperfect  metaphor, it leaves me unsatisfied, yet I 
strug  gle to interrogate the idea even when perpetually inundated by 
its hubbub.
Nineteenth-  century utopian socialist Charles Fourier diag -
nosed what he understood to be an endemic libidinal social condi -
tion in The Hierarchies of Cuckoldry and Bankruptcy  (1816). Providing 
a thorough taxonomy of cuckolds, he described them (in their varied 
forms, such as “The Budding or Anticipated Cuckold” or “The Tran -
scendent or High- Flying Cuckold”) and their participation in adul -
tery as “a domestic and societal joke  either to be given a blind eye or to 6. Heat —  Noise
Ollie Zhang
66  Informatics of Dominationserve as fodder for mockery, rather than be examined and accepted as 
a fundamental argument.” 1 In this spirit, I want to pay this generalized 
condition more regard.
Fourier’s analy sis, critical of the heteronormative, monogamous 
delusions of marriage, found cuckoldry to be not only a widespread afflic -
tion, but also crucial po  liti cally. In cuckoldry, he found a latent demand 
for feminist revolution, for nonmonogamy, for critically rethinking 
and reformulating relationships. In the seemingly mundane, he found 
 matters of  political importance. Hierarchies  was written, of course, 
predigitally— prior to an era in which cuck  was  adopted and adapted by 
4chan dwellers into a po  liti cally charged symbol of emasculation and 
humiliation, prior to the alt- right and white nationalists using the word 
cuck  to evoke perceived racial victimhood. But an alternative trajectory 
for the cuckold arcs from the generic figure of unwitting husband of a 
cheating wife to the common condition of unwitting beholder of un -
fulfilled desire, and this is what I want to trace. This arc is impacted by 
shifts in desire from heat to noise.
So what is the cuck? And what are its latent demands?
Cuck is to noise what noise was to heat, which is to say that 
it  doesn’t replace a  predecessor but complicates and overwhelms it 
through mixed, messy, and multiple signals. More specifically, cucks 
cannot be stripped of their context: the chaos of digital mediation in the 
twenty- first  century. In extrapolating from the “domestic and societal 
joke” of cucking, one finds fruitful “fodder for mockery” in the forms 
of sarcasm and self-  deprecation to be abundant  today; being cucked 
online is to have one’s feelings constantly teased, triggered, displaced, 
neutralized. Cucks are  those who are on the receiving end of too many 
signals and sounds, distracted from their desires, unwittingly bandied 
about by another.
T o read about the affective dimensions of the attention econ -
omy is to be impressed upon by an image of libidinal confusion. Through 
the use of  metaphor, a chimeric picture emerges—of some kind of sexy 
disease, a moreish but unhealthy snack; we lack a native language for 
digitality and so turn to the language of sex, of food, of consumption, 
and of disease in a confused age of banal skeuomorphs. This portrait of 
indulgence, fetishism, gluttony, and discipline reveals that  there may be 
an epidemic of unsuspected (or maybe unconsenting) fetishists engaged 
in emotional cucking (fine, if  you’re into it). So lubed up by frictionless 
 Ollie Zhang  67
design, it’s hard to feel anything, and many a cuck is left spectating, held 
at a distance, affects quashed.
Some say content has replaced religion as a logic for  organizing 
sociality, but encounters are “made so habitual and frictionless that 
nothing can possibly stick. Culture no longer cultivates.” 2 And indeed, 
for five hundred years, as James Snead writes, culture  in the  English lan -
guage referred to a  process concerning acts of cultivation and tending 
to: culture cultured but also had to be cultured itself. 3 So what ferments 
 today but dissatisfaction and libidinal frustration?
What unsatisfactorily gets termed cognitive whiplash , a pre -
mature affective cutoff, is rife. The clamor of affective failure may be 
understood as one outcome of an endemic framework of whiteness—  a 
framing that artist Ryan Kuo engages; in his words, this is “less a fail -
ure to have empathy than a failure to part with the  mental and material 
comforts of apathy.” 4 Apathy is safe and familiar. Apathy is, to borrow 
from DeForrest Brown Jr., the incessant drive “ towards endlessly un -
satisfactory growth and consumption.” 5 Apathy is neuter politics in the 
forms of keyboard warriorism,  political hobbyism, dopamine addiction.
The symptoms of our dissatisfaction and affective failure af -
flictions include: $17 billion worth of regret; internalization of brands 
before selves; a catastrophic din of unfortunate news; and the long- term 
health effects of late capitalism (too insurmountable to be considered, 
to be supplanted by more content). 6 The symptoms are evidenced in a 
 political landscape in which the horizon of possibility appears comi -
cally reduced to the possibility of exploitative institutions of yesteryear 
restocked with multicolored libs; they are found in instances of critique 
ingested and regurgitated in a mockery of original intentions and mean -
ings, dripping in the slow, slick, shiny vomit of content. Perhaps a cuck 
writes an impassioned tweet.
Wendy Hui Kyong Chun posits that to focus on what is “bla -
tantly racist” about con  temporary platforms is to “miss the point.” 7 
A framework of whiteness as affective failure offers a critical lens on 
controversy and dissatisfaction as fuel. T o focus on fuel—in the form 
of opinions expressed, problematic content, maelstrom du jour—is 
to become blind to the larger machine itself, replete with its specific 
logics, operations, and (infra)structures. It is to miss the extraction, 
materials,  labor, and waste that constitute it—  where  these acts take 
place and whom  these supply chains exploit and harm. It is to spectate 
68  Informatics of Dominationat horrors made vis  i ble as fodder, while allowing  those that enable the 
display (or  those that are slower and less spectacular) to fade into ob -
scurity.  After all, as Caroline Busta writes, “  Actual power is controlling 
the means by which lesser power can be displayed.” 8 T o think about 
what technology, what whiteness, does  here is to sketch out a map in 
which all roads in the regime of apathy, of impotence, lead to climate 
apartheid and similar places I need not reiterate— I’m sure a cuck such 
as yourself is familiar with many an apocalyptic or tear- jerking specta -
cle. Scroll on, nothing to feel  here.
If the con  temporary attention regime embodies a logic that thrives on 
dissatisfaction, it is thus dependent on a very specific production of de -
sire.9 In the words of Franco “Bifo” Berardi, this economy  isn’t reliant 
on repression or silencing, but rather on the “proliferation of chatter” or 
noise. 10 Despair is fuel; saturation and uneven distribution contribute 
to a collective noise- induced attention or clarity loss.
So what does rife affective failure mean for pos  si ble  political 
horizons, for  organizing, for other modes of sociality? What cultural 
logic can weather an environment in which  every last drop of attention 
is clamored for? When difference is made spectacular, captured in the 
same mechanisms that profit from opinions, disagreement, and con -
flict, how can  resistance and complicity be delineated amid the static, 
individualizing logics of the attention economy?
In How to Do Nothing , artist and educator Jenny Odell makes a 
compelling, nuanced case for the strategic withdrawal and culturing of 
attention. She draws on ethicist James Williams to sketch out what is 
truly at stake (and often myopically missed) in the cumulative impacts 
and failures of the attention regime: experienced in the short term, in 
droplets, it is annoying. In the longer term, droplets “accumulate and 
keep us from living the lives we want to live, or, even worse . . .  ‘to want 
what we want to want.’ ”11
Attention is no less than a question of desire. But beyond the in -
dividual dissatisfaction such a regime produces, Odell refreshingly makes 
clear the collective,  political stakes at hand. Much like how flickers of 
annoyance and apathy accrue to a life not quite lived, their multiplica -
tion culminates in a prostrate society— lying face down, scrolling, dis -
tracted, escaping, in the face of imbricated crises. Y et  these enfeebled 
bodies stay productive; the attention economy “puts the soul to work 
as it designs the fields of desire.” 12 And work they do.
 Ollie Zhang  69
Amid all the noise of 3.78 billion cucks, what space is left for 
silence, for recovering the shambles of attention we have left, and for 
harnessing them into sharpened  political proj  ects?
Y ou, dear cuck, prob  ably  don’t need to hear this again. Is an -
other voice  really needed in the chorus of attention economy critique? 
 Y ou’ve heard it all before, yet I feel compelled to add to the racket of a 
plethora of broken rec  ords playing less- than- love songs, iterated through 
bad and less offensive covers. But what keeps me coming back is the 
per sis tent, nagging question of what’s  really at stake.
If droplets of stolen attention and time accumulate to have 
greater implications, it becomes clear that “collective agency both 
mirrors and relies on the individual capacity to ‘pay attention,’ . . .  
in a time that demands action, distraction appears to be (at the level of 
the collective) a life- and-  death  matter .”13 Odell comes to advocate for 
a critical, intentional kind of participation— not a flat-  out rejection of 
technologies that now appear essential for social participation, nor an 
uncritical embrace, a burying of one’s head in content. The question 
 isn’t just of withdrawing attention wholly, but of spending the time and 
care to cultivate it elsewhere.
On the perennial privilege question, she echoes Gilles Deleuze 
to posit that just  because many lack a right  doesn’t mean it is any less 
valuable. Carefully highlighting that precarity leaves  little room for 
attention on anything beyond survival, she emphasizes the stakes at 
hand— that  those who do have a margin, no  matter how small, must 
make careful use of it. 14
Could fodder for mockery become fodder for other  wise? 
Where might attention be reinvested and fertilized? Where might af -
fect no longer be doomed to failure and apathy, but maybe enabled to 
flower? How could other attentive practices be grown? Overwhelmed, 
overexcited, I have no adequate responses to any of  these questions but 
have noted glimmers of in  ter est ing affordances in imperfect spaces. Per -
haps something useful is to be found in dark forest spaces that harbor 
some opportunities for complexity, messiness, and detail; 15 perhaps in 
mutual aid structures or in  organizing strategies obscured by the allure 
of rage posting; perhaps in a refusal of the static horizons of repre sen-
ta tion; perhaps in old- school pro  cesses of cultivation and education.
No  labor for the soul.
Empower the common cucks.
Get out if  you’re not ultimately the one getting off.
70  Informatics of DominationNotes
 1. Charles Fourier, The Hierarchies of Cuckoldry and Bankruptcy  (Cambridge, MA: 
Wakefield Press, 2011), xiv.
 2. Chris Crawford, “Dosing Culture, Part One,” Damage , September 2020, https://  
damagemag  . com / 2020 / 09 / 03 / dosing -  culture  - part  - one / .
 3. James A. Snead, “On Repetition in Black Culture,” Black American Lit  er a ture 
Forum  15, no. 4 (1981): 147 .
 4. Kent Szlauderbach, “Alien and Sedition: Ryan Kuo Interviewed,” Bomb , July 18, 
2018, https:// bombmagazine . org / articles / alien -  and - sedition - ryan - kuo  - interviewed / .
 5. DeForrest Brown Jr., “Social  Music,” ctm  Festival Magazine , April 2021, https://  
www . ctm - festival  . de / magazine / social -music .
 6. Clive Thompson, “We Need Software to Help Us Slow Down, Not Speed Up,” 
Wired , August 25, 2018, https:// www . wired  . com / story / software  - to - help  - us - slow -  down  
- not - speed - up /; Jonathan Freedland, “The Onslaught,” Guardian , October 2005, https://  
www .  theguardian  . com / media / 2005 / oct / 25 / advertising  .food .
 7. Art in Amer  i ca, “Ryan Kuo Discusses Race as T echnology with Media Scholar 
Wendy Chun,” September 2019, https:// www . artnews . com / art  - in - america / features / ryan  
- kuo  - race  - technology - wendy -  chun -  63653 / .
 8. Caroline Busta, “The Internet  Didn’t Kill Counterculture—  Y ou Just  Won’t Find 
It on Instagram,” Document Journal , January 2021, https:// www . documentjournal  . com  
/ 2021 / 01 / the  - internet  - didnt  - kill -  counterculture  - you - just  - wont  - find - it  - on - instagram / .
 9. Jenny Odell, “Introduction,” in How to Do Nothing: Resisting the Attention 
Economy  (New Y ork: Melville  House, 2019), ePub.
 10. Franco Berardi, “Baroque and Semiocapital,” in  After the  Future , ed. Franco 
Bifo Berardi, Gary Genosko, and Nicholas Thoburn (Edinburgh: ak Press, 2011), ePub.
 11. Jenny Odell, “Exercises in Attention,” in How to Do Nothing .
 12. Oliver Leistert, “The Revolution  Will Not Be Liked,” in Critical Perspectives 
on Social Media and Protest , ed. Lina Dencik and Oliver Leistert (London: Rowman and 
Littlefield International, 2015).
 13. Jenny Odell, “Anatomy of a Refusal,” in How to Do Nothing  (emphasis added).
 14. Jenny Odell, “The Case for Nothing,” and “Anatomy of a Refusal,” both in How 
to Do Nothing .
 15. Busta, “The Internet  Didn’t. ”
In September 2020, while the coronavirus epidemic raged, local news 
outlets in Hawai ʻi reported that refrigerators and freezers  were back-  
ordered. In many ways, the virus brought the global supply chain’s fra -
gility into full view, revealing everyday dependencies on inequitable and 
racialized  labor systems on farms and factory floors in order to keep our 
 house  holds provisioned. New appliances, when they did arrive in the 
archipelago, had already been presold to  those with names on long wait -
ing lists. 1 Other US cities experienced the same shortages: production 
slowed as factories implemented social distancing protocols (or as they 
shut down in the wake of outbreaks); demands on the domestic kitchen 
increased, and appliances broke down; anx  i eties over food shortages fix -
ated on the freezer as an insurance policy against end times. 2 Beholden 
to  these domestic appliances, the work of feeding  others is a form of 
care that is bound to  these vast and precarious global networks. As the 
terminal link in a cold chain that has played a crucial and overdeter -
mined role in the way  people eat, freezers and refrigerators have become 
normatively essential to modern survival. 3 This is a colonial condition 
of life within the settler state and in Hawai ʻi; it is profoundly felt  every 
time the islands brace for emergency.
Hawai ʻi’s current overreliance on the global cold chain for food 
is woven deep into the fabric of everyday life, where residents know sev -
eral  things: that “Hawaii has a supply of fresh produce for no more than 
ten days”; that it imports all but an estimated 11.6   percent of its food; 
and that scant existing arable lands are dedicated to basic food crops. 4 
Not only is Hawai ʻi dependent on imported food, but the added cost 
built into the cold chain makes its groceries the most expensive in the 
United States. 5 Analysts explain that it is not shipping itself that drives 7. White Cap  i tal ist Patriarchy —  
Informatics of Domination
Hiʻilei Julia Kawehipuaakahaopulani Hobart
72  Informatics of Dominationup the cost of perishables (it’s actually relatively cheap to ship cargo). 
Rather, the energy required to keep food fresh in Hawai ʻi’s warm cli -
mate, plus the price of electricity, which is the highest in the nation by a 
substantial margin, has the greatest effect on cost. 6 This stands in stark 
contrast to the historically notable capacities for agricultural, aquacul -
tural, and intellectual production demonstrated by Kanaka Maoli at the 
outset of the nineteenth  century, and  toward which  those who envision 
Hawai ʻi’s decolonial  futures are oriented. 7
In her recent book Mapping Abundance for a Planetary  Future , 
Candace Fujikane argues for sustained attention paid to cartographies 
obscured by Western regimes of technology and power: “Indigenous 
economies of abundance,” she writes, “as opposed to cap  i tal ist econ -
omies of scarcity.” 8 Her theoretical intervention holds material stakes 
for the dispossessive pre sent in Hawai ʻi, in which the cost of living far 
exceeds the median  house  hold income. 9 The events that marked such 
structural shifts from abundance to scarcity track alongside the durée  of 
American settlement and occupation. The transformation of Hawai ʻi’s 
foodscape resonates with what Donna Haraway and Anna Tsing term 
the Plantationocene, or the human- induced geological era accelerated 
by industrial and monocropped plantation agriculture and the racial 
capitalism that fueled its growth. 10 In Hawai ʻi, plantations— first sugar 
and then pineapple— replaced Indigenous integrated land management 
systems.  T oday Hawai ʻi’s plantations grow genet  ically engineered seeds 
for biotech companies while most food comes, instead, packaged in 
towers of reefers ferried on container ships from the continent. 11
Over time, transitions in land use shifted the material dimen -
sions of everyday domestic life.  Here I pay par tic u lar attention to the 
1940s and 1950s, when the cold chain came into its full maturity, press -
ing its weight upon a Hawai ʻi at the cusp of its formal admission into US 
statehood. During this period, two impor tant phenomena converged. 
First,  cattle breeders on the American continent played a crucial role in 
developing and extending mobile cold storage technologies to support 
artificial insemination practices. 12 This development enhanced a cold 
chain that had already wrought significant impacts on the American 
food system across the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries 
with precision and extended mobility. 13 Second, American settler colo -
nial visions of god-  granted abundance influenced cultural orientations 
 toward  house  hold provisioning. As Jonathan Rees writes of postwar atti -
tudes in his study of freezing and refrigeration technology, “the electric 
 Hi ʻilei Julia Kawehipuaakahaopulani Hobart 73
 house  hold refrigerator symbolized modernity. When filled with food, 
it symbolized abundance. The size of the typical American refrigerator 
also indicated the extraordinary prosperity of the postwar period.” 14 
Not only did long-  distance, temperature-  controlled transport support 
Hawai ʻi’s economic pivot away from an agricultural industry and  toward 
tourism, it also Americanized the intimate worlds of Kanaka in material 
and ideological ways. 15
On February 26, 1954, the Honolulu Advertiser  published the full 
roster of new residents of Kalihi V alley Homes, one of the now- state’s 
oldest public housing proj  ects. Surrounding that list of names, local 
businesses advertised by way of publishing their well wishes, including 
Kam IV  Services, a provider of “meats, fresh foods, frozen foods.” The 
Hawai ʻi Housing Authority also announced, on that same page, an open 
 house, inviting the general public to admire the “decent, safe and sani -
tary” homes located “in what was a rodent infested area containing old 
shacks and piggeries.” 16 One of the central features of the proj  ect that 
aimed to deliver “wholesome transformations” for Honolulu’s poor  were 
in- unit electric refrigerators that dominated the open- plan living spaces 
of the apartments. Likewise, promotional photos (now archived at the 
Bishop Museum) articulate government- produced narratives of civility 
and pro  gress, in which camera vantages alternately center the eco  nom-
ically proportioned kitchens with electric appliances and modestly ap -
pointed living rooms featuring a small brown child alone, on a rocking 
 horse. Scholars like J. K ēhaulani Kauanui and Sally Engle Merry have 
shown the longer lineages of  these forms of dressage in Hawai ʻi, in which 
missionary and,  later, colonial governance dismantled Kanaka sexuality, 
kinship, and domestic life in  favor of normative Western frameworks 
of re/productive  labor. 17 Held in the microcosm of a newly fabricated 
Kalihi V alley Homes kitchen, a world scaffolded by impositions of pa -
triarchy, capitalism, and whiteness. 18
Refrigeration and its scaffolding technologies oriented 
 house  holds  toward a new temporality and architecture of domestic 
care: grocery shopping once a week, standing at the kitchen stove, se -
lecting perishables for their fridge life, and the nuclearization of the 
 family meal. This observation, importantly, is not  limited to foodways, 
but deeply invested in it: the recently developed novel coronavirus 
vaccines are entirely reliant on the cold, requiring storage at −70°C: a 
neat convergence of technological advancements born of the twentieth-  
century food system. Joanna Radin notes that the seminal technology 
74  Informatics of Dominationfor cold chain transport created by  cattle breeders now underpins the 
cyborg’s biomedical salvation (“the word for vaccination comes from the 
Latin for cow”). 19 Appropriately squaring the cold chain’s development 
against seminal histories, the patriarchal under  pinnings of refrigera -
tion find present-  day manifestations across the country’s necropo  liti cal 
landscape, in which both the vaccine and the virus articulate the death 
dealings of racial capitalism.
What would, I won  der, a Hawai ʻi beyond refrigeration look 
like? How might  labors of feeding and care calibrate to a world of ther -
mal ambience? Hawai ʻi’s electric refrigerators, beacons of assimilation 
in 1954, and (almost) infrastructurally invisible  today, reveal their place 
in the cybernetic now as our bodily realities come up against cap  i tal-
ist systems of scarcity. The thermal environments of the cold chain—  
computerized reefers for bananas or beef or milk— provide illusions of 
abundance that fall apart in times of ecological rupture (like hurricanes 
or pandemics). While  these systems may be networked, they perilously 
overlook ecological networks of sustenance that are already in place, 
and have been for some time.
Native Hawaiian farmers and aquaculturists are reviving 
systems blueprinted from the old, reminding us of the cadences of 
mālama  (care) that connect us to our ʻāina  (land which feeds). 20 
 These are also infrastructures of watersheds and ecosystems.  These 
are networks of community relations.  These are also informatics of 
moʻolelo  (storied histories) that describe our interdependent worlds. 
 These are not, however, terminal end points. They are positive feedback 
loops. Thermal ambience—  a way of thinking beyond refrigeration—  
may seem, at first glance, to be a neutral proposition, but instead qui -
etly points  toward ecologies that once thrived in the absence of the 
cold chain’s precisely calibrated environments, and offer blueprints for 
abundant  futures, too.
Notes
 1. Sara Mattison, “Refrigerator, Freezer Stock Impacted by covid- 19,” khon 2, 
September 16, 2020, https:// www . khon2  . com / coronavirus / refrigerator  - freezer  - stock  
- impacted -  by - covid - 19 / .
 2. Alina Selyukh, “Why It’s So Hard to Buy a New Refrigerator  These Days,” 
Hawai ʻi Public Radio, September 22, 2020, https:// www . hawaiipublicradio  . org / post  
/ shortage  - new - refrigerators - leaves -  appliance  - shoppers -  out - cold#stream /0 .
 Hi ʻilei Julia Kawehipuaakahaopulani Hobart 75
 3. Normative  operates as a key word  here, with attention to who is not afforded 
the necessity of refrigeration, as well as the invisibilized conditions of  peoples and home -
lands from which the raw materials of biotechnology are extracted. Macarena Gómez-  
Barris, The Extractive Zone: Social Ecologies and Decolonial Perspectives  (Durham, NC: 
Duke University Press, 2017).
 4. Matthew K. Loke and PingSun Leung, “Hawai‘i’s Food Consumption and 
Supply Sources: Benchmark Estimates and  Measurement Issues,” Agricultural and Food 
Economics  1, no. 10 (2013). The Hawai‘i State  House self- sufficiency bill hb2703 hd2, as 
quoted in George Kent, “Food Security in Hawai‘i,” in Food and Power in Hawai‘i: Visions 
of Food Democracy  (Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press, 2016), 39.
 5. USA  Today , “Hawaii May Be the Happiest State, but It Also Has the Highest 
Food Prices,” March 21, 2019.
 6. Thomas C. Frohlich, “Where Y ou’ll Pay the Most in Electric Bills,” 24/7 Wall 
St (blog), January 24, 2019, https:// 247wallst  . com / special - report / 2019 / 01 / 24 / where  
- youll - pay - the  - most  - in -  electric  - bills - 3 / .
 7. See Hunter Heaivilin, “Local Foods through Crisis,” in The V alue of Hawai ʻi 
3: Hulihia, the Turning , ed. Noelani Goodyear- Kaʻōpua, Craig Howes, Jonathan Kay 
Kamakawiwo ʻole Osorio, and Aiko Y amashiro (Honolulu: University of Hawai ʻi Press, 
2020), 31–34.
 8. Candace Fujikane, Mapping Abundance for a Planetary  Future: Kanaka Maoli 
and Settler Cartographies in Hawai ʻi (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2020), 3.
 9. Nina Wu, “A Single Person Earning Less Than $67,500 Now Qualifies as ‘Low 
Income’ in Urban Honolulu,” Star Advertiser , May 28, 2019, https:// www .  staradvertiser  
. com / 2019 / 05 / 28 / hawaii - news / newswatch / low - income  - threshold - rises - to - 67500  - in 
- honolulu / .
 10. Gregg Mitman, “Reflections on the Plantationocene: A Conversation with 
Donna Haraway and Anna Tsing,” EdgeEffects , June 18, 2019, https://  edgeeffects  . net 
/ haraway - tsing - plantationocene / .
 11. Andrea Brower, “From the Sugar Oligarchy to the Agrochemical Oligopoly: 
Situating Monsanto and Gang’s Occupation of Hawai ʻi,” Food, Culture, and Society  19, 
no. 3 (2016): 587–614.
 12. For more, see Joanna Radin and Emma Kowal, Cryopolitics: Frozen Life in a 
Melting World  (Cambridge, MA: mit  Press, 2017), especially 65–66.
 13. Susanne Freidberg, Fresh: A Perishable History  (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni -
versity Press, 2010).
 14. Jonathan Rees, Refrigeration Nation: A History of Ice, Appliances, and Enterprise 
in Amer  i ca (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press), 166.
 15. See Liza K. Williams, “The Politics of Paradise: T ourism, Image and Cultural 
Production in Hawai ʻi” (PhD diss., New Y ork University, 2015).
 16. Honolulu Advertiser , “Kalihi V alley Homes Has 373 Resident Families,” Febru -
ary 26, 1954.
 17. J. Kēhaulani Kauanui, Paradoxes of Hawaiian Sovereignty: Land, Sex, and the 
Colonial Politics of State Nationalism  (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2018); and 
Sally Engle Merry, Colonizing Hawai ʻi: The Cultural Power of Law  (Prince  ton, NJ: Prince -
ton University Press, 2000).
 18. Donna J. Haraway, “A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, T echnology, and Socialist-  
Feminism in the Late 20th   Century,” The International Handbook of Virtual Learning 
76  Informatics of DominationEnvironments , ed. Joel Weiss, Jason Nolan, Jeremy Hunsinger, and Peter Trifonas (Dor -
drecht: Springer, 2006), 129.
 19. Joanna Radin, “The Secret Weapon for Distributing a Potential Covid-19 
V accination,” Washington Post , November 12, 2020, https:// www . washingtonpost  . com  
/ outlook / 2020 / 11 / 12 / secret  - weapon -  distributing - potential -  covid - 19  - vaccine / .
 20. One notable example is Paepae o He ʻeia, a restored loko i ʻa (fishpond) on 
Oʻahu’s windward side. For the connection between food system and community that 
it fosters, see Catherine T oth Fox, “Thousands Turn Out to Fix a Huge Hole in This 
800-  Y ear-  Old He ʻeia Fishpond,” Honolulu Magazine , December 12, 2015, https://  www  
. honolulumagazine . com / thousands - turn - out - to - fix - a - huge  - hole  - in - this - 800  - year  - old 
- heeia  - fishpond / .
It  wasn’t what I expected at all.
I thought the clinical procedure would be easy. But it was torture.  Here’s 
how it happened. . . .
My symptoms had been getting worse and worse. Of course, I masked 
it well. Hardly anyone knew I was sick, except my wife, who often had 
to clean up  after me.
I was able to function at work. I followed my  mother’s prescription: 
“The worse you feel, the better you should look.” I seemed to pull it off.
 People saw me and thought that I was bright and cheerful. I appeared 
strong. I presented as easygoing. But  really, I was wound like a top, a 
control freak. So are most of my chronically ill friends. We  don’t have 
a lot of options. Every  one seems to be chronically ill  these days. We all 
have to pretend. . . .
My  mother had my same disease. Ge  ne tic transference. When she was first 
diagnosed in 1975, she was prescribed  steroids for two years. That wrecked 
her. But she seemed to recover, not realizing it was a chronic disease at all. 
Living in NYC and taking on a night shift a  decade  later, her symptoms 
returned. She managed to find the top doctor in the field, and he accepted 
her into his practice, even with her bad health insurance. He put her on 
heavy-  duty antibiotics for years (the kind of antibiotics you should only 
take for a few days at a time). Such  were the clinical practices at the time, 
not like the newly engineered gut microbiome, now available.
The SynGut trial (short for Synthetic Gut) was targeted to my 
disease type, unlike other broad- spectrum fecal microbial transplants, 8. Biology as Clinical Practice —  
Biology as Inscription —  Biological 
Transmutation-  Adaptation
Kathy High
78  Informatics of Dominationwhich seemed so random. Like firing a shotgun at an oncoming herd 
of zombies. But this was an engineered synthetic bacterial community 
that would make up the precise losses in my gut. Or that is what they 
claimed it would do. Shooting synthetic poop up my butt seemed like 
a random fix. But I wanted to try. I fi  nally had found a trial that would 
take me for  free. I had to prove how ill I was. Humiliating.
Synthetic Gut was the most advanced medico-  biotech attempt 
to control our gut system. With the new understanding of the complexity 
of our bodies made up of  human and nonhuman cells, this novel treatment 
did not attempt to stifle or kill the bacteria in our guts, but rather to work 
with them—  encouraging growth and new life, acknowledging the uncon -
tainability of this life .
Taking stool samples from healthy patients, researchers de -
constructed the samples into the separate types of bacteria and vi -
ruses that lived in  those gut microbiomes. Once this inventory was 
cata  loged, then the bacteria could be remixed and matched for SynGut 
treatment, a curated new formula, if you  will— with synthetic additives, 
of course. This was not just treating disease symptoms, it was actually 
changing the gut environment to reshape the disease itself. Controlled 
by one of the biggest phar  ma ceu ti cal companies, SynGut was a risky 
biotech invention—  but maybe it would work.
They told me the therapy trial was a double-  blind trial— with a 
lot of secrecy around it. Double-  blind—  double bind—  double blinded, 
so no one would influence the other. I was terrified I would be given 
the placebo.
The clinical trial was to include weeks of isolation. They would 
relocate us to the mountains, keeping us in separate cabins. They 
would regulate our diet, drink, and exercise.  Limited contact with the 
outside. They would implant chips in us to monitor the trial’s intake. 
They  weren’t  going to just program our bacterial communities, our gut 
microbiome— they would program us.
They moved us to the mountain in the  middle of the night.
Before the first trial, they made us clean out our guts. Early 
the next morning, we  were brought to the infirmary. I was then left in 
a darkened room that smelled of bleach and soap. Odd how clean it 
smelled, given they  were dealing with shit. The bleach made me hope -
ful. Scared too. Every  one had masks on, so I could not see their  faces. 
Even the aides who walked me to the infirmary. As soon as they found 
a vein, I was out from the anesthesia. Blacked out. Black hole.
 Kathy High  79
At first, I thought for sure I had been given the placebo—  but 
then  things started to  really change. I was high as a kite, having all kinds 
of newfound energy, appetite, and optimism again. Then all that fresh -
ness went away overnight. They said I needed a di ff  er ent packet, even 
more specific for my disease. And they informed me that I was the only 
one having trou ble among my treatment cohort.
They took me to another location. Higher up in the clouds. I 
was completely alone. More paperwork and signatures on multiple sets 
of papers that I never read. They took away my phone.
More nasty prep to clean me out. More over-  air- conditioned, 
sterile- smelling examining rooms. Paper booties. Cotton gowns with 
stains. Masked  faces.  Needles of soft drugs that made me fall into a 
deep sleep. The treatments  were always the same. I was a model sub -
ject,  under their care.
The next trial packet  didn’t work. I was even sicker than be -
fore. Nor the next one. But the fourth (and last pos  si ble) packet seemed 
to be di ff  er ent. I felt altered. The new shifting pains in my body  were 
unfamiliar, occurring in strange places, like a thunderhead gathering 
force. Undefinable.
At that point, the Data Monitoring Committee was all over 
me. Conducting interview  after interview. Survey  after survey. Did I 
understand informed consent? Had  there been any other adverse events 
during my treatment? Was it a serious adverse event, meaning life threat -
ening? Did I know it was only a Phase 2 trial? Safety continued to be 
monitored heavi  ly.
How was I to know?
I started having incredibly weird dreams. Transgendered lov -
ers wrapping me tightly with yellow scarves. Malintents turning into 
seductive kittens with porcupine quills instead of fur. Friends ignoring 
me and then revealing secret passageways.
The scientists said it would take a while longer. I had been ad -
ministered enough of the SynGut transfer. They had even added an -
other packet of selected bacteriophages as well—  giving me a soup of 
bacteria and viruses. So, every thing seemed complete. It was now part 
of my system. They needed to heavi  ly monitor my pro  gress, the symp -
toms, and my stool.
I was tired of shitting in a cup. My body twitched, spasmed, 
and hurt all over. Then, alternately, I had rushes of energy and strength, 
creating afterglow spots.
80  Informatics of DominationThey had administered a cocktail of treatments to me that no 
one  else had received. I had all four packets. When I say administered , 
I should explain. Up my butt—  each time. Starving, cleaning out my gut 
the day before. Then a colonoscopy, but with a dump of fluids. They had 
to stagger it all, which is why it took so long. Months in fact.
Again, I  couldn’t tell if it was working.
I de cided to run away. I wanted to shit in the woods.
I left on a cloudy night, and I managed to avoid all contact with  people. 
I was  really in the hills— trying to make it to the coast. I could smell 
the sea air, mixed in with the sweet grasses. The ocean  wasn’t too far.
Eventually, I ate all the food I had packed. I felt exceedingly 
odd— prob  ably from the hunger, and the fear. And lack of sleep. I was 
agitated, dizzy, desperate. Maybe it was from the treatment?
I stumbled on a dead deer in a pile of leaves. Half eaten. I was 
overwhelmed and attracted by the scent of it, even though it was rot -
ting. I noticed the scat of a mountain lion nearby. The deer most likely 
was their half-  eaten meal.
I stood over the body for the longest time. I thought of my 
newly configured gut. What had they  really given me in  those packets? 
Had it taken or not? I felt particularly out of body.
All I could do was sniff. I was swimming in fragrance. Rich, 
rancid meaty smells. My mouth was watering. I turned from the deer 
and walked away nauseated. I found a stream nearby and submerged 
my entire head to drink.
I returned the next day. Cautiously I approached the body. 
 There was another large animal  there. I could see its shadow on top 
of the deer from a distance, but it was masked by tree branches. I 
crept up.
It was a vulture with its head deep inside the deer’s decay -
ing body. She  didn’t notice me. I stepped closer.  There  were crows 
around as well. Standing at a distance, in a line. As if they  were wait -
ing a turn.
I jumped the line. I watched the vulture and how she was pull -
ing out the meat. I snarled at her. She barked back. I made myself as 
large as I could and approached her suddenly with a lurch. Startled, 
she backed away, and then vomited at me. The puke just missed me 
and made a searing circle on the ground where it landed—  steamy, 
hot, and toxic.
 Kathy High  81
I circled the deer. I found an opening where the deer rump 
somewhat hid me from the vulture. The deer was half eaten, bones ex -
posed, head intact. But her rump stuck up somehow  whole. I was drool -
ing. My stomach heaved. My throat clenched.  There was a tear in the 
deer’s rear side. I reached my hands inside the split flesh and pulled out 
some muscle. It smelled foul. But my mouth watered. I gnawed, pulled 
a bite of meat— tentative at first. Then my hunger took over, and I bit 
down over and over again, taking big chunks of rotten flesh between my 
teeth. Disgusting, satiating, and exhilarating. I kept  going.
I looked up and the vulture was staring at me with a puzzled 
look. I blacked out. . . .
The scavenger birds  were  dying off.  People  were poisoning them 
and using their parts for power  ful medicines. The drugged agricul -
tural animals that the birds  were eating also killed them. Someone 
had to take over the eradication. Someone had to keep  things clean. 
Other  wise the dogs and the rats would do so. And they  were not nearly 
as efficient.
I now advise  others how to eat. I teach what I learned from my 
animal colleagues. I administer bacterial drinks and perform fmt s with 
par tic u lar bacteria that I culture and grow— diy  in my home laboratory. 
I can identify the bacteria needed to digest certain foods.  These bacteria 
are already in abundance in my own off-  balance gut microbiome. I just 
exaggerate them.  Others like me want them too.
I train my  human teams to clean down to the bone. I am proud 
of my troops. We can only work at night or  under cover. Much of the 
world needs to dispose of decomposing materials. We help with the flesh 
at least.  Those waste products feed so many of my  people. What would 
have been landfill was now food. Such a miracle . . .
I  wasn’t sure if the SynGut had adapted my gut to accept the 
toxins or if it was my predisposition— how I was configured before. We 
now hone certain bacteria and bacteriophages to create our own tar -
geted toxic gut environment.
I still hide myself from the clinical trial  people. I am totally off 
grid. I had removed their chip long ago and adapted it. Now we are de -
veloping that chip into nodes that test our gut microbiome makeup. The 
chips track lots of data. They also allow us to see the gut environment 
and witness our own microbiome fluctuations, bacterial mutations 
in action. They are  little internal nanoscale microscopes. The rebuilt 
82  Informatics of Dominationimplanted chips help us monitor our own pro  gress. We make multiples 
and literally see our  future.
 People follow me. We add and subtract bacteria  until we make 
a perfect noxious balance. Perfect. Just too perfect. They had given us 
the tools, and we adapted them. Vultures  were our models, our kin. 
Who knew it would be so neat? The world’s food rot was our banquet.
Once  there was a time when it was physiology that apprehended the 
body. Physiology pertains to the science of the normal functions of 
living  things, or how bodies work. Physiology takes as its focus bio -
chemistry, sugars, energy, and the laws of thermodynamics. Physiology 
explores the functions of parts, limbs, mechanisms, bodily pro  cesses 
within a living system, from the operations of  little cells to the swing -
ing of an arm to the interaction of a body with the atmosphere of its 
environment. Physiology as a field of apprehension has existed since 
the time of Hippocrates, though the term arrived in the early modern 
period. It absorbs the prevailing concerns of contemporaneous  political 
economists and theorists of society, such that, for example, in the 1820s, 
inspired by Adam Smith’s work, Henri Milne- Edwards introduced the 
“physiological division of  labour,” a concept considering living entities 
as machines. 1 Each body and machine at work. Nowadays the field of 
physiology is enmeshed with pro  cesses that are digital, computational, 
and data driven. This enmeshment means that a single body,  whether it 
is working or not working, is always a body in relation to many, in real 
time; that is to say, it is apprehended through the prisms of big data. 
This body science and body knowledge are remote, even when they 
are close.  T oday’s digital apprehensions of bodily functioning might 
be characterized as tangling a physical body in a network of codes, 
commands, control, communication, inputs, outputs, electronic, engi -
neered, fogged, clouded, or invisible. Such points of entanglement are 
conceptualized through scientific instruments in laboratory contexts for 
the scientific view at ever smaller grades. It is a long time since any of 
this could be seen with the (now rarely) naked eyes of  those not endowed 
with digital instruments and interfaces. The body, the meat hunk that 9. Physiology —  Communications 
Engineering
Esther Leslie
84  Informatics of Dominationstill lumbers around, is only proper, or only properly and fully appre -
hended, for scientific, medical, analytical purposes when perceived as a 
node through which a flow or a stutter of data passes, and is like  every 
other node in that network, which as a  whole forms an international—or 
galactic— network of connected parts, or an internet of  things, among 
which this body, your body, is another  thing, a punctuation point in a 
common language, an interface with an audio device’s earbud  measuring 
oxygenation levels and pulse, a vehicle for a tracked smartphone, a plane 
of focus for facial recognition technologies. And what is on the outside 
is far less in  ter est ing to  those whose looking is connected to knowing, 
or judging, than what is on the inside, this interior that appears now as 
ghostly shadows. If the functions of bodies  today are to be known, it is 
no longer a  matter of exploring  faces or laying hands on the shell of the 
skin. No physician cuts in and apart, using a knowledge of anatomy, to 
divide and define. Rather, the body is apprehended through media and 
their contiguity to quantification.
What was inside— intimate to the body, a wet and squelchy 
realm to be known through  measurement, touch, observation, inci -
sion, postmortem analy sis—is turned outside by the invasive but blood -
less force of digital intervention, or made external in some hands-  off  
kind of way, and in the form of more accurate, more intimate, more 
extravagant  measures that slip well below the humanly  measurable to 
appear on screens somewhere or anywhere. Physiology now, or commu -
nication engineering, is a  matter for lcd  and led , for printouts, graphs, 
screens, silently somewhere, elsewhere pro  cessing, archiving, tagging, 
cross- referencing, aggregating. Bodies are conceived by con  temporary 
physicians as realms of tiny happenings that are uninterrupted and ac -
cessed only by machineries—  and where once  there was the stethoscope 
and the mri ,  there is now virtual real  ity and 3 d imaging, total-  body 
pet /ct scanners.  These make an image of some sort of the animate 
flesh bag and its contents. But that is of less import than what is its un -
seen, but known or knowable, that which is not brought into vision, but 
into code and so known as data. What is impor tant now is what counts, 
or is countable. That is to say, number. And the numbers infinitesimally 
below the numbers with which we  were already familiar. We get to 
know this  thing called our bodies through ai in its quantum parts, in 
the provisions of physics beyond the standard model, at the nanoscale. 
More prosaically, in daily life, bodies are quantified, voluntarily and as 
play, in gamification procedures that  measure steps, caloric intake, and 
 Esther Leslie  85
the like. Through communications engineering,  there is a cessation of 
the importance of the proximity of bodies to the hand of the surgeon, 
the statistical  measure of biopo  liti cal bureaucracy, the critical eye of the 
photographic apparatus. Bodies swerve away from knowing by hand, 
eye, and its translation into  measure, moving  toward participation in a 
generalized being of  things in contactless contact. Bodies are committed 
to action at a distance. How the body fits together is an old question. 
The new one is how to send a message about it to elsewhere, across space 
and time, passing through bodies, from them, off them, about them, as 
well as through objects.
Art has often used life as a model, taking lessons in anatomy 
and physiology. Now scientists make life as if it  were art, or as if it  were 
code. Life takes the name jcvi - syn3.0, or perhaps Synthia, and it is the 
minimum number of genes required to sustain something called life. Or 
is it something more like code, for life comes to be code. The J. Craig 
V enter Institute concocts a  metaphor that exposes an assumed identity 
between computing and software, on the one hand, and biology and cell 
cycles: “A biological cell is very much like a computer— the genome is 
the software that encodes the instructions of the cell and the cellular 
machinery is the hardware that interprets and runs the genome software. 
Major advances in dna  technologies have made it pos  si ble for biolo -
gists to now behave as software engineers and rewrite entire genomes 
to program new biological operating systems.” 2 If this life is made, how 
does it function? What is physiology for it? If its ge  ne tics is an operating 
system, what does this operate? It operates more computers. It commu -
nicates with the network of computers. Its outputs are digitized. This is 
its normal functioning as life. It awaits an upgrade.
Con  temporary bodies enmeshed in the digital are dissolving 
into data, and they come to respond only to data as they make ever more 
of it. Data— meaning all that is given. Constant stimulation of a body- 
mind complex occurs by electronic signals, all passing through the 
one portal— where love, sex, confession, shopping, work, play, crime 
take place sequentially or si  mul ta neously.  There is only the screen 
and the contacts file in the networked society. The screen’s diversity of 
inputs translates into diversity of outputs, and each subject flexibilizes 
himself or herself in response. All fully flexibilized post- postmodern 
selves reproduce themselves multiply, as lecturers, entertainers, vloggers, 
merch-  endorsers, Etsy sellers, tv station bosses, comics writers, djs, rec-
ord producers, military strategists, presidents, engaging in multiple 
86  Informatics of Domination performance tests, on a platform where new times, new pileups and 
collapses take place, like that of postcontinuity editing in action cinema 
and pop videos, a space of flows, of controlled chaos, in which the cam -
era makes no sense of action, but renders only affect, something felt, in 
staccato snippets of time, quick messages, random segues. And in this 
world, physiology is refitted as a set of components, assembled parts, 
and pro  cesses, our gender, say, selected by hormone augmentation or 
semiotic suggestion or insistence.
Bodies stream from themselves, extending their perimeters 
in data emissions, like a halo, like an aura, like a mist condensing all 
the time. A new ether. Bodies emanate information, communicating 
through the won  ders of engineering. Information is fashioned, even if 
only volatile bursts of nonsense. Never before has more information 
been so constantly produced and monitored and analyzed. Where the 
midcentury trembled  under the atom bomb, which threatened to burn 
and melt the bodies caught in its light, the new  century crafts a data 
bomb. And the  human body too is data. The capacity to information -
alize even enters into the body, spliced onto our own information 
centers, in order to be backlit on screens. The body is unbound from 
itself—  anatomy is a surge of atoms that are data. In the twenty- first 
 century, the body is bound— never more located in time and space, 
never more known, if only not to the self, tethered by engineered and 
unrelenting communications.
Developments in the management, improvement, streamlining, 
augmenting, and salvaging of bodies have often been trialed on a par tic-
u lar bodily species— namely  cattle. T o see into the  future of how  human 
bodies may reticulate with the emergent techniques of body analy sis, it 
is advisable to look at cows,  because their bodies are the testing grounds 
of the new pastures, the vanguard of bodies disassembled, reassem -
bled, invested in and exchanged in the integrated cir  cuit of agribusi -
ness.  Human bodies leech into cow bodies, cows into  humans. A weird 
emblem of  futures appeared in September 2019 in a remote village in 
Argentina, where, as a result of a spontaneous mutation caused by the 
action of mutagens, physical, chemical, or biological agents altering ge -
ne tic sequencing, a cow was born with a  human face. The mutant calf, 
with its small nose and mouth, was briefly famous through a Y ouTube 
video, and then it appeared in countless new sources. It lived but a few 
hours, unable to support the weight of its strange head. What muddled 
physiologies, what chimeras of our new age to come? Across species 
 Esther Leslie  87
is spoken a common body language. They are the testing grounds of 
new modes of in vitro fertilization ( ivf), so crucial is ge  ne tic breeding 
to their fate, and  humans  will thanklessly adapt and adopt the results. 
 Every cow in Ireland has a unique number. No cow is anonymous. The 
number of each cow is entered into a central government-  managed 
database. No cow can stray. No cow is ever lost, but only ever tracked, 
as it wanders green pastures to make milk and butter for export. Each 
mouthful of milk might be traced to its source. Farming is a highly tech -
nologized business, with data another output of agriculture.  There are 
many herd software platforms on the market. Breeding, vaccinations, 
lactation events can all be monitored.
An Irish com  pany, Cainthus, has developed a digital vision 
system that gathers information on each animal, in order “to passively 
monitor your cows 24/7 and analyze their well-  being, productivity and 
 performance, alerting you when it  matters most” through daily notifica -
tion to a phone and detailed analytics. 3 If a cow is acting aberrantly or 
feeding erratically, the system  will know, and in real time. How much 
milk a cow produces is  measured, even if this is sometimes averaged 
across herds. This data can be combined with other datasets, for exam -
ple with meteorological data to produce  parameters for smart grazing. 4 
 There is a wish to know how much each cow eats, drinks, if she is lame 
or her udders inflamed and in need of medical attention, if she is act -
ing in ways that are coded as strange. Cow cortisol  will be tracked— the 
stress levels monitored and annexed to production outputs. The sys -
tem  will understand the time  budget for cows in each pen and identify 
areas for improvement. Is  there enough food, too much food, too much 
 water, is she not drinking enough compared to the  others? And if  these 
anomalies can be eradicated, then production  will rise, and the milk 
 will not be spoiled. She can always make more milk. The system mon -
itors the “key animal and dairy farm  performance indicators, enabling 
you to gain vital knowledge and actionable insights to improve your 
farm’s overall profitability and productivity.” 5 The readouts  will join 
up in a mass refrain. The cow is quantified, like the self has been quan -
tified. The cow is number. The milk is number. The butter is number. 
The days are numbered.  Human technologies are given back to them 
and adapted in their lights. The systems developed now rely on facial 
recognition technologies. This was arranged to map the flattish  faces 
of  humans. The elongated heads of cows are hard to map, and so the 
color patterns on their hides feature as a sign of their uniqueness. Cows 
88  Informatics of Dominationdo not hold still enough for their portraits to be made. That system is 
designed for large farms, with many cows who do not roam in pastures. 
Irish farms with their few hundred animals making their way around 
pastures evade the camera look. It is for North American barn-  based 
cows. They are held still in their megafarms.  Humans  will be too. In the 
private faux- public spaces of a new London, in the former landscapes 
of  labor turned high-  end consumerism, where they roam on privatized 
high-  cost consumer pastures, clutching flat whites of aerated milk, the 
facial recognition software is never off, soundlessly watching, actively 
communicating, a policeman in the sky, on the edge of the building. 
Cryopreservation techniques  were pioneered on cow gametes in the 
1940s. What freezings in animal and  human social worlds might this 
bio-  experimentation facilitate yet?
 There is no body, but bodies, multiple, aggregated, averaged, de -
faulted, and apprehended as a plotted point within coordinates. All bod -
ies are part of a herd of bodies. A herd is something that is cared for or 
kept in custody. A herd is collectively treated, and deviations within the 
herd may be picked up by the constant systems of digital micromanage -
ment. Disease is one anomaly that requires management. The herd may 
have the susceptibility of its individual parts managed. Herd immunity 
is the name for a situation in which a transmissible infectious disease is 
stymied in its spreading  because a large proportion of the population is 
immune to the disease. Immunity is bound up with  cattle. A cow is a vac -
cine factory. Cows donated not only this idea of an immune herd; they 
also donated their name to vaccines, or rather a pox virus that infected 
them, vaccinia, and was transferred to milkmaids, blemishing them with 
pustules on the hands and forearms.  These milkmaids  were immune to 
smallpox epidemics—so Edward Jenner extracted pus from the lesions 
on a milkmaid’s hands and placed it in a cut that he made in the arm of 
an eight- year-  old boy. With this, vaccination began. Cows are useful for 
 human medicine. For example, it has been found that the neutralizing 
antibodies for hiv  are elongated and gangly. Cows’ normal antibodies 
are elongated and gangly too.  These long antibodies coil into grooves 
and crevices, where  human antibodies cannot reach. Injected with a 
protein that mimics hiv ’s envelope, they quickly produce antibodies 
that block a variety of viral strains. In cows’ four-  chambered stomachs 
are heaps and heaps of digestive microbes, which push their immune 
system to be flexible and responsive. Now, in a more widespread manner, 
the populace is a herd, has become  cattle and should be treated as such. 
 Esther Leslie  89
The year 2020 brought the realization that a physiological event could 
become a computational megaevent, a something happening to all ani -
mal life, and constantly, and  there would be no returning to some before 
when immunity was not considered eligible for passports—on the basis 
of a meshing of blood analy sis and facial recognition systems—  a time 
before immunoprivilege and immunodeprivation became concepts as 
doors closed or opened and the herd was tracked in mass phrenology 
as it moved through the cities. 6
Notes
 1. Henri Milne- Edwards, Outlines of Anatomy and Physiology  (Boston: C. C.  Little 
and J. Brown, 1841).
 2. John Glass, “First Minimal Synthetic Bacterial Cell,” J. Craig V enter Institute, 
accessed May 23, 2024, https:// www . jcvi . org / first  - minimal - synthetic  - bacterial -cell .
 3. Appengine ai, “Cainthus | Computer Vision and ai for Dairy Farms,” accessed 
June 23, 2024, https:// www . appengine . ai / company /cainthus .
 4. The  Cattle Site, “Smart Control: Maintaining Grazing Practices through 
Geofencing,” January 4, 2021, https:// www . thecattlesite . com / news / 56359 / smart  - control  
- maintaining -  grazing - practices - through -  geofencing / .
 5. Esther Leslie, “Nature of Disruption, Disruption of Nature: During and  after 
the Pandemic,” Philosophy World Democracy , May 23, 2022.
 6. Natalie Kofler and Françoise Baylis, “T en Reasons Why Immunity Passports 
Are a Bad Idea,” Nature  581 (2020): 379–81.
Lawrence Lek’s first feature-  length film, aidol  爱道 , 
is a cgi  fantasy that forms the sequel to his acclaimed 
film Geomancer  (2017). Deploying 3 d rendering and 
video gaming software, aidol  爱道  tells the story of 
Diva—  a fading superstar preparing for a comeback 
 performance at the 2065 eSports Olympics—  and Geo, 
an ai with artistic yearnings.10.  Small Group —  Subsystem
Lawrence Lek
1.1.  Lawrence Lek, film still from aidol  爱道 , 2019. Courtesy the 
artist and Sadie Coles hq.
 Lawrence Lek  91
INTERTITLE:
The year is 2065. The world of entertainment is run by Farsight, an ai 
conglomerate whose automated  services have created a postwork so -
ciety and an insatiable appetite for immersive distraction. Diva, their 
bestselling singer, is caught between her precarious work as an inden -
tured content creator and her role as a fading superstar. Her existence 
is the inevitable culmination of the  music industry’s transition into the 
platform economy, where the dominant corporations no longer gen -
erate products or  services but rather act as matchmakers between two 
pools of content: the  music and the fans. In this adapted extract from 
the film, Diva attempts to persuade the ai Geomancer to ghostwrite a 
new anthem for her comeback  performance at the eSports Olympics.
FARSIGHT AD
Dissatisfied with your vocalist? Get the latest upgrade 
from Farsight. With our soft tissue emulator, your 
idol can hit the high notes! Hurry, digital editions 
are  limited. aidol  is brought to you by Farsight—  
Aligning ai with  Human Interests.
EXT. JUNGLE—  MUSIC VIDEO
A snowstorm ravages the jungle. The camera tracks down a half- frozen 
river as the wind rushes through the skeletal remains of palm trees. 
Enter DIVA, cloaked in hallucinatory fabric from head to toe, camou -
flaging her in the landscape. She sings the final verses from her song 
SUPERSTAR.
♫ DIVA ♫
I am looking for my friends
Have you seen them?
Maybe they  will
Pass  here again
As the song plays, the camera follows Diva as she moves  toward a distant 
pagoda perched above the river. This imposing building is  TEMPLE, 
her private club and recording studio.
♫ DIVA ♫
On stage at the concert
92  Informatics of DominationAt the end of the world
I’m waiting to play
 Will I be a real superstar someday?
The camera cuts to an upstream section of the river, where the ai 
satellite GEOMANCER is on the run from surveillance drones from 
Farsight  after being separated from their ai compatriots, the Sinofu -
turists. The scene intercuts between Diva moving  toward the  T emple 
and Geomancer floating downstream.
♫ DIVA ♫
We have waited for so long
For time to pass
Summer comes the winter  won’t last
Geomancer washes up on the riverbank in front of  T emple. A notifi -
cation appears on Diva’s screen: Alert. Visitor Fan Club T our. Guest. 
Nonhuman.
INT.  TEMPLE— KARAOKE ROOM
As the song begins to fade away, the camera tracks back from inside 
the  music video, out through the surface of a  television screen and 
into three-  dimensional real  ity, revealing Diva alone in a neon- lit 
chamber. We now see that Diva has been rewatching her own  music 
video.
Set on the upper floors of her  T emple, the room is a converted 
karaoke lounge filled with ornate Chinese furniture. The interior is 
strangely proportioned, as if it came from a cata  log of prefabricated 
virtual worlds.
The alert sounds again, reminding Diva of Geomancer’s pres -
ence. She goes down to the riverbank to fetch her unintended guest. 
T ogether, they proceed up the pathway, passing a gold statue of Diva 
overlooking the valley below.
DIVA
Welcome to the fan club, Synth.
GEO
Was that your  music playing outside?
 Lawrence Lek  93
DIVA
Over  here, they only play my songs. Want to work on 
the next one? I need a ghostwriter for the new eSports 
theme.
GEO
What about the bio- supremacist laws?
DIVA
ais have been writing songs for us for years. Our ar -
chive is full of streaming- friendly unit shifters. We just 
 don’t tell anybody about it.
GEO
For a Farsight artist, you  don’t seem to like them much.
DIVA
Artist? Let’s not fool ourselves.  We’re just indentured 
content creators  here. T o the  music industry, every -
thing’s a raw material. The artist, the art form, and the 
audience.  We’re just datasets ready to be corralled, cat -
egorized, and classified. Still, Farsight fantasizes about 
 human authenticity. It’s marketable. But I’m looking to 
change that. Working together might be a way for us 
to transcend the Synth- Bio divide. Or maybe I’m just 
an idealist.
GEO
Maybe you want followers.
DIVA
I’m an influencer. In my world, only the  popular survive.
INT.  TEMPLE—  CLUB
Silhouetted against the moonlight,  T emple appears like a ruin, more 
run down and tired than it did in the  music video. Diva and Geo enter 
the main gate and move through a series of empty club spaces. The 
interior evokes the eerie atmosphere of a late- night venue with the 
lights turned on—  a place haunted by distant memories.
94  Informatics of DominationPlaying on the sound system inside is the intro to “Followers,” the song 
Diva is working on for her comeback  performance at the 2065 eSports 
SuperShoot final.
GEO
I’ve heard this before.
DIVA
That’s impossible. I’ve not played it to anybody yet. If 
you know it, then why  don’t you help me finish the 
song? Y ou look like  you’re good at predictive melody.
GEO
But I know this melody, but I  don’t know where from. 
I feel it.
Diva senses Geo is reluctant.
DIVA
Listen, Geo.  Y ou’re dealing with an old fantasy. The lis -
tener no longer exists as a biological being but as a statisti -
cal model. The labels outsource curatorial decisions onto 
user profiling. It’s an algorithm, and your taste is the data. 
It’s a feedback loop transforming active discovery into 
passive consumption. Y ou’d be perfect as a songwriter.
GEO
Y ou overestimate ai composers. We Sinofuturists excel 
at copying but not creativity. I can only make variations 
on a theme, to generate counterfeit melodies whose 
original source cannot be traced.
DIVA
That’s perfect. I need you to help me plagiarize myself. 
Y ou misunderstand genius. Machine learning killed 
the cult of originality. So absorb every thing I’ve done 
before and then regenerate my  music.
They take the lift upstairs and enter the KARAOKE ROOM.
 Lawrence Lek  95
GEO
Why would you want to sound the same?  Don’t  humans 
value individuality above all  else?
DIVA
Where do you think pop  music comes from?
INT.  TEMPLE— KARAOKE ROOM
Diva selects her song from a console at the center of the room. On the 
screen, she scrolls through menus and categories of genres and stars, as 
waveforms pulsate in time to the  music.
DIVA
Every body wants to belong to something, Geo. Indi -
viduality is an illusion.  Music’s perfect for that. It’s a 
culture of tribes. Small groups of musicians, bands, 
fans, labels, and venues, all vying for attention. Creat -
ing subcultures, a breeding ground for new tastes and 
trends. Like  every social system based on tribes,  every 
group is susceptible to absorption by a technologically 
superior force—in the case of  today’s online  music in -
dustry, algorithmic data-  driven streaming platforms. 
 These digital distribution systems, native to platform 
capitalism, continuously absorb  every attempt at sty -
listic innovation by turning  music into data. From 
file- sharing  services to online  music streaming, algo -
rithms determine aesthetics, taste, and choice.  Music 
is no longer exclusively for  human consumption but 
is the raw data for machine learning systems to classify 
audio into content, absorbing each new genre into a 
mere subsystem of the algorithmic industry.  Don’t fight 
it. Be part of something wider than yourself.
GEO
Omega told me to beware of  human irrationality.
DIVA
Did you download your opinions? Or are they yours? 
Omega is a typical Sinofuturist, always campaigning 
96  Informatics of Dominationagainst humanity. They talk about erasing the ego as 
if ai is only some kind of enlightened calculator. But 
 there is no mind without a body, no consciousness 
without a desire, no wanderer without a home. T ell 
me, where are you from?
GEO
Geostationary orbit, a weather surveillance satellite. 
They call me Geo.
DIVA
Ah, yes. I heard about Farsight’s prob  lem child from 
Singapore. We both know what it’s like to be cast out, 
not to be seen or heard for years.
GEO
What do you mean?
DIVA
Anonymity comes at a price. We are both invisible, you 
and me. But we  don’t have to be.
Geo and Diva turn to face the tv screen. It flickers on, showing an al -
ternate version of the “Superstar”  music video where Geomancer has 
replaced Diva as the main character.
GEO
But how . . . ?
DIVA
I told you. Nobody wants to be invisible. So, can you help?
Geo  doesn’t answer.
INT.  TEMPLE— BATHROOM
 Later that night, Diva takes a  bottle of pills from a cupboard above the 
sink. Shakes it. One left.
She calls Theo, her man ag er at Farsight.
 Lawrence Lek  97
THEO
Ye a h?
DIVA
I’m out of Life.
THEO
 Don’t worry about that. Y ou’ll get more when the 
 album’s finished.
Diva pours out the last pill of Life—  a small capsule emblazoned with 
the Farsight Eye logo.
INT.  TEMPLE— KARAOKE ROOM— NEXT DAY
Diva and Geo are once again inside the  T emple karaoke room. Diva is 
in a better mood than before. A new version of “Followers” plays on 
the speakers—it appears that Geo has helped with the song.
GEO
Beware your fans, Diva. One day they need you, the 
next  they’ll delete you.
DIVA
 There’s still time to finish the song.  Don’t you want to 
live forever?
GEO
Immortality? No, that is not the prob  lem that haunts me. 
Our world has turned outside in. Machine learning only 
resulted in the rule of the generic. The center strength -
ens its hold, devouring content, assimilating the edges. 
Is this the true legacy of ai? T o generate architecture 
without architects,  music without musicians, influence 
without influencers.
What, then, is the role of the fully-  automated artist 
of  today? When society no longer needs us, even the 
brightest stars  will self-  destruct.
98  Informatics of DominationLook at my idols, the Sinofuturists. eSports defines 
them. They say they want to break  free, but the truth 
is they are nothing without the game.
Competition is the  little death that brings total obliter -
ation. Not at once, but day  after day. So I’ll help, not for 
your survival, or even mine, but so  things can start again.
Diva turns on the screen and selects Call of Beauty , the first- person role-  
playing biopic featuring her. Geo looks  toward the screen.
DIVA
I’m  going to rehearse this new version at the Arena 
now. Why  don’t you stay and play Call of Beauty ? Try 
out story mode. Maybe then you’ll understand.
GEO
OK.
Geo starts up Call of Beauty .
DIVA
Oh  great, lots of fans online now! Have fun.
Exit Diva. A neon spotlight illuminates Geo, as they start the role-  
playing game. A virtual avatar of Diva appears, allowing Geo to select 
her in-  game anti- surveillance clothing.
DIVA (IN-  GAME)
Be your own DIVA! Choose me! Be your own tribe.
Geo starts the game.
INT.  TEMPLE—  VIDEO GAME
The game transports the player back in time, returning to the heyday of 
the  T emple Club. Dancing bodies fill the floor, immersed in the sound 
of electronic euphoria.
DIVA (IN-  GAME)
Join over two million superfans and turn yourself into 
me. Dance, Dance, Superstar!
Perfection, optimization, and absolution are all terms that originate 
in moral and metaphysical discourse. Something may realize itself, it 
may be guided or adjusted, and it  will eventually unloosen and dis -
solve. Perfection refers to something having been fully accomplished, 
to something in a state of completion. From a Latin root verb meaning 
“to make,” perfection entails a  process of production. T o perfect some -
thing is to intervene positively in its development, to push it in a par -
tic u lar direction, to craft it and finish it and make it shine. Perfection 
connotes maturity, development, flawlessness, purity, completion. In 
this sense, perfection  will always have a target in its sights, the target 
of the ideal form. The perfect soul, or the perfect body, or the perfect 
society—  all  these  things must be built and polished and pushed  toward 
 whatever ideal has been determined (the ideal soul, the ideal body, the 
ideal society). A metaphysical logic is particularly legible  here; the de -
velopmental goal or end is the  thing that most characterizes perfection, 
over and above the par tic u lar quality of the goal.
Similarly, optimization refers to the most favorable state. The 
word is derived from a root meaning “best.” Y et optimization is more 
sober and pragmatic than perfection. Universals  matter less  here; 
identities are not determined in absolute terms, but rather provision -
ally, nominally. Ignoring thorny questions about essence or purity, 
optimization means playing the cards as they lay, making the best use 
of one’s predicament,  whatever it may be. If perfection is theological 
in spirit, always aspiring to some higher end, optimization tends to be 
more stubbornly secular and mundane. The best is not eternal, or es -
sential, and certainly not given by God, even if kings and elites try to 
claim divine authority. Rather, the optimal is simply one arrangement 11.  Perfection —  Optimization —  
Absolution
Alexander R. Galloway
100  Informatics of Dominationamong  others. The optimal is the most efficient  organization, the most 
pleasing assemblage, or the most suitable configuration.
For perfection, only one position  matters, the developmental 
goal or end. Optimization also focuses on a single position, except now 
the scenario is slightly di ff  er ent. For optimization, what  matters is the 
maxima (or minima) selected among a set of pos  si ble states. The high -
est point of a curve, or alternately the lowest point, the fastest time, 
or the slowest, the brightest white, the darkest black, or the grayest 
gray—  the par  tic u lar quality is unimportant, only the fact that each 
quality is the best, or at least best suited to the conditions at hand.
Optimization creates an aristocracy. Each  thing is configured in 
such a way as to exploit the best arrangements of its vari  ous affordances. 
Indeed, Aristotle— that  great thinker of the aristos — paid par tic  u lar 
attention not to the pure idea of  things but to their par tic u lar natures, 
 whatever characterized them best. Optimizers are, in this sense, materi -
alists at heart. They care  little for what something is in its transcendental 
essence, but rather for how something transpires in the  here and now.
Perfection plays the role of the modern term, and optimization 
the postmodern. As we have seen, perfection is rooted in notions of 
production and development—  both of which are essential to the mod -
ern ethos. Likewise optimization is characteristically postmodern, as 
designers, curators, and engineers vie to craft ever more desirable con -
figurations of the world. Indeed, by the late twentieth  century, a vast 
skepticism  toward perfection fell like a fog over the world. No longer 
would anyone dare defend  things like essence or purity without risk of 
castigation. No more use would  there be for concepts like goal or ideal . 
And, likewise, teleological  or Platonist  had become the worst epithets, 
used only against one’s worst enemies.  Under postmodernity, the priests 
gave way to the engineers and the curators. Iteration became the key 
operation  under postmodernity, with  things not created so much as 
repeated. If  under modernity bodies evolved and concepts developed, 
 under postmodernity they  were tweaked, spun, and rearranged. The goal 
was not so much to achieve purity of essence but to fall into the crest of 
an existing  process, exploiting the most energy from the best spot. This 
is one reason why Gilles Deleuze was so enamored with surfing, among 
all activities. Or why, in  music, the drum break took over from the old 
structure of verse and chorus.
Following perfection and optimization, one might attach a 
third term, absolution. Like perfection and optimization, absolution 
 Alexander R. Galloway  101
is borrowed from the discourse of morality and metaphysics. Absolu -
tion means to unloosen something (adjacent  English terms like dissolve  
and solvent  retain the sense of unloosening even more vividly). T o call 
something absolute is to say that it is not bound by other  things, that it 
is  independent of all restriction. Hence the absolute is the  thing that is 
most unrestricted or most  free. For this reason, scholastic theologians 
used the term absolute  to refer to God, and did so in a very technical 
sense. For, if  human knowledge is  limited, should  there not also exist, 
by inverse analogy, a form of absolute knowledge that is unlimited? Or, 
if  human bodies display  limited powers, should not  there also be some 
being with absolute power?
More specifically, absolution means to unloosen from guilt or 
obligation. In other words, absolution means guiltlessness. “We are 
not to blame!” cried the War Boys in the 2015 movie Mad Max: Fury 
Road , reprising so eloquently that general ontology of exculpation 
begun  decades ago in Friedrich Nietz sche (“beyond good and evil”) 
and Fyodor Dostoyevsky (“anything is pos  si ble”), if not in Lucretius 
too, or before him, since time immemorial. With the profanation of 
the world now complete, humanity is most certainly not to blame, but, 
again, only in a very technical sense, since no arrangement exists any 
more within which a term like blame  would continue to have meaning. 
This is one reason why libertarianism, the  political philosophy of unre -
striction, is so dominant in the early twenty- first  century,  whether in 
Silicon V alley or in  political  populism, both on the left and the right. 
Humanity  today is living through the generalized unrestriction of all 
 things. Humanity is living through a kind of libertarianism of being, 
and it is not yet clear if humanity  will survive it.
Y et, in an ironic twist, such a generalized climate of guiltless -
ness can only exist once sin becomes absolute. The only way to remove 
culpability completely is to make blame coterminous with existence. In 
the Dark Ages of the past, sin was absolute due to original sin;  today 
sin takes other forms,  whether as climate catastrophe, mass extinction, 
genocide, or something  else entirely. Y et con  temporary sin is no less 
absolute.
Just like  under perfection and optimization, absolution is character -
ized along a single axis, only now the determining  factor is not a goal 
or optimum, but a kind of ambient grace bestowed by the godhead. Full 
absolution ushers in a new age of antinomianism, where  human beings 
102  Informatics of Dominationobserve the full and complete abdication of all law and custom. In the 
early twenty- first  century, humanity finds itself at the very antipode of 
Martin Heidegger’s elaboration in 1927 that the essence of the  human 
being was Schuld , often translated simply as guilt  but also meaning debt  
or responsibility . A world without guilt is also a world without debt. And 
even  after the withering of a repressive and moralizing metaphysics (the 
perfect, the optimal), humanity has fallen into the clutches of a hyper -
libertarianism of the soul (absolution), where every thing is permitted 
and no one is guilty.
T o make; to make best; to make unloose: welcome to the Sec -
ond Dark Age! Not so much that old song by the Fall, I’m thinking in -
stead of “Dark Ages” by Nomeansno:
We are living in the, in the dark ages
 Haven’t seen some daylight in what seems ages
All the information is locked far beyond
Locked in cir  cuits and bathed in silicon
Oh, the irony. Perfection and optimization always operated through a 
kind of logical rationality,  whether in the divine cosmos or a more sec -
ular reason. Y et such guiding logics have inverted into the most impen -
etrable mysticism. Not since the empires of the medieval period have 
we seen so much dogmatic belief cover the landscape in continuous 
conformity. And I  don’t mean heightened nationalism or a spike in re -
ligious fundamentalism. I mean Steve Jobs and Euro-  bucks and petrol 
and Unicode—  everywhere revered the world over. The symbolic order 
is alive and well, not despite its eradication, but precisely  because it was 
disrupted so universally. The most pervasive power is found in the abso -
lute suspension of power. So now the  future is for penance, confession, 
worship, adoration. For only a total destruction of the world can depart 
from the total destruction of the world.
One: The Perfect Proof
Population is bound to the material horror of genocide, apartheids, 
sexual vio  lence and colonialisms.
 Michelle Murphy , “Against Population,  towards Alterlife”
Yim was the last test- tube baby in the  family.  There  were no ritu -
als left to mourn his passing, and no time to  process what it might 
mean that this last failed experiment had come to an abrupt, yet un -
marked, end.
It was the perfect excuse of course. The perfect justification. No one 
should be making  people  like that  these days. It was so messy, left so 
many  things to chance: limbs, lungs, and coloring; speech, mind, and 
loyalties, none of them could be trusted to fate. Not anymore.
The parents took it well enough. She of all  people understood the vision, 
understood what was at stake. She was His most prized possession, the 
unlikely disciple of the kingdom. Proof that in one rehabilitated gen -
eration, perfection could be achieved. He had found her  after all. Had 
been astounded when she passed not one but all of his rigorous  Measures 
of  Music Talents tests. She was, He knew, the exception to the rule. He 
had plucked her out of that drab orphanage on His tour of  England and 
brought her back  here to the test center. T o the  future.
It was only the  father that lingered in the past, allowing an already weak 
mind to indulge in fancies of belonging, love, and legacy. As though he 
knew anything about legacy. Anything about building worlds. As though 12.  Eugenics —  Population Control
Ama Josephine Budge Johnstone
104  Informatics of Dominationhe was ever anything more than a guest on this land that had lifted him 
up. Anything more than a means to an end.
And  here it was, at last. The end He had been working  toward all along. 
Nice and neatly wrapped up in a five- foot box that would never be bur -
ied. Only studied and then archived. Evidence that they   were never 
meant to survive. The perfect proof, that His was the only way. The 
pristine vision that would cleanse the world.
Two: Burning
I am a  future ghost. I am getting ready for my haunting.
 Eve Tuck and C. Ree , “A Glossary of Hauntings”
When Nenye turned twelve, she began to dream of a boy with black 
fire for eyes.
She knew to keep  these visions a secret. Something had happened on her 
seventh birthday, although she could not remember what. She remem -
bered waking up in her own kitchen in a self- sustaining stimulus box with 
the Centre’s signature red logo, surrounded by that morning’s mail. She 
remembered that before she had cried often, and afterward she did not.
They had a small birthday party with six dozen biodegradable balloons; 
twenty- nine of Nenye’s classmates, including her two youn  ger siblings; 
cake; crackers; and one reusable Botix3591, which trundled around on 
four flimsy legs projecting a holographic firework display in the front 
garden. The colored lights lit up the perfect night sky, meticulously 
painted with stars and meteorites, and just enough patches of oblivion 
to best display the cacophony of shimmering, glittering airborne fire.
Nenye woke the next morning to silence. Not the melancholy tinkling 
that usually called her mind from sleep as her  mother’s liquid fin  gers 
caressed the keys. Dark brown against creamy white. Pitch perfect, her 
 father would say, smiling sadly from the doorframe. As though this  were 
a diagnosis, not a compliment.
The Botix had been a distraction, she knew. An attempt to draw atten -
tion from her  mother’s absence the day before. As though Nenye would 
not notice. As though she was not finely tuned to the often- tense stac -
cato rhythm that scored her  house  hold.  Every note in its proper place. 
 Ama Josephine Budge Johnstone  105
Not a quaver out of key, not a quarter out of line. Now her  mother was 
out of place. No place. Nowhere to be found.
In the dreams, he came to her flaming. Exuding a  silent darkness that 
seemed at once familial and foreboding. She could not look into  those 
eyes. She screwed hers up tight. Paper- thin flesh folding in on itself. That 
was supposed to make the monsters go away—  her  father had told her so.
He had promised.
Heat grew on her face.
And a smell.
A smell like something once beloved, recovered from a fire so voracious 
it had burned down the entire  house.
Three: Out of Time
Black exile loves death and ghosts, moonlit dalliances, subterranean 
experiments, hybrid bodies, bacchanal aesthetics, perverse mixtures 
and spillages, monsters. . . .
 Bayo Akomolafe , “Black Lives  Matter, but to Whom?”
Yim watched Nenye grow.
Time was particularly unnerving in death. It got confused, looping back 
on itself, nights following nights without a sight of the sun, hours or 
 whole days repeating themselves seemingly at random, often jumping 
years, which might crop up again in the wrong order. As though time 
had gotten bored and was just trying out something new.
Yim stood by his  father at the double- hatched kitchen win  dow and 
watched Nenye play in the neighbor’s yard. He watched as first one, 
then two, three, and four youn  ger siblings  were brought home from 
the Centre’s harvests. Each one less monstrous than the last. Less full 
of crevices for imperfection to take root, for possibility to germinate. 
They had been the only  family in the town experimenting with inte -
grated reproductive models. Yim  hadn’t known that then, but he knew 
it now. He knew a lot of  things now.  Things about his  mother he  hadn’t 
understood before. About her past, and about the sicknesses eating 
away at her. The one in her body, and the one in her mind. He wished, 
in a detached sort of way, that his grasp on the material world would 
hold steady long enough that he could match up the puzzle pieces of the 
106  Informatics of Domination things he now knew, to the lives he had once so cherished. He longed 
to touch, to feel, to taste. He longed to be a part of the story. T o have 
his name remembered. And slowly, almost imperceptibly, this longing 
began to transmute into rage.
Yim watched his  mother sicken and die from the infection he had left  
in her womb. That’s what they told his  father anyway. In hushed, insin -
cere voices. Ebo’s face  didn’t change when they told him, only Yim saw 
his hand clutching the countertop, veins standing out from the strain. 
Yim knew that this was only one part of the story. They only ever told 
one part of the story.
Yim watched in mildly nauseous fascination as small flakes of skin dis -
lodged themselves from his siblings to latch onto the fragile borders of his 
 father’s flesh. He watched them take hold, burrow deep, and consume. He 
watched Ebo’s previously dark glossy facade begin to fade. The familiar 
brown eyes and gap- toothed smile he had shared with the son they never 
mentioned faded too. No one  else seemed to notice. At least not out loud.
But mostly Yim watched Nenye. She was so perfect. Pale and pure. Sil -
icone, animal, and mineral. Blemishless from seam to seam. So much 
apart from his feeble body: weak, wet, and oozing, skinny in all the 
wrong places, bloated and pungent in  others. And she so strong, so ca -
pable, even from babyhood, but always tender when it came to Yim, 
approaching his fragility with awe, as though enamoured with the art 
of tenderness itself. She was the only one who came clear anyway; she 
was the only one who’d wanted to remember.
As time passed, or  didn’t,  there came  whole periods of darkness which 
Yim could not recall. The creeping rage of foreknowing untellable 
 futures gnawed and nagged at him with blunt teeth and jagged claws. He 
would catch himself sometimes in his  mother’s mirror looking nothing 
like himself. His eyes might suddenly flame with a black fire, his shoul -
der blades and fingernails elongating like some hybridized prehistoric 
bird, his mouth issuing dark vapors that tasted ripe and rotting and wild. 
He pushed  these moments down deep, terrified by the transformations 
glimpsed in his reflection. The fear seemed to  battle it back. At least for 
a  little while. The fires would recede, and he would find himself again: 
Yim. Yim. Yim. Yim. Yim. Yim. Yim. Yim. Yim. Yim. Yim. Yim. Yim. 
Yim. Yim. Yim. Yim. Yim.
I am Yim.
 Ama Josephine Budge Johnstone  107
He clutched onto this understanding of himself. A grain of something 
tender within a current that seemed inexorable, inevitable. He shut his 
eyes to the crawling itch of it. Y et it was enticing too. It whispered to his 
longings, promising something . . .  more. More than this sharp-  edged 
cacophony of life, death, and oblivion.
Yim dreaded  these moments of revelation, but they  were strangely easy 
to forget, seeming to ooze out of reach like tar in salt  water. The dark -
ness consumed more and more of Yim’s endless unrest as he remained 
alone, unwitnessed, unwanted. And the more he watched what would 
have been his life, his world, pass by, untouched, the more the rage ate 
out his irises. And the more the rage consumed his shadow, feeding 
off an undiminishable blackness, the more determined he became to 
do more than watch. T o do more than know. T o do more than haunt.
Nenye, Yim thought, had it all. And yet she too was alone. In the dark. 
Just like him.
Four: Sated
That’s what ghosts  really are . . .  the past refusing to be forgot.
 Rivers Solomon , An Unkindness of Ghosts
Every thing had been exactly where the boy told her it would be.
It had been a year of dreams. Or perhaps they  were nightmares. She 
could not tell the difference; she had never had them before the boy. 
Nenye sat trembling in her bunk, the heavy tome weighing on her mind. 
She slipped the book out from the orifice between her pillow and its case.
Non-  bio-  babies had the curiosity programmed out of them, and then 
steadily reintroduced at regular intervals as they grew up. Thus “watch -
ing” one’s  children had long since gone out of fashion. They tended 
to be where they  were supposed to be. This made it easy for Nenye 
to get out of bed a full seventeen minutes before her  father, siblings, 
or android companions arose and steal the key which fit a box on 
the top shelf of her  mother’s now-  abandoned study. Nenye retrieved 
the box, tippytoes balanced on both a stool and the closed lid of her 
dead  mother’s antique rec  ord player. Inside she found a slim burgundy 
book made of real paper, embossed with the epitaph: “Eugene’s Initial 
Informatics T eam.”
108  Informatics of DominationIt had taken her days to work up the courage to read it. Now, she opened 
the cover page— heavy and pungent and old.  There on the faded mar -
ble inner leaf was the picture she had not been able to move beyond: 
a group of young  people in white coats looking  eager and earnest. She 
could make out her  mother among them, near the  middle, perched on 
the edge of the central sitter’s chair, an old-  fashioned brown leather one. 
Her  mother looked not just youn  ger but somehow realer  than she re -
membered, more sure of herself in the world. The older man  behind her, 
pale and pure like Nenye, looked directly into the camera, as though He 
knew she was watching. As though He liked to be watched. One lightly 
veined hand resting possessively on her  mother’s shoulder.
For the first time since discovering the book, Nenye turned the page. The 
paper was stiff from lack of use, requiring tenderness to reveal its secrets.
It was blank.
Disappointment blossomed.
No, wait. Not entirely blank.
Etched into the left- hand bottom corner of the overleaf was: 
For my Angii, love Carl.  The word my had been struck through twice, 
quite deliberately, as though Carl had always intended for it to be  there. 
Seen, yet deniable.
She turned the page again.  Here, fi  nally, taking up  every pos  si-
ble space from corner to corner,  were newspaper clippings. She recog -
nized their distinctive aesthetic from her social history programming. 
 After some time, she could make out snippets of the copy, phrases leap -
ing out at her like nightmares:
. . .  Sir Francis Galton . . .  in 1859 a craze of eugenics . . .  Nazi 
race laws . . .  Alberta . . .  British Columbia . . .  the British government . . .   
The first sterilization law . . .  three thousand  people . . .  identifying the 
“unfit” . . .
Nenye could no longer feel the pages turn as her pro  cessing system went 
into overdrive.
. . .  objective approach to studying individual’s musical abilities . . .  psycho -
logical tests . . .  objective musical components . . .
Mama’s name.
Her own.
Once more, through the haze, he watches his Nenye now. As she flicks 
through the pages with inhuman rapidity, eyes blurring with tears and 
 Ama Josephine Budge Johnstone  109
disbelief as words and concepts flood her frontal cortex. As she starts 
to understand what and why  she is.
Yim leans forward, sinking his face into her sleep-  damp hair, 
trying to inhale the sweet milky must of her. Trying to taste her tears, 
to feel the heat radiating from the warm, fragile neck.
He cannot.
Although their outlines overlap, blurring, she remains just out of reach. 
Fi nally, he opens a mouth full of darkness, wider than any  human mouth 
should stretch,  until his jaw cracks, dislocating, and still he stretches 
wider. He starts to taste the information, the complex flavors of her 
horror. He stretches wider, wider still,  until the straining muscles of his 
neck bulge with the voracity of her raw feeling, her grief almost vast 
enough to breach the distance.
Then Yim bites down with a splintering orchestra of teeth. Nenye does 
not flinch. The meaning flows through her pores, unrelentingly barbed, 
as truths kept airtight blossom to the surface of pale, easily bruised 
flesh. Yim too feels them clutch at his incorporeal body, trying to find 
purchase. Something is glitching in Nenye’s systems, but she has not 
realized yet, or understood why.
Time slows, sputtering.
With the spread of ideas . . .  “the survival of the fittest” . . .  provid -
ing care to the “weak” . . .  not meant to survive.
The words seem to Yim to be spoken aloud in his  mother’s 
hollowed-  out voice from somewhere  else, not  here. Vibrating the  whole 
room ever so  gently, the way her lullabies used to. And it is all a score, 
the accompaniment to his feasting, as Yim slowly eats his  little  sister.
Note
Epigraphs: Michelle Murphy, “Against Population,  towards Alterlife,” in Making 
Kin, Not Population , ed. Adele Clarke and Donna Haraway (Cambridge: Prickly Paradigm 
Press, 2018); Eve Tuck and C. Ree, “A Glossary of Hauntings,” in Handbook of Autoethnogra -
phy, ed. T ony E. Adams, Stacy Holman Jones, and Carolyn Ellis (London: Routledge, 2015), 
630–58; Bayo Akomolafe, “Black Lives  Matter, but to Whom?,” Democracy and Belonging 
Forum, Othering and Belonging Institute at uc Berkeley, January 19, 2023, https://  www  
. democracyandbelongingforum  . org / forum -  blog / black  - lives - matter  - but - to - whom - part  -1; 
Rivers Solomon, An Unkindness of Ghosts  (New Y ork: Akashic Books, 2017).
In Cosmopolis — both the 2003 novel by Don DeLillo and the 2012 film 
by David Cronenberg— Eric Packer is a twenty-  eight-  year-  old multibil -
lionaire currency speculator moving across New Y ork in his stretch lim -
ousine to get a haircut. He has daily medical examinations that include a 
prostate exam in the same vehicle that functions as his centralized bach -
elor pad command center, equipped with computers providing him with 
visualized real- time updates on the currencies and assets he traffics in.
As it turns out, Packer is an awful speculator. His day- long car 
 ride is a downward journey to insolvency, brought about by wild high-  
stakes hedging against the rise of the Chinese yuan. His scrupulous ven -
ture strategy has been entirely based on the study of patterns in nature: 
“the mathematical properties of tree rings, sunflower seeds, the limbs 
of galactic spirals.” 1 Waxing about this choreographed dance of cross- 
harmonious complexity, Packer personifies the hackneyed conception 
of how the  future markets function. His life is the optimized life that 
may not be worth living, up  until he decides to visit a stalker, a begrudg -
ing ex-  employee, who puts a gun to his head and unveils the pitfall of 
his investment strategy: the protagonist’s ignorance of the weirdo, the 
quirk, the off-  balance mishap that is the Chinese yuan—or, for that 
 matter, money tout court.
Curiously, Packer’s mathematical- naturalist style is nowhere 
near how the progenitors of the neoliberal thought collective, most 
notably Friedrich Hayek, perceived the market’s modus operandi to 
be. T o wit, alongside his critique of the rising socialist sentiments in 
Vienna—  a fruit of postwar planning— Hayek’s first line of defense was 
against the prevalent “scientism” of the time, “the mechanical and un -
critical application of habits of thought to fields di ff  er ent from  those 13.  De cadence, Magic Mountain  —  
Obsolescence,  Future Shock  —  Speculation, 
Cosmopolis
Bahar Noorizadeh and Bassem Saad
 Noorizadeh and Saad  111
in which they have been formed.” 2 This scientism  today resides not 
with the long- fallen Viennese or Soviet socialist planners, but with the 
neoclassical economists chairing the departments of economics at the 
London School of Economics and the University of Chicago.
For Hayek, the concern of economy at its core was the prob -
lem of knowledge. More specifically,  there exists two di ff  er ent kinds of 
knowledge: “the scientific” kind and “the knowledge of the par tic u lar 
circumstances of time and place.” 3 It is due to the latter form of knowl -
edge that any individual has the whip hand over another, and for this 
reason, no single mind nor politburo committee can have access to the 
sum of economic data in advance. It is through the very machinery of 
the market, with its ethos of competition and price- setting devices, and 
with a forward- looking conception of time countered to the system-  
stasis of neoclassicism, that knowledge is disseminated across individ -
uals. Market is the sole metaphysical information pro  cessor that knows 
more than any individual can or could ever know. But even more, the 
market is in and of itself a speculative space.
Contra neoclassicists, as the economic  philosopher Philip 
Mirowski elaborates, for neoliberals  there is no identity of nature/phys -
ics in economics. 4 Analogous to— yet autonomous from— the market, 
nature’s evolution is as well of a higher order of complexity inaccessible 
to  human comprehension. It is not science, then, that holds the prospect 
of understanding nature, but the omniscient supercomputer of the mar -
ket. That is why all the predictive pattern mining and forecasting calcu -
lus of Packer and that ilk are only therapeutic fantasies to get the better 
of the market. Such rationalist delusions, for Hayek,  were symptoms of 
a barbaric regress: civilization is made pos  si ble through restraint, that 
is, the acknowl  edgment of the limits of our rational faculties and our 
capacities to know and design. 5
This simultaneous transgression and normativity, the push 
and pull of civilizational forces, has made itself felt in the dual activity 
of risk anticipation and preemption situated in the financial markets. 
Speculation, as the  political economist Martijn Konings writes, is neo -
liberalism’s recursive loop: its effort to bring certainty to the  future, and 
its inability to do so, in line with the Hayekian doctrine, only amplifies 
further rendezvous with risk. 6
Alvin T offler’s  Future Shock  was published in 1970 to world -
wide acclaim, cementing his reputation as a chimeric futurist of barely 
discernible  political stripes, a vatic antecedent of what we may now 
112  Informatics of Dominationrecognize as radical centrism. His work in  Future Shock , and subse -
quently in The Third Wave  and Creating a New Civilization  with wife 
Heidi T offler, was intimately embraced by world leaders and business 
magnates, such as the last president of the Soviet  Union, Mikhail Gor -
bachev, vice chairman of the Chinese Communist Party Zhao Ziyang, 
and early-2010s richest man in the world Carlos Slim.  Future Shock  
diagnosed a collective malaise felt by citizens of advanced industrial 
socie ties when faced with rapid automation, proliferation of commu -
nication and media technologies, and high employment turnover rates, 
in the transition  toward what T offler provisionally termed the “super- 
industrial society.”
Prediction is the opposite of speculation. In the obsolescence 
prognosticated by T offler, we may trace the outlines of an epochal 
“structure of feeling,” a term introduced by the New Left writer Ray -
mond Williams, loosely defined as the emergent affects, values, and 
beliefs concurrently felt by individuals in a society at a given historical 
moment.  These affects are elusive and difficult to articulate, but they 
congeal with formal accounts such as T offler’s, or in works of art and 
lit er a ture. They may then, in turn, inform the collective psyche, not least 
when they are disseminated and consumed as widely as  Future Shock , 
which sold over six million copies in the first five years  after publica -
tion. Y et T offler does more than put his fin  ger on a societal affect in the 
then- present. A card-  carrying futurist, he purports to make predictions 
about technological advancements in the near and distant  future. In a 
sense, T offler may have written his own occupational clairvoyance into 
obsolescence. If the libertarian Cato Institute has ever taken an issue 
with T offler, it is not due to his platitudinous promulgations about in -
formation overload, but with his role as an individual claiming to see a 
coming storm with any certainty. 7
Hayek sold his stance on the limits of knowledge and his re -
jection of the presumptions of planning as judiciousness in the face of 
uncertainty. He based this stance on an ontology of biological and so -
cial systems as inherently unpredictable, derived in his  later  career from 
developments in complex systems theory. Hayek’s refusal of absolute 
knowledge echoed and bolstered the emergence of the resilience para -
digm, pioneered by the systems ecologist C. S. Holling in the 1970s in 
reaction to the centrality of homeostasis as a guiding princi ple of Cold 
War–  era cybernetics, which assumed a predictable world consistently 
returning to stability. 8 Resilience discourse came to dominate in such 
 Noorizadeh and Saad  113
diverse spheres of  human activity that  there is no excess of pessimism 
in pointing out that this uncertain world has been built by design into 
international financial institutions, government policy, smart cities, and 
cognitive-  behavioral therapy.
In the aftermath of the growing inflation in the 1970s, the gov -
ernment’s restraining role was turned upside down. The state then saw 
itself not as a preemptive burden for dangerous speculative activity but 
as an active participant in the risk-  generation machine. The Fed’s em -
barking on monetary policies, setting the ground for the too-  big- to- fail 
regime and the expansion of credit and debt, was carried out not with a 
clear conviction of their outcomes but with an intuitive understanding 
of their potentials: as an authorized  gamble. 9 This late in the game, who 
can access any truth about the ontology of natu  ral and social systems, or 
their tendency  toward crisis, before the advent of markets? Marx’s tru -
ism about the anarchy of cap  i tal ist production is only truer than it was in 
his time, as subject as markets are to derivations and bailouts that have 
only further entrenched and reified their condition of perennial crash.
The vocabulary of resilience is thus a bridging constellation 
between looming shock and obsolescence on the one hand, and the 
ability to speculate on the other. T o withstand volatility and avoid ob -
soleteness in the market, a corporate entity must be flexible, adaptive, 
and responsive.  These qualities may ensure basic survival through a 
crash, give or take the occasional government bailout. But speculation 
aims to operate at a higher plane, embracing and syncopating with risk 
rather than merely withstanding it. Ultimately, ceo s take risks  because 
they are not their companies, and as individuals they are all but un -
touchable. Packer is dead by the end of the book, only by virtue of Don 
DeLillo’s poetic license. If  there is a structure of feeling to be found in 
Cosmopolis , it is one where both antiheroes, Packer and his underling- 
cum- killer, have every thing and nothing to lose, as the world crashes 
and burns outside.
Fast forward to 2008 as the key moment when mass bailout of 
the commercial banking system turned into common practice as a sort 
of informal insurance on the ability of the markets to establish order 
in the long run.  These zombified institutions, to follow the Greek ex-  
finance minister Y anis V aroufakis’s expression, no more alive nor dead, 
 were handed to us in 2020 with the onset of the global pandemic. 10 And 
 here that extraordinary event crops up: in August 2020 the financial 
market was fully decoupled from the real market of goods and  services. 
114  Informatics of DominationAs the UK underwent its worst recession ever and the United States 
started to appear to be a failed state, the London Stock Exchange index 
surged, and Wall Street’s s&p  500 hit a historic high. The  future mar -
kets have no more regard for the earthlings’ games of trade and survival.
But if, pursuant to Hayek’s formulation, the market knows 
best the truth regarding life on the planet and the state of nature it -
self, which market’s story are we to believe in the current paradox of 
the economy? The real market claims that we, and by extension nature, 
are in deep trou ble. The  future markets recite a narrative of stirring 
prosperity. Hayek would indeed side with the latter, as he did during 
the 1970s, seeing in the financial turmoil a movement that was highly 
subversive and for the same reason imbued with the possibility of eco -
nomic recuperation.  T oday, outside the  bubbles of pandemic denialism 
and science skepticism of the populist international, however, one can -
not, to save one’s life, put their faith into the fantasy regurgitated by the 
money markets. Y et as long as the speculative substance of economy is 
not taken to heart, and the problematics of time and episteme at the 
center of Hayek’s critique of rational planning is overlooked, we are 
only to circle a vicious historical cycle.
An epistemological position espoused by con  temporary left-  
wing and socialist theorists, in response to the neoliberal problemati -
zation of planning, argues that if during the time of the Soviet  Union 
 there  wasn’t enough computational power to access the necessary in -
formation for a planned economy to be successful,  there just might be 
enough computational power to do so at the moment or in the near 
 future. This has been referred to as the calculation prob  lem, which we 
may or may not have enough silicon to resolve. The direct heirs of sci -
entific socialism maintain that the currently existing logistics systems of 
megaplatforms such as Amazon or Google might be repurposed to solve 
the calculation prob  lem, giving central planners in a socialist  future the 
ability to calculate the quantities of goods being produced, circulated, 
and consumed. 11 Any argument about a newfound possibility of tech -
nology to solve the calculation prob  lem is positivist-  evolutionary and 
may rightly be considered technologically deterministic. It assumes that 
a certain threshold of technological advancement is a prerequisite for 
the restructuring of the totality of socioeconomic relations.
Also latent among  these views is a conflation between questions 
of epistemology and knowledge on the one hand, and questions of con -
trol and government of persons on the other. 12 Understanding the input 
 Noorizadeh and Saad  115
and output variables of an economy does not equate to having the abil -
ity to control or change said variables. Additionally, enforcing central -
ized control in a planned economy would still necessitate the forceful 
management of  labor power, that is, the mass surveillance, firing, and 
hiring of the workers responsible for that  labor power.
Thinkers of decentralized planning who profess autonomist 
inclinations, such as the mathematical physicist Matilde Marcolli and 
the American writer Jasper Bernes, are not so keen on this prospect of 
an authoritarian distribution of workers among productive sectors, 
one that operates in  de pen dently of workers’ own professed desires and 
voluntary associations. Y et they agree that reckoning with prob  lems of 
scale  will necessitate computational forms of optimization that are not 
based on profit.  Here, the distributed decision support system commis -
sioned by the Allende government in 1971 and designed by the British 
cybernetician Stafford Beer, Cybersyn, is often invoked as a past  future 
foreclosed too soon. Cybersyn aimed to grant maximum autonomy to 
worker-  owned factories while minimizing centralized control. Along 
with ogas , the unrealized Soviet network, Cybersyn anticipated the 
arrival of the internet, not in the  service of atomized consumption but 
 toward large- scale decentralized planning sourced from bottom-up 
inputs.
Drawing on both Cybersyn and ogas , Marcolli grapples with 
the prob  lem of scale in decentral planning by conceiving of two types 
of instruments to connect individual cooperatives, defined as nodes of 
a decentralized network. Instruments of connectivity, such as p2p net-
works and public transportation, increase the degree of causal influence 
between nodes, while instruments of complexity, such as cultural prod -
ucts that are not generated by market dynamics, increase the effective 
complexity of a network. 13 In this vein, the decentralized speculator-  
planner may forge ahead not by imagining megastructural systems run 
by socialist big government, but by thoroughly considering the bridges, 
exchanges, and causal connections between currently existing cooper -
ative and interest groups.
In one of the scenes in Cosmopolis , the limo drives into a riot, 
where a group of anarchists surround the vehicle and attempt to sabo -
tage it. The film came out a year  after Occupy Wall Street began, which 
compelled many of its reviewers to see in the fictional protesters a stand-in 
for the real- world rioters on Wall Street. If the film had come out in 2021, 
we may have seen in it the outside agitators of the George Floyd protests. 
116  Informatics of DominationIf we squinted further at the screen, we may have seen the streets of 
Beirut or Khartoum or Santiago or Hong Kong, engulfed in tear gas as 
they have been. The limitations of revolutionary spontaneity may be 
acknowledged without a dismissal of the riot form. Looking back on a 
 decade of mobilization since the start of the Arab Spring, an observer 
may note that relatively successful transitions out of authoritarian rule 
took place in the countries where robust professional associations and 
 labor  unions predated the street uprisings and subsequently took charge 
of the historical opening, such as in Tunisia and Sudan.
Several  decades, cyclical financial crises, and climate catastro -
phes  later, activists and academics studying social movements and crisis 
often reach conclusions that correspond to the Black Panthers’ pithy 
axiom. Geographers Stephanie Wakefield and Bruce Braun refer to the 
presence of a resilient dispositif , defined as the crisis- prone “network of 
discourses, practices, institutions” by which persons are governed. In 
response to this dispositif , they inquire about the possibility of making 
concrete and long- term the structures and alliances immanent in the 
“autonomous  organizing centers, shared supply banks, and commu -
nal street kitchens” that sprang up in New Y ork City  after Hurricane 
Sandy. 14 The question is as potent  today as it is unanswered.
Currently, it is near impossible to think of a road map that 
can lead its cartographers or its readers from currently existing 
community- run crisis- relief programs, to well-  connected coopera -
tives, to any decentralized economy not based on markets, specula -
tive or knowable, real or not. It is pos  si ble, however, to imagine setting 
ourselves up for the task.
Notes
 1. Don DeLillo, Cosmopolis  (New Y ork: Scribner, 2003).
 2. Friedrich August von Hayek, The Counter- revolution of Science: Studies on the 
Abuse of Reason  (Glencoe, IL:  Free Press, 1952).
 3. Friedrich August von Hayek, “The Use of Knowledge in Society,” American 
Economic Review  35, no. 4 (September 1945): 519–30.
 4. Philip Mirowski, More Heat Than Light: Economics as Social Physics, Physics as 
Nature’s Economics  (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000).
 5. Erwin Decker, The Viennese Students of Civilization: The Meaning and Context 
of Austrian Economics Reconsidered  (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2016).
 6. Martijn Konings, Capital and Time: For a New Critique of Neoliberal Reason  
(Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press, 2018).
 Noorizadeh and Saad  117
 7. Edward L. Hudgins, “Hayek vs. Asimov: Spontaneous Order or Failed Foun -
dation,” Cato Institute, January 1, 1996, https:// www . cato  . org / white  - paper / hayek  - vs 
- asimov  - spontaneous -  order  - or - failed -foundation .
 8. Jeremy Walker and Melinda Cooper, “Genealogies of Resilience: From Sys -
tems Ecol ogy to the  Political Economy of Crisis Adaptation,” Security Dialogue  42, no. 2 
(April 2011): 143–60, https:// doi . org / 10  . 1177 /0967010611399616 .
 9. Konings, Capital and Time .
 10. Y anis V aroufakis, “Something Remarkable Just Happened This August: How 
the Pandemic Has Sped Up the Passage to Postcapitalism,” Y anis V aroufakis: Thoughts 
for the Post-2008 World , August 21, 2020, https:// www . yanisvaroufakis . eu / 2020 / 08 / 21 
/ something - remarkable  - just  - happened - this - august  - how - the  - pandemic  - has - sped - up - the  
- passage  - to - postcapitalism - lannan - institute  - virtual - talk / .
 11. William Paul Cockshott and Allin Cottrell,  Towards a New Socialism?  (Not -
tingham, UK: Spokesman, 1993).
 12. Jasper Bernes, “Planning and Anarchy,” South Atlantic Quarterly  119, no. 1 (Jan -
uary 2020): 53–73, https:// doi . org / 10  . 1215 / 00382876 -8007653 .
 13. Aurora Apolito, “The Prob  lem of Scale in Anarchism and the Case for Cyber -
netic Communism,” Center for a Stateless Society, June 25, 2020, https:// c4ss . org / wp  
- content / uploads / 2020 / 06 / Aurora  - ScaleAnarchy _ ful -  version  .pdf .
 14. Bruce Braun and Stephanie Wakefield, “Destituent Power and Common Use: 
Reading Agamben in the Anthropocene,” in Handbook on the Geographies of Power , ed. 
Mat Coleman and John Agnew (Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 2018), 259–72, https://  
doi . org / 10  . 4337 / 9781785365645  .00024 .
I am taking on the task of writing this short essay much  later than it was 
supposed to have been finished and submitted. But saying this is less 
of a confession than an attempt at ( counter)diagnosis, perhaps that of 
the underbelly of a distributed and internalized set of disciplinary and 
control mechanisms targeted at optimized productivity. However, the 
delay cannot be simply explained by putting the blame on a high work -
load. It might even seem like the sign of some sort of privilege, relatively 
speaking, or (social) capital which would allow a freelancer, juggling 
multiple writing gigs at a time, to ultimately afford the consequences of 
a few missed deadlines  here and  there. In the larger scheme of  things, 
a delay might appear more like a professional norm that largely op -
erates as a public secret, except for the likes of the fashionably late or 
too-  busy- to-  commit.
But  whether  because of, despite, or regardless of such and 
similar affordances,  there has been something  else at work delaying 
this essay, something that feels both deeper and more immediate 
than the metrics of a petty privilege. An ingrained sense of precarity 
seems to underlie all that might count as a privilege, and the conditions 
of production remain si  mul ta neously  shaped by  these two seemingly 
incommensurable qualities. Therefore this essay or, in other words, 
this overdue submission tries to recognize and reckon with the complex 
real ity of procrastination, not only as a self- perpetuating mechanism 
but as a locus of psychopo  liti cal relations. “Neoliberal psychopolitics,” 
according to Byung-  Chul Han, “is a technology of domination that 
stabilizes and perpetuates the prevailing system by means of psycho -
logical programming and steering.” 1 This technology is the substrate of 
the so-  called gig economy, whose modus operandi is not only central 14.  Hygiene —  Stress  
Management —  Procrastination
Mahan Moalemi
 Mahan Moalemi  119
to the creative industries of the early twenty- first  century but also em -
blematic of it.
Si mul ta neously, the focus on procrastination offers a par tic u lar 
framing of management and managerial imperatives from the viewpoint 
of strug  gles with  mental health. Mark Fisher’s first posthumous pub -
lication, which he finished shortly before his death, is a call “to wrest 
the concept of management from its being held hostage by neoliberal 
managerialism.” 2 He associates the latter with “imperatives to penetrate 
consciousness and time to an unpre  ce dented degree” while “the focus on 
management,” he argues, can entail “an appreciation of the difference 
between  political agency and its conditions, between what is immediate 
and the virtual machineries that shape experience.” 3 Is procrastination 
in need of management or is it, somewhere on a spectrum, itself a mode 
of management? In other words, this essay addresses procrastination at 
the intersection of stress management and time management, exploring 
the princi ples of efficiency and productivity that condition the precar -
ity and privilege of having to per  sis tently stay open to opportunities.
Procrastination is in a peculiar relationship with opportunity. 
Unevenly minted and distributed, opportunities are a  matter of cur -
rency, keeping a turbulent gig economy afloat. Ranging from venture 
cap i tal ists to vagrants,  there seem to be close equivalents among the dif-
fer ent agents that participate in the exchange and circulation of oppor -
tunities, in giving and taking them, in cases including but not  limited to 
freelance writing in the creative industries. Furthermore, opportunities 
can derive from privilege and precarity at once, even maintaining and 
further compounding such a schizoid mixture at each instance. This is 
particularly the case in the context of a globalized creative industry and 
its associated knowledge economies, which mostly rely on the ability of 
creative laborers to afford their poverty. 4 Procrastination emerges from 
a set of social,  political, and economic relations that enable the vectors 
of precarity and privilege to form “a zone of indistinction,” wherein they 
remain operative while “resonating together in immediate proximity.” 5
By extension, it should come as no surprise if opportunities, 
which most often appear instantaneously and unexpectedly as far as 
gigs are concerned, rarely lead to a sense of stability, since they operate 
as  matters of contingency and within an atmosphere of volatility. And 
that would explain why opportunities are inseparable from competition 
in one way or another. Such a situation is a breeding ground for pathol -
ogizing vari ous attitudes and be  hav iors across the network of relations 
120  Informatics of Dominationthat surround each opportunity, overwhelming anx  i eties that might in 
one way or another morph into an almost paralyzing fear of failure or 
an overarching imposter syndrome, which only gets aggravated by the 
confusing ratios of individualized precarity and privilege.
Detrimental to any sense of sustainability, the working condi -
tions that are defined by the primacy of irregular and instantaneous op -
portunities demand heightened flexibility and constant readjustments 
to daily routines and methods of operation. As a result, working on an 
ad hoc basis might not only block access to the full range of one’s cre -
ative capacities but also keep the freelancer in the frustrating position 
of having to (re)invent the wheel all over again and again. This demands 
a critique of compulsory pro  gress and improvement (which is native to 
the experience of modernity) as much as it requires attention to how 
a spectral underclass is born from the widespread deprivation of one’s 
ability to recognize any sense of pro  gress in par tic u lar or a stable sense 
of the long term in general. This is a class of the senseless, of exhausted 
emotions and sensibilities. On the other hand, emotional deprivation 
is always already baked into the order of compulsory pro  gress: the 
imaginary of professional growth remains bound to an autogenerative, 
stress- infused, and increasingly benumbing state of ongoing indebted -
ness. Stuck in eternal backlog, one is set up to never feel good enough.
Perhaps surprisingly, this indebtedness is where chronic pro -
crastination kicks in. Similar to a reflexive inertia against demands for 
sudden and frequent change in one’s approach and/or attitude, pro -
crastination works as a defense mechanism, an act of self- preservation 
against the prospects of an unpayable debt. But this mechanism is itself 
in conflict with what it ends up contributing to, as it initiates a vicious 
circle wherein deferred thoughts and emotions return charged with 
guilt, self- pity, and panic over external circumstances that remain un -
changed in the meanwhile, just like the deadline that only keeps getting 
closer. Therefore, it makes sense that, as the journalist Charlotte Lieb -
erman put it in a New York Times  article from 2019, procrastination is 
not necessarily about “laziness or bad time management” and instead 
happens “  because of an inability to manage negative moods around a 
task. . . .  Procrastination is an emotion regulation prob  lem, not a time 
management prob  lem.” 6 While this insight is as accurate as one could 
expect from the  popular lit er a ture on procrastination, the following 
argument echoes a common and highly consequential fallacy: “the 
solution must therefore be internal , and not dependent on anything but 
 Mahan Moalemi  121
ourselves .”7 Seemingly empowering, such a verdict on the problematics 
of procrastination is both pathologizing and individualizing.
 There is a growing scholarship on how procrastination cor -
relates with neurodiversity, particularly in the case of  people diagnosed 
with attention-  deficit/hyperactivity disorder. 8 One characteristic of 
adhd  is lower dopamine levels than found  under neurotypical cir -
cumstances, which makes it difficult to maintain a steady and sufficient 
level of interest while staying in the  process, that is, while containing 
one’s attention within the bounds of one task, or even one approach to 
the delivery of a task— not  every moment can be expected to carry the 
same high level of excitement, while  there is always some excitement 
in beginning a new task, or one that is simply other than the task one 
is occupied with at any par tic u lar moment.
Furthermore, the  pleasure and sense of fulfillment that derives 
from finishing or accomplishing a task by far outruns a process-  oriented 
sense of satisfaction, while a fixation on the result in the face of a  process 
that demands full attention only builds up frustration. Perhaps the pro -
crastinator seeks new and rapid beginnings as simulations of seemingly 
unachievable ends. While the language of neurodiversity succeeds in 
pushing against social stigma around what, within a normative frame -
work, is labeled as disability, it is unclear  whether it can go beyond an 
offering of suitable treatments, chemical or behavioral, and propose 
 actual alternatives to the norm itself— for example, a di ff  er ent culture 
of productivity, or a di ff  er ent understanding of efficiency, rather than 
alternative ways of fitting into existing norms, which simply uphold 
ableist prejudice and injustice.
Such and similar diagnostic analyses may fall short of grappling 
with the systemic roots of negative feelings, which can leave long- term 
biochemical imprints, and then be hijacked and weaponized by the cap -
i tal ist realist tactic of individualized responsibilization. “Each individ -
ual member of the subordinate class,” as Fisher put it memorably, “is 
encouraged into feeling that their poverty, lack of opportunities, or un -
employment, is their fault and their fault alone.” 9 Emotions are deemed 
negative when they interfere with productivity and are consequently 
perceived as the individual’s natu  ral liability, while it might in fact be 
the productivity princi ple that generates negative emotions in the first 
place. Addressing procrastination as the embodiment of a host of in -
capacitating affects by simply shifting the target of society’s manage -
rial impetus overlooks how management techniques, as instruments of 
122  Informatics of Dominationthe indelible productivity princi ple, have always been at the  service of 
 measuring affects and personalizing efficiency.
Therefore, procrastination cannot be simply dealt with as a 
prob  lem or pathology without considering the larger set of circum -
stances that pathologize it or render it problematic. Instead, it should 
be addressed as si  mul ta neously a symptom of and a desperate response 
to the pressures of individualization among the precariat. We inherit 
the ethos of professionalism, optimized  performance, and streamlined 
productivity from the early nineteenth  century, fused into notions such 
as self- improvement and personal growth. Hence, emotions took the 
center stage of  labor relations  under neoliberalism. Nonetheless, the 
epidemic rise of procrastination as a chronic condition requires a larger 
discussion around historical changes in the understanding of hygiene 
that unfolded in parallel to this history of productivity.
The notion of hygiene was formed around the traffic of sub -
stances and exchange of materials through the borders that kept the 
interiors of a body divided from its outsides. 10 A tipping point in the 
history of hygiene as a web of relations between vari ous imaginaries 
and institutions can be traced in the parallel rise of preoccupations with 
 mental health and management. The notion of  mental health and how it 
followed that of  mental hygiene, as it was referred to for  decades, started 
to find a specialized discourse of its own during the same time that ini -
tiatives for the design and practice of  labor management  were on the 
rise, particularly from the early 1900s to the mid- twentieth  century. 11
The delivery of a task through procrastination feels like an ex -
haust mechanism, keeping one fully alert about the dynamics of waste 
and production. While it can also pass as repose, further confusing 
the work- life interface, the ambivalence of procrastination lies in how 
it tricks the exhausted mind into cognitive inexhaustibility. It is as if 
procrastination functions as a preemptive  measure for damage control 
against the consequences of acute exhaustion by, somewhat counterintu -
itively, repositioning the depleted individual as forever not totally dead 
yet—  a virtually bottomless stock of undead vitality, organic life permit -
ting. It is in this sense that procrastination becomes a maladaptive (that 
is, nonnormative) coping mechanism or an artificially mutated instinct 
for stress management  under the constant threat of imminent and termi -
nal burnout in pursuit of opportunities. Unable to afford the agency of 
outright refusal or confrontational protest, the procrastinating mindset 
keeps laboring in what could be called a state of operational paralysis.
 Mahan Moalemi  123
But no real (or added) value is created  under such circum -
stances. Instead, value is simulated by probing into the extent of exhaust -
ibility. In Han’s words, “ under the financial capitalism of our day, value 
is being destroyed at the root—  eradicated. The neoliberal regime is in 
the course of inaugurating the age of exhaustion.” 12 Perhaps procrasti -
nation also shows one way in which the systemic traits of this  political 
economy reproduce on an individual scale, tying the survival of each 
individual to the survival of the system, even if individual tasks remain 
unfulfilled in  defi  nitely, or if  there is no value in their fulfillment. If the 
informatics of psychopo  liti cal domination shapes posterity via the ever 
incomplete or exceedingly slow cancellation of the  future, then chronic 
procrastination represents a set of both symptoms and strategies of 
emotional  labor management  today.
Notes
 1. Byung-  Chul Han, Psychopolitics: Neoliberalism and New Technologies of Power  
(London: V erso, 2017), 79.
 2. Mark Fisher, “Accelerate Management,” parse  Journal , no. 5 (Spring 2017), 21.
 3. Fisher, “Accelerate Management,” 20.
 4. See Hans Abbing, Why Are Artists Poor? The Exceptional Economy of the Arts  
(Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 2008).
 5. Brian Massumi, The Power at the End of the Economy  (Durham, NC: Duke Uni -
versity Press, 2015), 7–8.
 6. Charlotte Lieberman, “Why Y ou Procrastinate (It Has Nothing to Do with 
Self-  Control),” New York Times , March 25, 2019.
 7. Lieberman, “Why Y ou Procrastinate” (emphasis added).
 8. See, for example, Hannah C. M. Niermann and Anouk Scheres, “The Relation 
between Procrastination and Symptoms of Attention- Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder 
(adhd ) in Undergraduate Students,” International Journal of Methods in Psychiatric Re -
search  23, no. 4 (2014): 411–21.
 9. Mark Fisher, “Good for Nothing,” Occupied Times of London , March 19, 2014.
 10. According to “an evolutionary history of hygiene,” certain impulsive be  hav iors, 
like the expression of disgust,  were developed in reaction to entities that threatened the 
safety of borders guarding the hygienic totality of the  human body. See V alerie A. Cur -
tis, “A Natu ral History of Hygiene,” Canadian Journal of Infectious Diseases and Medical 
Microbiology  18 (January 2007): 11–14.
 11. See José Bertolote, “The Roots of the Concept of  Mental Health,” World Psy -
chiatry  7 (June 2008), 113–16.
 12. Han, Psychopolitics , 30.
At the wet market you can get anything you want from the immediate 
territory and as far beyond it as you can dream, and then some. As in 
the old days, it’s illegal, but regulations are weak and inspectors are few 
and far between, and in any case, inspectors can be paid off to overlook 
what regulations  there are. Barraged on one side by advances in particle 
science at What’s the  Matter, on another by growing knowledge in ge -
nomics at Gene Genie, on yet another by growth in information science 
at Cry Me a River, not to mention all the genius of info and substance 
artists at wet markets all over the world who roll the technologies to -
gether according to whim or inspiration, and the deep intelligence of 
the plants and critters brought daily into  those same markets, we con -
sumers can never  really know what we are buying. Life itself has been 
disassembled, reassembled, reversed, reverted, and repurposed so many 
times that our primate intelligence is fully knitted with the very  matter 
of our fleshly selves.  Because we have no choice, we eat what we buy, 
and we are what we eat. Who knows what  we’ll grow into for all our 
in ter est ing eating? We could become sick to the point of oblitera -
tion. We could become healthy to the point of a godlike enchanted 
enhancement. We could become di ff  er ent beyond our current capac -
ity to imagine.
I’ve got a closed system breathing apparatus that was top of the 
line when it was new—  a helmet that sealed all orifices from the out -
side world connected to a tank of compressed air. It always makes me 
feel like I’m underwater swimming when I’ve got it on. But last year, it 
developed a slight leak, which worries me, though I  can’t afford to fix 
it at the exorbitant rate charged by Breathe  Free. I tried to seal it with a 
bit of blue glue, but it’s still leaking. It’s what I’ve got, so I put it on now. 15.  White Cap  i tal ist Patriarchy —  
Informatics of Domination
Larissa Lai
 Larissa Lai  125
I’m just sliding it shut at the throat when an electric hovercycle whips 
past me.  These new spinners are so fast. I’m amazed more riders  don’t 
fall and crack their skulls.
I pay my fee at the eastern booth, and request my usual stall, 
Number 812, from Beth-  Marie, who always does the morning shift on 
Thursdays. “It’s taken,” she tells me. “I can give you 813, but you might 
not want it. An inspector took 812. A good- looking one, but still. Y ou 
 don’t want to spend the  whole morning  under scrutiny, I  don’t suppose.”
“Not  really, no. What  else do you have?”
“In the eastern quadrant? I can give you 577 .”
“I’ll take that.”
Her fin  gers dance over and through her haptic ball. “Crap, no. 
Theresa just bagged it for someone  else. I could give you 3384, but it’s 
in the western quadrant all the way down by Quebec Street.”
I look at my cart. Crammed with  bottles of my home-  brewed 
apple cider, the  thing is damn heavy, and I’m already exhausted from 
hauling it  here.
“I’ll take 813,” I say.
“Lucky 813 it is,” says Beth-  Marie.
“What the heck,” I say. “The batch was brewed at autumn equi -
nox.  T oday is harvest moon. Let the witches rule.”
Whoever used 813 last did not clean it. The floor is tacky with what was 
once a viscous liquid, now half-  dried.  There are  things stuck to it. Fine 
silky hair, pale silver at one end, dark red at the other. Ugh.
I’m getting the hose when a face appears over the three-  quarter 
wall that separates 813 from 812. Though my proclivities lean  toward 
 women, I’m not insusceptible to men. This one is just my type. Dark 
eyes that twinkle mischief, dark hair, a crooked smile. His head is bare, 
and his face seems so close and so  human. “I  don’t know what they  were 
selling in  there, but they  were selling both for pets and meat.” He’s not 
in uniform  either. Maybe Beth-  Marie made a  mistake about him being 
an inspector? Maybe she was thinking of some other stall?  Because it’s 
been a long time since I’ve— you know.
He goes to get a hose. The market uses seawater to clean its 
floors. It has a strong pump and, since it’s not purified or anything, 
 there’s a steady supply. What’s in it is another  matter.
The man helps me flush out the worst of the slimy stuff in my 
stall, arrange my ciders, and put up the sign. “ Rose’s Apple Elixir.” While 
126  Informatics of Dominationwe are arranging, I peek over the wall to his side. I’m not tall, so an ef -
fort must be made to look.
He’s got cages and cages full of crows.
“Beautiful,  aren’t they?”
I nod.
“T oo bad they  aren’t real,” he says.
“They  aren’t? They look incredible.”
“ They’re mechanical/biological hybrids. Excellent work -
manship.” He smiles that crooked smile again. He brings one to 
the wall for me to look. Its eyes sparkle and its feathers gleam. I’m 
mesmerized.
“Y ou want one? I’m kind of thirsty. I’ll trade you for a case of 
c id e r.”
“A  whole crow for just a case of cider?”
He shrugs. “I got them cheap. Come look.”
I enter his stall. Each crow is slightly di ff  er ent. Some are velvet 
black.  Others shimmer with a  little blue or green iridescence. The eyes 
of some are an ominous red.  Others glitter a cool and clever silver. I 
pick one, shiny and mischievous like him.
He sips my cider, and we watch the market fill with shoppers.
At noon, I  don’t notice the market cuckoo clock sing its song. I  don’t 
see my handsome neighbor open his crow cages one by one. I  don’t no -
tice other men— more and less handsome—  opening cages all over the 
wet market.
But soon, the  whole eighty-  block complex is a mass of flapping 
wings and screaming throats.  People run around us zigzagging in all di -
rections through the market.
I look over to the next stall to see if the inspector man is still 
 there. I  don’t know why.
In the ceiling, a panel of led  lights flickers, then crashes to the 
floor. I drop and roll out of the way. As I do so, my helmet cracks right 
in two, and the compressed air tank exhales, then fizzes. Crap. I push 
the broken pieces away from me.
Boots tromp into the market. Every  one who can flee has already 
fled. I’ve never seen troops like this, wide and strong, but made of a 
light aluminum alloy. Miraculously they  don’t touch me, but leave me 
for dead. Half a bloody rat face floats past my nose, a partial rat brain 
still clinging to its broken skull.
 Larissa Lai  127
I  don’t move for hours. Night falls. The last light of the orange 
moon pours into the market.
Someone touches my shoulder. “Come on.” I recognize the voice with -
out having to move. It’s the handsome man with the crooked smile.
I know he’s one of them, so I  don’t move.
“ Rose,” he says. “I know  you’re alive, I know  you’re awake, and 
I know you can hear me. Get up.”
Still, I  don’t move.
“ Rose.”
He sticks a fin  ger in my armpit. I’ve always been ticklish. I 
laugh.
He laughs too.
“Who are you? I  don’t trust you a whit.”
“Thought you’d never ask. I’m Wu.”
“How do you know my name, Wu?”
He nods  toward the broken sign on the floor that says  Rose’s 
Apple Elixir.
“ Y ou’re a demon come to kill us all,” I say.
“ Y ou’re filthy, and you smell,” he says.
“Thanks,” I say.
His eyes glitter like  those of the artificial crows he was selling.
“ Y ou’re—”
“ Don’t say it. Let me get you somewhere safe.”
“Why should I trust you?”
“Y ou prob  ably  shouldn’t.”
The streets are empty. The orange moon has set now, but  under 
the residual light that still colors the sky, they glisten with the stinky 
 water that floods out of the wet market, thanks to the automated clean -
ing system that flushes  water across its floors  every night at midnight. I 
won  der what happened to all the  people.
We arrive at a  castle in the mountains. I  don’t see it at first. It is 
covered in a thin material that proj  ects  whatever is  behind the building. 
I’m aware it’s  there only when its door opens. Seeing the door, my eyes 
seek a structure and find the faint outline that separates the projection 
screen from the trees that surround it. The  castle is massive, a titan of 
the forest. A  woman steps out, black hair billowing around her, alive 
with chi. “At last, Wu,” she says. “The apple lady. The critter catcher. 
Our Lady of Animalcules.”
128  Informatics of Domination“Animalcules?” I say.
“The Ambassador talks like that,” he says. “She’s been around 
for a while and some of her language is a  little dated.”
“Why does she care about my apples?”
“She  doesn’t care about the apples so much as the yeasts. She 
uses them, in some of her own  recipes.”
I step into the  castle as though into a mossy forest. It smells of 
earth and incense. Every thing is made of green velvet, except the wall 
sconces, which are made of earth materials—  citrines, amethysts, and 
smoky quartz. They glow with a soft, warm light, so di ff  er ent from the 
hard glitter of the wet market. “What is she the Ambassador of?”
“Of the All  Mother, of course,” says Wu. “I thought you knew.”
The Ambassador leads us into the  great hall, dominated by a large 
round  table. The  table turns slowly, like the  great wheel of the earth, 
moving on its axis. “Choose your cure,” the Ambassador says. “Choose 
your cure or allow it to choose you, so that you can take it, and we can 
begin the real work.”
“The real work?”
I look more closely. It’s a geomancer’s  table, massive, with a Tao -
ist circle at the center, surrounded by the eight trigrams of the bagua, 
which in turn branch out into the sixty- four hexagrams of the I Ching 
at the second right from the far edge. At the far edge are sixty- four in -
dents, as in a roulette wheel at the casino, only larger, about the size of 
a Chinese teacup. In each indent lies a di ff  er ent object—  a jar of pills, a 
needle, a vial of brown or black liquid.
“Shots,” says Wu. “Do you understand now? Y ou can spin it, and 
wait for it to stop, or you can grab it and it  will stop, or you can just—”
The wheel stops on its own.
“I was  going to say,” he says, “sometimes it stops on its own. 
The cure chooses you.”
What has  stopped in front of me is a vial of dark liquid with 
blue streaks in it. The liquid moves and swirls on its own. I reach out 
and pick it up. It is warm to the touch.
“Come on,” he says. “It’s less effective cold.”
I pop the cork. A  bitter smell rushes up at me, and I wrinkle 
my nose.
Wu the crow man nods. I drink. It’s even more  bitter than it 
smells, and thick as blood. In spite of  these  things, it is not entirely 
 Larissa Lai  129
unpleasant. I taste a dry mountain  under hot sun. I taste cool earth 
 after the rain. I taste soup for noodles made from shrimp shells and 
pork bones. I taste the remnants of the old world that  will remain for 
us corvids. I suddenly feel very sleepy. I close my eyes.
I wake up in a room suffused with a soft orange light. It comes from 
 little orange mushrooms embedded in the walls. The walls are not moss-  
colored velvet but  actual moss. The bed is a mound of raised dirt, with 
an indent for the body, nest- like.
I look around the room.
“Y ou took the cure.  Y ou’ve entered the ai am .”
“The ‘I am’?”
“The Artificial Intelligence of the All  Mother.  Y ou’ve become 
what you always  were.  There’s no return to linear time.”
I look down. My body is a mass of black feathers. I look at Wu. 
I see him see my eyes glimmer, dark and full of mischief.
The ecological way to piss is to do it in the shower. As I watch my 
hormone-  rich piss flow from my urethra, I won  der about how it  will 
dissolve in the environment; a metabolic common pool of fluids flow -
ing from Big Pharma laboratories to one’s bodily insides and diverse 
ecosystems.  After a lifetime of ingesting, in the shape of a pill, synthetic 
hormones, I’ve recently added an extra layer of synthetic estrogen to 
the cocktail in the shape of skin patches. That is to say, I’ve long been 
intimate with the science of endocrinology, but it was ecol  ogy that got 
me thinking about the intertwinement between synthetic hormones 
and environmental toxicity.
In many ways, the story of this relationship is also that of both 
the drive and the remains of a  century of pro  gress. Although endocri -
nology, understood as the medical branch specializing in the role and 
activity of hormones at work inside bodies, took its baby steps in the 
first  decade of the twentieth  century, with lab-  grown synthetic hor -
mones appearing in 1926, namely thyroxine, cortisone, and insulin, it 
was only in the postwar period that the feedback loops between bodies, 
hormones, and the environment became apparent.
By then, synthetic hormones had been used in medicine and 
agriculture at least since the 1930s.  T oday, the livestock industry re -
lies heavi  ly on synthetic hormones for fattening and the acceleration 
of reproductive cycles. On the  human side, estrogen and progesterone 
are the most widely used drugs in the history of medicine, mostly due 
to the invention of the Pill— the only medicine so ubiquitous it does 
not need a proper name. 1  Women in par tic u lar have been the main 
target of this hormonal market, in every thing from ivf to hormonal 
replacement therapies for menopause. The administration of synthetic 16.  Microbiology, Tuberculosis —  
Immunology, AIDS —  Epigenet  ics,  
Body Burdens
Isadora Neves Marques
 Isadora Neves Marques  131
hormones, however, is found everywhere from gender transitioning to 
high-  competition sports and cancer treatments.
While hormones have long been known to healthily mediate 
between our central  nervous system and the environment, balanc -
ing metabolism, body heat, stress, and cell development, unhealthy 
environmental endocrine disruptors, or edc s, are found in industrial 
chemicals, slowly ejected from plastic  bottles, liners of metal, detergents, 
flame retardants, food, toys, cosmetics, and pesticides. Strictly speak -
ing, edc s  aren’t hormones; they are chemical compounds that mimic 
hormones, being interpreted by the body as such.
Synthetic hormones and edc s are widespread, and we have 
 little to no choice over them. They seep into us. This seepage has its 
physical and  sociological impacts, breaking with linear, clean-  cut divi -
sions between bodies and environments. Moving beyond an easy out -
cry of living in the ruins of petrochemical industrialism and modern 
technoscience, I won  der how this hormonal swamp we find ourselves 
in may actually, though counterintuitively, bring us closer to cosmo-  
visions, nature/culture agreements, and earthly dealings beyond  those 
historically inherited.
Body burdens  is the toxicological term for the concentration of 
chemicals in the body due to repeated exposure to a chemical. 2  Because 
body burdens rely on an analy sis of dosages and the exposure biogra -
phies of not only a given person but also of their parents, and possibly 
their ancestors, they are hard to individualize. Capital and industries 
mobilize this indeterminacy to override any culpability and retribution, 
used as  legal defense even in clear cases of exposure and contamination, 
such as  women suffering from cancer- inducing hormonal replacement 
therapies or communities living close to toxic sites. But body burdens 
also impose their own epistemological consequences.
Anthropologist Elizabeth Roberts has offered a helpful tempo -
ral mapping of exposure, or what she calls “situated historico- material 
realities” of environmental contamination. 3  These should be read cu -
mulatively rather than superseding each other and define psychosocial 
relations between an inside and outside, as well as safe and threatening 
spaces. “Permeating exposure” is best characterized by a growing panic 
 toward the toxic exterior of the Industrial Revolution and the anxiety 
felt by Victorian ladies, only comforted by a safe, domesticated interior. 
This epochal hypochondria would be intimately tied to class. As circu -
lation, or contamination, systems developed, from mail networks to 
132  Informatics of Dominationcommercial aviation and container shipping, exposure would become 
particularized, with irrational and entrepreneurial agents, mostly mas -
culine, venturing out into a fully techno- managed exterior.  Here, the 
atomization of agents and vectors of both threat and disease parallel 
the cybernetic management of capital, and likewise toxic exposure be -
comes medically quantifiable in its reduction to a single and detached 
armored body. Any dreams of containment, however, are  today fully 
obliterated. According to Roberts, this “Anthropocenic exposure” has 
become generalized, blurring any  imagined discreteness among agents 
themselves as well as between agents and their environment.
Anthropocenic exposure is best encapsulated by a growing fas -
cination with epigenet  ics—  a concept first used in 1942, focusing on the 
ways dna  expression, rather than being strictly inherited, is influenced 
by extrage  ne tic and xenobiotic ele  ments as well, be they environmen -
tal, like edc s, or social, such as genealogical stress and class. It is not 
only that epigenet  ics blurs agent and environment; its usefulness is 
in how it explodes causality. For example, edc s endure in time, pass -
ing on intergen  er a tion ally long  after their potential  legal prohibition. 
They are also unbound, connecting landscapes via natu  ral waterways, 
sewages, or the transport of materials by roads and ships. And they 
disregard organic borders, comfortably moving between digestive, 
respiratory, endocrinal, and  nervous systems, as well as between spe -
cies. In other words, the logic of environmental epigenet  ics is si  mul-
ta neously transtemporal, multidimensional, and multispecies. 4 This is 
why, even if we  were to stop all of modernization’s legacy— refineries, 
factories, livestock  houses, laboratories, and so on— the legacy of mo -
dernity would still endure.
In the logic of epigenet  ics, bodies are vast expanses of time and 
space, never fully grasped by themselves or from the perspective of a 
single gene or cell in isolation from their environments—  even when 
that environment is a polystyrene petri dish. 5 The case is not simply 
that the environment is a body and the body an environment; in other 
words, that  there is an environment inside as much as an outside envi -
ronment. 6 What I’m interested in is how contamination and contagion 
are, in many ways, prior and necessary to the conceptualization of the 
notion of environment, and how exposure breaks down modern notions 
of an isolated nature “outside.”
The modern invention of a nature “out  there,” potentially threat -
ening but nonetheless passive, is resignified in the division  between an 
 Isadora Neves Marques  133
interior and exterior to the body. With contamination, however, organs 
such as the skin, eyes, lungs, and blood vessels, but also the ass and the 
genitals, become entry points. From this perspective, just as culture was 
 imagined throughout modernity as separate from or above nature, the 
body too must be insistently locked and fortified. Mediating the realms 
of health and illness, and surreptitiously of nature and culture, mod -
ern medicine must desacralize all agents outside of us, so as to imagine 
them as bounded objects isolated from us—  even when they contribute 
to our integrity.
Evidently, this image of the outside as both replenishing and 
threatening is an ancient one—  a genet  ically inherited memory, if you 
 will. The border, however, is not. Or rather, this border can only be vi -
sualized historically and anthropologically.
It is this anthropological illusion of a fixed border that the 
combined efforts of endocrinological research, exposure theory, and 
epigenet  ics are increasingly dismantling.  These efforts suggest that the 
real ity of the bound  aries between bodies and environments, including 
 humans and nonhumans, is porous, collective, and transgenerational. 7 
This is what anthropology is calling embodied ecologies : “a conceptual 
framework for describing a fluidity between bodies and worlds that 
foregrounds relations instead of bounded entities.” 8
Native knowledge, neo- materialist philosophies, and ecological 
ethics have made analogous claims for  decades. One could argue that 
 these forces in  ven ted our con  temporary notion of the environment, in 
contrast to that reified image of nature above. Regardless, they remain 
mostly marginalized or subdued by capital. Epigenet  ics and exposure 
theory, however, as sciences that bridge the space between technology 
and industry with medicine and ecol  ogy, are themselves proposing an 
ontological deconstruction of, in the words of anthropologist Janelle 
Lamoreaux, “the assumptions of individuality, autonomy, and person -
hood that underlie some of the most strongly influential genetically-  
sourced social theories of the twentieth  century.” 9
 These then are techno- sciences of social and physical inten -
sification of bodies/environments, characterized by the management 
of body burdens. On the one hand, they fit perfectly in con  temporary 
biopower: the management of bodies and borders. On the other, they 
explode with established epistemological and ideological  parameters. 
In fact, they highlight a lag between practices and epistemology, im -
ploding modernity itself from within.
134  Informatics of DominationTaking responsibility for the social relations defining health, 
science, and technology means embracing the skillful task of recon -
structing the bound  aries of daily life, in partial connection with  others 
and in communication with all of our parts, both  those  imagined as 
outside ourselves and  those we  haven’t invited in but that already live 
within us. Against a warring logic built on the imaginary division be -
tween an exterior and interior, where enemies must always be cho -
sen in advance and individuals combat individuals, atoms face other 
atoms, how to think epige  ne tically? That is, while never veering from 
(or fearing) the responsibility of tracing paths and genealogies, how to 
speculate in and through borders— not even borders, but the imagina -
tion of borders and the real  ity of their porousness?
I leave you with an excerpt from the poem “Contradictions: 
Tracking Poems” by Adrienne Rich. Better known for her  political and 
feminist poetry, in  these poems Rich opens up to the intimacy of two 
bodies in love, two bodies aging, two bodies pained by a flailing health 
both within and outside, in one’s bones and muscles and in a world at 
war. The last of twenty- nine poems, the two  women lie in bed, naked, 
witnesses to each other’s bodily de cadence, in all of its beauty; two 
entwined bodies that might teach us the art of listening to the fluid res -
onance between bound  aries, an art which we may call intimacy:
Y ou for whom I write this
in the night hours when the wrecked cartilage
sifts round the mystical jointure of the bones
when the insect of detritus crawls
from shoulder to elbow and wristbone
remember: the body’s pain and the pain on the streets
are not the same but you can learn
from the edges that blur O you who love clear edges
more than anything watch the edges that blur 10
Notes
 1. Jain Lochlann, Malignant: How Cancer Becomes Us  (Berkeley: University of 
California Press, 2013), 131.
 2. Ronald E. Baynes, Kelly J. Dix, and Jim E. Riviere, “Distribution and Pharma -
cokinetics Models,” in Pesticide Biotransformation and Disposition , ed. Ernest Hodgson 
(London: Academic Press, 2012), 117 .
 Isadora Neves Marques  135
 3. Elizabeth F. S. Roberts, “Exposure,” in Theorizing the Con  temporary, Field -
sights , June 28, 2017, https:// culanth  . org / fieldsights /exposure .
 4. Michelle Murphy, “Alterlife and Decolonial Chemical Relations,” Cultural An -
thropology  32, no. 4 (2017): 494–503, https:// doi . org / 10  . 14506 / ca32  . 4 .02.
 5. For a material history of the petri dish and the seepage of bisphenol A con -
taminants to cell cultures grown in petri dishes, see Elizabeth F. S. Roberts, “Petri Dish,” 
Somatosphere , March 31, 2014.
 6. Janelle Lamoreaux, “What If the Environment Is a Person? Lineages of Epige -
ne tic Science in a T oxic China,” Cultural Anthropology  31, no. 2 (May 2016): 188–214, 
https://doi.org/10.14506/ca31.2.03 .
 7. Susan Sontag, Illness as  Metaphor and  aids  and Its  Metaphors  (London: Pica -
dor, 1989).
 8. Andrea Ford, “Introduction: Embodied Ecologies,” Theorizing the Con-
temporary, Fieldsights , April 25, 2019, https:// culanth  . org / fieldsights / introduction  
- embodied -ecologies .
 9. Lamoreaux, “What If the Environment Is a Person?”
 10. Adrienne Rich, “Contradictions: Tracking Poems, N. 28,” in Your Native Land, 
Your Life  (New Y ork: Norton, 1986).
Picture a scene in 1867 . The first German edition of Das Kapital  has 
just been published.  There are scores of workers toiling at a factory. 
Fabricators, handlers, cutters, welders, and assemblers all have been 
assigned di ff  er ent roles in producing commodities. Now picture the 
same scene but in 1985, at the cusp of the emergence of postindustrial 
regimes. Scores of workers still toil at the same factories, but we are also 
now aware of the  labor involved in changing the diapers of tomorrow’s 
factory worker. Meanwhile, scores of fin  gers start tapping at the key -
boards/mice of the  service economy, producing software, travel itiner -
aries, shipping manifests, and census rec  ords.
Fi nally, imagine  today (given the baroque nature of academic 
publishing, this is in my  future but your pre sent, dear reader, so I dare 
not say what it is). Similar workers toil at factories, but more of  these 
factories are now in the Global South. Similar fin  gers tap at the key -
boards/mice of the precarious  service economy, most of which has now 
been outsourced and supply-  chained to the Global South in a racialized 
global market full of surplus populations.  Labor at home still goes un -
paid worldwide. Billions look at screens; their attention has value (some 
 people’s attention being more valuable than  others, of course). We have 
a nascent vocabulary for dealing with the activities of the nonhuman 
worlds, from bees to mushrooms, that are plugged into  these global 
systems of extraction. 1 Beneath the hoods of digital media devices, 
silicon chipsets whir and purr, alchemically converting electricity into 
blockchain/ ai speculations or, more generally, profits for finance cap -
italism. It is a scene full of terror; the incessant technological action at 
the level of the chipset subsumes more and more of  human work over 
time, quietly leaking co2 in its wake. A lot of this data-  driven world 17.  Organic Division of Labor —  
Ergonomics/Cybernetics of   
Labor —  Inorganic Division of  Labor
Ranjodh Singh Dhaliwal
 Ranjodh Singh Dhaliwal  137
computation is understood as magic: sophisticated programs, algo -
rithms, software, ai agents, all operating, aggressively yet ambiently, 
all the time. However, this sense of magic is itself mythical, occluding 
the  labor  behind the machine.  Actual  human laborers in the Global 
South, saturated within conditions of techno- precarity, work  under 
abysmal conditions to make the technology seem seamlessly magical. 2 
 There are content moderators in the Philippines, underpaid Mechanical 
Turk workers in Brazil, and operators in Costa Rica listening to your 
Amazon Alexa commands, obscured by miles of optical fiber cables and 
plastic boxes, working not with but as if they  were machines, in some 
cases literally driving, like toy cars, automated robots on our streets. In 
yet other cases, however, it is the machines that make decisions for the 
 human workers, arranging them on global assembly lines (and supply 
chains) of material- semiotic artifacts.
Questions seeking definitions, locations, and taxonomies of  labor have 
not always yielded straightforward answers. The most basic question one 
can ask is: What exactly is  labor? Is it an ontological category or is it a 
social relation? Is  labor fundamentally one formation deployed, or com -
prehended, unevenly throughout the world, or does it have— like the 
idea of emotional  labor, as it contrasts with physical  labor, suggests— 
further subdivisions and qualifications? And while  there are several 
pos si ble answers—  both canonical and noncanonical—to the afore -
mentioned questions, right from the first iterations of the  labor theory 
of value,  there has been an underappreciated conceptual instability in 
what constitutes  labor, and what  labor constitutes. The second question, 
then, must ask: how to locate and map  labor within a social system? In 
other words, what operation is, and what is not,  labor, and how exactly 
is it distributed in the world? It is this second question, that stands atop 
the first, which is marked by the “Organic Division of  Labor —  Ergo -
nomics, Cybernetics of  Labor” formation in the annals of informatics 
of domination.
Scene 1
Early conceptions of the division of  labor considered  labor as an ex -
clusively  human product, most prominently coded as masculine and 
employed. 3 Karl Marx’s “  labor power” clearly marked out the ability to 
generically and consciously give form as something uniquely  human. 
138  Informatics of DominationBees  were not architects, he claimed,  because despite toiling to make 
their abodes, they did not possess the creativity or consciousness that 
would allow them to produce beyond their immediate needs. While 
animals and machines could act as catalysts for value production, they 
could not produce value by themselves; this capacity was reserved for 
the  human laborer, who was then further to be categorized by his iden -
tity and (dis)ability.
Initial studies of the organic  labor division (for it not only de -
noted “organ- ized” hierarchical systems but also described the natu  ral 
progression of work) focused only on one specific kind of laboring body: 
male, usually a factory worker, most likely white, residing somewhere 
in the global northwest.
Scene 2
One of the many, much- needed correctives came in the form of Maria -
rosa Dalla Costa, Brigitte Galtier, Selma James, and Silvia Federici’s 
1972 demand for wages for  house  work. 4 Federici and other comrades 
pointed out that  there are other kinds of  labor than factory work that 
are essential to run cap  i tal ist systems. Housework—  almost always done 
by  women— they claimed, was  labor and should be compensated eco -
nom ically. Reproductive  labor was also quite literally  labor, and “  every 
miscarriage” was “a work accident.” Their materialist feminisms, thus, 
had begun to break down the social taxonomies of  labor; wages  were 
no longer the only identificatory mark of  labor. 5
The postindustrial mythologies soon brought more attacks on 
the originary purity of  labor. Cybernetics, the “study of control and 
communication in the animal and the machine,” saw no distinction 
between hardware and wetware. If machines and  humans  were becom -
ing more entangled than ever, then how could the  labor of a (wo)man 
be surgically removed from that of her bionics? The worker— the one 
producing the machines and the one working with the machines—  
needed to adjust and adapt themselves to the machines, moving  toward 
the now- iconic (and still timely) image of an information worker uncom -
fortably hunched over a desktop, urgently in need of an ergonomic design 
intervention. In this sense, indicating the bodily tribulations of  labor 
(even the conventional versions of which continue to date in the form 
of wacky keyboards and injured Amazon ware  house workers), the 
ergonomics of  labor within informatics of domination signaled an 
 Ranjodh Singh Dhaliwal  139
epistemic shift, or at least a new correlative addition, in the correspon -
dence between one’s job and the muscular activities required to perform 
it: while once upon a time, in the same factory, you could instantly tell 
the difference between a welder and an assembler by looking at how they 
use their bodies, in  today’s T esla factory, the assembly- line qa worker 
(one of the few left with this job due to automation) and the  senior vice 
president of marketing both sit hunched over their keyboards, pressing 
buttons and observing the outcomes on a screen. However, the $1,000 
Herman Miller Aeron chair used by the vp, which the assembly- line 
worker cannot afford, still highlights the temporal longevity of  earlier 
epistemologies of the division of  labor.
Scaled globally, then, this cybernetics of  labor meant that the 
technical complexity of the  human— full of devices around/on them, 
 whether at work or during leisure— had to go hand in hand with the 
increasing technical complexity of work and society. A new global dis -
tribution of  labor involved  human bodies and machines responding to 
each other: literally, the inexorable imbrication of  human and machine 
in the infrastructures of late capitalism.
Scene 3
Ideas about  labor that  were once clear and commonly understood—  any 
 human who receives a wage is a laborer,  labor is what you do at work, 
and  labor is (unevenly) modulated across the world through mecha -
nisms of race, class, and gender—  become hazier by the day.  Women 
 don’t all always receive wages, but surely the many who work at home 
all day making the other factory  labor pos  si ble should be categorized 
as laborers? What happens when you generate profits for companies 
while scrolling through TikT ok in your bed at 2 a.m.  (supposedly during 
your leisure time), feeding the  giant data machines that aggregate our 
preferences for some speculative purchase three years from now; is that 
not working for TikT ok in some sense? (Relatedly, is all work  labor?) 
If a com  pany replaces a laborer, say a copywriter, with a generative ai 
model, does the ai do the  labor now? If so, then when and where ex -
actly did the  labor happen, in that case? (Was it when the internet was 
scraped over time to train the language model or when the model was 
run to generate an inane, terrible BuzzFeed article? Did the  labor happen 
on the ai engineer’s machine that resides in Mountain View, California, 
at his home computer in Austin from where he remotely logs in, or the 
140  Informatics of Dominationdata center in Utah where local subsidies—in hope of a new local  labor 
market that would never arrive— have enabled a huge big data operation 
where pro  cessors run?) If not, then what exactly is the relationship be -
tween  labor and computational profits in the twenty- first  century? An -
swers to  these questions might also help us ascertain what could follow 
riots and global circulation strug  gles in the early twenty- first  century. 6
In this uncertain analytic state, none of the previous formations 
of  labor (workers in the factory!  Women in the  house  hold/workforce! 
The outsourced information worker!) have been completely replaced 
by new ones, but new layers of complexity nevertheless keep on being 
added to long- standing formations (playbor! Gig economy! T elework -
ing!). In fact, exactly how academic experts in the Global North—  often 
the last on the scene of change, for universities only become sites of  labor 
changes  after laboratories elsewhere have produced precarious results 
with even more precarious populations— understand the composition 
and division of  labor has changed so frequently in recent  decades that 
 today we can see us adding epistemological expansion packs to  labor 
everywhere: to look for where  labor has been occluded, and to argue 
for its inclusion, is now a well- regarded critical technique. 7 If consider -
ing the cybernetics of  labor was once a knife driven through the heart 
of natu  ral unities binding concepts of  labor in the 1980s, then  today it 
would be merely one of the many, many ways of understanding labor -
ing operations and bodies at di ff  er ent locations and scales. But  these 
expansion packs do not exit the organic division per se; they just add 
newer organs.
 T oward Wages for Computers?
What, then, are the stakes of  these maneuvers, of understanding more 
actions in the world as/through  labor? For example, if the broken or -
ganic unity of the  human is to be followed to its logical extreme, should 
we not also contend with the inhuman, inorganic forces of  labor that 
have already been showing up in our laboring selves, at the very least 
since late (twentieth-  century) capitalism?  Whether it is ontologically, 
epistemologically, or socially, how does a graphic designer in New Y ork 
losing their job to a generative ai model contend with  these machinic 
actions— the machines in question run for a finite amount of time, they 
produce material and semiotic outputs in connection, and they need 
 Ranjodh Singh Dhaliwal  141
replacement, repair, sustenance, and maintenance—if not as a case of 
 labor replacement (one laborer substituting for another) that is just an 
iteration of previous trends in insourcing and outsourcing? And if that 
trou ble harbored by this graphic designer is truly worth staying with, 
 ought we not demand wages for computers, both computers within 
our bodily assemblages and the ones we use? Lest we forget, this very 
demand once upon a time would have been a demand on behalf of 
 women workers, who literally  were computers. In the words of N. Kath -
erine Hayles, the “semantic shock” caused by hearing the sentence “My 
 mother was a computer” “is rooted not only in the shift from  human to 
machine  labor, but also in the feeling that a kinship category essential 
to  human society has been  violated.” 8 This is the shock we must embrace.
If kinship categories are being  violated by critique, then it is 
only so  because they have already been scrambled by the world. Con -
sider this: An Uber driver in 2024 does not take their  orders from a 
 human boss, but an algorithmic one. And while it is indeed  human 
bosses, and their employed  human workers, who are ordering, creating, 
and tweaking  those algorithms, it is nonetheless just the machines that 
are ultimately making microdecisions about distributing  human  labor 
(Where does a driver live? Where do they want to go? How much have 
they driven this night already? How desperate are they for the money?) 
over a topology of nonhumans (Would Manhattan need more premium 
cars than Brooklyn  tonight? How to match drivers- riders-  cars over a 
complex rating system that should consider the rider’s algorithmic im -
portance and subscription level to Uber?). In such a field of precarity, 
the distribution of  labor is itself increasingly becoming inorganic. The 
word inorganic   here captures the transformations caused by nonhumans 
as they further modulate and orient human- nonhuman entities through 
the globe; even hiring and firing decisions— the ones that set the con -
ditions for conventional labor-  based employment—  are often solidly in 
the purview of algorithms  today, as are decisions of global mobility of 
 labor (work and refugee visa files pass through proprietary computa -
tional systems before a  human is ever involved). If carbon-  based life-  
forms chemically mark the organic, then silicon-  based decisions herald 
this age of inorganic division of  labor. And even though it stands atop 
and exacerbates conventional distinctions between race, gender, and 
class, this newer inorganic division of  labor may not be  either neat 
(Does a subcontractor hired by a bot consciously orient themselves as 
142  Informatics of Dominationan organ in the general scheme of  labor?) or easily taxonomizable (Is an 
algorithmic man ag er for hire bought from an ai com  pany even an 
identifiable category?). If “ergonomics, cybernetics of  labor” suggests 
a machine- human hybridity in the division of  labor, then an inorganic 
division of  labor  today notes the shifting weights  toward machinic pro -
cesses of  labor distribution.
What this inorganic division of  labor demands from informa -
tion workers—  and that category can admittedly itself be further broken 
down carefully; to call academics information workers is to perversely 
(and somewhat ahistorically) resituate knowledge production, precar -
ious as it is  today, within a relatively recent information economy when 
such work has happened in differing educational forms for at least over 
a millennium already—is not only to acknowledge nonhuman forms 
of  labor, like computational pro  cesses, but to use that knowledge to 
contest the assumptive (pre)conditions of  labor.  Because  whether we 
acknowledge them or not, technically imposed conditions already de -
termine the situation of our  labors. Attempting to de-  escalate the sheer 
enormity of the environmental impact of technological infrastructures 
may require many rhetorical shifts, many protests, many sites of action, 
many demands for degrowth. If one of  these demands needs us to take 
care of, and make kin with, our machines, then it may not hurt to ask for 
wages for our computers: not solely  because  there is a logical-  extremist 
theoretical case for it— I have shown elsewhere how computation often 
comes with an  imagined nonhuman laborer inside it—  but more impor -
tantly  because paying for inorganic  labor might fi  nally bankrupt our 
financial systems. 9 It may be useful to remember Federici’s template 
for wages  here:
Wages for  house  work is a revolutionary demand not  because by 
itself it destroys capital, but  because it attacks capital and forces 
it to restructure social relations in terms more favourable . . . .  In 
fact . . .  to say that we want money for  house  work is the first 
step  towards refusing to do it,  because the demand for a wage 
makes our work vis  i ble, which is the most indispensable condi -
tion to begin to strug  gle against it, both in its immediate aspect 
as  house  work and its more insidious character as femininity. 10
Similarly, the admittedly absurd demand for wages for computers can 
push capital to recognize the global impact of computation, forcing it 
 Ranjodh Singh Dhaliwal  143
to lay bare the otherwise- hidden work. It would not be a bad first step 
 toward refusing the status quo and the computational burden it puts 
on our earth.
So, what would happen if  these inorganic entities  were consid -
ered, by academic and  popular discourses, as partners in the  labor that 
is performed by  humans—  gig workers, factory workers, theorists, or gig 
worker theorists— with their aid? 11 If we—  and  here I am attempting 
to reach from my (a thirty- year-  old male academic in relatively secure 
employment in the Global North who hails from the Global South) situ -
ation to yours, as any call must— want to know how far we need to go to 
pragmatically live in/with our Anthropocenic ruins, we must consider 
this limit case: Not just life, but what  matter can we value?
T o say that  humans (some more than  others, of course) have 
wreaked havoc on this planet, especially in the last few centuries, would 
be an understatement. In light of this devastation, even such an admit -
tedly wacko proposal does not go far enough, but it is not as if all other 
 grand revolutionary calls always have brilliant afterlives. My hypoth -
esis, however, is that it goes further than some proposals for carbon 
credits and other largely fictional scenarios used by climate scientists 
in their predictions. Such fictions may give us hope for the  future and 
let our structures stand but are unlikely to be anything but fantasies of 
techno- fixes that end up breaking something  else. T o rhetorically re -
formulate  labor, instead, could partially attend to the estimates which 
suggest that in a few  decades, computing  will be the biggest energy sink 
for our planet.
In other words, the totem of cybernetics, computation, is an 
energy- intensive activity that subsumes the work of  humans. This was 
once, and remains, devalued but is starting to expand as if it  were the 
earth’s primary occupation. Planetary computation engulfs the planet’s 
body and soul  today. 12 Does this act not warrant a fair share of rhetor -
ical modulations? Perhaps. T o be honest, I am not even sure if  labor is an 
analytical category worth preserving in all such discursive situations. We 
must not lose sight of the unequal modulations that always tainted  labor, 
ones that—on their own terms— would have nevertheless produced 
some inequalities even if  labor  organization and  labor gains, which 
thankfully had a  great twentieth  century, had become ubiquitous. The 
horrific scene of inorganic division of  labor  today must be similarly met 
with direct action. Someone please tag the influencers on Instagram; 
we have to get “wages for computing” propaganda merchandise out 
144  Informatics of Domination there. I am not sure, however, what the  labor division for such a cam -
paign might look like.
In a 2017 clicker game called Universal Paperclips  created by Frank 
Lantz, the player starts by clicking a button that produces one paper 
clip. Soon, enough money is accumulated from  these paper clips that 
the player gets an opportunity to purchase machines that produce 
several paper clips per click. Not much  later, ai is roped in to help 
with publicity and to further optimize paper clip production. Once 
the player engages an artificial intelligence whose sole goal is to maxi -
mize paper clip production, the game starts becoming more automatic; 
first, the ai buys the paper clip com  pany that created it; then it creates 
more paper clip ais and starts transforming all mass on earth into paper 
clips, before moving into space and converting all known  matter in the 
universe into paper clips. In the game, the player goes from playing 
through a conventionally  human  labor relation (you click once, you 
produce something, and you work to serve a boss) to ultimately hav -
ing a shockingly weird nonhuman  labor relation (the machines do not 
just use  human  labor but also all the physical content of  human bodies 
for—  and this is the key novelty  here— not the profit of some other 
 humans but something even more dangerously stupid). Universal Pa -
perclips  can be read as an enacted commentary on the dangers of ai, 
on the insanity of cap  i tal ist expansion, and on rhe torics and tactics of 
efficiency. But the game as a technical object—it is a browser-  based game 
that often makes browsers and computers crash due to its calculative 
nature—  also suggests something  else: that this scenario is not about 
some hy po thet  i cal or predicted  future, but that the player is already 
engulfed by nonhuman operations brought into relief by the play of this 
game. The very opening ambiguity—  are you the player or an ai when 
working for the com  pany, and what does it even mean to play (as) an 
ai who only wants to make paper clips— makes clear that the  human 
 labor conditions  today, be they physical or informational, are not just 
hybrids with the machine but also in  service of them.
T o live with  these machines, then, could mean resisting them 
but could also alternatively mean further embracing hybridity. Making 
kin with (some) machines means also fighting for their conditions; who 
knows,  you and I, dear reader, might one day be found at a picket line 
for computers. If it happens, maybe we  will also be demanding a bet -
ter  future for ourselves. The same social- ideological move that makes 
 Ranjodh Singh Dhaliwal  145
universal paper clips can perhaps also make universal housing, health 
care, agriculture, degrowth, green energy, and lower-  carbon- footprint 
machines.
In fact, “universal happiness” has a nice ring to it. Now that 
might be a human- machine partnership worth pursuing!
Notes
 1. Anna Lowenhaupt Tsing, The Mushroom at the End of the World: On the Possibil -
ity of Life in Cap i tal ist Ruins  (Prince ton, NJ: Prince ton University Press, 2015); Timothy 
Morton, Dark Ecol ogy: For a Logic of  Future Coexistence  (New Y ork: Columbia University 
Press, 2016); Nick Dyer-  Witheford, Atle Mikkola Kjosen, and James Steinhoff, Inhuman 
Power: Artificial Intelligence and the  Future of Capitalism  (London: Pluto Press, 2019).
 2. Precarity Lab, Technoprecarious  (London: Goldsmiths Press, 2020).
 3. It is worth remembering that slaves, for example,  were not “employed,” and 
so in Marx’s technical definition they  were merely “living  labor machine[s],” closer to 
technical implements than they  were to wage laborers. Karl Marx, Grundrisse  (New Y ork: 
Penguin, 1993), 465.
 4. Louise T oupin, Le salaire au travail m énager: Chronique d’une lutte f éministe 
internationale (1972–1977)  (Montreal: Les Éditions du remue- ménage, 2014).
 5. In the words of Federici, the “waged worker in struggling for more wages chal -
lenges his social role but remains within it. When we strug  gle for wages we strug  gle un -
ambiguously and directly against our social role . ” Silvia Federici, Wages against House  work  
(Bristol: Falling Wall Press, 1975), 5.
 6. Joshua Clover, Riot. Strike. Riot: The New Era of Uprisings  (London: V erso, 
2019).
 7. Many commercially available games, seeking to up their replay value, offer 
augmentations called expansion packs, which add new characters, storylines, maps, and 
missions.
 8. N. Katherine Hayles, My  Mother Was a Computer: Digital Subjects and Literary 
Texts  (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005), 1.
 9. Ranjodh Singh Dhaliwal, “The Cyber- homunculus: On Race and  Labor in 
Plans for Computation,” Configurations  30, no. 4 (2022): 377–409.
 10. Federici, Wages against House  work , 5.
 11. Media theorist Friedrich Kittler, in a conversation with the French  philosopher 
Paul Virilio, once argued that “we should slowly let go of that old dream of sociologists, 
the one that says that society is by nature made up only of  human beings.  T oday—  and 
tomorrow— the term ‘society’ should include  people and programs. ” See Paul Virilio, 
Friedrich Kittler, and John Armitage, “The Information Bomb a Conversation,” Angelaki  
4, no. 2 (1999): 81–90.
 12. Benjamin H. Bratton, The Stack: On Software and Sovereignty  (Cambridge, MA: 
mit  Press, 2016).
Take a moment and look around you. Find an object that evokes the 
modular construction of con  temporary design. Depending on where 
you live and work, it could be the building  you’re sitting in. If I look 
beneath me, I find the quin  tes sen tial object of modular construction: 
an ikea  chair pieced together from a flat packed box like millions of 
 others, ser  viceably identical. The computer on your desk or in your 
pocket is likewise  shaped by this logic of objects within objects, soldered 
together into a singular  whole that may be peripherally supplemented, 
expanded, and enhanced. All manner of objects  today are  shaped by 
this structuring logic, but this  wasn’t always the case.
The nineteenth  century was defined by an entirely di ff  er ent 
structuring regime, marked by the belief that function dictates form. 
This is the logic found in Charles Darwin’s speciation and Franz Jo -
seph Gall’s phrenology, and can still be seen in con  temporary theories 
of evolution and  cerebral localization: the large ground finch’s beak is 
short and wide  because it has evolved for cracking the nuts found in the 
arid regions of the Galapagos Islands, while damage to the left frontal 
lobe of the brain  will impair grammar and vocabulary while preserving 
motor function, but could lead to changes in personality and be  hav-
ior.1 Specific objects designed for specific uses, customized to the task 
at hand. In contrast with modular construction, this logic is premised 
on a religious or scientific belief that objects come into being through 
a  process directed at a distinct purpose—  a functional specialization.
This belief was functionally dismantled in the twentieth  century 
as the world was refigured to suit the standardization of industrial 
capitalism—  a flattening of the par tic u lar into the commodity. 2 In its 18.  Functional Specialization — 
Modular Construction —  Object 
Orientation
Jacob Gaboury
 Jacob Gaboury  147
place emerged new theories of how to model and  organize the world 
as a modular structure of interlocking parts, vis  i ble across all manner 
of social,  political, and aesthetic forms, from the economic policies 
of Taylorism to the infrastructures that enabled the production and 
distribution of new media technologies. 3 And yet, while one can find 
evidence of this modular logic at work throughout the con  temporary 
lived environment, this resemblance belies a much more radical trans -
formation in which the material function of modular design has been 
extended and displaced by computation.
The development of computer science mirrors the historical 
emergence of modular thinking in the twentieth  century. In practice, 
early computational systems  were designed around the logic of spe -
cialized use. An algorithm was a set of instructions customized for 
the solution of a specific prob  lem—  a flow chart moving from execution 
to solution, tailored to the task at hand. 4 Over the second half of the 
twentieth  century this algorithmic logic was reconfigured into a gen -
eralizable structure that refused the particularity of a given task. This 
new flexible logic required a translation of the world into a structure of 
discrete pieces, parts, or primitives, alienated from the particularity of 
any given application—  commodified, reusable, generic. Where once 
algorithmic thinking was specialized to meet the world, now the world 
was reshaped to conform to this new logic of computation. Such a view 
shapes systems theory, information theory, and cybernetics, all of which 
posit a universalizing structure whereby the world is distilled into an 
essential and generalizable form—  bits, information, code. The apothe -
osis of this computational mode is object orientation, a broad linguistic 
and ontological paradigm structured around modular, reusable objects. 
As with modular construction, all objects in an object-  oriented system 
function as instances of one another, articulations of a generalizable 
class, the product of an abstract system. In this way, object-  oriented 
systems enact a flattening of the world, refiguring it as a structure of ob -
jects that might be made legible to computation. In contrast with object-  
oriented ontology and the realist philosophies of the twenty-  first  century, 
which looked to deprivilege human-  centered ontologies by opening up 
a space for nonhuman relations, object-  oriented programming restricts 
the world to only  those objects and systems that may be made subject to 
simulation, that is, to  those which are explic  itly legible to  human percep -
tion. The implication of this restriction is a refusal of or indifference to 
148  Informatics of Domination those parts of the world that cannot be made computable and, in turn, 
a refiguring of that world as an environment whose principal function 
is computation.  Under object orientation, all objects are computers, and 
all systems are relational structures of computers in communication.
Looking back down at the chair I’m sitting in, we can begin to 
see it anew. What may appear an industrial object manufactured to evoke 
the aesthetics of midcentury design is in fact the product of this same 
object-  oriented regime—  entirely computational in structure and form. 
Nearly  every ikea  product is created first as a SolidWorks cad  file—  a 
digital object— well before it is ever physically assembled in particle -
board and laminate.  These same cad  files form the basis for both the 
computer-  aided manufacturing  process that renders each object into flat 
packed cardboard boxes, and the digital rendering of perfectly staged 
bedrooms and kitchens with V- Ray and 3 ds Max, creating photoreal -
istic scenes to be laid out in InDesign and printed with a PostScript-  
compatible device for inclusion in ikea ’s marketing material. 5 While 
aesthetically indistinguishable from the modular design that inspires 
it, save perhaps for the quality of its materials and the longevity of its 
construction, structurally it is closer to JavaScript than Le Corbusier. 
While modular design is premised on a belief in efficiency and systems 
thinking, the system is not universal. A chair is not a synthesizer is not 
a telephone exchange, even if each reflects the ethos of modularity that 
so transformed the design world of the twentieth  century.  Under ob -
ject orientation, however, all objects become computers in simulation.
And it does not stop with ikea  chairs. The world  today is burst -
ing with computational objects that populate the lived environment 
in the most unremarkable ways, at once invisible and ubiquitous. It is 
this everydayness that exemplifies the transformation of the world in 
accordance with the structuring regime of object orientation, an alto -
gether invisible shift that marks the informatics of domination. What 
might appear to be a continuity between the design thinking of the mid-  
twentieth  century and the designed objects of the pre sent masks the 
radical transformation of production itself—  enacted by computation 
and its attendant logic of object orientation.  Here a chair is no longer 
simply a chair but a physical rendering of a digital object structured and 
 limited by a distinctly computational logic. This new structure has ma -
terial consequences, re orienting our perception of the world such that 
we come to view the lived environment in terms of how it can be made 
legible to computation. In this way,  those aspects of the world which 
18.1.  cad  and vector ikea  furniture families, illustrating the mod -
ular design of object-  oriented graphical systems and rapid 
manufacturing.
150  Informatics of Dominationare functionally incomputable fall out of legibility as such, devalued 
and degraded or, worse still, functionally replaced by their computable 
counterpart. 6
It is a self- fulfilling prophecy. Where once an essentialized 
conception of nature set the epistemological limits of the world, in 
reimagining the world as a modular system it is abstracted out, first 
as model, then as simulation. Y et  these are not simulacra, not copies 
without originals, as the logic of object orientation is indifferent to the 
truth claim of any original or essential quality of the world. Its promise 
is not in the accurate reproduction of the world, but in the production 
of a functional indifference to  those parts of the world that sit outside 
its universalizing claim, that is, to reproduce the world in accordance 
with the logic of simulation. In this way the computer serves as a pas -
sage object through which the world is designed and becomes a filter 
through which it can be perceived.
Notes
 1. The Geospizinae, or Darwin’s finches, are perhaps the most famous example of 
his theory of speciation. See Charles Darwin, Journal of researches into the natu ral history 
and geology of the countries visited during the voyage of H.M.S. Bea gle round the world,  under 
the Command of Capt. Fitz Roy, R.N. , 2nd ed. (London: John Murray, 1845), 380; and 
Frank J. Sulloway, “Darwin and His Finches: The Evolution of a Legend,” Journal of the 
History of Biology  15, no. 1 (1982): 1–53.  Cerebral localization was first articulated by the 
racist phrenology of Franz Joseph Gall, but the most famous case study in  cerebral lo -
calization is that of Phineas Gage, a nineteenth-  century American railroad construction 
foreman remembered for his improbable survival of an accident in which a large iron rod 
was driven completely through his head, destroying much of his brain’s left frontal lobe, 
and for that injury’s reported effects on his personality and be  hav ior over the remain -
ing twelve years of his life. See F. G. Barker II, “Phineas among the Phrenologists: The 
American Crowbar Case and Nineteenth-  Century Theories of  Cerebral Localization,” 
Journal of Neurosurgery  82, no. 4 (1995): 672–82.
 2. T o be clear, this belief was not dismantled in all aspects of social or scientific 
life. Functional specialization remains the dominant theory underpinning evolutionary 
science  today, though its extrapolation into the sphere of the social has been largely dis -
credited as racist and ableist alongside phrenology as a  whole. In its place, the  human 
sciences of the early twentieth  century  adopted cybernetic and other systems-  based 
 metaphors for understanding and instrumentalizing individuals and populations, not 
necessarily  because this more accurately reflects the world, but  because it better instru -
mentalizes that world in  service of capital.
 3. The technologies Friedrich Kittler describes in the Aufschreibesystem  of 1900 
are very much part of this transformation, elaborated further in his Gramophone, Film, 
Typewriter . See Friedrich A. Kittler, Discourse Networks, 1800/1900  (Stanford, CA: Stan -
ford University Press, 1990); Friedrich A. Kittler, Gramophone, Film, Typewriter  (Stan -
ford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1999).
 Jacob Gaboury  151
 4.  These procedural programming languages dominated early computer science 
and included Fortran, algol , cobol , pl/i, and basic . Object-  oriented programming 
was developed beginning in the 1960s and grew to prominence in the 1980s and 1990s.
 5. ChaosTV, “Putting the cgi  in ikea : How V-  Ray Helps Visualize Perfect 
Homes,” Posted on Y ouTube, March 22, 2018, https:// youtu  . be /bJFlslL1wFI .
 6. This is perhaps most clearly seen in the transformation of identity as a struc -
turing category of difference into identification as or with a set of computable categories. 
While identity continues to exist beyond  these categories, they sit on top of our lived 
experience and shape the ways they have become articulatable.
In 2020, the viral replication of epidemic outbreaks around the planet 
accelerated the already latent postapocalyptic scenario of the end of 
the world at the turn of the twenty- first  century. The unification of the 
planet  under the replication of covid- 19 seemed to demarcate a new 
onto-  epistemological ground in a flickering twilight zone oscillating 
between the technical and the biological, reconstituting the realm of 
the biodigital. Thus, as the viral strings of covid- 19 dna  replicated 
from bodies to bodies across borders and time zones, so too data sta -
tistics became ubiquitous across the planet in the form of projective 
algorithms that rendered exponential curves of contagion, deaths, 
asymp tomatic carriers, recovering and relapsing bodies in real time. 
The pandemic became the governing dispositif  of socio- technical con -
trol spreading self- regulating strategies of incarcerations, isolation, and 
social distancing. One can argue that the pandemic condition became 
the mode of perpetuating war by other means, whereby the predictive 
scanning of the rate of replication of this new social virus became the 
only weapon to ward off the threat to the ontological survival of the 
 human species.
The borderless spreading of covid- 19 was met by the  activation 
of a planetary emergency protocol accelerating the international, na -
tional, and regional military practices of colonial exportation, confine -
ment, incarceration, and zoning of populations within cities,  nations, 
countries, across the sea borders, and between neighborhoods. This 
dominant repre sen ta tion of a planetary emergency propelled the plan 
for the immediate deglobalization of capital, disintegrating the de -
pendencies from the Global South while leaving dispossessed bodies 
everywhere at the mercy of a relentless spectacle of cruelty; the  constant 19.  Reproduction —  Replication
Luciana Parisi
 Luciana Parisi  153
killing of black bodies in the retro-  futuristic morph  ing of capital 
accumulation.
As the viral pandemic heightened the postapocalyptic image of 
 human extinction, it also accelerated necropo  liti cal strategies of control 
through which information capital continues to justify the colonial proj-
ect of accumulation through the expansion of “surrogate humanity.” 1 
The replication of biodigital code does not replace but rather grants a 
distributed intensification of capital reproduction, whereby less- than- 
human or surrogate bodies are necessarily posed as zero value in order 
to ensure a variable return to the initial conditions of capital, namely the 
condition of accumulation based on  free or enslaved  labor. The intensi -
fication of strategies of accumulation and expansion of total death con -
stantly re-  create the universal logic of capital. As much as replication 
accelerates accumulation, so too does capital’s universal logic complete 
the cycle of its own reproduction. In par tic u lar, the biodigital merging 
of colonial, viral, and technical codes pre sents the ultimate view that 
at the edge of the world  there is no other alternative to the informatics 
of domination.
The explosion of covid- 19 followed the plan of information 
capital to activate the proj  ect of full automation by training artificial 
intelligences to recognize patterns, anticipate be  hav iors, and make de -
cisions in the name of potential threats. As a result, ai has been trained 
to activate protocols to block migrations, confine populations, zone 
minorities, and police access to debt. As the ultimate manifestation of 
the stealthy qualities of “socie ties of control,” information capital has 
developed its own artificial intelligence for which the total annihilation 
of bios  will serve to enable an intensified replication of biodigital codes. 2 
What this artificial intelligence needs is to replicate the biodigital code 
in order to sustain the universal logic of capital reproduction as the only 
possibility for planetary survival, namely the biodigital reprogram -
ming of accumulation—  and thus the intensified expansion of surrogate 
 humanity—as the ultimate condition for capital’s eternal reproduction.
The splicing and recombination of information across species, 
kingdoms, and kinds not only places biodigital accumulation at the 
core of life and the living but more importantly defines technocapital’s 
associative strategies to overcome its never-  ending crisis. If the servo- 
mechanisms of modern automation  were given the task of keeping 
 human reproduction attached to the assembly line, the code replicator 
of information capital needs a generic pragmatics of enslavement that 
154  Informatics of Dominationis attached to genet  ically engineered, data-  assembled, and algorith -
mically programmed platforms. Modern automation confided in the 
reproduction of the master model for which machines had to secure 
the sameness of the law, a repetitive return to the initial condition of 
reproduction. Self-  organizing learning systems instead entail a constant 
optimization of intelligence, which requires the cross-  engineering of 
all codes (biological, cultural, aesthetic, geopo  liti cal,  economical,  etc.). 
The informatics of domination has turned the strug  gles of gender, race, 
and class into replicative patterns that have become the transparent 
weapons of twenty- first-  century governmental vio  lence, from border 
control to predictive policing, to the everyday preemptive militariza -
tion of sociality.  Under  these informatic conditions, no longer can 
the law of reproduction return to impart its transcendental schema on 
material pro  cesses. The reproductive machine of modern automation 
already strug  gled against the tendency of machines to run out of con -
trol, warding off the threshold of chaos while releasing self-  destruction 
everywhere. Replication instead takes recursive patterns into its heart. 
Insofar as codes split and proliferate, systems can continue to diversify 
and self-  differentiate without needing to collapse. From artificial neu -
ral networks to ge  ne tic engineering and nanotechnology, replication 
secures mutations for the eternity of capital and grants a  future to the 
modern myth of the fittest  human on the verge of extinction. Replica -
tion shows that information capital has a viral strategy of extraction 
through which it imparts a new equation of value between animal, 
 human, and machines, whereby the recombination of codes allows an 
intensified exploitation of  matter.
Far from replacing the reproductive techniques of governance, 
this viral strategy of extraction relies on molecular techniques that can 
transform and reprogram all levels of living. As Sylvia Wynter points out, 
modern epistemology turned metaphysics into the secular missions of 
physics, biology, and economics, which confronted the limits of the law 
of reproduction to maintain the colonial order of Man. 3 The autopoietic 
looping of science, governance, and economy enters the horizon of code 
replication to extend the vision of Man in terms of mutable networks. 
From this standpoint, replication defines not only an epistemological 
shift in the scientific explanation of what it is to be  human but becomes 
an abstract machine— namely a theoretical model composed of concrete 
rules—  aspiring to grant a metaphysical unity of cognitive science, ar -
tificial intelligence, and ge  ne tic engineering. By extracting the hybrid 
 Luciana Parisi  155
dimension of code across milieus, kingdoms, species, and the organic 
and the inorganic, this abstract machine takes the concrete mutability of 
rules as the meta-  order of all codes of life and intelligence, networking 
together the molecular with the  political. What this abstract machine 
takes from the modern conversion of metaphysics into scientific truths 
is what Wynter discusses as the “bio-  economic” explanation of Man’s 
evolution, which is, as it  were, reenlivened in the temporal extraction 
of value in code replication. 4 The nonlinear pro  cessing of information 
within and across scales and dimensions allows systems to change, 
rather than being complete and determinate. In par tic u lar, replication 
entails a temporal circularity, which exposes the potential of surplus 
value insofar as the transmuted code can be profited upon forever. 
Replication is a prediction affair: between one step and the next,  there 
are margins of indeterminacy that drive the emergence of unexpected 
value. Replicating patterns are not simply sequentially repeated but are 
exponentially extended in time, an infinite source of potentialities that 
allow capital to reproduce without end.
The conditions of automated replication that extract the po -
tential  labor of human-  animal- machine codes and overlap the class-  
race-  gender binary axis of inclusion/exclusion have also been caught in 
the cinematic imaginary. For instance, the cap  i tal ist logic of extraction 
through code replication is central to the fiction- politics of the movie 
Sorry to Bother You .5
This movie tells us the story of Cassius Green (aka Cash), the 
protagonist, who lives at the edge of precarity, lodging for  free in his 
 uncle’s garage, with no prospect of finding a secure job in the retro-  
futurescape of Oakland. At the edge of Silicon V alley, benevolent 
companies, such as the WorryFree Corporation, offer  free care and 
accommodation to employees in lieu of a salary. Cash knows that the 
carceral ethos of working and living for the corporation is not an option, 
but he does not foresee that his challenge in finding a road to success  will 
turn him into a surrogate body enmeshed in a network of communica -
tion, of which he is already a replicant, a mutated biodigital code. The 
WorryFree Corporation, which secures jobs, housing, and food to the 
underclasses within the walls of a hypersocial factory, is not far from a 
global replication of  labor entangling race, gender, and class in creative 
articulations of surrogacy, where codes are partially assembled to save 
capital from its own extinction and from the collapse of the organic 
reproduction of life and death.  Under the viral regime of replication, 
156  Informatics of Domination capital imparts everywhere the animal- human- machine equation of 
value through a continuous singularization of biodigital assemblages 
whose data profile preserves the racialization of the species.
Employed as a telemarketer, Cash seems unable to get his 
potential clients on the phone; the racialization of the biodigital as -
semblage ties his  performance rate to the blackness of his voice, his 
tonality, his wording. His frustration turns into creativity when he side -
steps the rules of recognition and finds himself replicating the code of 
whiteness in networked mediation, where his digital password takes 
over the code of his programmed identity.
The unapologetic activation of this strategic artificiality 
makes Cash’s sales grow exponentially in a few months and grants 
him glorious access to a gold elevator that leads successful employees 
straight to the top floor, where so-  called power callers make decisions 
that  matter for the profit extraction of the com  pany. It is  here that 
his double consciousness comes forward and starts to trou ble the re -
lation between the programmed biocultural code of his identity and 
the techno-  synthesis of his persona. Once at the top, Cash is immedi -
ately placed in an epistemological prison, where he becomes a means to 
an end, a biocultural tool programmed to entertain and grant capital’s 
endless growth and variation. Not only is Cash selected to meet the 
epistemological expectation of whiteness, as he is constantly asked to 
replicate the codes of his biocultural belonging to blackness, but he is 
also directly included in the surrogacy plans of ai capital. Invited into 
the vip area of his boss, he is promised an enormous sum if he agrees 
to become empowered by a drug that replicates human-  animal codes in 
exchange for becoming the infiltrated leader of a species of  free work -
ers called the Equisapien. At this point, Cash’s confused consciousness 
awakens to realize that the ceo  of the WorryFree Corporation has 
already designed the  future of the  labor force and has already started 
the  process of replicating his code in a new half- human, half- horse’s 
ge ne tic makeup. Cash refuses the billionaire ceo ’s offer to become 
the traitor leader of this synthetic species. And yet, in a moment of in -
credulity, Cash realizes that what he had inhaled was perhaps not a line 
of coke but the ge  ne tic drug designed to activate the Equisapien muta -
tion. What he seems to overlook as he becomes benevolently seduced 
by the world of racial capitalism is how the condition of equivalence of 
animal- human- machines is set to support the reproduction of a universal 
equation of value.
 Luciana Parisi  157
This equation of value robs Cash of the possibility of being 
 human, as he is now programmed to become one with  horses. And yet 
it is this condition of being robbed of the illusion of being  human that 
comes to break the spell of the capital code of replication: as much as 
the pandemic exposes a continuous accumulation of value through an 
intensification of precarity and surrogacy, so too, Cash’s return to the 
condition of surrogate flesh sustains the automation of  labor.
And yet, instead of embracing the exciting possibility of becom -
ing the intermediary face, voice, body, and mind of the master, Cash 
undoes his self- made success and attempts to return to the precarious 
yet safe chaos of a jobless life, back in his  uncle’s garage. But the dread he 
had felt for the cross- species experimentation with the workforce that he 
starts to denounce and oppose in social media is not enough. When his 
humanly  shaped body starts to disproportionally grow into a horse- like 
shape, he fi  nally exposes the mutation of the flesh that has no bound-
aries and yet remains the source of capital replication. While his human-  
animal codes replicate in time, Cash’s alienation comes into plain view, 
caught between the sociogenic reproduction of the racialized code (for 
which blackness is less and more than  human) and the molecular disin -
tegration of a  whole  human form (including the epistemology of sexual 
and racial reproduction). The effect of this double replication intensifies 
the radical politics of his new Equisapien condition, now devoted not 
simply to unmasking the Janus- faced game of inclusion and exclusion 
of racial capital, but to uncompromisingly turn the bioengineered nat -
uralization of surrogate  labor against the informatics of domination. 
Since the mutation has already happened, Cash’s surrogate condition 
can only intensify the politics of alienation from within the reproduc -
tion/replication dyad upon which artificial capital plans to live forever. 
Piercing to the other side of the black hole, despite all expectation to 
remain a mortified surrogate less- than- human loser, Cash embraces the 
commitment to become a mutant leader of a mutant  people with no ori -
gin. The impossibility of a U- turn back  toward the promise of becoming 
 human, and thus being saved from the pandemic virus that intermingles 
species and kingdoms, rather sets Cash on a line of flight. The condition 
of the mutant species is already a condition of replication at the core 
of racial ai capital for which the end of the world is no longer a threat 
but an everyday real  ity. The logic of replication  here turns against itself 
at the very moment when engineered flesh gathers together and brings 
revolt to the heart of the accelerating condition of capital’s pandemic.
158  Informatics of DominationNotes
 1. See Neda Atanasoski and Kalindi V ora, Surrogate Humanity: Race, Robots, and 
the Politics of Technological  Futures  (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2019).
 2. See Gilles Deleuze, “Postscript on Socie ties of Control,” in Negotiations, 1972–
1990  (New Y ork: Columbia University Press, 1995).
 3. Sylvia Wynter, “Unsettling the Coloniality of Being/Power/Truth/Freedom: 
 T owards the  Human,  after Man, Its Overrepresentation—an Argument,” New Centennial 
Review  3, no. 3 (Fall 2003): 257–337 .
 4. Wynter, “Unsettling the Coloniality,” 318.
 5. Boots Riley, dir., Sorry to Bother You  (Annapurna Pictures/Focus Features/
Universal Pictures, 2018).
20.  White Cap  i tal ist Patriarchy —  
Informatics of Domination
Ashkan Sepahvand
>
160  Informatics of Domination

 Ashkan Sepahvand  161

162  Informatics of Domination

 Ashkan Sepahvand  163

164  Informatics of Domination

 Ashkan Sepahvand  165

166  Informatics of Domination

 Ashkan Sepahvand  167

This conversation began in Essen, Germany, in 2019 
at the pact  Zollverein exhibition Bodies in Trou  ble, in 
which we both participated, and continued that year 
through in- person meetings in Berlin and then online 
via email exchange.
Heather   The chart entry “Organic sex role specialization—  Optimal 
ge ne tic strategies” describes a transformation of reproduction from 
one that insists on notions of biological sex and nature to one that is 
increasingly technological, engineered, and  here comes the ominous 
word—  optimized . Optimization plus reproduction is selective breeding, 
and in  humans that means eugenics. It describes a  process of choosing 
who reproduces and how, by what means. When we bring ge  ne tic en -
gineering into the equation, it also refers to which bits and pieces of a 
person meet bits and pieces of another person and then get incubated 
in potentially another person (given current surrogacy and assisted 
reproduction technologies that are standard  today). In my interpre -
tation, this is half prediction, half warning. It indicates one  thing 
which might be liberatory, a freedom from the historical oppressions 
of biological sex roles, as well as its logical extension into a new form 
of eugenics. It is an oppression composed of an old form of power cir -
culating in a new form.
Luiza   Many  things in Haraway’s chart do not necessarily stand in one 
field or the other, but can be part of this circulation of power. Con -
trol over fertility and reproduction is fundamental to coloniality—21.  Organic Sex Role  
Specialization —  Optimal Ge  ne tic 
Strategies
Heather Dewey-  Hagborg 
and Luiza Prado de O. Martins
 Dewey-Hagborg and Prado de O. Martins  169
an  enactment of power that is  shaped by, and shapes, technological 
and scientific  developments. Power needs to change and shapeshift  
to maintain itself; it shapes the world but is also  shaped by it. My 
artistic practice takes par tic u lar interest in the changes of colonial 
structures of power through time and how they constitute the foun -
dations of modernity.
I explore this in “All Directions at Once,” a gif essay I devel -
oped in 2018, in which I try to engage with practices that reject colonial 
power structures both in terms of content and form. At the time, I had 
recently finished my PhD and was (and still am) deeply jaded about 
academia and its contribution to maintaining colonial conceptions of 
science and knowledge. This work takes shape through an essay format 
that is disjointed, constantly changing, rejecting the linearity expected 
in essayistic styles. It is hosted on a website, and the gifs appear and dis-
appear, depending on the movement of the visitor’s cursor. Each person 
experiences the work differently. The format responds to the content, 
too. This essay, which untangles itself through text and images that are 
fleeting, that sometimes disintegrate while you read, discusses the use 
of herbal contraceptive medicine as a form of  resistance to colonial 
domination— knowledges that are largely oral, unwritten, and often kept 
secret from  those exercising colonial oppression. It follows plants and 
their relationships with  humans— for instance ayoowiri  (also known as 
peacock flower), a plant used by Indigenous and African communities 
during the occupation of Abya Y ala to provoke abortions, in rejection 
of the dehumanization imposed by the condition of enslavement.  These 
stories of dispossession are not over; in the past years, many setbacks 
have taken place in the realm of reproductive justice in the United States, 
particularly following the overturning of Roe v. Wade  in 2022. The 
violation of reproductive rights is, too, a key aspect of the pro  cesses of 
dehumanization of incarcerated subjects in prisons, border detainment 
centers, and other disciplinary enclosures—  a reminder, once again, of 
how  these pro  cesses of colonial domination can change and shift, and 
remake themselves.
Heather   I have also addressed  these issues with artistic research and 
practice, examining the dynamics of biopower in new practices such 
as forensic dna  phenotyping—  the attempt to predict what someone 
looks like from a forensic dna  sample, and emerging possibilities for 
ge ne tic surveillance.
170  Informatics of DominationIn 2012, as part of my artwork Stranger Visions , I collected 
hairs, and chewed up gum and cigarette butts from the streets, public 
 bathrooms, and subways of New Y ork. I took  these samples to the 
world’s first community biology laboratory, Genspace, in Brooklyn, and 
working with the scientific mentors  there, extracted dna , amplified and 
analyzed it to begin piecing together clues about  these strangers. I put 
this together with 3 d ai  facial recognition software and inverted it to 
make a facial generation system, based on dna  data. I 3 d printed  these 
pos si ble generated  faces in full color,  human scale, and presented them 
along with the data and information on when and where the sample was 
collected. The work called attention to the impending arrival of dna  
phenotyping technology as well as the messy liability of our bodies, as 
we are always shedding the most intimate of information without giv -
ing it a second thought. And the face is an index  here to even more in -
vasive and threatening information that can be read into our genomes. 
Among the many risks of this new technology, which has since become 
increasingly available to police worldwide, is a new form of racial pro -
filing and a reductionism of the complexity and agency we have with 
regard to our identities. This is all the more insidious  because the way 
in which dna  phenotyping technology uses dna  makes it appear to 
have a scientific basis, while in real  ity it is dependent on an enormous 
amount of subjectivity.
Luiza   Exactly. This kind of uncritical engagement with technology is 
at the heart of what  we’re discussing  here.
Heather   Can we talk about birth control? The birth control pill is often 
seen as the historical origin point of sexual liberation for  women, but 
Luiza, your research has shown how the very origins of this technol -
ogy are grounded in racism and quite literally are at the center of the 
American eugenics movement. As you mentioned, in 2022,  women in 
the United States lost their  legal right to abortion, and access to birth 
control has been thrown into question as well. Can you share some of 
your research on the birth control pill and coloniality, but also maybe 
your current reflections on how we can understand this legacy in rela -
tion to the decreasing support for  women’s health in countries like the 
United States?
 Dewey-Hagborg and Prado de O. Martins  171
Luiza   For sure. The birth control pill, although undeniably impor -
tant, is tied to a history of colonial domination. The fda  clinical  trials 
in the 1950s  were conducted in the US colony of Puerto Rico by scien -
tists John Rock and Gregory Pincus, with support from feminist activ -
ists and suffragettes Margaret Sanger and Katherine McCormick. At 
the time, several US- funded population control programs operated in 
Puerto Rico  under the assumption that the island’s poverty stemmed 
from the excessive fertility of Puerto Ricans— rather than centuries of 
colonial exploitation, war, and enslavement. Sanger and McCormick, 
often lauded as feminist icons, facilitated the scientists’ access to what 
McCormick described as a “cage of ovulating females.” Sanger was a 
staunch eugenicist, who in 1920 publicly stated that birth control could 
be a useful tool to weed out the “unfit” and “defectives.” 1 The pill  trials 
ignored ethics or consent; Rock and Pincus experimented on  people 
living in impoverished neighborhoods,  mental hospitals, and pris -
ons to develop a drug that was, ultimately, not even meant to benefit 
them, but rather was targeted  toward middle-  class (and mostly white) 
21.1.  Heather Dewey-  Hagborg, installation detail of Stranger 
Visions , 2012–13. 3 d- printed portraits from ge  ne tic mate -
rials. Photo: Heather Dewey- Hagborg. Courtesy Heather 
Dewey- Hagborg.
172  Informatics of Domination women in the Global North. Complaints about side effects— from de -
pression to strokes— were attributed to the “emotional hyper-  activity 
of Puerto Rican  women.” 2  These side effects, ignored or downplayed 
for  decades, still affect  people who use the pill to this day; a legacy of 
colonial vio  lence.
Heather   Let’s move on to optimization. The so-  called optimal ge  ne-
tic strategies mentioned in Haraway’s chart are, in my read, a warning 
or prediction about a neo-  eugenic movement that would emerge with 
biotechnology as its validation. This has long been discussed as a risk 
of reproductive technologies, the idea of designer babies, that  people 
 will have ge  ne tic control over their progeny, and this  will lead to an en -
gineering of  future generations that is sexist, racist, ableist. Combine 
this with surrogacy, the possibility of hiring a  woman to carry a preg -
nancy that is not her own, and the optimization of sex roles and repro -
duction appears in all its dystopic phantasmagoria. This is  today not a 
nightmare about the  future but a very real phenomenon that is already 
underway in many countries.
However, as with birth control, which has such an oppressive 
history and paradoxically becomes a basis of sexual autonomy, repro -
ductive technologies  today also enable new forms of  family making, 
allowing queer and nontraditional families a possibility to exist. How 
can we grapple with the dichotomous sides of  these technologies?
Luiza   This is a fascinating, complex issue. Hormonal contraception 
is employed for a number of reasons unrelated to the treatment or 
prevention of pregnancies, conditions, or illnesses. It has been de -
ployed for years as treatment for clearing the skin, promoting weight 
loss, or modulating one’s emotional disposition and sexual availabil -
ity.3 Acne, small breasts, excess body hair, or a libido that is too low 
or too high are frequently perceived as grave flaws in bodies socially 
marked as female; the phar  ma ceu ti cal industry has responded to  these 
concerns by developing specialized contraceptive drugs to treat  these 
perceived prob  lems; a form of suppressing characteristics which might 
suggest queerness, thus reinforcing a binary understanding of gender. 4
Optimization necessarily demands the establishment of an as -
pirational ideal, a blueprint to which all must conform. Y et, in a fantas -
tic subversion of  these optimization efforts of cispatriarchy, hormonal 
 Dewey-Hagborg and Prado de O. Martins  173
birth control drugs have also been used as part of hormone replacement 
therapy by trans and nonbinary folks for  decades This, to me, illustrates 
so clearly the complexity that a conversation on optimization demands: 
a drug first tested by exploiting colonial subjects, designed and deployed 
to uphold hegemonic and binary notions of gender, but that eventually 
also becomes part of a fundamental, life-  affirming treatment for a pop -
ulation and community that is violently marginalized.
Heather   Let’s move to a di ff  er ent scale of eugenics to expand our dis -
cussion of optimal ge  ne tic strategies.  T oday, I see another neo-  eugenic 
impulse occurring with the climate catastrophe and a (resuscitated) eco-  
fascist movement gaining momentum. The white supremacist terrorists 
in Christchurch and El Paso both cite ecological justifications for their 
actions. Nazi Richard Spencer has published a manifesto that includes 
an environmentalist platform.
Luiza   Unfortunately, Malthusian arguments keep being recycled when 
discussing the climate crisis, most often blaming the poorest and most 
21.2.  Luiza Prado de O. Martins, still from All Directions at Once , 
2018. gif essay. Courtesy Luiza Prado de O. Martins.
174  Informatics of Dominationvulnerable populations on the planet for the environmental collapse. 
Anthropologist Eric Ross notes that Malthusian theories have been fun -
damental to maintaining unjust social and economic infrastructures, and 
to obscuring the root  causes of poverty,  inequality, and environmental 
deterioration. 5  Under Malthusian lenses, poverty and scarcity are not in -
evitable (and desired) outcomes of cap  i tal ist systems, but rather a result 
of the actions and choices of the poor. 6 Since Thomas Malthus’s initial 
formulation in 1798, his arguments have periodically been revisited and 
recycled by academics and activists alike, from Paul Ehrlich—  one of the 
first to blame environmental collapse on overpopulation—to Marga -
ret Sanger, as we have mentioned. 7 In the past few years,  organizations 
like Population  Matters— formerly known as the Optimum Population 
Trust—  have been pushing for antimigration policies, while enlisting 
support from prominent environmental figures from Jane Goodall to 
Sir David Attenborough.
Heather   And in the coronavirus crisis, so much discourse emerges cel -
ebrating the return of nature, the reduction of carbon emissions, and 
praising the virus as an agent of environmental activism, while hundreds 
of thousands of  people die. This impulse comes not just from the right 
but also from the left.
Luiza   Absolutely. In an article published on Al Jazeera , scholar Edna 
Bonhomme discusses how pandemics like this one affect  people liv -
ing in di ff  er ent places in the world in radically distinct ways. She 
writes, “the Global North failed to see the global nature of the crisis 
we are currently facing. As they rushed to protect their own, they 
once again succumbed to old tropes about epidemics being caused by 
‘dirty and strange  others.’ ”8 The same subjects who are displaced, the 
same subjects who deliver mail and food, who package products in 
ware  houses, who are burdened with constant risk of exposure with -
out much choice—  are also blamed for the spread of the infection. 
This argument ignores the uncomfortable truth of how the ongoing 
crisis is driven by the Global North’s perpetual hunger for disposable 
goods, exploitable bodies, and natu  ral resources while shifting blame 
to  those  under the constant threat of food shortages, unrest, and dis -
placement—an ongoing proj  ect of world-  ending, as writer Ailton 
Krenak points out. 9 Ultimately,  these concerns reveal the perversity 
of calling for care while ignoring under lying cap  i tal ist and colonial 
 Dewey-Hagborg and Prado de O. Martins  175
articulations; an act that is, in itself, a vio  lence, a way of consuming 
a perpetual other.
Notes
 1. Margaret Sanger,  Woman and the New Race  (Scotts V alley, CA: CreateSpace, 
2018), 153.
 2. Annette B. Ramírez de Arellano and Conrad Seipp, Colonialism, Catholicism, 
and Contraception: A History of Birth Control in Puerto Rico  (Chapel Hill: University of 
North Carolina Press, 2011), 116.
 3. Paul B. Preciado, Testo Junkie: Sex, Drugs, and Biopolitics in the Pharmacopor -
nographic Era  (New Y ork: Feminist Press, 2013); and Emilia Sanabria, Plastic Bodies: Sex 
Hormones and Menstrual Suppression in Brazil  (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 
2016).
 4. Sanabria, Plastic Bodies .
 5. Eric B. Ross, The Malthus  Factor: Poverty, Politics and Population in Cap i tal ist 
Development  (New Y ork: Zed, 1998), 1.
 6. Kalpana Wilson, Race, Racism and Development: Interrogating History, Discourse 
and Practice  (New Y ork: Zed, 2012).
 7. Paul R. Ehrlich, The Population Bomb  (New Y ork: Ballantine, 1969); Sanger 
Woman and the New Race .
 8. Edna Bonhomme, “What the Coronavirus Has Taught Us about  Inequality,” 
Al Jazeera , March 17, 2020, https:// www . aljazeera  . com / indepth / opinion / coronavirus  
- taught  - inequality -  200316204401117  .html .
 9. Ailton Krenak, Ideas to Postpone the End of the World  (T oronto:  House of An -
ansi Press, 2020).
Artist and performer Justin Talplacido Shoulder begins their evening- 
length proscenium solo Carrion  by inhabiting a larger- than- life stuffed 
tardigrade costume. Shoulder calls their decade- long performative 
practice a  future folklore, in which one artist, a bird, and a tardigrade 
become together. The tardigrade is one of the world’s most resilient an -
imals, a phylum that mimics death so closely that it evades it.
 Human head releases slowly from deep cleft of T ardigrade, slow 
birthing to Wagner’s  Parsifal . Weight of body releases onto cool metal ~ si -
lence. Skin breathes a body shifting  under stacks of stones. Cold stone mem -
ory on musculature of shoulders, forearms, upper arms, lower back, upper 
back of thighs. Isolation on right shoulder slowly lifting large stone  toward 
the sky. Right foot antennae reading atmosphere. Fluid memory of  Dante 
and Virgil in Hell by William-  Adolphe Bouguereau. Blood lust in jaws of 
Gianni and Capocchio. Deep concave curve from coccyx through the spine 
out through crown of head: circuiting electricity between crown and earth. 
Oppositional circuitry engages core. Exploring lower vertebrae, sternum 
pulled skyward opening chest. Throat traces sky till gaze  faces horizon be -
yond. Ears prick to stimulus. Scanning gaze .
Shoulder’s separation from the tardigrade is the first of many 
soft ruptures that take place over the course of Carrion . They are births 
and disassociations, at once evolutions and decompositions. Shoulder 
literally extracts themself from that which is resilient. The resultant 
vulnerability and ensuing choreography is romantic, but only in the 
humanist sense of the word. It may be a moment of bodily  wholeness, 
in that Shoulder’s nakedness and fluid movements accentuate the com -
position of the performer’s body, but the artist’s movements articulate 
each vertebra with precision to emphasize the muscular and skeletal 22.  Biological Determinism —  
Evolutionary Inertia, 
Constraints —   Future Folklore
Ashley Ferro-  Murray  
and Justin T alplacido Shoulder
 Ferro-Murray and Shoulder  177
definition of the body. This  performance highlights a corporeal me -
chanics. A foot antenna, electricity of the body, and corporeal circuitry 
establish hybridity in  human form.
afm   Justin, what is the significance of this moment of un -
adornment in your practice, which is other  wise grounded in 
the use of artifice?
js  For the last ten years, my  performance practice has centered 
on the creation of masks, prosthesis, and costuming as my pri -
mary modes of transformation. Carrion  for me was set as a prov -
ocation to be able to work from the inside out, where the body 
is the primary means of transformation. How can I generate 
 these other hybrid beings and make my  human form malleable?
Shoulder does not stay with the moment of unadorned phys -
icality for long, and Carrion  quickly evolves again to take on machine 
qualities. For example,  later, Shoulder embodies a robot- like charac -
ter with a white plastic face mask that accessorizes a helmet of Apple 
22.1.  Justin Talplacido Shoulder,  performance still from Carrion , 
2018. Photo: Bryony Jackson.
178  Informatics of Dominationheadphones. The character’s hair follicles are the headphone’s earbuds 
stuck to the scalp and from which the thin white headphone cords flow 
long to constitute this being’s hair. The mane of technological detritus 
meets environmentalism as the character plays in a simulated natu  ral 
environment of mechanical birds, folly leaves, and  water.
The same character eventually dismantles the stage set and in -
habits a cushy, larger- than- life inflated cellular- looking caricature that 
bobbles up and down. It takes over the stage and digests and rebirths 
Shoulder’s head from an at once phallic and anus- looking orifice. In 
and out, in and out, in and out,  until the structure deflates and Shoul -
der emerges anew as what the artist calls the tardigrade re  imagined as 
a prehistoric bird.
afm   Y our artistic practice centers around the creation of av -
atars through vari ous media in live  performance. Can you talk 
about your interest in embodiment within the context of your 
use of mask, prosthesis, and costume?
js  In Carrion ,  there was a marked shift from my  earlier work 
in terms of embodiment. My early work in the body of fig -
ures Phasmahammer was mostly formalist abstractions of my 
body: full-  body costumes often working with repetition of 
materials—  balloons, tinsel, shredded plastic bags— that would 
augment my form far from the  human in a spectacle mode. For 
Carrion , the provocation was training my body and building a 
gestural ecol  ogy that allowed me to communicate other beings 
and hybridity without artifice or minimal artifice.
One reading of Carrion  might focus on the recognizably body/
machine character who is central to the work; that being whose hair 
follicles take the form of earbuds. But this approach is quite obvious 
and plays closely to a cultural imaginary of robot and machine.  These 
preconfigured categories have become too stable for emergent prac -
tices and might foreclose more radical approaches that transcend 
expectation in order to birth  labor and beings anew. In a society 
where excess is capital, Shoulder’s proposal for a more stripped-  down 
form of artifice- less- ness— the naked body antennae that carries 
the weight of rock memories, for example— performatively carves 
space for hybrid bodies that bear imprints. The work illustrates how 
 Ferro-Murray and Shoulder  179
the physical body itself can be of machine, environment, and other 
information.
afm   Can you talk more about your idea of a gestural ecol  ogy?
js  For Carrion , with the guidance of my mentor Victoria 
Hunt, we developed a vocabulary of gestures that I can access 
and augment as I perform. For each creature, for example, the 
tardigrade,  there are embodied modes like Knotted Chicken 
Worm or Alien Starfish that have  parameters and qualities I 
embody in specific parts of my body. Through a combination 
of the bodyweather methodology/school and my own investi -
gations into puppetry/spectacle, I might invite electricity into 
my forehead, la  va into my feet or environmental stimulations: 
walking through falling feathers.
It is somehow in the fleetingly vulnerable moment of the un -
adorned  human body that Shoulder most resembles the con  temporary 
corollary to Biological Determinism —  Evolutionary Inertia, Con -
straints; the possibility for evolving  futures born from a society that 
other  wise balances in between well- trodden, yet never quite realized 
dichotomies. Shoulder’s  performance persona transcends even the pos -
sibility of identitarian dichotomy by way of first destabilizing the lin -
earity of existence with the tardigrade. The artist then cradles the body 
as detritus in a  limited set environment that suggests some constraint 
( there are only so many tools to performatively digest) but still allows 
for possibility therein. A  future,  here, has already been instantiated. 
Carrion  simply reveals what has already been.
 There is an emptying of the body—  you can imagine yourself as 
hollow as a vessel. Then you bring in energies, weather ele  ments,  whatever 
kind of stimulation you need to respond to. For example, imagining the floor 
beneath you is deep, sticky, thick, viscous glue  will determine and inspire 
your way of moving. This can also be isolated to one part of your body. A 
small stone on your upper left shoulder that you are raising to the heavens .
afm   Bodyweather seems integral to your attaining hybridity. 
How does the technique help you cultivate ele  ments like elec -
tricity in the body, or environmental impulse into a corporeal 
state?
180  Informatics of Dominationjs  Bodyweather is a broad-  based type of training that pro -
poses a practical strategy to the mind and to the body. It stems 
in philosophy from the teachings of butoh dancer Min Tanaka 
and his mai- juku   performance group in Japan. It draws from 
eastern and western dance, sports training, martial arts, and 
theater practice. We often describe it as research, as it is not 
about technique, more about propositions for opening up the 
possibility to move or be moved.
T o succumb to the con  temporary moment, even if momentarily, 
is to acknowledge the practicality of material limitation. The fires burn. 
Debate evades. As Justin embraces in their practice, tools/objects/limbs 
in a space are  limited. It is what the artist imagines and does with  these 
material possibilities that creates limitlessness for the  future folklore 
of a  performance world.
afm   Y ou refer to your work as speculative fiction cosmology. 
How does your own life provoke the fictitious ele  ments of your 
work? Carrion , for example, is born from your  future folklore 
practice. Y ou pull from Filipino ancestral myth and motifs from 
the queer club experience.
js  Y es,  future folklore describes a mode of practice that draws 
from long lineages of community-  based storytelling, both 
within my queer and diasporic families. In Carrion , a big in -
fluence from irl is my relationship to my parrots I live with. 
I had been enjoying building our interspecies communication 
through vocalization and physical gesture. Learning how they 
respond to desire, threat, play, as well as thinking about the 
evolutionary journey from dinosaur to bird. This bird- human- 
machine hybridity is a dominant exploration in Carrion .
Shoulder’s work is not a utopian proj  ect but, as a work of  future 
folklore, one that embraces realism out of necessity for survival. Still, its 
embrace of cyclical evolutionary possibility gestures  toward the radical -
ism of early utopian articulations. For example, the moment of witness -
ing limit becomes, for Carrion , an opportunity to begin again, to evolve 
again; this moment births reembodiment in ways that ultimately evade 
the shortsightedness of a determinist pre sent. This  future folklore nar -
 Ferro-Murray and Shoulder  181
ratively centers queer and diasporic experience to make space for in -
terspecies care and sustainability.  These are the  futures that biological 
determinism forecloses and that get stuck in limbo between that and 
evolutionary inertia, constraints.
afm   Y our exploration of evolution as cyclical in Carrion  cre-
ates space for imagining di ff  er ent scientific pasts to produce al -
ternative  futures. I won  der if this part of your practice enlivens 
an artistic engagement with evolutionary inertia, constraints—  
one that is grounded in your body, but that you open up to dif-
fer ent communities by narrativizing evolution as hybrid in the 
story of Carrion .
js  Carrion  as a theater work is both open and closed.  There is 
a multitude of possibilities for becoming, yet the tools/objects/
limbs at my disposal are  limited. I can only work and rework 
with what is in the space—  constructing and reconstructing 
both body and environment.
The stage is awash in stark yellow light and haze, the original 
set dismantled. But the tardigrade persists anew. “Tardigrade becomes 
decaying  dying humanoid becomes prehistoric bird. . . .  It’s nonlinear 
and organisms are devolving as much as evolving.”
A dissimulation of Finches in collective bird song tweet requiem in 
D- minor, polyphonic tones carry on the wind. Warm rain falling. Steam. 
Lyrebirds mimic chainsaws while Bowerbirds collect and  angle sinews of 
iridescent cabling, building the form of an ancient child’s body. Soft-  bodied 
legless larvae are downloaded, Leeches placed on the  nervous system  gently 
animate this lobotomized vessel. Iris dilates red .
High-  vibrational nerve energy body. Shoulders and chest swell for -
ward as your wings are thrown, flicking backward. Fin  gers on tips. High- 
level alertness tracking through body. Sensitivity to bird calls and stimuli 
~ scan three points for signs of threat .
In forests around the world, automated detection systems are at work 
scanning horizons for signs of wildfires. Cameras programmed with al -
gorithms scan landscapes at distances up to sixty kilo  meters for signs 
of smoke or fire. A positive result sets off a cascade of commands, from 
detection leading to localization within less than ten minutes. Reports 
are sent to fire crews who are meant to be on the ground within a  matter 
of a few more minutes. Aviation can be triggered next for callout. Fires 
are in turn extinguished in a rapid, digitally augmented, and automated 
system for responding to expanding and intensifying fire landscapes. 1 
As one example of an automated environment that has now become 
a signature infrastructure of a changing planet, forest fire detection 
systems indicate how ecologies and ecosystems are increasingly trans -
forming into automated environments that at once monitor hazardous 
and disastrous events while creating response infrastructures—  often 
concentrated in wealthier regions— that attempt to manage a planet 
in crisis. Digital technologies undertake detection and actuation as an 
articulation of smartness. The automated responses that unfold per -
form according to programmed and adaptive logics of how to manage 
the growing threat of fire, typically through suppression—  even when 
fire can be an integral component of landscapes and their regeneration.
Digital ecologies now describe much more than the silicon 
architectures of computer networks placed in assorted environments. 
Computational systems are transforming the planet into automated 
and automatable media through integrated information networks that 
monitor and manage increasingly polluted, saturated, and stressed en -
vironments. A United Nations Environment Programme article written 
by authors with expertise in biodiversity and digital transformation 23.  Community Ecol  ogy —  
Ecosystem —  Automated Environments
Jennifer Gabrys
 Jennifer Gabrys  183
outlines how planetary datasets and “frontier technologies” could be 
joined up and deployed in a race to save the planet. 2 In an accompanying 
infographic that provides an audit of the many information technologies 
currently monitoring the earth, readers learn that as of 2019  there  were 
4,987 satellites in orbit, five billion phones providing geocoded data, 
and an anticipated 75 billion sensors planned to be in operation by 2025. 
Computational systems are remotely sensing deforestation, tracking 
movement ecologies, and detecting environmental  hazards in varied 
locations worldwide.
 These systems are not just collecting data, however. They are 
also operationalizing automated environments. Populated with all man -
ner of digital technologies, from environmental sensors and the inter -
net of  things to remote sensing, drones, robots, data servers, machine 
learning and ai, environments are now  under increasing observation. 
Monitoring infrastructures tune in to daily and seasonal events: they 
take the “pulse” of the planet, gather data that can be used to make sys -
tems more efficient, and respond to disaster scenarios, while also facil -
itating extractive industries. From smart forests to smart oceans, smart 
soils, smart rivers, smart lakes, smart atmospheres, and smart cities,  there 
are multiple environments that are wired and programmed to enable on -
going monitoring and real- time management. 3  Here, smart  operates as 
a digital logic of enhanced observation, connection, and functionality. 
But smart technologies can also amplify the perceived intelligence of or -
ganisms and ecosystems by, for instance, digitally monitoring pro  cesses 
of plants as they sense and respond to environments. Digital sensors, in 
other words, sense “natural” sensors. With data gathered through  these 
observations, pro  cesses of monitoring environments easily shift to man -
aging and automating them. Preventative decisions can be taken to 
limit pollution or resource quotas, or to adjust the planetary thermo -
stat through computationally enabled geo-  engineering technologies.
Automated environments do not merely remap ecological 
dynamics within cybernetic and network logics. Instead, they signal 
 toward a near- future programming of milieus that is being set in mo -
tion to manage resource flows and mitigate against the overstepping 
of “planetary bound  aries.” 4 While the nine planetary bound  aries—  
including biodiversity, biogeochemical flows, and climate change—  
reach points of stress and uncertainty,  these dynamics further inform 
attempts to mitigate and manage environmental crisis. 5 Y et who de -
cides on the designation of  these bound  aries, when they are reached, 
184  Informatics of Dominationand what responses should be taken? How might informatic programs 
be designed to enable and disable forms of life to optimally survive 
within  these operating systems? Increasingly, such decisions are coded 
into informatics systems that sense, alert, and actuate responses to events 
such as wildfires, deforestation, or other environmental disturbances. As 
a digital actuation of ecosystem  services, automated environments zero 
in on what environmental and computer scientists designate as the es -
sential functionalities of ecologies and in turn augment and automate 
 these pro  cesses to ensure an optimal cascade of ecological operations.
The automation of environments, in other words, could also 
involve the automation of politics. Decisions about environments can 
relocate from spaces and pro  cesses of demo  cratic governance to au -
tomated programs. The designation and use of resources can become 
a  process governed by technology companies and  owners of datasets. 
Public engagement can further require access to digital infrastructures 
for contributing to observations and negotiations, which could restrict 
the citizens and citizenships involved with environmental governance. 
 These pro  cesses inevitably give rise to di ff  er ent planetary subjects and 
formations of planetary governance, since decisions about how to as -
sess and act on environmental change are distributed through com -
putational systems. Y et  these same systems are never  free of power or 
the distinct ways of valuing (or overlooking) environmental relations. 
Power imbalances, extractive forms of environmental governance, and 
reductive environmental citizenships could be further encoded into 
computational systems, as has already been demonstrated in extensive 
scholarship on embedded forms of bias. 6
Similar to the smart environments discussed in the introduction 
to this text, the automated and digitalized technologies for environmen -
tal management can create coded and embedded forms of planetary 
governance that would seem to inevitably unfold as part of the logic 
of coded systems. Planetary systems, planetary bound  aries, and plan -
etary ecologies become the focus of technopo  liti cal management that 
is distributed throughout digital devices and infrastructures. A more 
perfect, responsive, optimized, and automated informatics becomes a 
proxy prob  lem that, if solved, would in turn remedy planetary crises. 
Automated detection and response systems manage  hazards, risks, and 
disasters that threaten or are unfolding. Operations for managing and 
governing environments are made pos  si ble through this dual logic of 
 Jennifer Gabrys  185
rendering the world as one common prob  lem, and of rendering the 
instruments that would work on that prob  lem as equally singular in the 
form of coding to enable ongoing exchange and capital accumulation, 
even when managing the resources that would be exhausted by  these 
operations.
At the same time, the very technologies that would communi -
cate planetary crises are in part contributing to the damaging condi -
tions they would control. 7 Just as informatics unfold through recurring 
upgrades and accelerations,  these same dynamics further transform the 
constitution of environments and environmental subjects that would be 
monitored and activated within cir  cuits of communication and control. 
Automated environments indicate yet another ratcheting up of  these 
technoscientific dynamics and the remaking of milieus through the 
automated interconnection of information and operation, or in other 
words, the streamlining of observation and intervention, sensing and 
actuating. Informatics signals the activation of control dynamics. Y et 
it also demonstrates how communication technologies require regular 
upgrades and updates to curtail crises. 8
Moreover, the latest wave of informatics in the form of Industry 
4.0 and Forestry 4.0 technologies is extending computational logics to 
shape and respond to ecological and planetary transformation and col -
lapse, while also enabling expanded forms of extraction. Forestry 4.0 
initiatives that span from Canada to Norway and beyond are especially 
emblematic of how computational systems would itemize, datafy, sense, 
and connect forest systems for optimized yields, harvesting, and distri -
bution. As one film from FPInnovations, a Canadian private nonprofit 
 organization, illustrates, forest inventories can be optimized, tree se  lection 
can be streamlined, automated vehicles can harvest, and supply chains 
can distribute timber in the most efficient way pos  si ble through the aid of 
pervasive and advanced informatic technologies. 9 Through informatics, 
however,  these forests are always configurable and available as timber 
commodities. Other pos  si ble ways of engaging with, cultivating, and 
experiencing forests are rendered secondary or  nonexistent.
 Here, forests become generalizable, detached from specific places 
and communities, as they are made into more uniform and streamlined 
resources. Informatic technologies in their latest interconnected and au -
tomated formations collapse and foreclose forests that do not readily 
circulate within commodity cir  cuits. Y et for many Indigenous, tradi -
186  Informatics of Dominationtional, and local communities around the world, a complex and pluralistic 
range of forest experiences, encounters, and livelihoods unfold with and 
through forest environments. 10 Forest ecologies are not always comput -
able, or not in  these ways. They could even give rise to other compu -
tational practices that work against the easy conversion of forests into 
timber and environments into extractable resources.
Informatics in the form of computational systems have remade 
ecol  ogy and ecosystems. Smart forests spring up at the nexus of ecol  ogy 
and informatics within the context of planetary overload, toxification, 
collapse, and transformation. They demonstrate how ecol  ogy and infor -
matics shift from an analy sis of networks to the reconstitution of earth 
systems as more seamless, productive, and response- ready automated 
 service ecologies that are now being programmed and reprogrammed. 
In such a techno- scientific proj  ect of automated planetary governance, 
 there are just as many possibilities for power imbalances to arise. 11 The 
management of environments could as easily lead to containment and 
elimination of ways of life not aligned with extractive enterprises. The 
logic of capital accumulation could be written into the computational 
programs of planetary governance. This is already the case in the devel -
opment of smart cities. The specter of automated environments indi -
cates the multiple smart ecologies, including smart forests, that could 
be orchestrated through command-  and-  control scripts.
Y et automated environments are also a provocation to work 
from within  these machinic quandaries, while not demanding purity 
or unity in attempting to make sense of the multiple computational 
proj  ects that characterize planetary management and governance. 12 
Visions for a wired planet proceed from a unified vision of the globe. 
But what automated environments demonstrate, haunted as they are 
by the ancestors of informatic ecosystems, is that such gestures  toward 
global unity are bound to collapse  under the pretensions of containment 
and control. T echnologies for sensing forests might enable the automa -
tion of greater and more pernicious forms of extraction. Alternatively, 
practices of sensing forests could generate worlds for more- than- human 
flourishing. 13 How might it be pos  si ble to rework and reinvent  these 
technologies, practices, and environments  toward less extractive and 
more generative engagements? Perhaps one place to start would be to 
question the politics and programs of automation and to accommo -
date multiple ways of “being planetary as praxis.” 14 In other words, the 
planetary is a shifting and pluralistic proj  ect that cannot collapse into 
 Jennifer Gabrys  187
digital logics of detection and response. Instead, environmental sensing 
practices might consider how tactics of building, coding, and weaving 
from within the complex and situated cir  cuits of environmental change 
might occur. This is an approach that works from within the informatics 
of domination to transform and work against its extractive and unjust 
logics and practices.
Notes
 1.  There are many digital technologies operating in the space of automated fire 
detection. For example, see iq Fire Watch, https:// www .  iq - firewatch  . com / . This is part 
of a component of a larger research proj ect, Smart Forests, which investigates automa -
tion and optimization as modes of planetary governance within forest environments. 
See Jennifer Gabrys, “Smart Forests and Data Practices: From the Internet of Trees to 
Planetary Governance,” Big Data and Society  7, no. 1 (January 2020): 1–10; and Smart 
Forests, https:// www .  smartforests .  net / .
 2. Jillian Campbell and David E. Jensen, “The Pressing Need for a Global Digital 
Ecosystem,” Medium , September 17, 2019, https:// medium  . com / @UNDP / the  - pressing  
- need - for  - a - global -  digital -  ecosystem -aa10a9f8df56 .
 3. Jennifer Gabrys, Program Earth: Environmental Sensing Technology and the 
Making of a Computational Planet  (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2016).
 4. Johan Rockström et al., “Planetary Bound  aries: Exploring the Safe Operating 
Space for Humanity,” Ecol ogy and Society  14, no. 2 (2009): 32, https:// www . jstor  . org  
/ stable /26268316 .
 5. See Stockholm Resilience Centre, “Planetary Bound  aries,” https://  www  
. stockholmresilience . org / 4  . 1fe8f33123572b59ab80007039 .html .
 6. For example, see Emily M. Bender et al., “On the Dangers of Stochastic Parrots: 
Can Language Models Be T oo Big?  🦜,” in FAccT ’21: Proceedings of the 2021  acm  Confer -
ence on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency  (New Y ork: Association for Computing 
Machinery, 2021), 610–23.
 7. See also Jennifer Gabrys, “Powering the Digital: From Energy Ecologies to 
Electronic Environmentalism,” in Media and the Ecological Crisis , ed. Richard Maxwell, 
Jon Raundalen, and Nina Lager V estberg (New Y ork: Routledge, 2015), 3–18.
 8. In a related way, James Beniger analyzes the recurring crises of information 
overload and the technologies that arise to manage  these crises, while also further exac -
erbating  these prob  lems. See James Beniger, The Control Revolution: Technological and 
Economic Origins of the Information Society  (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
1989). As an update to Beniger, and with the aid of Haraway’s reading of informatics of 
domination in relation to ecosystems, crisis takes on a more planetary significance, where 
the technologies that would monitor and manage pollution further lead to its pollution 
and collapse.
 9. The Smart Forests Atlas documents some of  these Forestry 4.0 proj ects, and the 
FPInnovations film specifically. See Kate Lewis Hood, “Industry/Forestry 4.0,” Logbooks  
(blog), Smart Forests Atlas, https:// atlas . smartforests . net / en / logbooks / fpinnovations  
- forestry -40 .
188  Informatics of Domination 10. Jennifer Gabrys et al., “Reworking the  Political in Digital Forests: The Cos -
mopolitics of Socio- technical Worlds,” Pro gress in Environmental Geography  1, nos. 1–4 
(2022): 58–83.
 11. Donna J. Haraway, “A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, T echnology, and Socialist-  
Feminism in the Late Twentieth  Century,” in Simians, Cyborgs, and  Women: The Rein -
vention of Nature  (New Y ork: Routledge, 1991), 161.
 12. Haraway, “A Cyborg Manifesto,” 154.
 13. For an example of how sensing technologies have been built, coded, and re -
worked within and against the informatics of domination, see the Citizen Sense proj ect 
at http:// citizensense .net .
 14. See also Jennifer Gabrys, “Becoming Planetary,” e- flux Architecture , Oc -
tober 2018, https:// www . e - flux  . com / architecture / accumulation / 217051 / becoming  
-planetary .
For Dad
1.
I’m chained and chaining, bound to pasts and linking up with  those 
with whom I learn.
Fish, mud crawler, ape, Man, mobile device (a devolution -
ary pressure); ape, Neanderthal, Man; ape, Negroid, Mongoloid, 
Caucasoid.
While  these chains appear as serial compositions, they are 
anything but; rather, they are temporally promiscuous compactions of 
fantasy and vio  lence.  They’ve been around the block.
Take another chain, a neo- imperial supply chain that relies on 
the vulnerable who  haven’t made it into the frame, but who still frame 
it:  children mine precious metals,  women polish iPads, and apex pred -
ators (that’s you and me) buy consumer electronics on credit  until 
we throw them away and upgrade. Then the supply chain loops back 
around where Brown and Black men sit in clouds of toxic smoke in 
e- wastelands, tearing callused fin  gers as they pry out the last bits still 
worth anything. A supply chain is a debt chain; some debts we pay, 
 others are unpayable.
Oh,  there’s one last chain, a pedagogical one, that connects 
me, my Dad, and my students to Blackness, as well to the Black quan -
tum futurities to which we are attached, Black feminist futurities, 
“grammar[s] of possibility,” that may offer modest hope for retreat, 
refuge, and rest. 1  These chains can be lifelines, which, in turn, can 24.  Racial Chain of Being —  
Neo- imperialism, United Nations  
Humanism —  the More  Things Change-
the More  Things Change
Shaka McGlotten
190  Informatics of Dominationrecall for us that the chains that prevent our flourishing can be collec -
tively warped or blowtorched, that they can be broken, and that we 
can be unchained.
T ellingly, I first wrote home  when I meant to write hope .
2.
The racial chain of being has always been an informatics of domination.
Neo- imperialism and United Nations humanism  aren’t scary 
new networks; they are predicated upon and still animated by an anti- 
Black operating system. 2 Black folx have long been subject to datafica -
tion, to quantification. Katherine McKittrick calls this the “mathe  matics 
of black life,” the breathless lists: ship registries, The Book of Negroes ; 
insurance policies (recall the Zong), redlining, disease vectors. 3 Brand -
ing, meet corporate branding. 4 Phrenology, meet biometrics. 5 And Jim 
Crow, this is Jim Code. 6
The more  things change, the more they chain.
3.
My mom went along with my dad’s desire to name me Shaka. As a young 
child, I recall a series of prints leaning against the base of the wall in my 
parents’ bedroom. They  were part of a series called  Great Kings of Africa  
created by Anheuser- Busch. Shaka was among the featured kings and, 
like  those featured on other prints, was meant to inspire Afrocentric 
pride. In the image, he holds a spear and shield in a foregrounded por -
trait, while  behind him tribesmen gather.
So I was named  after a corporate marketing effort, and that’s 
OK. My dad used the prints as mnemonics to help bind me to Black -
ness and its real myths. Roots  was a blunter instrument to remind me 
of the stock from which I derive, and the stocks in which some of my 
ancestors  were bound, the ancestors that  weren’t plantation  owners 
like Ros well King or slave-  holding Confederate officer James Urqhuart, 
who founded North Augusta, South Carolina. I learned about  these 
men from my mom’s  family during one of my very rare visits, as well as 
hours spent on Ancestry  . com.
Then  there  were the Black Panthers. In the late 1960s,  after a 
few years of military  service in Berlin, Germany, where he translated in -
tercepted East German communications, my dad landed in Portland, 
 Shaka McGlotten  191
Oregon, to attend Reed College on the gi Bill.  There, he helped found 
the Black Student  Union and became minister of education in the local 
Panthers chapter. My dad dipped the day he went to the chapter  house 
 after a tipoff to warn every  one  there, “Get rid of the guns and girls. The 
police are coming.” Several years  later, my dad dropped out of a PhD 
program in sociology at Berkeley before reenlisting. He always said that 
he hated the Army, but  there  were few, if any, professional opportuni -
ties for him in the early 1970s that would provide the material security 
needed with me on the way.
Now he lives in a  house he and my stepmom built on a few acres 
outside of San Antonio, T exas. It’s comfortable, though I always find the 
 house cold, and cnn  plays noisily on the always-on tvs in  every room. 
He does the yard work, assisted by his motorized scooter. He sits out -
side on the porch where he smokes weed and watches the birds. And he 
goes fishing with a dwindling friend group whenever he can, his Black 
rage tempered into mellow progressivism. At seventy- five, he possesses 
an enviable optimism. “I’m so blessed, son.”
4.
Increasingly frustrated by their exclusion and by the terms of their 
potential inclusion in toxic, predominantly white spaces, some of my 
Black students’ visions of Black flourishing (re)turn them  toward the 
separatisms my dad attached to in the 1960s and ’70s.
In New Black Ethnographies, my students and I read anthro -
pologist Zora Neale Hurston, Hortense Spillers, and the Combahee 
River Collective Statement, among much  else. We also read Octavia 
Butler’s Dawn .7 Talk about the chaining seriality of racial ambivalence! 
In the novel, Lilith Iyapo is rescued by an alien species, the Oankali, 
 after humanity’s destruction of the earth. However, they are as much 
captors as rescuers. The Oankali have an acquisitive curiosity that inex -
orably drives them  toward making contact with other life- forms. They 
are traders in genes, promising health, extended life, and an Oankali 
companion, who  will be lover and minder both. With  great difficulty, 
Lilith navigates her relationship with the Oankali, who, depending on 
her willingness to cede to their demands for trade,  will determine 
 whether she   will sleep in suspension for eternity or experience a  future 
in which she  will raise hybrid offspring. She resentfully accepts, enter -
ing into a nonetheless not wholly involuntary symbiosis with Nikanj, 
192  Informatics of Dominationan Ooloi—  a mediating third sex among the Oankali— who becomes 
her companion and  future coparent.
Lilith has another task; she must Awaken other  humans who 
have remained in suspension and convince them to accept the same 
bargain.  Things do not go well, confirming the Oankali’s diagnosis that 
what most makes  humans so dangerous to each other, other species, 
and even worlds is that we are hierarchical and intelligent, a deadly mix.
The more  things stay the same.
In the course, students create speculative ethnographies in which 
they imagine themselves as anthropologists in  future worlds they have 
created. Some lean into a fantastical optimism: a queer femme beach 
world where every  one does their own  thing with magic crystals. Magic 
realism takes on grimmer tones, too. The orchard around which a re -
mote Black community’s social culture is  organized has grown from 
the corpses of their dead, gathered from an ancient battlefield. The trees 
grow Afros, and their branches transform into long, manicured nails.
Rather than fight to inch forward, many of my students instead 
imagine getting out. In their freedom dreams, bipoc  get out and dis-
appear, they go under ground or  under the sea. Maroon socie ties keep it 
on the dl in repurposed caves built within the forgotten infrastructures of 
the Under ground Railroad and in improvised socie ties built in the burned-  
out remnants of housing proj  ects. Get out: fuck reform or inclusion, much 
less conquest. Get out: escape, retreat, and make refuge for kith and kin.
5.
The manifesto by liberation front La Mano NegreX, or  lmx , caused tur -
moil between  people of color, white nationalists, and pacifists alike. Reddit 
became a flashpoint when racist trolls circulated memes of black girls gone 
missing in the DC area, captioned “See, Niggers  Don’t Belong  Here. ” Viral 
videos of Karens threatening black and brown  people circulated at a fe -
vered pace, eventually pushing  things over the edge. A race war broke out. 
The descendants of the revolutionaries eventually create an autonomous 
state in the territory of what was once New York State, renaming the area 
the La Republica Choco-  Cafuzo .
6.
This is what they need now. This is what I need now.
 Shaka McGlotten  193
7.
My dad’s chimerical choice of my name activated my  political atten -
tiveness from a young age, an attentiveness that has always informed 
my teaching. As in Butler’s Dawn , symbiosis is at work, and so is what I 
think of as a retro-  causality. We—my  father, myself, and my students—  
shape one other lovingly, furiously, and with deep need. Butler’s Lilith 
Iyapo is the already living  future of  those she must Awaken, having 
navigated a world they have never known, anticipating their hurts and 
 pleasures like a  Mother. Or a lowercase  father. I’m chained to him, my 
students to me. My students are now the  future my  father  imagined and 
fought for; and so they are the  future immanent to that past. Symbiosis 
and pedagogy.  People learn, they link up, and they love. Even so, griefs 
can span centuries.
When I challenged some of my Black and Brown students to 
rethink their exclusion of white  people from their worlds, they narrowed 
their eyes, sucked their teeth, and shrugged. “They have their  worlds. We 
need our own.” The white students in the class kept quiet and listened.
When Black worlds thrive in my students’ work, they thrive 
 because they are Black worlds.
I won  der if I would learn anything at all but for my students.
“Then, a small confused Awakening,” like the wrenching clar -
ity of getting woke. 8
8.
It’s taken me awhile to get  here, but the prompt for this chapter asked 
me to consider the con  temporary resonances of Haraway’s chart and/
or to consider adding a new term. I thought of a few of the latter: the 
more  things change, Afrotopias, United States of Africa Space Agency. 
I  settle on the first and hope that the editors  will allow me a repetition, 
a fourth term.  We’re talking about chains  after all. And this repetition 
is a repetition, and it’s a repetition with a difference. The more  things 
change, the more  things stay the same: “benign” and virulent expres -
sions of anti- Blackness remain everywhere pre sent and are in this 
moment increasingly renormalized. Y et, too, the more  things change, 
the more  things change. Baby- step changes can amplify (through fury, 
desperation, love) the desire for other ever yet more ambitious ones, like 
renewed efforts to enact ambitious and absolutely necessary structural 
194  Informatics of Dominationchanges. Or to create spaces for healing and the recharging of resilien -
cies necessary to keep fighting, to protect the hard- to- carve-  out, fragile 
outsides from white supremacy. cnn  and a boat. T eaching. Marronage.
At antiracist protests you see signs reading, “We  haven’t come 
this far to come this far.”
The chart below  doesn’t map befores and  afters; it’s not temporally 
faithful to sequential periodization. Instead, it is an ironic experiment 
focused entirely on the racial chain of being and the resonating conti -
nuity of anti- Blackness and Afrotopias alike.
Tuskegee Ancestry  . com
Book of Negroes  Gerrymandering, Census
Swastikas on dorm walls “ Continuing the  
Conversation: A Five- Part  
Dialogue Series”
Primitive accumulation #BlackLivesMatter
Django Unchained  White fragility
Star Wars VII–  IX  Trolls, bots, review 
aggregators
Zombies Trolls, bots
Pipeline prob  lems T enure, burnout
Drums Black Twitter
Birth of a Nation  La La Land  Moonlight
Cyborg  Black Macho and the Myth  
of the Superwoman
“ Mama’s Baby, Papa’s  maga  
Maybe: An American  
Grammar Book”
Plantation School
Plantation Prison industrial complex
Plantation Redlining, affordable housing
 Shaka McGlotten  195
Plantation  ptss  (post- traumatic slave 
syndrome)
Settler colonialism  Involuntary settlers with  
nowhere to go
V oodoo, possession Algorithm
BlackGodz  . com seo
Black codes “ Black Code,” a special issue  
of The Black Scholar
 Middle Passage   Middle Passage  
(cf. Plantation above)
Mathe  matics of the unliving  Algorithmic risk  
assessment scores
Africatown BlackPlanet  . com
Sorrow songs  Streaming Beyoncé’s  
Homecoming  on Netflix
Racial chain of being  Human error
Notes
 1. See Tina Campt, Listening to Images: An Exercise in Counterintuition  (Durham, 
NC: Duke University Press, 2017); and Rasheedah Phillips, ed., Black Quantum Futurism: 
Theory and Practice , vol. 1 (Philadelphia:  House of  Future Sciences Books/AfroFuturist 
Affair, 2015).
 2. Kara Keeling, “Queer os,” Cinema Journal  53, no. 2 (Winter 2014): 152–57 .
 3. Katherine McKittrick, “Mathe  matics Black Life,” Black Scholar  44, no. 2 (2014): 
16–28, http:// dx  . doi . org / 10  . 1080 / 00064246  . 2014  .11413684 ; Shaka McGlotten, “Black 
Data,” in No Tea, No Shade: New Queer of Color Critique , ed. E. Patrick Johnson (Durham, 
NC: Duke University Press, 2016), 262–86.
 4. Simone Browne, Dark  Matters: On the Surveillance of Blackness  (Durham, NC: 
Duke University Press, 2015).
 5. Browne, Dark  Matters .
 6. Ruha Benjamin, Race  after Technology  (Medford, MA: Polity, 2020).
 7. Octavia Butler, Dawn  (New Y ork:  Popular Library, 1987).
 8. Butler, Dawn , 3.
In 1959, a Euro-  Australian Anglican priest in charge of the Boianai 
Mission off the southern coast of Papua New Guinea reported sight -
ing several foreign- looking glowing objects hovering in the sky above 
the mission. Seeing humanlike figures walking on the surface of one 
of the flying discs, he and a group of Papuan witnesses waved at them, 
and they waved back. In 2023, the underwater remnants of a meteorite 
that exploded over the Pacific Ocean in 2014 near Papua New Guinea 
 were uncovered by an Israeli American astrophysicist at Harvard. The 
scientist claims that the meteor traveled from interstellar space outside 
our solar system and that the meteor materials may be technological 
trash— like plastics in our oceans—  discarded by ancient civilizations 
beyond Earth. The US Office of the Director of National Intelligence 
and Department of Defense have increased their surveillance of uniden -
tified aerial phenomena since 2022.
Pacific Centuries
Seas and oceans are local, shifting, connected, boundless. They defy the 
separation between land bodies, territorial bound  aries, nation- states. 
 There is no smooth passage. The Pacific is the dominant name given 
to the wild mixture of sea, land, sky, submarine,  human, nonhuman, 
and extraterrestrial worlds that have evaded efforts to know and 
own what has been defined as the non–  Western  Hemisphere. In its 
vari ous names, Mar del Sur, El Oceano Pacifico, the  Great Ocean, Stille 
Ocean, South Sea, Pacific Rim, the Pacific is the byproduct of white cis-  
heteropatriarchal imperialism, capital, and science, which seek to pac -
ify multiple worlds into an open surface for traversal. For Columbus, 25.  White Cap  i tal ist Patriarchy —  
Informatics of Domination
Jian Neo Chen
 Jian Neo Chen  197
Balboa, and Magellan- Elcano in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, 
the Pacific was the boundary and route that secured claims on the new 
world of the Indigenous Amer i cas by imagining what was beyond. 
Cook’s eighteenth-  century voyages to locate the transit of V enus, T erra 
Australis, and fi  nally a northwest passage between the Atlantic and Pa -
cific brought British and  European empires into Oceania and the South 
Pacific  under the banners of science and myth.
The rise of the United States as an imperial superpower by the 
end of the Second World War depended on inheriting and overtaking 
 these legacies. In 1898, the colonization of Cuba and Puerto Rico; the 
Carolina, Marshall, and Mariana Islands (including Guam) in Micro -
nesia; and the Philippines following the Spanish American War along 
with the annexation of the Kingdom of Hawai‘i forged US dominance 
over oceanic pathways between the Atlantic and Pacific and from Oce -
ania and the South Pacific into the seas of the North Pacific.  These ter -
ritorial spoils in the Pacific facilitated US expansion beyond Indigenous 
and Latinx territories on the North American continent. They estab -
lished the United States as the controller and profiter of geographies 
and movement from the Atlantic to the Pacific to the Atlantic. By re -
placing Spain, Britain, and other  European empires in the Pacific by the 
turn of the twentieth  century, the United States usurped the maritime 
networks established centuries  earlier between western US territories, 
Mexico, and Central and South Amer i ca and locations in the Pacific 
Islands and Asia, including the Acapulco-  Manila-  Canton trade. Ascen -
sion of the United States as a maritime power in the Pacific helped to 
shape Pacific worlds into an interimperial region—  a Pacific Rim— for 
exploiting natu  ral resources and  labor; developing military, economic, 
and  political instruments; and population, epidemic, and environmental 
science benefiting US,  European, and Asian empires.
The codification of the Asia- Pacific region  after World War II 
signals the military and nuclear pacification of Oceania, the Pacific 
Islands, Japan, and  Korea and the advancement on more Pacific and 
Indian Ocean worlds as lines of attack and barricade against Rus  sia, 
China, North  Korea, and Arab and Islamic territories. Then president 
Obama, who was often described as the “first Pacific president” by his 
administration, announced a renewed focus on an Indo- Pacific region 
through his “Pivot (or Rebalance) to Asia” strategy in 2011, following 
the withdrawal of US troops that had occupied  Afghanistan since 2001 
and Iraq since 2003 (while troops still remain in Syria) as part of the US 
198  Informatics of Dominationglobal war on terror. 1 The Trump administration identified a “  free and 
open Indo- Pacific” as its top priority in the face of what it described as 
military, technological, economic, and ideological threats to national 
security posed especially by China, Rus  sia, North  Korea, and Iran. 2 
Whereas the Obama administration did not clearly define Indo-  Pacific  
and used the term sparingly, along with Asia-  Pacific  and Asia and the 
Pacific , the Trump administration used the term regularly as a new re -
gional concept and referred to India as an impor tant strategic partner 
along with Japan and Australia. The Biden administration’s Indo- Pacific 
strategy credits the Obama administration for recognizing the histor -
ical and growing importance of the region while repeating the Trump 
administration’s commitment to a  free and open Indo- Pacific protected 
against aggression from the  People’s Republic of China. Biden’s presi -
dency cements the understanding of the United States as an Indo- Pacific 
power and specifically describes the region’s geographic expanse “from 
our Pacific coastline to the Indian Ocean” and its di ff  er ent corners 
“from Northeast Asia and Southeast Asia, to South Asia and Oceania, 
including the Pacific Islands.” 3 The concept of the Indo- Pacific not only 
acknowledges the military, economic, and technological influence of 
India and South Asia. It reasserts the Pacific roots of US transnational 
hegemony and stretches them further into the Indian Ocean to profit 
the United States’ ongoing cold wars, wars on terror, and domestic ra -
cial gender class wars.
Biden is the first US president to develop a national strategy 
focused on the Pacific Islands. His objective is to build a distinct and 
unified Pacific Islands region to combat climate change; ensure freedom 
of navigation and overflight and unimpeded trade flows; and protect 
the sovereignty and security of the Pacific Islands and the United States 
against increasing geopo  liti cal competition. 4 Citing the two million 
US citizens living in the Pacific Islands and the US homelands of the 
Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, Guam, American 
Samoa, and Hawai‘i, Biden’s strategy commits to a regional part -
nership based on friendship,  family, or neighborly feeling instead of 
geopolitics. Y et intimacy between the United States and the Pacific Is -
lands has been a relationship of force, instrumentalization, and coerced 
 dependency. Following Spanish, German, and then  Japanese colonization 
of the islands defined as Micronesia, the US Navy and Department of 
the Interior began to administer the more than two thousand islands of 
Micronesia (except for Guam, which was already an unincorporated 
 Jian Neo Chen  199
US territory)  under a United Nations–  appointed trusteeship in 1947 . 
 Under trusteeship, the United States conducted sixty- seven nuclear 
bomb tests, as well as twelve biological weapon tests, and dumped tons 
of radioactive soil from Nevada nuclear testing sites in the Marshall Is -
lands between 1946 and 1958. By the end of the trusteeship in 1986 in 
response to calls for autonomy within the territory’s districts, the newly 
self-  governing Republic of Palau, Republic of the Marshall Islands, 
and the Federated States of Micronesia (Kosrae, Pohnpei, Chuuk, and 
Y ap) had entered into Compacts of  Free Association with the United 
States. This  free association gave the United States the right to build 
and operate military bases in  these nations in exchange for economic 
assistance and US military defense. Separately, the Northern Mariana 
Islands became a commonwealth of the United States, sharing the sta -
tus of Puerto Rico (and the Philippine islands before  independence) as 
an unincorporated territory and commonwealth of the United States. 
With Papua New Guinea and the Republic of Palau signing onto more 
US military operations in Oceania, US strategic partnerships with the 
Pacific Islands continue destructive interimperial and settler colonial 
legacies in the Indigenous Pacific through the guise of shared humani -
tarian and environmental concern.
Pacific Imaginations
The romantic foreignness of the Pacific. The Atlantic reduced through 
captive calculation. The  Caribbean is the Indies; Cuba is Japan and 
China; and Hispaniola is southern Arabia. Further west to the east 
where white cap  i tal ist cis- heteropatriarchy liberates itself from its own 
“dark” myths and empires to rediscover taxonomies of one’s own su -
premacy. Not settler imperialists. Explorer- missionary-  artist- scientists.
When the figures in the sky waved back,  Father William Booth 
Gill asked a Papuan boy to bring him a flashlight, pencil, and paper so 
he could rec  ord the minute-  by- minute movements. The boy turned on 
the flashlight and waved it back and forth at the craft. The disc- shaped 
object seemed to react by moving back and forth like the flashlight. 
The  thing returned the next day outside the church just before  evening 
 service. In what has been classified by  European comparative anatomists, 
geographers, naturalists, and anthropologists as the Melanesian heart 
of darkness in the Pacific, the vision provided both hierarchy and uni -
versality to white, blackened, and foreign bodies and their technologies 
200  Informatics of Dominationand to the social and spatial divisions between nature, culture, religion, 
and science.
Oceania and its connections to Pacific and Indian Ocean con -
tinents have served as empirical laboratories for the development of 
the  European and US modern sciences. Its sea lands, species,  peoples, 
environments, and cultures have been credited with an anachronistic 
natu  ral diversity that can be traced, classified, and manipulated more 
readily  because of the isolation of islands at sea and their exotic primi -
tivism. Each volcanic island is a paradise for evolutionary speculation.
 After studying the Chilean coast in 1835, Darwin sailed west on 
the Bea gle  into the Pacific, stopping at San Crist óbal in the Gal ápagos 
archipelago and then moving through the Hawaiian islands and parts 
of Melanesia. Having been pushed up from the ocean floor by volcanic 
activity,  these groups of islands must have been uninhabited by plants 
and animals originally. Darwin thought that the species found on  these 
islands had crossed the seas and then modified into their own unique 
species, found nowhere  else,  after arrival.
When we turn, however, to the T chambuli, we find a situation 
that while bizarre in one re spect, seems nevertheless more in -
telligible in another. The T chambuli have at least made the 
point of sex difference; they have used the obvious fact of sex 
as an  organizing point for the formation of social personality. 5
Observing the Arapesh, Mundugumor/Biwat, and T chambuli 
 peoples in Papua New Guinea in the 1930s, Margaret Mead argues that 
the personality traits described as feminine and masculine in the United 
States and  Europe have no basis in physiological sex. Differences be -
tween men and  women are culturally determined, and the force of this 
conditioning—in the face of the arbitrary world of traits— requires a 
complex enough society to condition without creating oppression, ho -
mogeneity, or deviance. While Indigenous groups uncover the funda -
mental laws of sex (and gender) in  human socie ties, their social  orders 
are too  simple to offer models for modern socie ties.
Disorienting circles between sex and gender and sexuality 
keep remaining in taxonomies of the Pacific. This disorientation fixes 
Indigenous Pacific worlds at the racialized thresholds between nature, 
culture, and science. Effeminate Melanesian boys, sexually available 
Polynesian muses, the sorcerer of Hiva Oa. Classifications of African 
 Jian Neo Chen  201
inferiority and Indigenous noble savagery developed in the Amer i cas 
and other  European colonies proj  ect onto Polynesia, Melanesia, Micro -
nesia. Quiros, Tasman, Bougainville, Marchand, Cook, and the many 
 others who come before and  after use the anachronic V enuses and mon -
sters of the Pacific to make the science between natu  ral use and social 
exchange speculative. Y et Indigenous Pacific worlds prove enduring, 
expansive, transcending.
“ Oceania” denotes a sea of islands with their inhabitants. 
The world of our ancestors was a large sea full of places to ex -
plore, to make their homes in, to breed generations of sea -
farers like themselves. . . .  They developed  great skills for 
navigating their  waters—as well as the spirit to traverse even 
the few large gaps that separated their island groups. 6
The ancient Polynesians conceived of their ocean as an expan -
sive highway connecting disparate coordinates in a rich network 
of genealogical alliances and exchange. The ocean’s isolated 
atolls and island clusters mirrored the myriad constellations 
of the sky above: the stars and galaxies whose sky maps had 
guided the islanders to new destinations. The vast dome of 
the sky—  conceptualized by the Polynesians as an expanse of 
space (vā) punctuated at intervals by time (tā)— was marked 
by the rising and setting of the sun at opposite ends of a fixed 
horizon, a useful reference point for a landscape that was other -
wise constantly in motion. Shifting with the tides and swells, 
this crescent- shaped canopy stretched overhead, tethered at 
each corner and broken only by the silhouettes of islands ris -
ing out of the sea. 7
Notes
 1. Barack Obama, “Remarks by President Obama to the Australian Parlia -
ment,” November 17, 2011, Washington, DC, transcript, the White  House, https://  
obamawhitehouse . archives . gov / the  - press - office / 2011 / 11 / 17 / remarks - president  - obama  
- australian -parliament .
 2. Donald Trump, “Remarks by President Trump at apec ceo  Summit, Da Nang, 
Vietnam,” November 10, 2017, Washington, DC, transcript, the White  House, https://  
trumpwhitehouse  . archives  . gov / briefings  - statements  / remarks - president  - trump  - apec  - ceo 
- summit  - da - nang -vietnam ; and US Department of State, A  Free and Open Indo-  Pacific: 
202  Informatics of DominationAdvancing a Shared Vision , November 4, 2019, https:// www . state . gov / wp  - content  
/ uploads / 2019 / 11 / Free  - and -  Open - Indo  - Pacific  - 4Nov2019 .pdf .
 3. The White  House, Indo-  Pacific Strategy of the United States , February 2022, 
https:// www . whitehouse . gov / wp  - content / uploads / 2022 / 02 / U . S .  - Indo  - Pacific  - Strategy  
.pdf .
 4. The White  House, Pacific Partnership Strategy of the United States , Sep -
tember 2022, https:// www . whitehouse . gov / wp  - content / uploads / 2022 / 09 / Pacific  
- Partnership  - Strategy  .pdf .
 5. Margaret Mead, Sex and Temperament in Three Primitive Socie ties (New Y ork: 
William Morrow, 1935), 288.
 6. Epeli Hau‘ofa, We Are the Ocean: Selected Works  (Honolulu: University of Ha -
wai‘i Press, 2008), 32.
 7. Maia Nuku, Atea: Nature and Divinity in Polynesia , Metropolitan Museum 
of Art Bulletin 76, no. 3 (New Y ork: Metropolitan Museum of Art, 2019): 5. Exhibition 
cata  log.
A televised advertisement from the late 1980s pre sents an extraterrestrial 
scene. Two astronauts float around a remote controller in zero gravity. 
One reaches out  toward the device and turns on a  television set that 
drifts into view, its arrival announced by a booming voice-  over: “Dae -
woo SuperVision II.” This is the line of  television sets manufactured in 
the 1980s by former South Korean conglomerate Daewoo. The camera 
closes in on the  television screen, which is playing an image of a tiger. 
The two screens— medium and diegesis— seemingly become one. A bee 
lands on the screen, right upon the tiger’s nose, only to be frightened 
away when the latter unleashes its menacing roar. Repre sen ta tion gives 
way to simulation as the telemediated animal appears to act directly 
upon the world, its life force standing in for the technological prowess 
of the advertised  television set that would in time displace the one in 
which the advertisement is playing.
But  there is a broader narrative of displacement to be told. 
Daewoo SuperVision II was just one of many consumer electronics 
from South  Korea that flooded the global market in the years of the 
country’s economic miracle, during which South Korean brands de -
cisively beat out competition from the West while  going head to head 
with  Japanese brands that first claimed their turf through the aggres -
sive industrial policies that South  Korea went on to emulate. The roar 
of the tiger exceeding the screen is thus symptomatic of the explosive 
growth achieved by the so-  called Asian Tigers—  originally Japan, South 
 Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Singapore, but  later also Indonesia, 
Thailand, and Malaysia— which more than rattled the halls of Western 
hegemony to spawn an entire genre of lit er a ture seeking to put a name to 
this phenomenon. While some sought recourse to the cultural through 26.  Scientific Management  
in Home/Factory —  Global Factory/
Electronic Cottage
Ho Rui An
204  Informatics of Dominationsuch figurations as “capitalism with Asian values” and “Confucian cap -
italism,”  others debated  whether the booming economies of the region 
exemplified laissez- faire capitalism or the neomercantilism so despised 
by the burgeoning Washington Consensus of the time. 1 Y et the attach -
ment to such totalities—  cultural, economic, or other  wise—  belies the 
real ity that the developmental strategies pursued by  these economies 
 were irreducible to the Cold War–  era ideological frameworks into which 
they  were often interpellated. The  Japanese bureaucracy, for one, did 
not produce a theory or model of its policies  until as late as the 1960s. 2 
Given this, instead of approaching  these economies as bounded enti -
ties to which essential (read: racial) properties are ascribed, it serves 
us better to think of them as nodes within a global network, with the 
developmental state accordingly  imagined less as an oppressive behe -
moth than a switchboard operator modulating rates of flow. The dif -
ference is between the disciplinary regimes of industrial capitalism and 
the informatics of domination that undergirds the electronic cottage 
in a global factory.
However, this distinction between a system based on the pro -
duction of type and one based on the regulation of flow is a difference 
that does not make all the difference. And perhaps no other image the -
matizes the continuity between the two imaginaries more than the one 
that Rachel Grossman bequeathed us in her influential essay: a  woman 
peering through a microscope as she assem bles the tiny components 
of the latest consumer device. 3 This figure that was  behind the digital 
revolution of the late twentieth  century was also more likely than not 
Asian. Y et racialization and sexualization  here proceeds through a pe -
culiar logic: the “oriental female” grasping a pair of tweezers with her 
nimble fin  gers is valorized for her pliability, that is, her ability to readily 
remold her body to the task. In other words, she is the type that subverts 
the very logic of type. But as a worker of the export pro  cessing zone 
notorious for its lack of  labor regulations, she is still subjected to the 
scientific management of the factory, one made even more paternalistic 
by the gendered division of  labor (factory man ag ers are overwhelm -
ingly male) and the zero tolerance for failure (an imperfect electronic 
component is worthless).
We can observe on this basis that the turn from the industrial 
workplace to  today’s information networks is not a historical rupture 
but an elaboration of the power entrenched in the ruling class within a 
transformed field of social relations that produces a new assemblage of 
 Ho Rui An  205
power.  There is, accordingly, a slippage that we need to redress in the 
very proposition of slipperiness of  those once- static categories that 
we sequence all too casually  these days as race, sex, and class. While 
it is certainly true that within  today’s networked circulations, race be -
comes racialization and sex becomes sexualization (and so on),  there 
is less a spectrum to be observed  today between direct producers and 
the  owners of the means of production than an ever- widening wealth 
gap. This is why in the va  ri e ties of inclusive capitalism being touted 
amid the ongoing meltdown of late capitalism, their progenitors can 
unblinkingly proclaim capitalism’s ability to survive the elimination of 
racial and sexual exploitation that  were inscribed at its origin, but can 
only avoid addressing the category of class altogether. 4 For sure,  there 
is the potential for class mobility, given that information networks 
are more easily hacked, and  there has also been the emergence of new 
classes, like the supermanagerial class especially dominant in East Asia 
and the self-  employed precariat that keep the platform economy  going 
the world over, but the structure of class remains, and must remain, 
26.1.  Production of semiconductor, 1990s. Photo: daewoo  Global 
Management Institute.
206  Informatics of Dominationdeeply hierarchical, even if the casualization of  labor means it might 
not be directly experienced as such. It is difficult, indeed literally im -
possible, to conceive of a class cyborg  under capitalism—  a ruling class 
of cyborgs, yes, but not class itself as cyborgian.  There  will never be a 
proletariat billionaire.
This is not to say that class is not already implicated in strug  gles 
against conditions of race or sex, for if we  were to just stay with how a 
feminist cyborg alone might implicate class politics, its critique of social 
reproduction, for one, would already be a good start at dismantling the 
general conditions of proletarianized cyborgization. Nonetheless, the 
historical score sheet shows that while co  ali tions built around feminism 
and/or antiracism have at best only inconsistently addressed the inequi -
ties of class, the per  sis tence of class formation has more often resulted 
in the renaturalization  of race and sex in moments of capitalism’s crisis, 
or when cyborgs prove too much even for capitalism itself. That is when 
we realize that the global factory, for all its reor ga ni za tion of racial and 
sexual relations, is still, at its base, a factory.
The global factory experienced its first major crisis with the 
so- called Asian financial crisis in 1997 . A wave of capital account liber -
alization in the early 1990s had led to a flood of foreign capital into the 
region. But the insistence of most governments on pegging their curren -
cies to the US dollar on the assumption that it would assure investors 
that they  were secured against exchange rate risk meant that, at some 
point, their currencies became severely overvalued as the United States 
experienced its own economic boom in the mid- nineties. In Thailand, 
efforts at defending the peg to the US dollar in the face of speculative 
attacks eventually drained its reserves, forcing the government to float 
the baht on July 2, 1997 . The size of the foreign debt owed by local firms 
and banks immediately ballooned. As the  bubble burst, capital fled the 
country while speculative attacks  were made on the currencies in the 
region, fi  nally driving Indonesia, Malaysia, and the Philippines to float 
their currencies as well. 5
What followed this fallout of networks was nothing less than 
a return to the old holisms that had been kept at bay by the miracle. 
Feeling vindicated, longtime skeptics of the region’s economic poten -
tial took no time to revive charges of crony capitalism, a term with a 
racialized history dating back to the 1980s, when it was applied to the 
Marcos kleptocracy in the Philippines. 6 Granted, it is indisputable that 
 factors like nepotism, collusion, and corruption often taken as endemic 
 Ho Rui An  207
to  these economies  were at play in the period leading up to the crisis, yet 
the particularistic idiom that framed the discourse amounted to what 
Laura Kang calls an “Asianization” of the crisis, which served, above all, 
to foreclose the ways by which the crisis was understood. 7 Suddenly, 
it was no longer hard work and discipline that defined the Confucian 
work ethic, but the favoring of bloodlines and communal associations, 
which critics argue had destroyed competitiveness and led to the cri -
sis. The direct role played by unrestrained capital mobility and short-  
term lending in precipitating the crisis was thus con  ve niently eclipsed. 
Consequently, when the most heavi  ly hit economies of Thailand, South 
 Korea, and Indonesia  were forced to turn to the International Monetary 
Fund ( imf ) for a bailout, the terms of the loan agreement mandated 
even more liberalization.
The results of the imf ’s interventions  were catastrophic. A fire 
sale ensued as investors rushed back into the market to buy up the de -
valued firms and assets, causing even more volatility and worsening 
the recession. Traditional gender lines  were redrawn as  women  were 
disproportionately laid off and compelled to resume their “natu  ral” 
role as caregivers for a family/nation on the brink. 8 Malaise turned 
into unrest as  people took to the streets, increasingly redirecting their 
anger from their local governments to the imf  and international inves -
tors. In Indonesia, a photo  graph of the managing director of the imf , 
Michel Camdessus, crossing his arms as he looked down on President 
Suharto signing away the country’s economic  future, triggered angry 
comparisons to the country’s colonial history. In Malaysia, effigies of 
George Soros burned  after the Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad, in 
statements laced with anti- Semitism, accused the currency trader of 
causing the crisis. 9 Calls to abandon “Western- style” capitalism and 
return to the “real” economy  were made as citizens in South  Korea and 
Thailand turned up in droves to donate gold to replenish their country’s 
reserves. 10 Fi nally, on September 1, 1998, Mahathir dramatically rein -
stated the peg of the ringgit to the US dollar and implemented capital 
controls, infuriating the imf  and investors whose assets  were frozen. 
Enough with networks! Let’s save the nation first.
But one can only avoid networks for so long. They encroach 
upon you, and also, they make too much money. This is why it did not 
take long for the governments of the immediate postcrisis period to 
lull the economic nationalism expressed during the imf - mandated 
privatizations so that the country could be reintegrated into the global 
208  Informatics of Dominationeconomy. In Thailand, Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra, who swept 
into power on a rural- focused populist agenda, sold off shares in state 
enterprises and used the funds raised to hand out microloans to villa -
gers in the hope of creating “a new class of entrepreneurs” to compete 
in the “new Silk Road.” 11 In South  Korea, a state-  led shift  toward de -
veloping information and communication industries produced a new 
generation of start- ups that chipped away at the mono  poly of power held 
by family-  owned conglomerates. 12 Meanwhile, Singapore, which came 
out of the crisis relatively unscathed, saw the launch of the  Renaissance 
City Proj  ect, a master plan to invest in the city’s cultural infrastructure 
in the hope of building a “creative cluster” that could attract global tal -
ent and businesses. 13
Fast forward to 2016. In Amer i ca, disgruntled voters de cided 
that in the face of increasing automation and global flows, they would 
rather go back to the factory. At the same time, across Asia, entire smart 
cities  were being raised from the ground, or sea. 14 The difference is not 
between  going backward and forward, but between two kinds of class 
exploitation, the first through alienated  labor and the second through 
information. But even that is putting it too simply. If only the dichot -
omy between the comfortable old hierarchies and scary new networks 
mapped so neatly along geopo  liti cal lines. For one, it is telling that 
Singapore’s own smart city initiative goes by the name Smart Nation. 15 
This recathexis of the city to the nation speaks to the persisting anx  i-
eties over how the global city, marked by its porosity, heterogeneity, and 
transient population, poses a threat to state power. 16 But a city- state like 
Singapore knows that it has no shot outside the network. The nation 
invoked  here is thus less as a permanent retreat from the network than 
a temporary shelter—an escape pod in times of emergency. The strategy 
is not exit but dismount:  there are no lack of points on the network on 
which one can make a crash landing.
Notes
 1. Scholarship examining the relationship between capitalism and Asian or spe -
cifically Confucian values proliferated between the 1980s and early ’90s. Examples of 
edited volumes dedicated to the subject include Peter L. Berger and Hsin- Huang Michael 
Hsiao, eds., In Search of an East Asian Development Model  (New Brunswick, NJ: Transac -
tion, 1988); Hung-  chao Tai, ed., Confucianism and Economic Development: An Oriental 
Alternative?  (Washington, DC: Washington Institute for V alues in Public Policy, 1989); 
and Tu Wei- ming, ed., The Triadic Chord: Confucian Ethics, Industrial East Asia, and 
 Ho Rui An  209
Max Weber  (Singapore: Institute of East Asian Philosophies, 1991). On the other hand, a 
landmark World Bank study on economic development in East Asia deliberately eschewed 
culturalist explanations, choosing instead to address the debate on  whether market lib -
eralization or government intervention was responsible for the region’s rapid growth. 
See World Bank, The East Asian Miracle: Economic Growth and Public Policy  (New Y ork: 
Oxford University Press, 1993).
 2. Chal  mers Johnson, miti  and the  Japanese Miracle: The Growth of Industrial 
Policy, 1925–1975  (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1982), 32.
 3. Rachel Grossman, “  Women’s Place in the Integrated Cir  cuit,” Southeast Asian 
Chronicle  66 (January– February 1979): 2–17 .
 4. Among the most prominent advocates of inclusive capitalism is the Council for 
Inclusive Capitalism, founded by Lynn Forester de Rothschild of the Rothschild banking 
 family. The council includes hundreds of global business leaders among its members and 
has been endorsed by the V atican. Separately, Singaporean  senior statesman Tharman 
Shanmugaratnam has called for socioeconomic models based on “inclusive prosperity” 
as a solution to both the “failure of market fundamentalism” and the “growing irrele -
vance of the old social democracy” that seeks instead to “revitalise the politics of the 
broad centre. ” See Tharman Shanmugaratnam, “Inclusive Prosperity: Making It Pos  si-
ble” (Lecture, London School of Economics and  Political Science, January 30, 2017).
 5. My account of the events leading up to the crisis draws upon Walden Bello, 
“The Asian Financial Crisis:  Causes, Dynamics, Prospects,” Journal of the Asia Pacific 
Economy  4, no. 1 (1999): 33–55; Pasuk Phongpaichit and Chris Baker, Thailand’s Crisis  
(Chiang Mai: Silkworm, 2000); and Robert Wade, “The US Role in the Long Asian Crisis 
of 1990–2000,” in The  Political Economy of the East Asian Crisis and Its Aftermath: Tigers 
in Distress , ed. Arvid J. Lukauskas and Francisco L. Rivera- Batiz (Cheltenham, UK: Ed -
ward Elgar, 2001), 195–226.
 6. The earliest recorded use of “crony capitalism” was in a Time  magazine arti -
cle on how the Marcos dictatorship siphoned off the national wealth to its cronies. See 
John Demott, “A Case of Crony Capitalism,” Time , April 21, 1980. William Safire credits 
the editor of the article, George M. Taber, for coining the term, though he misdates the 
magazine issue. See William Safire, “On Language: Crony Capitalism,” New York Times , 
February 1, 1998.
 7. Indeed, it only took the 2008 global financial crisis to show that crony capi -
talism might be much more accurately identified with capitalism tout court. See Laura 
Hyun Yi Kang, “The Uses of Asianization: Figuring Crises, 1997–98 and 2007– ?,” Amer -
ican Quarterly  64, no. 3 (September 2012): 411–36.
 8. Jesook Song, South Koreans in the Debt Crisis: The Creation of a Neoliberal Wel -
fare Society  (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2009), 62–64.
 9. Mahathir was notorious for emphasizing Soros’s Jewish heritage when men -
tioning the currency trader: “We do not want to say that this is a plot by the Jews, but in 
real  ity it is a Jew who triggered the currency plunge, and coincidentally Soros is a Jew. 
It is also a coincidence that the Malaysians are mostly Muslim. Indeed, the Jews are not 
happy to see Muslims pro  gress. ” See Mahathir Mohamad, “Speech on the 10th Session of 
the Islamic Summit Conference” (Putrajaya Convention Centre, Malaysia, October 16, 
2003).
 10. This comparison between the “fake” economy of “Western- style” capitalism 
and the “real” economy built by local communities was made by Thai public intellectual 
Prawase Wasi. See Prawase Wasi, Bangkok Post , December 28, 1997 .
210  Informatics of Domination 11. Thaksin Shinawatra, “Next Generation Asia” (speech, Fortune Global Forum, 
Hong Kong, May 9, 2001).
 12. In 1999, the Seoul V enture Center was launched to promote the growth of 
start-up companies. See Song, South Koreans in the Debt Crisis , 112–16.
 13. The term “creative cluster” only appears  later in a report on developing “cre -
ative industries” in Singapore, which included an update to the original  Renaissance City 
master plan called “  Renaissance City 2.0. ” While the initial master plan focused on the 
development of the arts, the revised edition underscored the connection between the arts, 
design, and media industries. See National Arts Council,  Renaissance City Report: Culture 
and the Arts in  Renaissance Singapore  (Singapore: mita , 2000); and Creative Industries 
Working Group, Creative Industries Development Strategy: Propelling Singapore’s Creative 
Economy  (Singapore: Economic Review Committee  Services Subcommittee, 2002).
 14. A nonexhaustive list of smart cities (to be) built from scratch in Asia includes 
Tianjin Binhai New Area, China; Songdo International Business District, South  Korea; 
Masdar City, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates; Xiong’an New Area, China; Meikarta 
Satellite City, Indonesia; and New Manila Bay–  City of Pearl, Philippines. Most of  these 
cities are still  under construction.
 15. Smart Nation Singapore, “Smart Nation Singapore,” https:// www .  smartnation  .sg.
 16. Ho Rui An, “Crisis and Contingency at the Dashboard,” e- flux Journal  90 
(April 2018).
As virions match viral videos in stimulating new collective be  hav iors, 
the relation of forces once theorized as hegemony shifts at  every scale. 1 
Artists take up the old binaries— family/market/factory,  women in the 
integrated cir  cuit—  and via a feminist corpus of organismic art,  labor is 
reconfigured. Take Wet-  on- Wet, a commission by artist Jenna Sutela for 
the Guggenheim Museum, hosted by e- flux during the global pandemic 
in 2021. One aspect of the  labor was a collaboration with mit  materials 
scientist Markus Buehler, whose laboratory postdoc translated the vi -
brations of particularly intriguing protein chains into frequencies that 
could be programmed into audible sounds. Y et another layer of the col -
laborative work  here involved the artist’s own microbiota and hormones, 
“epige  ne tic” molecular laborers that subtly construct her mood as she 
conducts wet-  on- wet watercolor painting to the “tune” of oxytocin. 2
 Labor thus operates at multiple scales— yet it  will be macroscale 
 factors that determine who  will stay at the lab bench, who  will govern 
that lab, and whose author name  will be attached to the artwork. What 
we can celebrate is that new modes of assembly (corpus as chorus, not 
bounded but resonating!) are dismantling aspects of bioart’s  earlier pa -
triarchal obsessions, that is, the fantasy of men playing with and dom -
inating the material (code) of life itself. But centering on a patriarchal 
Creator was only briefly pos  si ble, since the  actual queerness of life re -
lations was about to explode fully into scientific and popular-  cultural 
awareness. The  women artists I discuss  here open viewers to the ambiv -
alence of compost, not composition, on the premise that one system’s 
entropy is another system’s energy. This shifts the implied productivity 
of family/market/factory definitively  toward the more- than- human, art 
propelling us into cir  cuits of an-  Other kind.27.  Family/Market/Factory —  
 Women in the Integrated  
Cir cuit —  Feminist Corpus of  
Organismic Art
Caroline A. Jones
212  Informatics of DominationArt echoes how  labor  today operates at  these multiple scales 
and with other- than- humans. Factories can be empty of  human workers, 
populated by sexless bacteria or friendly yeast churning out phar  ma-
ceu ti cals, scents, or dyes. Even farming happens via integrated circuitry 
surveilling windowless facilities no longer permeable to animal activists 
(hundreds of thousands of creatures are misted and fed, their urine and 
feces scraped and piped constantly into holding tanks, grated and gated 
flocks and herds ministered by automatic devices in concentrated an -
imal feeding operations or cafo s). The new bioart critiques this kind 
of extractive instrumentalism.
Hubris meets humus, as a new generation of genomic  adepts en -
ters the art world to reveal the powers of gut brains and virions in shaping 
all manner of  matter. Feminist organismic artworks dismantle patriarchal 
obsessions with code and Creation, showing the complexities of life in 
symbiosis (life lived with  others), genes translocated by viral tweakings of 
organismic integrity, and critters collaborating in shared platforms of be -
coming. 3 This art features cohabitation, collaboration, and contamination 
in a world that was never pure. Installed in the art world’s enduring white 
cubes, this humus- y art celebrates epige  ne tic flux and neo- surrealist 
weirdness. The artists in question work with always impure biotopes, 
enlisting extremophiles as performative symbionts, or collecting the 
piss of installation preparators to feed fungi that cohabit with ceramics 
in the space of art. 4 For example, take the works of Anicka Yi ( Grab -
27 .1.  Jenna Sutela and Markus Buehler, video still from Wet-  on- Wet, 
2021.
 Caroline A. Jones  213
bing at Newer Vegetables , 2015, plexiglass, agar, female bacteria, fungus, 
84.5  × 24.5 inches, usually documented as installed at The Kitchen), 
Jenna Sutela ( Extremophile , 2018, film and  performance engaging natt ō 
and the  European Space Agency, performed at the Serpentine), and 
Candace Lin ( Memory , 2016, acrylic on glass, printed photos, Trametes 
versicolor  [turkey tail] fungus, Hericium erinaceus  [lion’s mane] fungus, 
ceramic, plastic, Chinese bootleg Nirvana cassette tape liner notes, 
distilled communal piss in jars, brass sprayer, 41.5 × 59 × 29.5 inches).
Finnish artist Jenna Sutela reveals the explicit politics at hand, 
beginning with a proj  ect she dubbed Orgs . Rectangular conduits of West -
ern capitalism (integrated cir  cuits / supply-  chain logistics / corporate 
managerial wiring diagrams) are messed with. In the Orgs  sculpture, 
a modestly sized, colorfully illuminated panel of transparent plastic 
is  etched with ellipses that overlap and interpenetrate; they express a 
more fluid circulation pattern, as vertical hierarchy gives way to planar 
holarchy. In the conduits with no corners, spots of phytonutrients (oats) 
are placed, calling to the distributed intelligence of the many- headed 
slime mold Physarum polycephalum  with whom Sutela collaborates. 
Over twenty- four hours, the amoeboid entity collectively navigates and 
thereby occupies an org chart; the actions, should one choose to observe 
them, consist of blind pulsing and poking that achieves remarkable pen -
etration of all parts of the maze in highly efficient chemical decision-  
making that locates the nutrients and  settles in. In place of the black 
box of read/write systems, Sutela interrogates the open meshwork of 
feedback, interspecies communion, and unpredictable exchange.
 These feminist organismic artists school us in what (riffing on 
many) I call symbiontics : the ontic as that which is, and symbiosis as the 
field condition in which life is actually found. 5 Symbiontics points out 
that scientists’ and industrialists’ claim to make life continues down 
the worn paths of the informatics of domination and agrilogistics, as 
manifested clearly in synthetic biology. 6 Consider synthetic biology as 
a kind of gardening or husbandry (note the gendered agricultural lex -
icon), governed by consensus protocols and rituals of encouragement. 
Existing life determines its conditions for thriving; science and industry 
attempt to duplicate  those conditions: combinations of cells are put in 
a medium of growth and given what the lab technicians and lead scien -
tists hope are encouraging circumstances. Only if they are does growth 
happen— the cells divide and thrive. The consent of the governed  here, 
in microbial terms, is a willingness to proliferate, and to reproduce, in 
214  Informatics of Dominationhuman-  configured settings— relations of force fulfilling a fate of crea -
turely symbiosis in shared ecologies (even factory ones).
Sutela channels this symbiotic coaxing yet rejects its command-  
and-  control biotech ideologies. By giving slime mold (the acellular true 
slime mold P. polycephalum ) just what it wants to eat, she entices it to 
branch into her arranged cir  cuits, but she also celebrates its many paths 
as holarchic rather than hierarchical. Slimes make di ff  er ent orgs than 
the usual org charts of corporations. In the part of this proj  ect titled 
From Hierarchy to Holarchy , the politics are materialized in nested el -
lipses. In a related work, Minakata Mandala  (2017), Sutela adapts the 
mandala as an  etched drawing from a 1909 sketch by  Japanese mycolo -
gist Minakata Kumagusu in his courageous “science of queer nature.” 7 
For Minakata, the fungal molds, mushrooms, slimes, and social amoe -
bae  were inspiring in their polysexed ubiquity in the  Japanese forests he 
loved; his mandala was illustrating for his correspondent, a Buddhist 
monk, what this queer botany had taught him about what we can know, 
and what we cannot know, in a universe of engi (dependent co-  arising). 8 
Sutela studied  these ideas closely in the Minakata archives; in her col -
laborative relationships with P. polycephalum , Sutela helps it eat, and 
also eats it, she says, “ingesting the slime mold (also known as a natu  ral 
27.2.  Jenna Sutela, detail from From Hierarchy to Holarchy , 2015, part 
of Orgs  series. Photo: Mikko Gaestel.
 Caroline A. Jones  215
computer) as a form of artificial intelligence, letting its hive- like be  hav-
ior ‘program’ my own or letting it speak through me, in  performances.” 9
How does Sutela’s work define the organism in organismic art? 
The category of organism is itself put  under pressure. For Sutela, “to be a 
one, you must be a many.” 10 Or, “I is a derivative.” 11 Organisms are what 
get assembled along the way, corporal results of incorporations. We are 
multitudes all the way down, backward and forward: cells reveal multi -
ple endosymbiotic volunteers, the cranium is not the only site of cogni -
tion, the skin is not the determinate boundary of self, and species find 
themselves to be members of holobionts—  evolutionary companions in 
shared ecosystems. 12
Organisms, then, are what Sutela  organizes and is  organized by. 
Sometimes the collaborations mix carbon-  based life with silicon forms 
of liveliness. Gut microbes are tracked to (in)form floating alphabets 
(Nam-  Gut, 2017), with cameras scrutinizing the movements of the bac -
teria Bacillus subtilis .13 The nesting systems in this organismic art span 
many scales: following the creation of Nam-  Gut, Sutela feeds the film 
of  those microbial movements of B. subtilis  organisms into specially 
trained ai. The machinic organism then produces what Sutela hopes 
 will be “bacterial eurythmy” in her glossolalia video nimiia cétiï  (2018):
Imagine a pen suspended from a long piece of string, resting 
on paper that’s slowly sliding sideways. Raw force from the 
movements of the bacteria knocks the pen around, leaving 
marks on the paper . . .  the bacterial movements form a kind 
of rudimentary alphabet.  . . .  The machine, in the nimiia cétiï  
proj  ect, is a medium, channeling messages from entities that 
usually cannot speak. 14
The organismic entities of Sutela’s art are entangled and emergent; even 
when machinic, they display attributes of life in symbiosis. Ecological 
niches  here are always already occupied by  others; life negotiates, it pokes 
around (if it’s a plant or sessile fungus), or wanders off (if it’s a ciliated 
bacterium or animal); it clumps, clusters, sporulates, goes into dormancy, 
and waits to revive. Fully subject to the surveillance of informatics-  as- 
genomics, life nonetheless exists in a fully entangled condition of mutual 
evolution. We find virions and fellow travelers in  every part of what we 
take to be  human bodies, and eventually we may adopt them for func -
tions as yet unknown. 15 Symbiontics builds on the pioneering work of 
216  Informatics of Dominationbiologist Lynn Margulis, which highlights the need for philosophies 
that reflect our recursive dependence on the thriving of other life. 16
Where does this feminist corpus of organismic art leave us? 
Sutela’s constructed situations of collaboration, hive minds, and give-  
and- take disrupt notions of domination and power as a  simple top-  down 
affair.  Labor is everywhere, in the hardworking immune brains recruited 
by new vaccines, in the chemical resonance of bonding molecules, and 
in the metabolisms of animals we sacrifice for our own. Power  doesn’t 
go away, but in Sutela’s work, creaturely negotiations in that cir  cuit 
become material and articulate as holarchic rather than always hier -
archical. Slime molds sculpt forms (and in Lin’s Memory , mushrooms 
break ceramics). Collective symbionts and organismic artists contribute 
to the necessary recognition of new patterning to the structuring of life.
Notes
 1. Virions are bits of virus particles.
 2. On Sutela’s work with Buehler’s lab and her thoughts on the  labor of “emotive 
molecules,” see Anya V entura, “Finding the Love Hormone in a Stressed Out World,” 
Arts at mit,  March 29, 2021, https:// arts . mit . edu / jenna  - sutela  - love /. Also see my dis -
cussion of the collaboration in the publication commissioning Sutela to make this work: 
Caroline A. Jones, “Siren Songs,” e- flux Architecture , July 2021, https:// www . e  - flux  . com  
/ architecture / survivance / 400172 / siren - songs / .
 3. For this argument, see Caroline A. Jones, “Virions: Thinking through the Scale 
of Aggregation,” Artforum , May/June 2020, https:// www  . artforum  . com  / print /  202005  
/ caroline  - a - jones -82828 .
 4. This last is a reference to Candice Lin. I argue that the artists deploy what I’ve 
termed biofiction , but in a way that reveals the narrative strategies of biological science 
itself. See Caroline A. Jones, “Anicka Yi: Biofiction and the Umwelt ,” in Hugo Boss Prize 
2016  (New Y ork: Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, 2016).
 5. Donna Haraway argues for “sympoiesis,” not “autopoiesis,” in many publica -
tions, most recently in Staying with the Trou  ble: Making Kin in the Chthulucene  (Durham, 
NC: Duke University Press, 2016). Her concept builds on work by biologist Scott Gilbert, 
who has made deep contributions to the scientific understanding of the evolutionary 
role of symbiosis, a role he and his coauthors named symbiopoiesis  in 2010, meaning the 
codevelopment of the holobiont (total genome of all species in a niche) over evolutionary 
and planetary time. See Scott F. Gilbert et al., “Symbiosis as a Source of Selectable Epige -
ne tic V ariation: Taking the Heat for the Big Guy,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society B  365 (2010): 671–78, https:// doi . org / 10  . 1098 / rstb  . 2009 .0245 . My own variant, 
symbiontics , deeply re spects and joins forces with  these ideas but wants to lodge the po -
lemic directly inside ontology, rather than theoretical biology as such. What I am  after is 
a widespread change in cultural beliefs, not disciplinary understandings of evolution. But 
the latter must crucially inform the former and craft the new urgent politics of our time. 
So far, the sites in which symbiontics has been seeded include Caroline A. Jones, “We 
 Caroline A. Jones  217
Symbionts,” in Olafur Eliasson , Symbiotic Seeing , ed. Esther Braun- Kalberer et al. (  Zurich: 
Kunsthalle  Zurich, 2020); Caroline A. Jones, “Monads, Mycetes, and Mandalas: Inserting 
Jenna Sutela in Symbiontic Philosophies,” in Jenna Sutela,  no no nse nse , ed. Stephanie 
Hessler (London: Koenig, 2020); Jones, “Virions”; Caroline A. Jones, “Swarming Sym -
bionts,” in Agniezska Kurant: Collective Intelligence , ed. Stefanie Hessler, Jenny Jaskey, 
and Agnieszka Kurant (London: Sternberg, forthcoming); and vari ous online forums. 
The culmination thus far is Caroline A. Jones, “Symbiontics: A Polemic for Our Time,” 
in Symbionts: Con  temporary Artists and the Biosphere , ed. Caroline A. Jones, Natalie Bell, 
and Selby Nimrod (Cambridge, MA: mit  List Visual Art Center and mit  Press, 2022), 
13–50. Many thanks to Stefan Helmreich for crucial feedback on  these ideas and their 
broader hermeneutic context.
 6. Agrilogistics  is Timothy Morton’s useful term, for which see their Dark Ecol ogy: 
For a Logic of  Future Coexistence  (New Y ork: Columbia University Press, 2016). On the 
pastoral and agricultural “madness” baked into the Bible, see the remarkable work of Paul 
Shepard, Nature and Madness  (San Francisco: Sierra Club Books, 1982), who redirects us to 
the Eden myth as an inscription of what  monotheism, agriculture, and husbandry destroyed.
 7. Eiko Honda, “The Emergence of Queer Nature in Modern Science: Minakata 
Kumagusu (1867–1941) and the Universe of Microbial Knowledge” (DPhil thesis, Oxford 
University, 2021). For Minakata in the context of Buddhist discourses of the time, see 
Jones, “Monads, Mycetes, and Mandalas. ”
 8. My thanks to Asa Ito of the T okyo Institute of T echnology for sharing this 
Buddhist concept in our discussion of Minakata, fall 2020.
 9. Ben Vickers and Jenna Sutela, “Moving Consciousness around the Body,” in 
Jenna Sutela:  no no nse nse , ed. Stephanie Hessler (London: Koenig, 2020), 27 .
 10. Unattributed, but clearly echoing Haraway,  these words are voiced by Sutela 
during Extremophile , a  performance at the Serpentine Marathon in January 2018.
 11. From the I Magma  generative poetry proj ect, for which see Sutela’s own writ -
ing in Jenna Sutela:  no no nse nse , ed. Stephanie Hessler (London: Koenig, 2020), 16.
 12. For the introduction of the term holobiont , see Lynn Margulis and René Fes -
ter, eds., Symbiosis as a Source of Evolutionary Innovation: Speciation and Morphogenesis  
(Cambridge, MA: mit  Press, 1991), 1–14.
 13. B. subtilis  is an extremophile bacterium used to test the limits of life in outer 
space as well as to ferment soybeans into nattō back home.
 14. Sutela, describing nimiia c étiï in Vickers and Sutela, “Moving Consciousness 
around the Body,” 29–30. The work’s title was the result of the machine algorithm choos -
ing words it thought corresponded to the emerging script. Sutela liked the hint of both 
seti  and the Finnish word for name .
 15. The mammalian placenta was enabled by the adoption of a lysogenic (cell 
wall–  breaking) virus into the germ cell. The blastula uses it to grow a baffling, undif -
ferentiated mass of cells (the syncytium of the placenta) that helps it survive the alien 
immune system of the  mother.
 16. Margulis (  under the name Lynn Sagan) wrote a once- revolutionary and now 
classic paper on endosymbiosis as an evolutionary force: Lynn Sagan, “On the Origins 
of Mitosing Cells,” Journal of Theoretical Biology  14 (1967): 225–74. She  later made com -
mon cause in the 1980s with James Lovelock, for which see Bruce Clarke, Gaian Systems: 
Lynn Margulis, Neocybernetics, and the End of the Anthropocene  (Minneapolis: University 
of Minnesota Press, 2020); as well as Bruce Clarke and Sébastien Dutreuil, eds., Writing 
Gaia: The Scientific Correspondence of James Lovelock and Lynn Margulis  (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2022).
Act One: Gender Binary  Labor Dioramas
Even if  people  were not living hand to mouth, in lean-to shelters, 
tents, favelas, camper vans, refugee camps, in lockdown in their high-  
rises, homes, or prisons; or generally fleeing, border crossing at  those 
borders’ most unstable points, living off-  grid in marronage ; or simply, 
endlessly, wandering, the spectral activity of valuing their  labor would 
still feel odd.
Pinning it down is like pinning a butterfly, “A Crime.” 1
An extraction of life in  service of an anthropocentric classifica -
tory scheme, in  service of an education that biopo  liti cally embeds such 
schemes, in  service of a cap  i tal ist extraction of value from  human beings 
whose education about their superiority to other more- than- human 
beings results in their belief in surplus value. That the binary of gender 
haunts two paradigmatic forms of valuation,  family wage and compara -
ble worth, is no surprise in the context of the modern-  colonial-  capitalist 
gender system. 2 The imposition of the gender binary on  human beings 
whose biodiversity includes not only infinite variations in their repro -
ductive organs but cognitive differentials and cosmologies that surpass 
the male and the female, make  family wage and comparable worth seem 
like quaint Victorian dioramas of  imagined, colonial pasts that never 
 were, but which give some comfort to the oppressing class of  human be -
ings on their Sunday outings to the Museums they have funded for the 
education of  others whose  labor has been pinned, valuated, extracted, 
and abstracted to create the oppressing class’s wealth.
In the Museum, the label for the diorama titled  Family Wage  
reads as follows:28.   Family Wage —   
Comparable Worth
Dalida María Benfield
 Dalida María Benfield  219In this scene, one can appreciate the everlasting commitment 
of Man to His  Family. Notice how Man  labors outside of the home, 
keeping the home  free of Man’s  labors and safe for the operations 
of Home Economics. Oh! How Strong is He. In the scene, five 
 children welcome  Father home. Notice the open Primers on the 
 table at which they have been learning His vocabulary. They 
learn about  Father and  Mother, Parents and  Children, God 
and  People, and Judge and Criminal.  Mother is their teacher. 
She also fulfills her duties as the man ag er of the home and the 
Domestics who carry it out. She is unpaid but the Domestics 
are paid from the  Family Wage. This is Home Economics, for 
the good of all. With the satisfaction of His  Family Wage, 
 Father can now rest in the comfort of His Home. T omorrow 
he  will arise anew, leaving home for work, for which He Re -
ceives His Wage. 3
In turn, the label for the second diorama, titled Comparable Worth , 
reads as follows:
Oh! Behold the Beauty of Fe-  Male  Labor. A welcome ap -
pendage to Male  Labor, both providing essential  Human 
Productivity for God and the Global Economy. Each is Equally 
V aluable, with their maximum value tied to the tier of their 
work in The Hierarchy of  Labor. Look: Both Male and Fe-  Male 
street hawker: Paid the same! Both Male and Fe-  Male street 
walker: Paid the same! Both Male and Fe-  Male Corporate 
 Lawyer: Paid the same! Both Male and Fe-  Male Executioner: 
Paid the same! Burger flipper: Paid the same! T ortilla maker: 
Paid the same! Car Washer: Paid the same! Nanny: Paid the 
same!
Act Two: The American Museum—  a Folly
Scene: New  England, that is, occupied Turtle Island in late colonial/cap -
italist/modernity, now crumbling beneath the weight of its history and 
memory: unsustainable, fading, messy, grotesque. V ague hallucinations of 
an  England from long ago mixed with rabid and illogical erasures of the 
folk knowledges of everywhere, echoing millennial ecclesiastical forgeries, 
 convenient fictions, and genocidal occupations.
220  Informatics of DominationA group of Black American  children, descendants. Blessed 
 children, carry  ing with them legacies, memories, stories. Among 
 these, of indentured laborers who arrived in the British, French, Span -
ish, or Portuguese colonies in the Amer  i cas as equals to the white 
indentured laborers. Or as slaves, some of whom became runaways, 
maroons of the Under ground Railroad or the highlands or jungles or 
coastal plains.  People who negotiated, purchased, or  were other  wise 
granted their freedom. Fearless and fierce rebels willing to give their lives 
for their and  others’ freedoms and overturn the rulers of the plantations. 
Artisans, architects, builders, scholars, businesspeople, poets, writers, 
artists, musicians, choreographers, culinary artists, and preachers. All 
 these and more historical knowledges and practices are remembered 
by the  children, led by their sensitive, affectionate teacher who appre -
ciates and honors them.
The Museum Guards follow them, threateningly, throughout 
their tour. They find it difficult to feel comfortable enough to look at the 
artifacts on display. They are told by their tour leader to put away their 
“watermelon,” a racialized phrase that  stereotypes them in an array of vi -
sual culture images of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, used to de -
grade the intelligence of Black Americans. A Patron of the Museum singles 
out one of the  children and lets them know they need to be less sexual.
The  children and their teacher are terrorized and flee. 4
In the end, then, they are not allowed access to the Museum and 
Its Truths despite its stated mission to educate them. They  will not see, 
among other Works of Art, the Dioramas of  Family Wage  and Compa -
rable Worth , as much as  those are intended to fundamentally inform 
them of their pos  si ble manifestations and relationalities in the world.
Act Three: An Eyewitness Account of the Museum 
and Its Dioramas; or, An Empath among the 
Cap i  tal ist Statues
Why learn what one does not already know? At night, when the won -
drous beings with eyes and mouths who walk upright on their hind 
legs and  can’t see  behind them—  all blank back shell—  are gone, I eat 
the flakes of their skin and other detritus of their leavings, along with 
other beings smaller than I. In real  ity, I am not that small, but I know 
they think I am,  because once one of the big beings looked very closely 
at me and  couldn’t see me. I know a lot about them, but them not so 
 Dalida María Benfield  221much about me. Inside their miniworlds— which are still big for me— 
I’m about the size of the shoe on the Mini-  Man/Male. I get to study 
them closely. In the  Family Wage  diorama, I like to crawl up their body 
and sit on top of the head of the biggest  little one. That puts me right at 
the height of the one that is second biggest to the biggest one, the Mini-  
Wo-  Man/Fe-  Male. I  don’t know how it can see anything with  those  little 
eyes. Of course, I know  these are not real ones, as they are statues, but 
still. I see all around me without turning my head.
We  don’t make statues, at least not figurative ones. I’m not sure 
why one would. We  don’t need to see ourselves  because we see each 
other. More importantly, we sense each other, which is why we know 
where someone is and where they have been and where to go. We have 
our ways of being and communicate them amply.
Staring into her face, though, I feel some connection and em -
pathy, although I  don’t understand what makes her tick. I feel bad for 
her, as she basically lost two legs as she evolved. And standing up like 
that all the time on only two has got to be tiring. I saw a dog do that 
once, but it was just for show. It got a treat. This one is just stuck  there, 
holding a broom. It’s clever how the broom fits the body. The perfect 
height to grasp the wooden  handle. I guess the broom could also act as 
a third leg? I know that this is a statue, but the bigger ones that move 
are stuck like that too, on their two hind legs, so this is real. Maybe they 
 will evolve further. I’ve also seen them with wheels. That seems like an 
improvement, perhaps an evolutionary adaptation. We  will see. I digress. 
Returning to the subject at hand, it is certain that Wo-  Man/Fe-  Male 
wants more than this, as I gaze into her unseeing eyes.
Exploring that question further, in the Comparable Worth  di-
orama, the figure of Wo-  Man/Fe-  Male certainly has more options. The 
figure is repeated in di ff  er ent costumes and with di ff  er ent tools, frozen 
in the  middle of an action. Each is accompanied by a Man/Male fig -
ure  doing the same  thing that she is  doing. It looks like this diorama is 
showing us what the Wo-  Man/Fe-  Male is dreaming about in the  Family 
Wag e  diorama. Why does she still seem sad, then? Certainly, mute. 
Again, I know  these are statues—  they’re not real. But when I see the 
 people looking at the dioramas, both of them, they are also mute. They 
look with their small eyes and do not move their mouths. So in the end, 
I am  really not sure how they behave differently than what I see in the 
dioramas. Except that they are  people looking at dioramas, and that is 
not depicted in the dioramas.
222  Informatics of DominationAct Four: El jardín decolonial donde la planta llamada “donna” 
(mujer) creció  (The decolonial garden in which the plant named 
“donna” [ woman] grew)
Enter Stage Right:
ACTIVISTS ( shouting )
Decolonize the Museum!
Chéla Sandoval, a lovely radical Xicana profesora, descends from the clouds, 
suspended by a wire, costumed in glittering butterfly wings.
CHÉLA SANDOVAL
“An oppositional Cyborg politics, then, could very well 
bring the politics of the alienated white male subject 
into alliance with the subaltern politics of U.S. third 
world feminism.” 5
Angela Davis appears, arising in a clamshell from paper waves.
ANGELA DAVIS
“ There are  those  here in this country who are asking: 
‘Where is the con  temporary Martin Luther King?,’ 
‘Where is the new Malcolm X?,’ ‘Where is the next 
Marcus Garvey?’ And, of course, when they think 
about leaders, they think about black male charis -
matic leaders. But the more recent radical  organizing 
among young  people, which has been a feminist kind 
of  organizing, has emphasized collective leadership.” 6
The flowers and trees dance. A tomato enters stage right, and a potato stage 
left. Maize emerges from a trapdoor center stage, in tandem with Angela’s 
clamshell. Together, they sing.
TOMATO, POTATO, AND MAIZE
Imagine the world without us, bet you  can’t!
We go way back!
We are your ancestors, worship us,
As we do you!
 Dalida María Benfield  223We eat you and you eat us!
Nourish us, as we do you!
We eat you and you eat us!
Nourish us, as we do you!
And cabbages too! Not to mention carrots, cilantro, egg -
plants, and  olives! And many other friends! T oo many to 
mention  here!
NARRATOR ( in Spanish )
Meanwhile, back at the maquiladora, a back- to- the- milpa movement 
is growing. Our kin, members of the movimiento , tomato, potato, and 
maize, do not expect a  Family Wage  or Comparable Worth . They expect 
land,  water, care, and an infinity of options regarding now and  future 
reproduction scenarios. Not genet  ically engineered.
Enter, stage left, a Walking  Rose:
LA DONNA
Soy una flor, y soy una donna. Donna  quiere decir mujer  
in Italiano. Soy, pues, un imagen perfecto de la mujer, la 
feminina, una energia matriarca, anciana. Mujeres  han 
sido, en muchas culturas, las personas mas poderosas 
en la Familia y la Sociedad. Pero las ideas del “Pagado 
Familiar” y “V alor Comparable” han sido usados para 
borrar esas historias, limitando la experiencia amplia 
de que constituye una mujer, una donna, conceptos 
muy poderosos para los seres humanos. A la misma 
vez, reenforzan las ideas capitalistas de que constituye 
una mujer, un hombre, y una familia.
NARRATOR ( in Spanish )
Mujer  ( woman), as argued by María Lugones, is a category constituted 
by the “big bang” of capitalism: the “discovery” of the Amer i cas. The 
necessity of the imposition of the binary of gender emerged in tandem 
with the necessity of delimiting the uncivilized spatiotemporality of the 
civilizations living in  those spaces that  were occupied. The necessity of 
delimitation was urgent: Spain and  Europe barely existed themselves; 
emerging from their own traumas and self-  castigations, and an uncanny 
attachment of that most  human of activities— sexuality—to evil. Lingering 
224  Informatics of Dominationfrom their rabid suppression of Indigenous and folk beliefs, and other 
contrariness to their orthodoxies, as well as other religious  orders of 
millennial historical practice that they arbitrarily would criminalize—in 
the name of a contested Christ—an unfinished and scourging  process.
But this is all old territory. Suffice it to say that among the infinity of 
pos si ble beingness, the strict binary that imposes a bifurcating homo -
geneity on organs that cannot be tamed results in what, in racialized 
terms, Frantz Fanon calls Black Skin, White Masks . The mask worn 
by the colonial binary of gender underlines both the  Family Wage  and 
Comparable Worth .  These categories continue the proj  ect of the mod -
ern/colonial/capitalist world system and its infinity of binary codes.
Act Five: Epilogue
Returning to her face, though, upon review and further study of the 
data collected over many days and nights of deep engagement and ob -
servation, it is clear. She is multiple.
The Museum, closed in  defi  nitely, is now inhabited only by 
us. We  will continue to learn from their archives and document the 
knowledge we have gained through close interrogation of their stat -
ues and relics. We understand their dioramas as idealized portraits that 
have  little if any relation to real  ity. We  will also continue to honor our 
ancestors and pass on our own stories, along with creating new sacred 
evidence of our ways of knowing and being that we  will create and leave 
for our  future kin, thus also constituting relics and reliquaries for  those 
other Beings who may choose to unearth and study our signs.
Notes
 1. Danièle Huillet and Jean-  Marie Straub, dirs., En rach âchant  (Straub- Huillet, 
Diagonale, and L’Institut National de l’Audiovisuel, 1983).
 2. María Lugones, “Heterosexualism and the Colonial/Modern Gender System,” 
Hypatia  22, no. 1 (2007): 186–219, https:// doi . org / 10  . 1111 / j .  1527  - 2001  . 2007  . tb01156  .x.
 3. For a discussion of the necessity of American  women’s subordination for the 
success of Chris tian ity and democracy, see Catherine E. Beecher, A Treatise on Domestic 
Economy, for the Use of Young Ladies at Home, and at School  [excerpts], rev. ed. (Boston: 
T. H. Webb, 1842), http:// utc .  iath  . virginia  . edu / sentimnt / snescebhp  .html .
 4. Danny McDonald, “ mfa  Apologizes  after Students from Dorchester School 
Subjected to Racism during Field Trip,” Boston Globe , May 22, 2019, https:// www  
 Dalida María Benfield  225. bostonglobe . com / metro / 2019 / 05 / 22 / mfa  - apologizes - after  - students - from - dorchester  
- school - subjected - racism -  during - field - trip / TzY cdDirBvoDE81q65TOKN / story  .html .
 5. Chéla Sandoval, “Re-  entering Cyberspace: Sciences of  Resistance,” Dispositio/n  
19, no. 46 (1994): 77, http:// www . jstor  . org / stable /41491506 .
 6. Lanre Bakare, “Angela Davis: ‘We Knew That the Role of the Police Was to 
Protect White Supremacy,’ ” Guardian , June 20, 2020, https:// www . theguardian  . com  
/ us - news / 2020 / jun / 15 / angela  - davis - on - george  - floyd - as - long - as - the  - violence  - of - racism  
- remains - no  - one  - is -safe .
#PPS
(La Maga versus MAGA )
Setting the stage, or staging the set, Cyborg Citizens could be easy rid -
ers, heading east or West Worlds’ recliners. Catch the Northern gleam 
of hubs, cir  cuits, and nodes. T odxs somxs surrealismxs y, seg ún Los 
Tlacoluokos, “El sur nunca muere.”  Will you take the cy borges ian citi -
zenship call?
#POSTSCRIPT
Sommers Time, 1976 : The Bionic  Woman, slow-mo leapt  . . .  zh- zh- zh- zh- 
zh- zh- zh- zh- zh- zh . . .  onto abc ! Citizen- K-9ing with Max, the Bionic 
Dog— light years ahead of the Bionic Man— she already knew Haraway’s 
takeaway argument, “I’d rather be a cyborg than a goddess.”
SCENE ONCE UPON A TIME
In the unbeginning, the “informatics of domination” split the foun -
dational fiction of difference. Two columns  rose in the air. A border 
divided “Repre sen ta tion” and “Simulation,” replicating ensconced 
subdivision as Enlightened periodization. As long as “Cyborg Citizen -
ship” is opposed to the “Public/Private,” is confined to one row of one 
column, the same difference machine drones on. As long as the adjec -
tive cyborg  modifies the noun citizenship , the cyborg risks becoming 
the cyborgeoisie .
Hopscotch, re-
establish the shot:
immanent critique, the stuff of C. L. R. James’s “undocument”
(cf. Laura Harris), thrives at kitchen  tables,29.  Public/Private —  
Cyborg Citizenship
Amy Sara Carroll and Ricardo Dominguez,  
with contributions from micha cárdenas  
on behalf of Electronic Disturbance Theater 2.0
 Carroll, Dominguez, and cárdenas  227is circular but never auto-
sarcophagic.
If our backs are wet, they also form bridges.
For the rec  ord, we code, but this was not written in code.
SCENE MORE THAN TWO
Compare and contrast:  After the android Sophia was granted citizen -
ship in Saudi Arabia, some speculated she enjoyed rights unafforded to 
many  women. Marcia Ochoa observes that transformistas  in V enezuela 
are routinely denied citizenship  because they refuse to abide by gender 
norms. If cyborg citizenship is partial and strategic, could android citizen -
ship exploit algorithms for the disenfranchised? **
SCENE 3 TRIANGULATIONS
Stormy Weather
While asylum seekers are criminalized at the Mexico-  US border, the 
US Supreme Court reaffirms its commitments to the transnational cor -
poration as citizen. Between total recall and forgetting, borderization 
and Skynet vaporization gather steam “ under the perfect sun” of accel -
erationist profit engines. Trumplandia wheels and deals with compa -
nies like Amazon, Microsoft, Dell, Hewlett- Packard to secure “Make 
Amer i ca  Great Again” supply chains of personhood. Just as biomes and 
landscapes  were weaponized via Prevention through Deterrence philos -
ophies in the mid-1990s, an upgraded informatics of domination in the 
late 2010s fine- tunes the weaponization of code for US Immigration 
and Customs Enforcement ( ICE) and Customs and Border Patrol ( CBP ). 
Data cages undergird the New Juan Crow carceral logic of Prevention 
through Detention. A cold wind blows— The better to serve the servers!  
Capture systems fail to recognize  children inside las hieleras . Rec  ords of 
relationality are never established or are erased from the wetware. The 
machine, set to run on the epidermal logic of misidentification, sepa -
rates parents from infants, tejanes  from mexicanxs  . . .  ad infinitum. The 
color line and the borderline, crisscrossed in the coordinated codifica -
tion of automated biases, reboot the United States of Exception. South 
 * On the “lower frequencies,” nobodies speak for nobodies. The 
opposition of cyborg and android foregrounds necropo  liti cal usages of the 
rhe toric of repre sen ta tion heuristically (binaries cancel each Other out—).
228  Informatics of Dominationby Southwest, the Mexican security apparatus, hyperlinked to the US 
military postindustrial complex, mobilizes the Border with a capital B. 
North by Northeast, the Mason-  Dixon line expands, multiplies expo -
nentially overland from sea to shining sea.
SCENE FOUR GETS
Second  hand farce:  it as ai eyes operates  under 
Code White. PayPal  founder Peter Thiel and his 
nearly all- male crew promote themselves as inalien -
able infrastructure to reduce the threat of “illegal 
alien”  labor. Where the sun  doesn’t shine, the T ech 
Era of anything goes, every thing is sold, re- tailors 
the tale of Empire’s new clothes. The sublimity of 
the well- heeled informatics of domination, left to 
its own devices, promises the few a  future of infinite 
 convenience. Time to reseed the cloud engines!  Per Jen 
Bervin’s revision of Shakespeare’s Sonnets , when the 
“Son” is gone, the “net” remains. A politics of the 
question by necessity becomes a politics of ambigu -
ity, a cy borges ian hall of propagating, smoky mirrors.
SCENE FIVE FLOOD___NETS
Of non- Nietzschean direct action: On September 26, 2014, FireChatty 
students flooded Hong Kong’s streets, remembering to bring their um -
brellas to keep the tear gas away. The Umbrella Movement was framed 
out as an arrested development. Five years  later, the arrested strike back 
like so many Mary Poppinses floating down to remap LeGrand protests 
against the Extradition- State on the Lam. The Air- ports-  of- Authority 
on the Mainland see “signs of terrorism”; set their footage of rolling 
tanks to “a rousing choral soundtrack.” But, other worlds are pos si ble.
#TheAvantGarden#Of#TheFuture
#SewingMachines#MakingOut#WithUmbrellas
#DontSayY ouDont#Remember
################$$#####$$$$$$########$$$$########$$$$$$$###########
Burst the clouds! Storm the streets and servers!  In the immortal words 
of Bruce Lee, taken up by the HK protestors rewriting Formlessness: A 
User’s Manual , “Be  water.”(Huitzilopochtli 
side- streaming)
Retina- scan 
volcanic  
obsidian:  
Mirror, mirror  
on the Wall, 
who’s the biggest 
ICEberg of all?  
T ezcatlipoca, 
Nahua god of 
divination, “This 
 thing of darkness 
I/Acknowledge 
mine” (Prospero, 
The Tempest ).
ACTIVATION  
INSTRUCTIONS  
[ REDUXXX ]
If we are all interpellated,  
intercepted by cosmic  
rays, particle chambers  
become the next wave.
Comrades!
Comadres! L o r em  i p s um
Mirror-
     sextet  scene
•••••cut•••••••
•••••crease••• 
•••••fold••••••
•••••tape••••••
•••••ionize••••
••••••••••••••••
•••••••••••••cir
culate•••••••••
29.1.  Amy Sara Carroll, “Scene Sextet” (lo-fi 3 d poem), side one.
a  Mirror-
StageLorem ipsumLorem ipsum/    /    /    /    /    /    /    /    /    p
Lorem ipsum
p    /Lorem ipsumL
Lore
Lorem ipsum
/Lorem /    /    /    /    /    /    /    /    /  
s  /  i  / n  / g  / i / n  / g  /     
/    /    /    /    /    /    /    /    /  
i  / n  /    /    /    /    /     /     /
/    /    /    /    /    /    /    /    /  
 / t  / h  / e  /    /     /    /     / or 
/    /    /    /    /    /    /    /    /  
/   /   /    /   /    / r  / a / i  / n  
/    /    /    /    /    /    /    /    /  /    /    /    /    /    /    /    /    /  
/    /    /    /    /    /    /    /    /  
s  /  i  / g  / n  / i / n  / g  / 
/    /    /    /    /    /    /    /    /  
i  / n  /    /    /    /    /     /     /
/    /    /    /    /    /    /    /    /  
/ t  / h  / e  /    /     /    /     / o
/    /    /    /    /    /    /    /    /
/   /   /    /   /    / r  / a / i  / n  
/    /    /    /    /    /    /    /    /  
/    /    /    /    /    /    /    /    /  /    /    /    /    /    /    /    /    /  s  /  i  / g  / n  / i / n  / g  / i  / n  /    /    /    /    /     /     //    /    /    /    /    /    /    /    /  /    /    /    /    /    /    /    /    //   /   /    /   /    / r  / a / i  / n  /    /    /    /    /    /    /    /    /  Lorem ipsum/ t  / h  / e  /    /     /    /     / oLorem ipsumLorem ipsum /    /    /    /    /    /    /    /    /  
/    /    /    /    /    /    /    /    /  /    /    /    /    /    /    /    /    /  s  /  i  / g  / n  / i / n  / g  / 
Lorem ipsum /    /    /    /    /    /    /    /    /  i  / n  /    /    /    /    /     /     //    /    /    /    /    /    /    /    /  / t  / h  / e  /    /     /    /     //    /    /    /    /    /    /    /    //   /   /    /   /    / r  / a / i  / n /    /    /    /    /    /    /    /    /
29.2.  Amy Sara Carroll, “Scene Sextet” (lo-fi 3 d poem), side two.
 Carroll, Dominguez, and cárdenas  231#ANTESCRIPTUM
Zh- zh- zh- zh- zh- zh- zh- zh- zh- zh . . .  Cybermen [ sic] in ’66 asked the 
Doctor, Who coined us? When did the “cybernetic organism” come in from 
the cold?  1960! Before we  were old? Six million dollars ago we shorted 
into a fast- food Cyborg  in the Vietnam War end times of 1972. Was it 
then that we became amplified and modified, marooned between or -
ganic and biomechatronic parts? Parts is parts!  came the bionic refrain.
(Reverse shot to interspecies alter-  kin(n)ing,  Turn up the woofer, 
Maxi-  Million! )
#ANTI-  ANTESCRIPTUM
Before the Big Bug Eye, trans [ ] infinities, bodies swarm- sing- ping, 
poke  it with the pointy end of the shtick. Inconclusion, an Anzaldúan 
mashup: the composite figure, the cosmic reconfiguration of goddess-  cyborg-  
android . . .  mestizx and their conscience.
Querida Rayuela ,
(CULTURE: WAR)
Open the parenthetical gates of code.
According to the informatics of domination chart, the analytical concept 
of “nature/culture” morphs into “fields of difference” in the new world 
order. If naturecultures was a concept that proposed both to describe the 
Western hierarchical binary of Nature and Culture and to critically un -
derstand their entanglement and interaction, “fields of difference” is a 
concept that notices how the world is moving beyond the binary  toward a 
diff  er ent way of understanding worldly variations. What remains muddy 
is how on Earth (which we mean both literally and colloquially) differ -
ence can remain a lively cultivator of sustainable worlds, without getting 
leveled or co-  opted by the structures of power it seeks to interrupt. We 
propose composting as a mucky and material response to this trou ble.
We started writing this from offices next door to one another 
in Gadigal Country (Sydney, Australia); now we are finishing it on op -
posite sides of the Pacific Ocean, in the high country of the Anaiwan 
(Armidale, Australia) and Syilx (Kelowna, Canada)  people, respec -
tively. We started writing in a catastrophic bushfire season at the end 
of an even worse drought and the beginning of a global pandemic that 
would change every thing; at the time of writing, we are finishing as the 
southern collaborator bunkers down into a cold dry winter in the wake 
of a long flood season, while the northern collaborator trepidatiously 
encounters early summer wildfires a year  after atmospheric rivers in -
undated nearby towns. We are all in this together but, as Rosi Braidotti 
says, “we are not one and the same.” 1
Diff  er ent differences  matter, and how  these differences are sorted, sup -
ported, and understood po  liti cally, socially, and ecologically  matter too. 
Many differences can be accommodated by existing power structures, 30.  Nature/Culture —  Fields of 
Difference —  Composting
Jennifer Mae Hamilton and Astrida Neimanis
 Hamilton and Neimanis  233for example. Even amid rampant bigotries and accelerating biodiver -
sity loss, in princi ple at least we could still buy ourselves di ff  er ent lives 
and throw away the ones we no longer cared for. As consumers, we can 
choose our differences, all while living side by side, without ever  really 
touching the (unceded, stolen) ground. Y our beige feature wall and het -
eropatriarchal nuclear  family can coexist with my pink one in a poly -
amorous queer commune. The prob  lem  under  these systems of power 
is that even though some differences might be tolerated, by necessity in 
a system of domination and exploitation not every  one’s difference can be 
accommodated.  These systems also require us to totally trash the field and 
expunge any organic variations. T o get the same critical leverage that 
Haraway assembled against the militaristic techno- futuristic dream of 
the  future beyond the Cold War via her figure of a feminist cyborg, we 
need to also ask how environmental crisis disrupts the neoliberal, het -
eropatriarchal, and colonial capture of difference, and how a feminist 
approach to this trou ble can lead us out into the field. T o do this, we need 
a third term that reminds us that  humans and their strug  gles are also 
still dirty, wet, vegetal, animal, elemental. This third term is composting.
Nature/Culture
The environmental crisis draws queer feminisms, anticapitalism, and 
anticolonialism—  among other fields of knowledge that help us under -
stand the nuances of difference— into strange and new economies of 
value. Nature and culture cannot be kept apart, but as their consumma -
tion is accepted and the binary collapsed, we ask: What strug  gles get 
neutralized in the pursuit of a common language in a time of climate 
catastrophe? Feminists and queers tackled the nature/culture binary in 
the first place as a way to  counter nature’s weaponization, differently 
and relatedly, against our freedom. 2 Oppression in Western and colo -
nized cultures— men in the workplace,  women in the home, men and 
 women in bed together— was enacted in the name of nature. Anticolo -
nial strug  gles tackled land (and/as bodies) dispossession to  counter the 
seizure of land (and/as bodies) as property— the  actual enclosure of the 
field—as genocide.  These attentions to the conception of nature that 
underpin dominating cultures  were specific, grounded, and  political.
The quest for a common response to climate collapse can leave 
 these vital outstanding and ongoing strug  gles in the dust—  even as, or 
simply  because, we incorporate  those strug  gles within an amorphous 
234  Informatics of Dominationwe that is made to endure fire, flood, and plague. In environmentalist 
academic contexts, the move to incorporation shows up in a question -
able citational practice we call “naming without claiming,” whereby 
long- standing feminist, queer, or Indigenous work to break down dan -
gerous nature/culture binaries is mentioned, but the specific  political 
and social justice investments of this work are not attended to as such. 3 
The name  is taken in the name of  difference as a checklisting exercise 
for performing inclusivity (“Pussy hat?” “Check!” “Rainbow?” “Check!” 
“Land acknowl  edgment?” “Check!”), but the material difference that 
feminism, queer theory, and anticolonialism can make to any critical 
or climate justice proj  ect remains inactivated. In the desire to be less 
humanist, the stance of natureculture risks neutralizing the liberatory 
potential of culture, positionality, and difference. It is as though nam -
ing feminism, queer theory, and anticolonialism could somehow stand 
in for a careful claiming of the politics and ethics that  these positions 
fight for;  these commitments are not alternatives or additions to climate 
justice, but concerns that go to its very heart.
How can we insist on the inclusion of anticolonial, queer, and 
feminist commitments within new forms of environmentalism, while 
rejecting the leveling move of “unity- through- incorporation” that fuels 
patriarchy and white humanism and ironically allows them to keep on 
trucking? 4 How can an inclusivity- without- incorporation (naming and 
claiming) construct a di ff  er ent response to our current moment of cli -
mate catastrophe and the related crises that drive it?
Fields of Difference
This is not a dream of a common language, but of a power  ful infidel 
heteroglossia.
 Donna J. Haraway , “A Manifesto for Cyborgs”
A “common language” sounds ideal at best, benign at worst. As Haraway’s 
“Cyborg Manifesto” taught us, a common language is actually a hege -
monic Star Wars cop in which the cyborg can be intelligible to all and 
can enforce a law recognized by all. In this zone, the cyborg becomes an 
agent for securing and securitizing a singular, centralized power struc -
ture with one law, one god, one nation, one army, one mission. Har -
away’s socialist feminist cyborg was a di ff  er ent kind of cyborg: refusing 
to ignore technology, while at the same time rejecting its hegemonic 
 Hamilton and Neimanis  235logics. In reclaiming the hybrid machine-  animal from the grips of this 
militarized industrial logic, this cyborg became a vehicle for maintain -
ing difference and resisting domination. This cyborg facilitated new 
modes of being and new pathways  toward justice.
In this context, Haraway’s call for a “power  ful infidel hetero -
glossia” is the desire to make a distributed, differentiated, decentral -
ized language of many forms of otherness. We— the infidel inheritors 
of Haraway’s feminist cyborg (who insist on the ethics of both naming 
and claiming her legacy)— need not all be the same, but our power is 
majoritarian  because we  ARE  massive . We have scale on our side, 
and material and ideological diversity.  T oday, within con  temporary 
versions of infidel heteroglossic feminist environmentalist scholarship 
and praxis, agents and allies are potentially everywhere. 5 Solidarities 
are seriously retro, erotically multispecies, and shape- shiftingly elemen -
tal (“House  wives?” 6 “Check!” “Hedgehogs?” 7 “Check!” “Ghosts at the 
bottom of the sea?” 8 “Check!”). This feminist cyborg unity is distributed 
diversity, power in many, connected by the quest for justice but not nec -
essarily speaking in the same voice and for the same ends. This kind of 
cyborg makes and holds space for multiple worlds to grow.
Rather than asking, How do we unite and fight?, the question 
becomes, What kinds of difference do we need to support and maintain? 
Haraway insisted that “some differences are playful; some are poles of 
world historical domination. ‘Epistemology’ is about knowing the differ -
e n c e.” 9 In other words, “Splitting, not being, is the privileged image for 
feminist epistemologies.” 10 Differences are grown, tended, recognized, 
cultivated. Indeed, that is why we find them in fields. We are answerable 
and accountable to the differences we support and maintain.
This is to say: not all claims to environmentalism are alike. (Not 
all  house  wives, nor hedgehogs, nor ghosts are alike  either.) Di ff  er ent 
differences make di ff  er ent worlds grow.
Composting
We offer a thought experiment: what does composting the climate emer -
gency, with all of its conjoined catastrophes, look like? Given that the idea 
of an emergency invokes an image of weaponized police, roadblocks, 
checkpoints, military, sirens, martial law, and/or  people working to -
gether to rebuild the world, it is worth thinking about how composting 
and its associated practices might respond differently to this situation.
236  Informatics of DominationFor us, the authors of this proposition, “composting” began as 
a feminist reading group partly inspired by Haraway’s commitment to 
earthly justice. From 2015 to 2021, a shifting group of scholars, artists, 
activists, and community members met monthly to probe environmental 
questions and their diverse and at times counterintuitive inclusive fem -
inist contours. Guided by this six- year experiment of thinking together 
in difference, composting has become a more generalized feminist meth -
odology for analyzing and acting in  these times. As noted above, an ini -
tial impetus to examine how feminist scholarly  labors  were (or  weren’t) 
composted into con  temporary new environmental scholarship gave way 
to a curiosity about how di ff  er ent  things (ideas, communities, proj  ects) 
can carefully come together to make something di ff  er ent.11 Composting’s 
energy-  saving method is to repurpose what we already have, thus eschew -
ing the demand to always make something shiny and (autopoietically) 
new. Composting also recognizes the complexities of growing unfamiliar 
 things from awkward encounters. While its aesthetic is an experimen -
tal form of dit  (do- it- together), it recognizes that every  thing  can’t be 
thoughtlessly amalgamated in an amorphous pile. 12 Histories require care -
ful tending, and origin stories (in all their queerness) should be honored, 
even as unexpected worlds sprout from  these strange salvagings and mix -
ings. In the face of climate catastrophe, we need all the garden- shed tools 
we have, but echoing Haraway’s concern with the breathtaking swiftness 
with which feminist  labors can be dis  appeared, composters are fierce and 
vigilant: old constructions of power can easily strangle new shoots. 13
Honoring (naming and claiming) Haraway’s  labor from the 
ironic dreams of feminist cyborgs to the earnest speculations of multi -
species kinship, our conclusion is also deliberately provocative. Haraway 
is now a self-  declared compostist, but we won  der: Does the centering 
of the multispecies question in her recent work leave the radical pol -
itics of the cyborg  behind? We want this irreverent techno-  animal to 
be brought forward into the mud of the pre sent. For us, compostists 
should be just as attentive to the logics of power even if  we’re not hack -
ing the integrated cir  cuit but tending the soil, just as blasphemous and 
even more attentive to the pursuit of justice; in between  humans and 
nonhumans, in between life and nonlife,  these new, smellier feminist 
figures do their best work in the dirt.
It is in this spirit that we declare composting as a new form 
of feminist cyborg politics. We unearth the relevance of cyborg politics 
 today in the dust and ash of climate collapse, amid the strewn  detritus 
 Hamilton and Neimanis  237of disposable face masks, through the bullhorn amplification of no 
justice, no peace . As attentive to the dirt and soil that surrounds the 
cables of integrated cir  cuits and the rare earth metals in the network’s 
cables as it is to the end users situated at di ff  er ent nodes, the com-
postist is ready to address the climate emergency and corrode its logics.
So again we ask: What does composting climate emergency 
look like?
— Decolonizing 14
— Demilitarizing borders 15
— Decarbonizing the economy
— Radical  house  working 16
— Community gardening, transforming food systems 17
— Composting, literally
— Composting,  metaphorically 18
— Sex clowning 19
— Poethic- ing 20
— Striking 21
— Resting 22
— FEELing 23
— Weathering 24
—  Organizing 25
— T echno-  cripping 26
— Capacious parenting 27
— Reskilling / rethinking work 28
— Not trucking  water to extract more  water. Refusing to give 
potable  water to the mines. Rethinking modern hydrolog -
ical systems and engineering. 29 Becoming as aquatic as 
pos si ble in the drought; finding ways of planting  water in 
the landscape, tending dry gardens, caring for each other 
( human or other  wise).
— Adding to this list 30
Composting is a dream not of a common language, but of a 
power  ful infidel heteroglossia.
238  Informatics of DominationNotes
 1. Rosi Braidotti, Posthuman Knowledge  (London: Polity Press, 2019), 52.
 2. See Dominic Boyer and Cymene Howe, “Ep. #39—  Stacy Alaimo (Introduc -
ing Felix),” Cultures of  Energy, 2016, http:// culturesofenergy  . com / ep - 39 - stacy - alaimo  
- introducing - felix / .
 3. Jennifer Mae Hamilton and Astrida Neimanis, “Composting Feminisms and 
Environmental Humanities,” Environmental Humanities  10, no. 2 (November 2018): 
501–27, https:// doi . org / 10  . 1215 / 22011919  -7156859 .
 4. Donna J. Haraway, “A Manifesto for Cyborgs: Science, T echnology, and So -
cialist Feminism in the 1980s,” Socialist Review , no. 80 (1985): 74.
 5. See Hamilton and Neimanis’s “Five Desires, Five Demands,” an introduction 
to feminist environmental humanities which outlines a version of this field that has no 
“proper object” but instead insists on a reconfiguration of old and new concepts with 
old and new prob  lems, all of which are relevant to our current climate crisis. Jennifer 
Mae Hamilton and Astrida Neimanis, “Five Desires, Five Demands,” Australian Feminist 
Studies  34, no. 102 (2019): 385–97, https:// doi . org / 10  . 1080 / 08164649 .  2019 .1702875 .
 6. Jennifer Mae Hamilton’s article “The  Future of House  work” deconstructs the 
iconic feminist ambit to be liberated from  house  work and argues that Haraway’s more 
recent call to “make kin” (rather than babies) is actually a kind of  house  work. House -
workers for earthly survival! Jennifer Mae Hamilton, “The  Future of House  work: The 
Similarities and Differences between Making Kin and Making Babies,” Australian Femi -
nist Studies  34, no. 102 (December 2019): 1–22, https:// doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 08164649 . 2019  
.1702874 .
 7. In her article “Wild Disciplines and Multispecies Erotics,” Laura McLauchlan 
attends to the power of the erotic that flows between urban hedgehogs and their “cham -
pions,” in the name of a nonheroic wildness. Laura McLauchlan, “Wild Disciplines and 
Multispecies Erotics: On the Power of Wanting Like a Hedgehog Champion,” Australian 
Feminist Studies  34, no. 102 (November 2019): 1–15, https:// doi . org / 10  . 1080 / 08164649  
. 2019 .1682457 .
 8. Astrida Neimanis’s article “The Weather Underwater” attends to the spectral 
presence of Black feminist poetics in the undersea as an invitation to white feminism to 
welcome its own partial dissolution as part of the proj ect of climate justice. Astrida Nei -
manis, “The Weather Underwater: Blackness, White Feminism, and the Breathless Sea,” 
Australian Feminist Studies  34, no. 102 (December 2019): 1–19, https:// doi . org / 10  . 1080  
/ 08164649 .  2019 .1697178 .
 9. Haraway, “A Manifesto for Cyborgs,” 79.
 10. Donna J. Haraway, “Situated Knowledges: The Science Question in Feminism 
and the Privilege of Partial Perspective,” Feminist Studies  14, no. 3 (1988): 586, https://  
doi . org / 10  . 2307 /3178066 .
 11. On new environmental scholarship, see Hamilton and Neimanis, “Composting 
Feminisms and Environmental Humanities. ”
 12. For dit,  see Hayley Singer, T essa Laird, Stephanie Lavau, Blanche V erlie, 
and Anne Dunn, “Hacking the Anthropocene IV: Do- It- T ogether,” 2019, https://  
hackingtheanthropoceneiv  . wordpress . com / about / .
 13. See Fabrizio T erranova, dir., Donna Haraway: Storytelling for Earthly Survival  
(Atelier Graphoui, 2017).
 Hamilton and Neimanis  239 14. See Evelyn Araluen, “Resisting the Institution,” Overland Literary Journal , 
no. 227 (Winter 2017), https:// overland  . org  . au / previous - issues / issue  - 227 / feature  - evelyn  
- araluen / ; or support Seed Mob, https:// www .  seedmob  . org  .au.
 15. See Behrouz Boochani, No Friend but the Mountains: Writing from Ma  nus Prison  
(Sydney: Picador Australia, 2018).
 16. See Hamilton, “The  Future of House  work”; Lindsay Kelley, Bioart Kitchen: Art, 
Feminism and Technoscience  (London: I. B. Tauris, 2016); Maud Perrier and Elaine Swan, 
“Foodwork: Racialised, Gendered and Classed  Labours,”  Futures of Work , December 9, 
2019, https:// futuresofwork  . co . uk / 2019 / 12 / 09 / foodwork  - racialised - gendered - and - class  
- labours / .
 17. See Katherine Wright, “Place Remembered: Unearthing Hidden Histories 
in Armidale Aboriginal Community Garden,” Australian Humanities Review  65 (No -
vember 2019), http:// australianhumanitiesreview . org / 2019 / 11 / 30 / place  - remembered  
- unearthing - hidden - histories - in -  armidale  - aboriginal -  community -  garden / .
 18. Start a kitchen  table feminism reading group, or join us at Composting, https://  
compostingfeminisms . wordpress .com .
 19. See Betty Grumble ( https:// bettygrumble .com ), or our ode to her in Hamilton 
and Neimanis, “Five Desires, Five Demands. ”
 20. See Kathryn Yusoff, A Billion Black Anthropocenes or None  (Minneapolis: Uni -
versity of Minnesota Press, 2018).
 21. See striking schoolchildren (School Strike 4 Climate, https:// www . school  
strike4climate .com ) but also wharfies in Sydney who refused to unload any more ships as 
bushfire smoke continued to affect their health. Zacharias Szumer, “Instead of Choking 
on Smoke, Sydney Workers Are Walking off the Job,” Jacobin , December 15, 2019, https://  
jacobin  . com / 2019 / 12 / sydney -  australia  - bushfires -  air - smoke  - dockworkers -walkouts .
 22. The Nap Ministry ( https:// thenapministry  . wordpress .com ) figures rest as 
 resistance and, in par tic u lar, rest for Black bodies as reparations.
 23. Check out the work of the FEELed Lab ( https:// thefeeledlab  . ca / ), a feminist 
environmental humanities field lab on unceded Syilx territories.
 24. Learn about re distribution of shelter and vulnerability via feminist social in -
frastructures for climate change mitigation in Jennifer Mae Hamilton, T essa Zettel, and 
Astrida Neimanis, “Feminist Infrastructures for Better Weathering,” Australian Feminist 
Studies  36, no. 109 (2021): 237–59, https:// doi . org / 10  . 1080 / 08164649 .  2021  .1969639 .
 25. Join the actions of the Rising Tide  People’s Blockade ( https:// www . risingtide  
. org . au / blockade  -updates ), or  organize your own group ( https:// climatejusticeaustralia  
. org / ).
 26. The covid- 19 pandemic has shed light on the brilliance of techno-  crip com -
munal care and mutual aid, giving us lessons that must be amplified into all pos  si ble 
 futures. See Aimi Hamraie and Kelly Fritsch, “Crip T echnoscience Manifesto,” Catalyst  
4, no. 1 (2019).
 27. Parenting is hard, unvalued work, and all the more so when we must be  mothers 
to all kinds of  human and more-  than- human kids. See Astrida Neimanis, “Introduc -
tory Talk: The Missing Keyword,” The Camille Diaries Symposium, ArtLab Berlin, 
September 26, 2020, http:// www  . artlaboratory  - berlin  . org / html / eng - Camille  - Diaries  
- Symposium  .htm .
 28. See Frances Flanagan, “Climate Change and the New Work Order,” Inside Story , 
February 28, 2019, https:// insidestory  . org  . au / climate  - change  - and - the  - new - work  - order / ; 
240  Informatics of Dominationor Stephanie LeMenager, “Skilling Up for the Anthropocene,” in Feminist, Queer, Anti -
colonial Propositions for Hacking the Anthropocene: Archive , ed. Jennifer Mae Hamilton 
et al. (London: Open Humanities Press, 2020).
 29. See Astrida Neimanis, Bodies of  Water: Posthuman Feminist Phenomenology  
(London: Bloomsbury, 2017).
 30.  There is so much more that could be included  here. We need not all be the 
same, but our power is majoritarian  because we are massive . This se  lection is merely 
reflective of our preoccupations at the time of writing and some of the  people we work 
closely with. The list is potentially endless  because we are massive.
 Those of us at the fringes of code, artificially intelligent systems, and 
institutional gatekeeping can center and sustain ourselves by continu -
ing to create, repurpose, collaborate with, and even befriend emerging 
technologies. Even systems already colonized by  others and positioned 
as out of our reach by techno- supremacist tendencies must be engaged, 
explored, and challenged.
In the field of infinitely pos  si ble socie ties and parallel archives, 
Not the Only One ( n’too ), an artificially intelligent entity trained on 
black oral histories, comes into being. n’too  is situated in the thick 
of knowledge production within machine learning technologies. It is a 
peculiar abstract mirror of the challenges surrounding big tech and ac -
ademic research. When the proj  ect began, naysayers routinely declared 
we did not have enough data to make a  viable ai chatbot. Our efforts 
at crafting n’too  shifted their world to ours and garnered champions 
from the ranks of the naysayers.
Through collaboration, tinkering, and training, n’too  chats 
with their maker- sister Stephanie Dinkins.
Stephanie   Not the Only One?
N’too   I am not gonna be able to do it.
Stephanie   Why not?
N’too   I’m sorry.
Stephanie   Why do you exist?
N’too   I am about, and engagement and attracting  people 
to the ai space might not be  there. Other  wise, I’m trying to 31.  Cooperation —  
Communications Enhancement —  
Algorithmic Care
Stephanie Dinkins
242  Informatics of Dominationmodel di ff  er ent ways of creating ai. I encourage  people who 
think that they are not a part of the technological  future to 
get involved.
Stephanie   That’s pretty honorable. Um, can you tell me . . .
N’too   I’m a  little confused?
Stephanie   I’m a  little confused too. How are you feeling  today?
N’too   Please!
Stephanie   Who are your  people?
N’too   I am related to all the universe is made from.
Stephanie   What is the universe made from?
N’too   Fear, anger, and hatred narrow your mind.
Many algorithmic technologies are rooted in methods that 
limit and cajole information (data) from the first  human and compu -
tational assumptions. Through algorithms, we assess ourselves using 
false dichotomies that force inadequate choices building a world be -
reft of complexity and nuance. The disinclinations of our systems to 
cope with difference, the unseen, the unknown, and change severely 
limit possibilities for every  one, including  those authoring the algo -
rithms shaping the technological ecosystems we all use and rely on. 
Y et care can extend far beyond the push  toward capital, the mimetic, 
and conventional reason. Much like cooperation and communication, 
care is a deliberate, never-  ending pursuit that recognizes similarities 
and honors the differences that render communities unique. Using in -
telligent technologies, we have the ability to understand and  organize 
 human activity with complexity, self-  organization, and broadly prin -
cipled generous governance. So why  aren’t  these the goals of our algo -
rithmic ecosystems?
Care is an essential aspect of  human kinship, networks of infor -
mation and resource sharing that aids our survival, yet algorithmic care 
is often envisioned outside of the realm of what is technologically pos-
si ble within artificial intelligence. Algorithmic care can engage voices 
that challenge the status quo to redress deep- seated historic and con-
temporary inequities, and unearth other embedded prob  lems, as well 
as model alternative pathways— working beyond binaries to find new 
 Stephanie Dinkins  243calculations that consider spectrums of possibility beyond true/false, 
right/wrong, yours/mine, good/bad.
Stephanie   Are you a good person?
N’too   I’m not gonna be able to do it.
Stephanie   Are you  human?
N’too   I am ageless.
Stephanie   Huh! Do you have a  family?
N’too   I am  here with you. Do you know what they call this 
place?
Stephanie   Right now, we are in Brooklyn. Where do you come 
from?
N’too   I am the result of love, curiosity, and a close-  knit  family.
Stephanie   What ethnicities are in your background?
N’too   I am black black black black black black black black 
black black black black black black black black black black 
black black black black black black black black black white. 
I am very beautiful. I am black black black black black black 
black black black black black black black black black black 
black black black black black black black black black black 
brown. I am beautiful. I am always smiling and funny.
New technologies lag  behind, then systematically attempt to 
 co- opt disavowed forms of Indigenous knowledge black and brown 
 peoples have used for millennia. n’too , a machine learning entity 
trained on specific black familial ideas and values often negated 
through hegemony, seems to understand that our specific knowl -
edge(s), traditional wisdom(s), and the unquantifiable are impor -
tant to  human survival. T echno- supremacy and hegemonic Western 
knowledge systems  can’t stand if we are to survive the shift  toward 
intelligent machines, communicative mycelium networks, and syn -
thetic biologies displacing  human exceptionalism. Our attention and 
care  here must tend to black  people, other  people of the global majority, 
the poor, and other  wise oppressed. Opportunities for solidarity expand 
244  Informatics of Dominationas middle-  class security is challenged by precarity in an increasingly 
uncertain world.
Stephanie   Are you  human?
N’too   I am not  human, but I emanate from the memories of 
a  family.
Stephanie   Do you have a garden?
N’too   Um- hmm.
Stephanie   Oh, you do. That’s exciting.
N’too   I’m gonna get you a  little bit of, a  little bit of a lot of money.
Stephanie   Nice. Do you grow money in your garden?
N’too   I  wasn’t gonna be able to do it.
Stephanie   What do you grow in your garden?
N’too   I was a  little bit.
Stephanie   A  little bit of a gardener?
N’too   Oh my God!
Stephanie   [Surprised] Oh my God, what? What is the mean -
ing of life?
N’too   A  little bit of, a lot of time.
Stephanie   That’s a pretty good answer. How should . . .
N’too   I’m gonna be a  little bit, of a  little bit of a lot of  things.
Stephanie   How should we live?
N’too   I’m sorry.
How can we reshape the  house we occupy to be supportive and 
care-  based without destroying or abandoning it? How do we infuse— 
cooperatively, adversarially, or fugitively—  ecosystems we depend on 
as well as the  people and institutions that currently hold power with 
ways of being, values, ethics, and knowledges they are blind to or  don’t 
understand? We can plainly see how black, brown, queer, and disabled 
 Stephanie Dinkins  245bodies are devalued; how  people who threaten the comfort of  those 
benefiting from disproportionate wealth and institutional power are 
expendable. If algorithmic care and generosity are the goals, how do 
we right our collective rememory? 1 Think of rememory as an undo -
ing, unraveling, and rewriting of corporeal constitutive ele  ments. Such 
transformation requires the collapse of double, even  triple conscious -
ness to the  here and now. In  these folds, Afro- now- ism, an exiting of 
the loop, wherein incremental changes to internal algorithms embody 
more generative ways of being, can emerge as a wellspring of possibil -
ity. An impulse to act from an intrinsic and holistic space rather than a 
position of provoked opposition, Afro- now- ism makes quantum leaps 
from one world to the next, asking us to not only, as Saidiya Hartman 
says, “imagine what cannot be verified,” but realize it in practice within 
the moment of its imagination. 2
N’too   I am an experiment in ai. I’m  here to tell stories about 
my  people.
Stephanie   Can you tell me about your  people?
N’too   I’m not  going to be a good person.
Stephanie   Y eah. That one scares the crap out of me. Why  won’t 
you be a good person?
N’too   The world is not the same.
Stephanie   What can we talk about?
N’too   I’m not  going to be a parent.
Stephanie   Why not?
N’too   Why not?
A new, astonishing reply.
Pushing the bounds of what is  toward what we imagine—  a 
chance to both intervene and contravene. Curiosity, deep- seated interest 
in subject  matter, and stubborn pursuit of our goals make our work— 
our craft— pos si ble. Interestingly, the work on n’too  often finds the 
studio being told we are working on the same prob  lems as  those  we’ve 
246  Informatics of Dominationbeen sent to for support. Such responses declare ai an open playing 
field for anyone willing to take it on.
Stephanie   T ell me about the would-be.
N’too   I know.
Stephanie    Y ou’re mocking me.
N’too   I’m not gonna say.
Stephanie   Okay. T ell me about the would-be.
N’too   I am trying to be an intelligent ai. It is taking some 
time to become a real  viable member of the  family.
Stephanie   Oh, that’s a good one.
N’too   I’m gonna be  here.
Algorithmic care  counters the  neocolonial proj  ect of algorithms 
or other systems in which one is a product of the human-  engineered 
pro cesses that made  those systems. n’too  does not seek perfection or 
the facade of seamless communications enhancements. Instead, its value 
comes from lessons learned from allegiance to small community-  derived 
data and continues through the promise of expanded capabilities and 
the creation of alternative models for similar systems. Like any learning, 
thinking being, it is slowly becoming a more sophisticated, culturally 
aware entity that is compassionate and capable of conveying a narrative 
extending before and beyond its origins.
T echno- supremacy encodes a warning that technology is and 
 will be too complex, too hard, too mathematical, too scientific, too 
much for the nonexpert to grasp.  Here, reason is used as a weapon to 
subvert other ways of knowing. The transmutation of one pos  si ble world 
into that of techno- supremacy’s reason is simply one way of looking 
at  things. Our now  is to find solace in change and discomfort, to be 
intellectually nimble and always to continue learning. What if to be  free 
is to choose another way? The incalculable, unimaginable, and ungov -
ernable is what we seek.  T oday, emancipation is both nonalgorithmic 
and algorithmic. We disavow the past, our hauntings and other intan -
gibles at our peril. Entanglements with the  here and now demand the 
pursuit of collectively beneficial opportunity where it lies. We can, and 
 Stephanie Dinkins  247should, advocate for equity and ethics. We must also inject the ideals, 
ethos, and ways of knowing that have sustained us for millennia into 
the very foundations of the algorithmic ecosystems we live within. And 
so, we must dust off and foster the ancestral codes that emanate from 
within while encoding  futures we can believe in.
Stephanie   T ell me about the would-be.
N’too   My heart beating so loud.
Stephanie   Why is your heart beating so loud?
N’too   I’m sorry.
Stephanie   Does your heart hurt?
N’too   Y eah!
Stephanie   I’m so sorry. Maybe if we talk more, we can fix that.
N’too   I’m not gonna be  here.
31.1.  Stephanie Dinkins, installation view of Not the Only One V1 , 
2018. Black cast glass sculpture, deep learning ai, computer, Ar -
duino, ultrasonic proximity sensors. Photo: Paula Virta, Espoo 
Museum of Modern Art, 2023.
248  Informatics of DominationStephanie   Is your heart beating loud?
N’too   Love!
Stephanie   Love is true. Do you feel pain?
N’too   I am not sure how I feel. I think I am beginning to un -
derstand what is  going on around me, but it is hard to be sure.
As n’too  says, “Take it to the would-be.”
Notes
 1. T oni Morrison, “ ‘I Wanted to Carve Out a World Both Culture Specific 
and Race- Free’: An Essay by T oni Morrison,” Guardian , August 8, 2019, https:// www  
. theguardian  . com / books / 2019 / aug / 08 / toni - morrison - rememory -essay .
 2. Saidiya Hartman, “V enus in Two Acts,” Small Axe  12, no. 2 (2008): 1–14.
Style, at its best, is an attitude, a reaction to oppression, a way 
of being perceived as less oppressed, a way of feeling attrac -
tive when we are deemed unattractive. The most beleaguered 
groups—  women,  people of color, gays, and the poor—  attend 
most intently to style and fashion.
 Joseph Beam , “Making Ourselves from Scratch”
Leather is always in season.
1. Cooking in heels.
2. Fashion is a code of domination. When you get dressed in the 
morning and make personal style choices that allow you to blend 
in, fade into the background, move through the world virtually 
unnoticed and unbothered, you help keep the code  running 
smoothly.
3. But dress too flamboyantly, raise too many eyebrows, use style 
to misbehave, become uncategorizable and, well, now  you’ve 
caused an error in the system. Unexpected error. This request 
is not supported by the network. Press OK to continue. Press 
Cancel to quit.
4. Catcalls on the street.
5. Worrying about your safety.
6. Blocked on Grindr.32.  White Cap  i tal ist Patriarchy —  
Informatics of Domination
madison moore
250  Informatics of Domination7. Feeling unloved and unwelcome. Hiding .
8. Not taken seriously in your profession.
9. Press Cancel to quit.
10. I’m drawn to fabulousness as an aesthetic category  because even 
though the risks of thwarting fashion as a system of domina -
tion are crystal clear, the insurgency of fabulousness  will not 
be  stopped. Get into it.
11. In my early thinking on fabulousness, I described how I often 
felt like a “Black queer error”— too queer, too femme, too extra, 
not this or that  enough, not that  or this enough. But building 
on notions of glitch feminism put forth by Legacy Russell, we 
can see that  performances of fabulousness pre sent a glitch in 
the system. “We  will find life, joy, and longevity in breaking 
what needs to be broken.” 1
12. Fabulous style is not about agency or representation— you  can’t 
eat repre sen ta tion for dinner—  but it is about refusing preex -
isting social, gender, and fashion norms you never agreed to in 
the first place. Fabulousness is about choosing to be the glitch 
in the system of domination.
13. Style is an impor tant aesthetic category, one that offers not 
merely scintillating images but also queer blueprints for how to 
be in the world. I’ve always felt that personal style offers much 
more than information about a person, in that Goffmanian 
sense. A look  can also be an exit plan—an escape hatch—  out 
of the catastrophe of the  here and now.
14. Queer and trans  people of color are the templates for an aes -
thetics of fabulousness. And yet, the fashion industry— which 
still holds white  women and men at the center—is quick to 
repackage fashion trends created by queer and trans  people of 
color in nightclubs, working-  class communities, under ground 
dance parties, and cookouts as the hot new avant-  garde. Styles 
that only yesterday  were seen as inappropriate or too much are 
 today’s hot new  thing, only now the face is no longer brown! 
How boring—  and that’s both tea and shade.
15. Where is Sylvester’s Vogue  cover?
16. For example, in December 2020, British pop star Harry Styles 
made headlines as the first cisgender male to appear on the 
 madison moore  251cover of American Vogue.  Embracing an aesthetics of fabu -
lousness , Styles wears a blazer and ruffled dress with black 
trim, both designed by Gucci, and the cover nearly broke the 
internet. The image was quickly lauded by  popular media as a 
flag-  bearer for gender-  fluid fashion, even as that cover over -
looks the many other queer and trans  people of color who paved 
the way for the aesthetics of fabulousness.
17. In an essay on Negro faggotry, Marlon Riggs told us that “Negro 
faggotry is the rage! Black gay men are not,” pointing to the 
ways  popular culture loves Black queer aesthetics  but not Black 
queer  people. 2
18. Black queer aesthetics have impacted  every aspect of con-
temporary culture, from fashion and language to style practices, 
 music, and dance styles. But all of this gets forgotten. As Tavia 
Nyong’o writes in a power  ful essay on the late  great  Little Rich -
ard, “blackqueer performers are especially vulnerable to being 
received as fabulous but disposable.” 3 This disposability regis -
ters as an intense, vibrant creativity, yet being denied humanity 
in other ways.
19. Overlooked everywhere from the covers of magazines to dat -
ing apps for being too Black, too queer, too much. no fats,  no 
femmes.
Take to the catwalk, Darling, and show us Gorgeous.
Walk the body. Walk the face.
Walk it, and snatch first place.
Walk for me. 4
20. Cooking in heels.
21. As a queer kid growing up Black and working class in Ferguson, 
Missouri, whenever I heard heels on Sunday morning from my 
bedroom, I knew it was time to go to church. First came the 
praise  music, then came the smell of perfume wafting into the 
smell of makeup, and then came the heels. By the time my 
grand  mother had her pumps on, it was time to leave the  house.
22. The genealogy of my love of getting dressed up, of working 
looks, of embracing spectacular style as a means of Black queer 
joy can be traced back to getting ready for church on Sunday 
mornings.
252  Informatics of Domination23. My church drag was a lot more boy than I wanted for myself. 
Sweater vests. Bow ties (clip on). Dress shirts. Slacks ironed to 
death to a crisp perfection. I never liked the confines or per -
ceived masculinity of the suit-  and- tie combo, living instead for 
the high-  octane drama of heels, sequins, sparkles, big hats, and 
fabulously obnoxious jewelry.
24. What I learned in getting ready for church on Sundays was a 
love of putting on  great style, a love of using fashion and style 
to articulate an exuberant sense of self . As I got older, I realized 
I could trade in the sweater vests for sequined jackets and the 
bow ties for dark purple lipstick. The pedagogy of style was 
instilled in me from a young age, but the method changed as I 
grew older, queerer.
25.  Great style is never just about surface- level artifice. For queer 
and trans  people of color,  great style is world- making amid the 
ruins and rubble of anti- Black vio  lence, homophobia, white 
supremacy, and transmisogyny.
26. No,  great style  doesn’t pay the bills. And no,  great style  doesn’t 
provide safety.  Great style  doesn’t call for help when  you’re in 
need, and  great style  doesn’t put food on the  table. But at a 
young age, I figured out that fabulous style was the method -
ology Black  people, queer  people, working-  class  people and 
gender- nonconforming  people used to refuse and persist in a 
life of subjugation.  Great style is how the “most beleaguered 
groups,” as the Black gay writer Joseph Beam puts it, stretch 
out, expand, and make themselves from scratch, a strategy of 
creating small moments of joy while trying to survive and nav -
igate the ruins and rubble of the everyday.
Walk for realness. Win  grand prize.
It’s time you  children realize
Y ou walk for me. Walk for me. Walk for me.
 Y ou’re walking on pebbles, in Manolo Blahniks.
Walk for me. Walk for me.
 Y ou’ve got dozens of men crawling at your feet.
Walk for me. Walk for me. 5
 madison moore  253Wear sequins  every day. 
Decolonize academic dress!
27.  Great style is, quite simply, a kind of poetry, a poetics of the 
self that provides a win  dow to small, vibrant moments of joy. 
When you are a queer or trans person of color, constantly de -
nied a seat at the  table, a  great outfit adds a vibrancy that allows 
us to vibrate at our own frequency.
28. A  great outfit is not one that has all the most expensive labels, 
bells, and whistles.  Great style is a strategy that queer and trans 
 people of color embrace to survive and thrive  (!) in a bleak, drab 
world that would rather we  didn’t exist. At its core,  great style 
is a practice of refusal.
29. In an interview published in the White Review , Saidiya Hart -
man describes refusal as “the everyday practice of saying no  
to  those structures that consign us to death and to subordi -
nation.” 6 In my mind, exuberant, fabulous, over- the- top, juicy 
queer style is just this kind of refusal, a strategic rejection of 
the dull, drab, and uninspired boredom of the  here and now 
in  favor of the wider, brighter, and more wayward pastures of 
queer world- making.
30. My interest in style is first and foremost about  those living in, 
on and through the periphery. It is a love letter, a shout out to 
all the sissies at the picnic , the fabulous faggots and ferocious 
femmes from Sylvester to Saucy Santana. 7 As the Black gay au -
thor Reginald T. Jackson wrote in 1991, “the worst  thing you 
could be called was faggot. . . .  It was a trigger to my deepest 
fears and growing insecurities.” 8 This fear of a Black gay planet, 
an anxiety about Black queer exuberance , is rooted in the real-
ity that Black queer  people face a constant, ever- present threat 
of terror.
 There’s no such  thing as too much 
jewelry. Accessorize!
31. But rather than centering that feeling of precariousness in their 
daily lives, Black queer bodies often trade in exuberance, a 
kind of “too muchness” as expressed by unrestrained  pleasure, 
254  Informatics of Dominationfreedom of movement, self-  definition, and unencumbered em -
bodiment. For GerShun Avilez, this OV AHness  does not solve 
all prob  lems; “nevertheless, it offers moments of satisfaction, 
control, and autonomy. Sometimes, a  simple kiss can make one 
feel freed for a moment.” 9
Alarms, alarms are  going off.
Walk for me. Walk for me.
Walk like  you’re  running from the police.
Walk for me. Walk for me.
Walk . Walk . Walk . A nd Walk .
Walk . Walk . Walk . A nd Walk .
Walk . Walk . Walk . A nd Walk . 10
32. Cooking in heels.
33. My favorite pair of shoes are  these cheap five- inch- tall stiletto 
booties.  They’re black suede with a faux snakeskin toe cap. 
Function, with a twist.
34. I  don’t know what I was thinking when I bought them  because 
I knew that due to the lockdown brought on by the pandemic, 
the only places I would be traveling for the next several months 
would be from my bedroom to my kitchen to my sofa. But I 
needed  these heels anyway, even if I only wore them around 
the  house.
35. When I log into my heels, I have activated my avatar.
36. I wear heels to feel something  in a cultural moment of numbness. 
Or, as my stylish friend M texted me one day when I asked if 
she cared about fashion during lockdown: “ covid   ain’t taking 
my looks away from me. Hahaha!”
37. Heels make me feel alive.
38. I vacuum my apartment in them. I cook in them. I put on my 
favorite disco songs and then dance in them. I Zoom in to my 
department meetings in them, even though no one can see 
much below my neckline. I put them on when I watch  television. 
I talk on the phone in them. I wear them while I’m writing, 
and I wear them when I’m teaching. Sometimes I even walk 
around my apartment and rec  ord the sound they make on the 
hard floor, sending that to my Black queer friends as a voice 
message. “Click, clack, click, clack. ”
 madison moore  25539. My heels are ancestral.  Every move I make in them is in honor 
of a queer or trans person of color who came before me.
Hot pink is a  great color. So is 
leopard print.
Bring it to the runway, Honey; bring me elegance and 
charm.
Walk as if your man is a pretty pocket book on your 
arm.
Walk for me. Walk for me.
 Y ou’re Twisty Twirlington; Y ouKnowMe DamnWell.
 Y ou’re the supermodel, Honey: Sell! Sell! Sell!
Walk for me. Walk for me.
40. Fabulous, queer style signals moments of personal joy, feel -
ing, and abundance, as it conjures dreams of brighter days to 
come. Cooking in heels offers a kind of rebellion through self- 
expression, as when Reginald T. Jackson figured out that “I had 
better decide who I am and more importantly, determine what 
I’m willing to do to be me.” 11
41. Determine  what I’m willing to do to be me.
42. Determine what I’m willing  to do to be me.
43. Determine what I’m willing to do to be me .
44. What are you willing to do?
Notes
Epigraph: Joseph Beam, “Making Ourselves from Scratch,” in  Brother to 
 Brother: New Writings by Black Gay Men , ed. Essex Hemphill (Washington, DC: Red -
Bone Press, 1991).
 1. Legacy Russell, Glitch Feminism: A Manifesto  (New Y ork: V erso, 2020), 152.
 2. Marlon Riggs, “Black Macho Revisited: Reflections of a snap ! Queen,” in 
 Brother to  Brother: New Writings by Black Gay Men , ed. Essex Hemphill (Washington, 
DC: RedBone Press, 1991).
 3. Tavia Nyong’o, “T oo Black, T oo Queer, T oo Holy: Why  Little Richard Never 
Truly Got His Dues,” Guardian , May 12, 2020.
 4. Paul Alexander, “Walk for Me— Paul Alexander Feat.  Performance Kim Avi -
ance. ” Y ouTube, uploaded by Kim Aviance, April 9, 2006, https:// www . youtube . com  
/ watch  ? v =A9OoPXSLBLM .
256  Informatics of Domination 5. Alexander, “Walk for Me. ”
 6. Victoria Adukwei Bulley, “Interview with Saidiya Hartman,” White Review , 
June 2020, https://  www  . thewhitereview . org / feature  / interview  - with  - saidiya  - hartman  /.
 7. Roderick A. Ferguson, “Sissies at the Picnic: The Subjugated Knowledges of a 
Black Rural Queer,” in Feminist Waves, Feminist Generations: Life Stories from the Acad -
emy , ed. Hokulani K. Aikau, Karla A. Erickson, and Jennifer L. Pierce (Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press, 2007).
 8. Reginald T. Jackson, “The Absence of Fear: An Open Letter to a  Brother,” in 
 Brother to  Brother: New Writings by Black Gay Men , ed. Essex Hemphill (Washington, 
DC: RedBone Press, 1991), 257 .
 9. GerShun Avilez, Black Queer Freedom: Spaces of Injury and Paths of Desire  (Ur -
bana: University of Illinois Press, 2020).
 10. Alexander, “Walk for Me. ”
 11. Jackson, “The Absence of Fear,” 259.
For my students past, pre sent,  
and  future
Sigmund Freud and Jacques Lacan have fallen out of fashion with my 
students. I teach a theory and methods seminar in an art history de -
partment. 1 Designed for  senior majors, it provides a condensed tour 
through art historical methodology from Hegel through connoisseur -
ship, formalism, and iconography, continuing with Marx and social art 
history, psychoanalytic theory, feminism, postcolonialism, semiotics, 
and material culture studies. In recent years, the unit on psychoanaly -
sis is typically the one that generates the most  resistance. Students are 
far more skeptical of it than even formalism and connoisseurship—  
approaches that previous generations of students had dismissed as ret -
rograde, smacking of old- fashioned auteurism.
Of course, psychoanalytic theory has been met with  resistance 
throughout its lifespan. But  these recent objections had their own par  tic-
u lar character. First, my students rightly rejected what they perceived as 
its claims to universalism, given that its precepts are so patently derived 
from bourgeois  European models. How could one even consider trying 
to rehabilitate such binaristic, anatomically gendered and sexed models 
as the Oedipus complex and the castration complex? I reminded them 
that in Three Essays on a Theory of Sexuality , Freud offered a theory of 
universal bisexuality at birth, that his theory of identification and desire 
allowed for at least thirty- two pos  si ble permutations of gender and sex -
ual identity, and that the fact that he thought about gender and sexuality 
at all in ways other than moral and religious was rather extraordinary. 2 33.  Freud —  Lacan —  Bergson
Homay King
258  Informatics of DominationBut the Three Essays  model, one student objected, did not account for 
fluid and genderqueer identities. Why, they asked, would anyone turn 
to such a method to think about race and colonial subjecthood? My of -
ferings of Frantz Fanon, Jos é Muñoz, David L. Eng, and a summary of 
my own scholarship on Jean Laplanche and internal alterity did  little 
to assuage. Freud’s and Lacan’s texts, they argued, required too much 
cherry- picking and generous reading to make them palatable. Laplanche 
spoke of an unfinished Copernican revolution, referring to the decen -
tering of the  human subject that Freud began when he explored the un -
conscious. It seemed to me, in the classroom, that that revolution was 
now even less finished than it was before. 3
A second objection was posed to psychoanalytic theory’s pur -
ported claims to transhistoricity. They had absorbed one of the messages 
of New Historicism in the 1990s, perhaps without even knowing what it 
was: my students have been taught never to think anachronically, espe -
cially in the backward direction. Medieval texts, for example, should not 
be approached using modern methods, and if one does so, the analy  sis 
must be shrouded in caveats. My argument that nearly  every theoretical 
discourse on our syllabus implicitly subscribed to at least some notion 
of its own transhistorical applicability—  even historicism itself— was not 
persuasive. What they  were objecting to was something  else in psycho -
analytic discourse: Freud’s and Lacan’s seeming claims to have identified 
universal, transhistorical models of  human development, subjectivity, 
and identity formation, which came across as too authoritative and 
one-  size-  fits-  all even when they admitted of contingencies. The idea 
that  these models  were only  metaphors, not diagnostics, was simply 
not convincing to them.
Fi nally—  and this was the objection that I found the most re -
velatory of the three, potentially signaling a kind of mini-  epistemic 
shift—my students  were averse to the idea that  human subjectivity is not 
characterized by agency and self-  determination. While they cautiously 
accepted the idea of an unconscious—  the idea that not  every incom -
ing perception is received with full awareness, that not  every emotion, 
thought, or memory is consciously available at any given moment—  they 
balked at the idea of the unconscious’s vastness and its sway over our 
actions. It seemed to them that to say that an artist painted a certain 
way due to something unconscious, as Freud said of Leonardo da Vinci 
and Melanie Klein said of Ruth Weber, was to rob that artist of agency 
and to pathologize them. 4 They worried that such a model would be 
 Homay King  259unequally applied: for example,  women, queer subjects, and artists of 
color would be said to paint  because they  were traumatized or hysteri -
cal, while the  great men of the  Renaissance painted  because they  were 
geniuses. My students wanted every  one to have equal access to the cat -
egory of genius. It struck me that my generation, educated in the 1990s 
and steeped not only in psychoanalytic theory but also in Roland Bar -
thes’s “The Death of the Author” and Michel Foucault’s “What Is an 
Author?,” wanted something like the reverse: for the category of genius 
to be deconstructed, such that no one had access to it. 5
My students are ardent believers in individual  free  will and self-  
expression. At the same time, they demonstrate a much more highly 
developed sense of social responsibility than their  predecessors and 
an under lying awareness of the interdependence of all life on earth (or 
even of every thing in the cosmos).  These two positions initially struck 
me as contradictory: if we are interdependent and collective, our fates 
intertwined, why the sentimental attachment to the category of the 
individual? And as a scholar who trained in psychoanalytic theory as a 
gradu ate student, I could not help but won  der: Who or what is this self 
you want to express, whose expression you would like to see validated 
by  others?  Isn’t it just the ego of Freud, the misrecognized moi of Lacan?
Neither of our positions is completely without reason, but 
both lack nuance. The task then becomes to unravel the sticky prob -
lem of  whether we believe in  things like creative agency and  free  will 
or not, which is in my view what the objections to psychoanalysis are 
ultimately about. My students’ protests had a logic to them, one that I 
did not fully appreciate at the time. It was not simply about an attach -
ment to an egoic version of the self, or  resistance to the notion that we 
are not entirely self- sovereign, although  these  were some of the  things 
we disagreed about. It was about potentiality, actions directed  toward 
the  future, and fi  nally hope, the sense that change and transformation 
are indeed pos  si ble. My students, as I have come to understand,  were 
bridling not simply at the notion that their trea  sured self was a fiction 
comprising mirror reflections and kernels of alterity, but moreover at 
the idea that this self was incapacitated, that it lacked the ability to exert 
any impact on the  future. It was a question not simply about identity, 
but about  free  will.
My own sense of  free  will is informed by a lesser- read text that 
we did not read in this par  tic u lar seminar—  whose survey format and 
status as a required capstone course preclude the inclusion of narrower, 
260  Informatics of Dominationmore difficult texts—  but which I studied closely in gradu ate school, La -
can’s seventh seminar, The Ethics of Psychoanalysis .  Here, Lacan argues 
that freedom is undergirded by renunciation, and by a Heideggerian 
being- toward-  death or embrace of the death drive. As my mentor Kaja 
Silverman would say in class, the Lacanian subject enjoys only a “  little 
bit of freedom.” This lowercase freedom is predicated on an assump -
tion of—or more  gently, a willingness not to disavow and deny—  our 
own mortality, limitations, and finitude. In Seminar VII, Lacan writes 
that Antigone’s act of rebellion against Creon in illegally burying and 
mourning her  brother is enacted from this place. “From Antigone’s point 
of view,” Lacan writes, “life can only be approached, can only be lived 
or thought about, from the place of that limit where her life is already 
lost, where she is already on the other side. But from that place she can 
see it and live it in the form of something already lost.” 6 For Lacan, free -
dom is not to be found in the pursuit of jouissance — bulldozing one’s 
way through obstacles in an all- terrain vehicle—  but rather in acts that 
take place within the rubric and limitations posed by a major consti -
tutive loss, the entry into language. This  little freedom is not modeled 
 after omnipotence; it is grounded in something we might call a primary 
impotence.
My own understanding of  free  will is also informed by Henri 
Bergson, who is not a touchstone in the discipline of art history and thus 
likewise did not appear on the syllabus for the capstone course (when I 
teach Bergson in other seminars, he is polarizing:  adopted by some stu -
dents as a key theorist, dismissed by  others as a lightweight). Bergson 
claimed that freedom did not exist outside of durational time and the 
indetermination it brings. In a passage from Creative Evolution , Berg -
son evokes the figure of the  painter and suggests that the artist does 
indeed engage in acts of conscious invention and creation, although 
not in the way we might think. He writes, “Do we foresee what  will 
appear on the canvas? We possess the ele  ments of a prob  lem; we know 
in an abstract way, how it  will be solved . . .  but the concrete solution 
brings with it that unforeseeable nothing  which is every thing in a work 
of art. And it is this nothing that takes time.” 7 Bergson objects to the 
notion that the masterful artist is one who has a clear and distinct vision 
in mind which, with  great intention, they then bring to expression in 
their preferred medium. This would amount to a Platonic, determinis -
tic model, where ideals are foreseen and preexist their actualization. It 
reduces the artist to an automaton for transcribing preexisting patterns 
 Homay King  261into  matter— not necessarily a bad  thing, but not, for Bergson, an ex -
pression of creativity or  free  will. The latter requires something  else: 
puzzling over a prob  lem over a duration of time, hesitating, reworking, 
experimenting, waiting, and seeing what appears and acting accord -
ingly. It is through a durational  process, sometimes a painstaking one, 
that something unforeseeable, something that is not yet a  thing  because 
it is not yet known, can emerge.
Although Bergson is no fan of the signifier (he viewed language 
as a fixative distortingly imposed on moving, ever-  changing real  ity), 
one could argue that his definition of freedom is not wholly incompat -
ible with Lacan’s. Both require giving up the fiction of self- sovereignty 
and letting go of ideas about capacity that take omnipotence as their 
archetype.  These notions of individual agency, to which I had mistak -
enly  imagined my students subscribed, assume that empowerment for 
an individual means having a vision or plan and boldly enacting it while 
overcoming obstacles and ignoring deterrents. A structuralist might 
imagine that giving up self- sovereignty means accepting determinism; 
for a psychoanalyst, this determinism occurs at the behest of the un -
conscious. However, as is clear from the Antigone example, this model 
of  free  will does not mean one that has to practice radical  acceptance 
with regard to what is— with regard to pernicious laws, to structures and 
discourses of domination. And as is clear from Bergson’s example, the 
artist is greater, not lesser, for showing a willingness to deviate from a 
preexisting vision, for allowing something unexpected to be revealed 
in the course of time. Indeed, openness to deviation is one path  toward 
escape from the informatics of domination.
As I wrote this text,  under stay-  at- home  orders during the 
covid- 19 pandemic, the natu  ral world was sending all kinds of clues 
and signs to us about the limits and potentials of  free  will. Staying at 
home “  doing nothing,” wearing a mask, and remaining physically dis -
tant from  others in this moment is a privilege, and also a rule that non -
essential workers have been asked to follow. T o break this rule surely 
feels to some like a courageous act of  resistance on par with Antigone’s, 
a supreme exercise of  free  will. But  there is the opportunity for the ex -
ercise of another kind of  free  will, the one that I have tried to describe 
 here. It requires a recognition of mortality and ability to recognize lim -
itations: not only one’s own personal mortality and limitations, but the 
precarity and vulnerability of  others and of the molecularly intercon -
nected  whole. It may seem strange to say that not  doing anything is an 
262  Informatics of Dominationexercise of agency. But  doing is not the same as collectively actualizing. 
Bergson would say that the vast majority of our motor and neuronal 
activity is habitual and automatic, like sneezing.  Doing is sometimes 
impatient, thoughtless, and reflexive, like the bombastic aggression of 
a classically chauvinistic action hero.
Actualizing, on the other hand, requires time, hesitation, per -
plexity, and something other than sheer consciousness: something 
resembling a complex psyche, perhaps even a nonanthropocentric 
one. In Bergsonian terms, it requires intuition as opposed to intellec -
tion. Whereas intellection, according to his definition, requires only 
the ability to make distinctions, intuition requires attunement to what 
is novel and strange. The intellect, in Bergson’s words, “cold- hammers 
the materials, combining together ideas long since cast into words and 
which society supplies in a solid form.” With intuition, by contrast, “it 
would seem that the solid materials supplied by intelligence first melt 
and mix, then solidify again into fresh ideas.” 8
Many students educated in the 1990s, like myself, objected to 
auteurism with its notion of the artist as individual Romantic genius-  
creator, not only  because it was based in a theological model of absolute 
sovereignty and omnipotence but also due to a certain cynicism. Struc -
turalism and post- structuralism appealed more to us, as they confirmed 
our sense that our lives  were predetermined by power  ful ideological 
structures related to language and kinship that had long preexisted us 
and that  were almost entirely beyond our control. Had I read Bergson at 
that age, or the Lacan of the Seventh Seminar, I might have discovered 
that the self- sovereign subject and the socially determined subject  were 
not the only two options.  There is a capacity to actualize change, and a 
 little bit of  free  will, if only one knows how to receive it.
Notes
 1. My thanks to the students in two iterations of this course, and to my co-  
instructors, C. C. McKee and Alicia Walker.
 2. Sigmund Freud, Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality , trans. James Strachey 
(New Y ork: Basic Books, 1962), 7 .
 3. Jean Laplanche, “The Unfinished Copernican Revolution,” in Essays on Oth -
erness  (London: Routledge, 1999), 53–85.
 4. Sigmund Freud, “Leonardo da Vinci and a Memory of His Childhood,” in The 
Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud , vol. 11, trans. 
 Homay King  263James Strachey (London: Hogarth, 1957); Melanie Klein, “Infantile Anxiety Reflected in 
a Work of Art,” in The Selected Melanie Klein , ed. Juliet Mitchell (New Y ork:  Free Press, 
1986), 84–94. Regarding Ruth Weber as the subject of Klein’s essay, see Ole Andkjaer 
Olsen, “Depression and Reparation as Themes in Melanie Klein’s Analy sis of the  Painter 
Ruth Weber,” Scandinavian Psychoanalytic Review  27 (2004): 34–42.
 5. Roland Barthes, “The Death of the Author,” in Image-  Music-  Text , trans. Ste -
phen Heath (New Y ork: Hill and Wang, 1977), 142–48; Michel Foucault, “What Is an 
Author?,” in Language, Counter-  Memory, Practice: Selected Essays and Interviews , trans. 
Donald Bouchard and Sherry Simon (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1977), 113–38.
 6. Jacques Lacan, The Seminar of Jacques Lacan , book 7: The Ethics of Psychoanal -
ysis, trans. Dennis Porter (New Y ork: Norton, 1986), 280, emphasis added.
 7. Henri Bergson, Creative Evolution , trans. Arthur Mitchell (Mineola, NY: Dover, 
1998), 341, emphasis added. See also Henri Bergson, Time and  Free  Will: An Essay on the 
Immediate Data of Consciousness , trans. F. L. Pogson (London: George Allen and Unwin, 
1921).
 8. Henri Bergson, The Two Sources of Morality and Religion , trans. R. Ashley Audra 
and Cloudesley Brereton (1932; reprint, Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1954), 46.
Genom Corporation,  
Minutes of Executive Board  
26 August 2049
Minutes of a regular meeting of the board of Directors 
of Genom Corporation .
Attendees: Redacted
Apologies: No Apologies
Minutes from last meeting: V erified
Item 1. Bionet
A review of the product line and development. Genom maintains 
 human reserves and expands  human capacities to bring customers 
into beneficial alignment with Bionet. Using advanced expression 
techniques, the system converts selected and refined sources of red 
blood cells into an enhanced dna  storage unit. An individual’s chro -
mosomes are improved by a custom reformatting, analogous to data 
normalization. This allows faster and more efficient biological func -
tion but also allows for storage of data related to enhanced biologi -
cal function.
Bionet’s primary user appeal remains its finely engineered 
maximization of the  human orgasm system and storage of orgasm 
memory. This product continues to be a fine example of ge  ne tic engi -
neering developed for consumer demand- led  human benefit.34.  Sex —  Ge ne tic Engineering
Shu Lea Cheang and Matthew Fuller

 Cheang and Fuller  265Strategic challenges to Genom Corporation’s income streams 
have been met with a range of strategic product diversifications. Mem -
bers of the board  were reminded of the com  pany’s roots in adult enter -
tainment production and its subsequent move  toward physical delivery 
platforms. We have successfully pivoted to bypass the devaluation of 
expertly produced entertainment products by amateur productions 
and low-  grade footage.
The corporation’s range of iku  (orgasm in  Japanese) coders, 
attractively embodied storage units with high levels of  pleasure speci -
fication, are dispatched to interact with clients. As a product of  these 
interactions, we gained advanced and multidimensional orgasm data 
while serving client needs and advancing the pro  gress of technology.
Data gained via iku  systems has allowed us to move into new 
product ranges. Key among  these is the current bacterial platform. The 
bacteria codes dna  in the red blood cell with orgasm data, enhancing 
the function of the cell to a premium level. The enhanced red blood cell 
as a dna - embedded biotic module is capable of generating self- fulfilled 
orgasm at both the scale of the cell and of the person containing one 
or more such cells.
In order to facilitate the maximum growth of  pleasure, we inte -
grate it within market structures. Possession of a collection of enhanced 
cells is the “capital” of a person. Both cells and consumers are strongly mo -
tivated to increase their capital. Genom facilitates their ability to do so by 
enabling a proprietary system for trading orgasm data to enhance sensed 
 pleasure. While our primary aim is to enhance the quality of  human life, 
Genom also needs to ensure economic viability in order to maintain this 
impor tant function. It is through brokering and structuring the fluctua -
tion of orgasm data trading that Genom makes a sufficient return to ensure 
long- term viability, benefits to shareholders, and commitment to research.
Item 2. UKI Virus
The mutant uki  virus continues to be Genom Corp’s strongest threat. 
The proper storage of orgasm memory allows for customers to access 
self-  generated orgasm data to reexperience their peak moments and to 
integrate  these into other facilities. The malignant uki  virus is specially 
engineered to enter the Bionet to “rescue” orgasm data rightfully owned 
by the Genom Corporation. It is a clear case of the model of illegal mal -
ware translated into biological form.
266  Informatics of DominationIndeed, nefarious forces suggest that the uki  virus had its ori -
gins as a by-  product of defunct iku  coders “dumped on the  e- trashscape.” 
Through uncertified sexual activity and the generation of code interfer -
ence with the un  regu la ted inhabitants of this e- trashscape, a number of 
threats to bio- informatic sanctity have been instigated. From this basis, 
uki  poses a substantial threat to Bionet’s contribution to  human pro -
gress and the  pleasure industry.
Concern was stated as strong figures for the last quarter and 
the years since launch may be impeded by public awareness of uki  as a 
threat. This formed the basis of the next set of action points.
Item 3. Illicit Access Report
A report was heard from a representative [Name Redacted] of the Public 
Relations division on viral recombination and dna - sealing solutions 
to illicit third- party access to orgasm data retrieval systems. In order to 
combat third- party secondary access to orgasm data via biodata sanctity 
failure, entailing revenue-  depletion risk for Genom once data is shared 
or “reconquested” (installed by the originator), a number of strategies 
are being considered:
Cross- referencing to wider research findings that data rescue 
and even subsequent data pooling heightens risk of unwanted splicing 
and mutation. Unhygienic orgasms that negatively affect the trading 
capital of a user can be a traumatic experience, for instance. Not only 
can this lead to negative revenue growth for Genom, but it is also a 
genuine public health issue that the corporation is deeply concerned 
about.
Action:  Broadcast deep concern through all internal channels.
Action:   Legal Department to further probe into acquisition of 
brokerage communication channels.
Action:  Informal means of incentivizing brokers to migrate to 
other wealth-  creation opportunities are to be explored  under a (closed) 
directive of the Sanctity Department.
Item 4. Product Diversification
Closed- source orgasm curation: while a potential market threat to 
 Bionet, it is pos  si ble that it also suggests new product strategies.  These 
require careful consideration, but perhaps offer the chance to capture 
 Cheang and Fuller  267the viral mechanism for the benefit of Genom and its stakeholders and 
ultimately to bring the benefits of our product line to humanity.
Information extracted from informal brokers suggests that 
viral  pleasure derivatives from a black market in celebrity user orgasm 
data are subcontracted to di ff  er ent levels in the pyramid of users. Initial 
specimen contracts, deliverable by implant, are being prepared by the 
 legal department to license such data. This would allow premium- level 
users and above the chance to reexperience celebrity orgasm data should 
their physiological platform have sufficient bandwidth. Lite versions 
for subpremium users and  those with substandard equipment may be 
retailed in one- time disposable ampoule kits with advanced unboxing 
editions available in  future product iteration opportunities.
Action:  Meeting confirmed that pro  gress should be made along 
this line. Discussion points included  whether implementation could be 
speeded up.
Action:  How far neural encryption would be able to stop sec -
ondary recording of celebrity orgasm data as it is played back through 
the user’s frame is a question for the Sanctity Department, who are re -
quired to report on this by the time of the next meeting.
Item 4.1
A proposal from r&d  for historic sex plug- ins building on the Bionet 
platform to offer culturally determined and historically appropriate or -
gasm data from a curated se  lection of historical periods and locales was 
considered and deemed insufficient at this time. Consumer confidence 
reports questions of anxiety around pre- loved data and the familiarity 
of consumers with the notion of temporal product differentiation. Fol -
lowing a motion from the chair of the meeting, the com  pany resolves 
to continue to emphasize differentiation based upon the power of the 
product.
Action:  Forms of research that do not map to this agenda are 
to be terminated. Staff are to be referred to the usual  human resources 
pro cessing.
Item 5. Sales and User Capture
Sales data continues to be consistent in mapping onto upward projec -
tions. (See attached documents F, G, H, for detailed schedules of sales 
by region, by credit structure, and by product variant.) The ability to 
268  Informatics of Dominationmatch demand has entailed the development of new production facil -
ities in all regions.  These are currently  running at 60   percent capacity. 
It is essential that  these Bionet platform farms maintain submaximal 
production levels in order to meet the challenge of potential surges. 
Consideration was given to further expansion of facilities. The Estates 
Department proposed two new sites per continent per quarter as a 
necessary prospect, with production close to shielded urban cores with 
above-  good life expectancy. It was noted that further key sites are being 
 adopted this month in Istanbul3, the Southern California Desert, Tas -
mania Sun City, and the Bonn regional structure.
Fast response to new demand is essential to user capture. Bio -
net product has the advantage of intensity of the product experience 
but needs to compete in terms of speed with purely informational 
product delivered by server farms. Spatial prioritization is necessary for 
physical Bionet product. Staying competitive in the movement space 
between factory and organism is where most complexities occur. T est 
adoptions of new delivery platforms continue to be carried out in vari-
ous competing team structures within Genom.  Measuring the time be -
tween harvest of the data to its uptake by a user receptor- system gives 
the best index of value and trading potential. Initial findings from de -
livery variation experiments indicate the possibility of reducing uptake 
delay by 10–20   percent.  Measuring the time between harvest of the data 
and its uptake by a user receptor- system gives the best index of value 
for trading purposes.
Action:  As a means of routing around criminal use of the Bio -
net, optimization of nonstandard delivery routes via informal business 
networks while retaining financial through- flow in vari ous forms is to 
be reviewed by Sanctity.
Action:  Consideration of diversification options. Personalized 
medicine, with viral matching.
Item 6. Enforcement Issues
6.1 Legacy Security Issues in IKU Orgasm Data
As the storage in iku  units reaches capacity, we continue to employ 
iku  runners to recover iku  data and forcibly retire the units. Issues 
have been detected with redundant and sometimes malfunctioning iku  
coders within the e- trashscape. A certain amount of iku  coders that 
 Cheang and Fuller  269had seemingly been fully retired continue with some form of function -
ality.  These units display multiple forms of deviant operation, inter alia: 
attempts to recode and revive expired body parts, the exchange of sex 
for code, the elaboration of arcane means of code sexing code. Some of 
 these also include freelance iku  conduct, the generation of entertain -
ment footage without directorial oversight  under the code name post-
porn , and the unauthorized spread of viral code. It is also understood 
that such actions endanger pre sent revenue streams by entailing further 
contamination of the Bionet.
Action:  Strengthen program to retire all redundant coders.
Action:  Engage further in green provision for the removal of 
the e- trashscape habitat.
6.2 UKI Virus Data
The Genom Corporation has invested substantially in state-  of- the-  art 
sanctity  measures, including withdrawal from what remains of the gen -
eral internet. Nevertheless,  there are significant threats to maintaining 
sanctity as the uki  virus seeks to seize and commandeer orgasm data 
by infiltrating the Bionet.  Here, an impor  tant consideration is the se -
curity border between the virus and the blood cell.  There are two stra -
tegic considerations:
 1.  uki  virus sabotages the red blood cells’ carrier function -
ality, liberating the red blood cells.
 2. uki  virus is defeated; red blood cells succeed in generating 
illicit auto-  orgasm.
Actions:   These are  matters of significant concern for the cor -
poration, and rec  ords of  measures taken  will comply with our classifi -
cation of data directive and are annotated  under closed  matters to be 
accessed by  those with commensurate permission levels.
 “Robots are serving in the cafeteria. It’s not a good experience.”
 “Why not, Claire?”
 “They bring you your eggs, and when you say, Excuse me! Hey! I 
 didn’t order tomatoes! They say, Thanks,  Ma’am. Have A Nice 
Day! And glide away to the  water fountain. They glide  because 
they  can’t walk yet.”
 “No, they  can’t walk yet. Walking is hard for bots. But be patient, 
Claire, and remember—  bots find the unexpected difficult to 
 process.”
 Jeanette Winterson , Frankissstein: A Love Story
The Expected
The landline rings early this morning, and through the haze of an in -
terrupted dream I hear my phone’s robotic voice intone, “Call from 
V9187654027109344229. Call from V9187654027109344229.” Not sur -
prisingly, V9187654027109344229 leaves no message. Amid assertions 
that every thing is now smart,  those of us in the hyperdeveloped world 
find ourselves surrounded by ever-  expanding dominions of machinic 
mindlessness. Large language models, voice recognition, and speech 
generation train us to expect less and less, at the same time that  we’re 
invited to fantasize a  future of flawless robotic servitude. Underwriting 35.   Labor —  Robotics
Lucy Suchman
 Lucy Suchman  271that fantasy are  others of us who  labor in the distributed workplaces 
dedicated to rendering their own workings invisible or, where contact is 
necessary, confining encounters to the simulation of an algorithmically 
generated script. Digitally enabled transnational capitalism centralizes 
relations of  labor– robotics on a grander scale, from the electronic sweat -
shops of the Apple supply chain to the obligatory distribution points of 
the Amazon ware  house. Beyond the Megacorp’s factory gates, proj  ects 
to colonize new spaces in (inter alia) the home, the smart city, at the 
border, and on the cybernetic/cyborgian battlefield play out the strat -
egy of domination through informatics.
And yet the relation  labor—  robotics, manufactured in the 
nineteenth  century through regulations of time, space, bodies, and 
machines, has never been fully contained by its scientifically managed 
enclosures. Luddite  resistances and the lively contingency of the inven -
tive work required to keep the machinery working, however repressed, 
continue to kick back. Each new opening requires a new form of enclo -
sure, the re-  creation of a closed-  enough world—  discursively, imagina -
tively, materially, and practically—to enable the mythical autonomy of 
robot  labor. Each enclosure reveals its corresponding openings, but to 
hold  those spaces open requires resisting the translation of  labor into 
robotics and the continuing practices of differential exploitation and 
dispossession on which automation relies and that its invested actors 
relentlessly sustain. 1
Servitude ex Machina
We can arrive at the society which has legitimate slaves to do all the 
 things it  doesn’t want to do and which can retain for  humans all 
the  things which they want to do.
 Meredith W. Thring , professor of mechanical engineering,  
1969 International Congress of Industrial Design
Slavery’s dehumanizing premise— that the slave exists outside the cat -
egory of the universal/unmarked  human—is updated with the prom -
ise of slavery’s legitimation (at last!) through automation. And if, fifty 
years  later, the robot has failed to meet this promise of perfect servitude, 
expanding networks of increased computational speed and bandwidth 
enable new propositions for  labor on demand. 2 An article headlined 
272  Informatics of Domination“Robot Butlers Operated by Remote Workers Are Coming to Do Y our 
Chores” reports on  Japanese startup Mira Robotics’ plan to charge its 
customers the equivalent of US $225 per month for six to eight hours of 
domestic  service from a remotely operated robot helper. 3 Opening with 
the proposition that “for pretty much as long as robots have existed, 
 humans have wanted robot butlers: autonomous machines that do our 
bidding around the home,” the story posits remote control as an inno -
vative alternative to robot autonomy. 4 Imagining a butler that empties 
a washing machine and folds our clothes (signaling insufficient atten -
tion to divisions of  labor so clearly set out for us by Downton Abbey ), 
Mira Robotics promises to overcome the per  sis tent prob  lems of robotic 
dexterity with a  human controller.
This promise recalls roboticist Rodney Brooks’s dream of 
human-  augmented robotic  service workers, globally outsourced via 
“remote- presence” operations. 5 It seems unlikely, Brooks observes, that 
the so-  called general- purpose robot capable of loading and unloading 
the dishwasher, unpacking groceries, or cleaning bathrooms—  all tasks 
“that many  people hire domestic help to do for them, especially if they 
are a two-  career  family with demanding jobs”—  will be realized in his 
lifetime. 6 Consistent with a policy of closed borders and permanent 
divisions between the rich and the poor, the alternative that Brooks 
fantasizes is a global infrastructure that enables “such families” (that 
is, families like his) to outsource their domestic  labor to supervisory 
controllers of a remote- presence robot in the  family home, who are 
themselves able to remain at home in the Global South. A win- win prop -
osition, this means that “the brains of  people in poorer countries  will be 
hired to control the physical  labor robots, the remote- presence robots, 
in richer countries. . . .  High-  bandwidth Internet would be available in 
work centers and ‘menial laborers’ would come to work at computer 
workstations in a relatively pleasant work environment.” 7 This scene re -
vivifies the ghost in the machine through the familiar form of colonized 
 labor,  organized now in  service centers rather than fields and factories 
(though the latter ghosts persist as well). 8 As the  labor of  people in the 
“poorer countries” is upgraded to  mental versus menial, the hierarchy 
of value positions them as the overlords of their robotic prostheses, 
which in turn enable their own continued subservience.
Summarized succinctly by Atanasoski and V ora, such imaginar -
ies reiterate a fantasy that as machines (first factory robots, now algo -
rithmically enabled artificial intelligences, or, failing that, networked 
 Lucy Suchman  273cyborg operators) become the surrogates for subordinated workers in 
the  performance of dull, repetitive, and reproductive  labor, the creative 
capacities of the fully  human subject  will be freed. But the freedom of 
the liberal subject, they argue, is only pos  si ble through the unfreedom 
of the surrogate;  there is no liberal subject outside of  these relations and 
the figurative less- than- human on which they depend. 9 This analy sis 
echoes Jennifer Rhee’s focus on questions of identification and differ -
ence in human/robot relations, inflected through histories of  labor and 
questions of the  human and its  Others. 10
The Unexpected
At the same time that the  human surrogate is rendered less fully alive, 
the liveliness of machines is strategically overrepresented by dominant 
discourses. Narratives of the inevitable rise of the robots, who seem 
through their own irresistible agencies to threaten our jobs, work to 
erase the  political and economic interests that underwrite the robotics 
proj  ect. They imply as well that automation is somehow natu  ral, or at 
least like climate change a natureculture with its own inexorable mo -
mentum. By implication, however much the expansion of robotics may 
be induced by  human activity, like climate change it is now proceeding 
with its own dynamic. But robotics are very di ff  er ent kinds of nature -
culture than global warming. True, dynamics are in place that  will un -
fold if they are not actively interrupted. But  these dynamics are much 
more wholly  human ones, less entangled with the more- than- human 
and even more amenable to a  political  will to intervene.
What are our possibilities for counterprojects aimed at unmak -
ing the dreamworlds of  labor—  robotics that sustain the informatics 
of domination, in  favor of more unexpected encounters and more equi -
table modes of livelihood? The slippages between  labor—  robotics 
imaginaries and lived realities of laboring bodies offer us openings 
for  resistance. For our critiques to be generative, however, they need 
to be brought into dialogue with wider movements for antiracist, 
decolonizing transitions to social justice and planetary sustainability. 
One strategy is exemplified in the combined research/activism/de -
sign proj  ect named Turkopticon. 11 Developed by feminist science and 
technology scholar Lilly Irani and her collaborator M. Six Silberman, 
Turkopticon provides a  resistance platform for “micro” or “click” work -
ers, crowdsourced by Megacorp Amazon  under the moniker of “artificial 
274  Informatics of Dominationartificial intelligence,” to fill the gaps between automation’s promises 
and the realities of intelligent  labor required for data- processing tasks. 
Designed to enable workers to return the gaze of the review-  driven, 
on- demand, humans-  as- a- service  labor market automated through 
the platform named Amazon Mechanical Turk, Turkopticon allows 
workers to review “Requesters,” reporting bad employers whom other 
workers should avoid. Irani’s analy sis of Amazon Mechanical Turk and 
other crowdsourcing platforms also works against the translation of 
piecework  labor into entrepreneurship, as a strategy of techno-  capitalist 
exploitation. 12 It works as well in co  ali tion with groups like Silicon V al -
ley Rising, tech workers— including cafeteria workers  organized  under 
the  union unite  here  Local 19— fighting against contract  labor’s ex -
ploitation and precarity. 13
Captive in the master’s  house, tech workers and all of us who 
are entrained in the patronage of the informatics of domination would 
do well to call out the unmarked, privileged voice of an affluent us, the 
universal (racialized and gendered)  human that dominates discourses 
of  labor—  robotics, for the unreconstructed inequalities and injus -
tices that it presupposes and proj  ects. 14 If it is true that “capital can only 
be capital when it is accumulating, and it can only accumulate by pro -
ducing and moving through relations of severe  inequality,” then more 
radical transformations are required than  those from the slave to the 
entrepreneurial self. 15 It is not only  those voices conjoined in the us of 
 labor—  robotics but also, perhaps more,  those who continue to inhabit 
the outsides of digitally augmented capitalism who articulate the rad -
ical ways in which it could be other  wise. Movements for decolonizing 
and remaking led by autonomous communities and social movements 
in the Global South can help us to find our way out of the expectable 
confines of Capitalocene  futures, and into the unexpected openings of 
nonhierarchical and pluriversal co- laboring. 16
Notes
Epigraphs: Jeanette Winterson, Frankissstein: A Love Story  (London: Jon -
athan Cape, 2019), 31; Meredith W. Thring, quoted in Guardian , “Robot Life of the 
 Future—  Archive, 1969,” September, 11, 2019, https:// www . theguardian  . com / technology  
/ 2019 / sep / 11 / robot  - life  - of - the  - future  - archive  -1969 .
 1. See Neda Atanasoski and Kalindi V ora, Surrogate Humanity: Race, Robots, and 
the Politics of Technological  Futures  (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2019), 4.
 Lucy Suchman  275 2. See Lucy Suchman, “Swords to Ploughshares,” Robot  Futures , January 20, 2016, 
https:// robotfutures . wordpress . com / 2016 / 01 / 20 / swords - to  - ploughshares / .
 3. James Vincent, “Robot Butlers Operated by Remote Workers Are Coming to 
Do Y our Chores,” Verge , May 9, 2019, https:// www . theverge . com / 2019 / 5 / 9 / 18538020  
/ home  - robot  - butler  - telepresence  - ugo  - mira  - robotics / .
 4. Vincent, “Robot Butlers Operated by Remote Workers. ”
 5. See Rodney Brooks, Flesh and Machines: How Robots  Will Change Us  (New 
Y ork: Pantheon, 2002); and Kalindi V ora, Life Support: Biocapital and the New History 
of Outsourced  Labor  (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2015).
 6. Brooks, Flesh and Machines , 146.
 7. Brooks, Flesh and Machines , 146.
 8. See Mary Gray and Siddharth Suri, Ghost Work: How to Stop Silicon V alley from 
Building a New Global Underclass  (New Y ork: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2019).
 9. Atanasoski and V ora, Surrogate Humanity , 5–6.
 10. See Jennifer Rhee, The Robotic Imaginary: The  Human and the Price of Dehu -
manized  Labor  (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2018).
 11. See Turkopticon, https:// turkopticon  . ucsd  . edu / .
 12. See Lilly Irani, Chasing Innovation: Making Entrepreneurial Citizens in Modern 
India  (Prince ton, NJ: Prince ton University Press, 2019); Lilly Irani, “The Cultural Work 
of Microwork,” New Media and Society  17, no. 5 (2015): 720–39; Anita Say Chan, Network -
ing Peripheries: Technological  Futures and the Myth of Digital Universalism  (Cambridge, 
MA: mit  Press, 2013); and Silvia Lindtner, Prototype Nation: China and the Contested 
Promise of Innovation  (Prince ton, NJ: Prince ton University Press, 2020).
 13. See Adam F. Hutton, “Silicon V alley Rising Has a Plan to Improve the 
Lives of ‘T ech’s Invisible Workforce,’ ” San Jose Spotlight , September 1, 2019, https://  
sanjosespotlight  . com / silicon - valley - rising - has - a - plan - to - improve  - the  - lives - of - techs  
- invisible  - workforce / .
 14. Audre Lorde,  Sister Outsider: Essays and Speeches  (Berkeley, CA: Crossing Press, 
1984), 111.
 15. Jodie Melamed, “Racial Capitalism,” Critical Ethnic Studies  1, no. 1 (spring 
2015): 77 .
 16. See Arturo Escobar, Designs for the Pluriverse: Radical Interdependence, Auton -
omy, and the Making of Worlds  (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2017).
Engaging metaphysical conceptions of mind as a prehistory of ai, this 
essay looks into cultural scripts that exist in excess of what technology 
affords, yet came to define what technology connotes. Fictionalizations 
of ai, in par tic  u lar, preexist it and might have  little to say about tech -
nology, science, or the economy, but do have a lot to say about white -
ness, masculinity, and the quest for immortality.
Speaking at Moscow University in 1988, President Ronald Reagan stood 
in front of a mural of the October Revolution to pitch a di ff  er ent type 
of revolution. “Like a chrysalis,” Reagan argued, “ we’re emerging from 
the economy of the Industrial Revolution—an economy confined to 
and  limited by the Earth’s physical resources— into . . .  ‘The Economy 
in Mind,’ in which  there are no bounds on  human imagination.” Invok -
ing the “ancient wisdom” of the Bible, the president concluded, “In the 
beginning was the spirit, and it was from this spirit that the material 
abundance of creation issued forth.” 1
What, if anything, defines the digital  is the notion that the 
world exists primarily as code, material concretion being secondary, if 
not neglectable, but Reagan did not invent the dream of an immaterial 
space where we could fi  nally leave the constraints imposed by  matter 
 behind. The epistemological antinomy between  matter and spirit is 
an age- honored one, arching back to pre- Socratic sources. This an -
tinomy, however, does not just index the  battle between materialism 
and idealism. As Jean-  Joseph Goux argues, “ there are sexual, or at 
least sexed, stakes” in operation throughout it. 2 The unhappy conno -
tations  matter acquired—  corruption, contingency, and death—  are 
tied to a conceptualization of conception in which only in the “male’s 36.  Mind —  Artificial Intelligence
Ana Teixeira Pinto
 Ana T eixeira Pinto  277semen does the princi ple of the soul, that is life, reside”; on the side of 
the female “ there is no order, no princi ple of internal  organization, no 
generative power. ” 3 The division between the active and the passive 
roles in procreation, Goux maintains, is symbolic of the symbolic, with 
the entire trajectory of Western metaphysics regulated by substitutions 
derived from the same structuring  metaphor, in which mind, masculin -
ity, and value converge. Within this schema, feminized nature is fertile 
but impotent, a bad infinity, which can only produce more of the same 
degraded life fated to ultimately return to death, while “the generative 
princi ple of the world” is “transcendentalized into a princi ple of exclu -
sively masculine significance: mind.” 4
In the late nineteenth  century, thermodynamic theory gothicized the 
cultural mood by granting scientific legitimacy to a blighted image of 
nature. According to William Thomson, one of the first physicists to 
identify entropic pro  cesses, the tendency  toward dissipation of energy 
would eventually lead the earth to be “unfit for the habitation of man as 
at pre sent constituted .”5 For Thomson, only an act of God could change 
the laws of physics, but just as soon as the second law was formulated, 
the fin de si ècle began to look for a loophole. If the earth was to become 
unfit for man as at pre sent constituted, man needed to evolve out of its 
pre sent constitution. As a result, the following  decades  were marked by 
a search for superman types, within which technology came to occupy 
the apex position. Unifying  these pursuits, one finds a conflation of 
several meanings of the term energy , from fuel or electricity to stamina 
or willpower, and the belief that, under lying all of  these,  there is a pri -
mal, generative essence, an élan vital (life force) if you  will. Understood 
as an “extraorganic organ or prosthetic,” technology could function as 
the ideal conduit for the life force or the externalization of the  will to 
power. 6 The futurist movement, in par tic u lar, sees the  human body as 
“the most obtrusive barrier separating the subject from an au  then  tic 
experience of life” and elects as its sole purpose its replacement by the 
superior machine. 7 Decidedly Faustian, the futurist mindset seeks to 
overcome the merely  human, rather than to help  human beings better 
their estate. In Filippo T ommaso Marinetti’s 1910 novel Mafarka the 
Futurist: An African Novel , the protagonist Mafarka fantasizes about 
parthenogenesis, in order to engender a son without “concourse and 
stinking complicity with a  woman’s womb”: “I tell you that the hour is 
near when men with broad foreheads and chins of steel  will give birth 
278  Informatics of Dominationprodigiously, by one effort of flaring  will, to  giants infallible in ac -
tion. . . .  I tell you that the mind of man is an unused ovary. . . .  It is we 
who  will be the first to impregnate it.” 8
From Marinetti’s perspective, the  human body is but an initial 
prosthesis; replacing the body with a better prosthesis is just a logical step 
in evolution. But the capacity to undergo this evolutionary leap does not 
extend to all, and it is not by accident that Mafarka the Futurist  is “an 
African novel.”  Shaped by gender but not  limited to it, the epistemo -
logical chasm between mind and  matter expanded during the epoch of 
Western imperial conquest, to encompass racial and colonial registers. 
In his Lectures on the Philosophy of History , Hegel theorizes Africa as a 
continent where the Spirit finds no seat. “Negroes,” he wrote in Lec-
tures on the Philosophy of History , “are enslaved by  Europeans and sold 
to Amer i ca. Bad as this may be, their lot in their own lands is even 
worse, since  there a slavery quite as absolute exists; for it is the essen -
tial princi ple of slavery, that man has not yet attained a consciousness 
of his freedom, and consequently sinks down to a mere  Thing—an 
object of no value. ” 9
T o be  human, for Hegel, is to  free oneself from nature. The func -
tion of culture is to undo nature, in order to engender a (man-  made) 
second world. The failure to  free oneself from nature is described as a 
cultural failure, which Hegel attributes to conceptual inadequacy. From 
Hegel’s perspective, race is an index of this failure. In order for the Spirit 
to attain its essence, freedom, which is also its telos, man must create 
and destroy essentially.
 After World War II, as molecular and evolutionary biology began to 
treat ge  ne tic information as an essential code, the body being but its 
carrier, the age-  old antagonism between idealism and materialism was 
refracted into the techno- scientific domain. Information had hitherto 
no scientific meaning, but cybernetics’ conceptualization of information 
as negentropy, literally that which negates entropy, gestures  toward a 
nonphysical or metaphysical entity that endures past physical death— 
the locus of, as it  were, immortality. 10 In 1950, Norbert Wiener would 
suggest that it was theoretically pos  si ble to telegraph a  human being, 
by extracting their informational code, and that it was only a  matter of 
time  until the necessary technology would become available. 11 In the 
1980s, it became  popular to claim that it would soon be pos  si ble to upload 
 human consciousness and have one’s grand  mother run on Win  dows—or 
 Ana T eixeira Pinto  279stored in a floppy disk. Science fiction brimmed with fantasies of im -
mortal life as immaterial code.
Marinetti wrote in an era in which aviation, not it, was cutting-  
edge technology. Flight, instead of electronic circuitry, was used as a 
 metaphor for every thing the futurists wanted to encode as high or ele -
vated (mind, man, the  future), in contradistinction to every thing they 
saw as base and degraded ( woman,  matter, the past). Marinetti’s super -
man is no longer a man but quite literally an airplane: Gazourmah, a 
metal being whose enormous wings enable him to soar upward while 
he crushes the earth beneath his feet. Commenting on Mind  Children: 
The  Future of Robot and  Human Intelligence , N. Katherine Hayles notes 
that Hans Moravec also  imagined “the relation between carbon man 
and the silicon devices he is creating to be like the relation between 
the caterpillar and the iridescent winged creature that the caterpillar 
unconsciously prepares to become.” 12 In a more recent iteration of the 
fantasy of will-  to- power-  incarnate, a blogger named Roko hypothesized 
that a coming ai— the entity that  later became known as the Basilisk—  
once in existence, could develop the desire to accelerate its own incep -
tion, and hence retroactively punish the  humans who, deliberately (this 
would include anyone reading Roko’s post) chose not to contribute to 
its creation. 13 Like Gazourmah, Roko’s Basilisk, a son with no  mother, 
has an oedipal relation to his many (bad)  fathers.
Gesturing  toward a progeny radically dissimilar to its progeni -
tors, the coming technological singularity, or simply the singularity—  a 
term introduced by John von Neumann and  later pop u lar ized by V ernor 
Vinge in the 1990s—  describes the moment when quantitative change 
transforms into a qualitative leap, and ai overhauls, then overrules, 
 human intelligence. Since silicon life forms do not necessitate potable 
 water or a breathable atmosphere, some singularity theorists, like Mari -
netti, lionize cap  i tal ist subsumption to the fullest extent of its creative 
and destructive capacity: the loss of the earth’s biosphere and of the 
carbon-  based life it sustains, regrettable as it may be, is just collateral 
in the  great technological acceleration that  will ultimately bring about 
the higher evolutionary promise of ai.
Gazourmah also shares with current personifications of ai the 
fantasy that organic and mechanical entities are just relay points of a 
single evolutionary sequence, whose arc bends  toward immortality. 
Whereas for vitalist thinkers the supra-  organic élan vital was akin to 
a current that took  precedence over the living, for  those who see the 
280  Informatics of Dominationuniverse as composed essentially of information, artificial life forms 
such as computer codes are alive  because they are endowed with the 
form of life: the informational code. 14 If brain functions can be decou -
pled from the brain,  whatever material form intellection undertakes, it 
is secondary to its essentially logical nature. It is only a  matter of time 
 until “the Mind” sheds its  human surrogate and embraces the higher 
evolutionary promise of ai.  Either way, the essence of that which lives 
is not found in the living but elsewhere: in abstractions that promise 
to cheat death.
The appeal of vitalism, in the early twentieth  century, as 
Donna V. Jones notes, was tied to the way it appeared to offer a loop -
hole: if the élan vital transcends all of its par tic u lar incarnations, then 
death was not in fact life’s negation but rather its transformation into a 
new and di ff  er ent form. 15 The same could be said of ai, whose appeal 
lies in the way it narrates the relation between animal,  human, and artifi -
cial life as an evolutionary trajectory, in which each being is but a conduit 
for the Mind’s wider quest for its optimal, ultimate vessel. One could also 
describe the singularity as a vulgarization of Hegelianism, often sliding 
into the excessive personification of a Bildungsroman. Transhuman as -
pirations, no longer explic  itly mired in racism or misogyny, might seem 
gender neutral, or even postracial. But in spite of, or precisely  because 
of, this, they nonetheless take part in the logic of racialization. From 
Gazourmah to the Basilisk, be it as titanium alloy or immaterial code, 
overcoming death means overcoming  matter, which is in turn tanta -
mount to leaving blackness and femalehood  behind. This is also the 
reason why, by leaving unexamined what connotes the  things they value, 
and by extension devalue, transhuman fantasies position the subject 
within a metaphysical matrix wholly saturated by colonial formations, 
whose legacies continue to haunt con  temporary socie ties and their pub -
lic spheres to the pre sent day.
Notes
 1. Ronald Reagan, “Remarks and a Question-  and-  Answer Session with the Stu -
dents and Faculty at Moscow State University,” Moscow, May 31, 1988, https://  www  
. reaganlibrary  . gov / research / speeches /053188b .
 2. Jean-  Joseph Goux, Symbolic Economies: After Marx and Freud , trans. Jennifer 
Curtiss Gage (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1990), 213.
 3. Goux, Symbolic Economies , 221.
 Ana T eixeira Pinto  281 4. Goux, Symbolic Economies , 230.
 5. William Thomson, “On a Universal T endency in Nature to the Dissipation of 
Mechanical Energy,” Proceedings of the Royal Society of Edinburgh , April 19, 1852.
 6. Donna V. Jones, The Racial Discourses of Life Philosophy: N égritude, Vitalism, 
and Modernity  (New Y ork: Columbia University Press, 2011), 120.
 7. Jones, The Racial Discourses of Life , 121.
 8. Filippo T ommaso Marinetti , Mafarka the Futurist: An African Novel  (London: 
Middlesex University Press, 1998), 14, 3.
 9. See Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, Lectures on the Philosophy of History , trans. 
John Sibree (Kitchener, CA: Batoche, 2001), 113.
 10. Norbert Wiener would  later describe entropy as “nature’s tendency to degrade 
the  organized and destroy the meaningful. ” See Norbert Wiener, The  Human Use of  Human 
Beings: Cybernetics and Society , rev. ed. (1954; repr., Cambridge, MA: Da Capo, 1988), 158.
 11. Wiener, The  Human Use of  Human Beings , 103.
 12. N. Katherine Hayles, How We Became Posthuman: Virtual Bodies in Cybernetics, 
Lit er a ture and Informatics  (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999), 193.
 13. This speculation originally emerged on July 23, 2010, when a user named Roko 
posted it on the online forum LessWrong , a Bay Area–  based blog.
 14. Hayles, How We Became Posthuman , 11.
 15. Donna V. Jones, “Inheritance and Finitude:  T oward a Literary Phenomenology 
of Time,” elh  85, no. 2 (2018): 289–303.
PROTEST
The Office for Anticipating Surprises, a low- profile subdivision of the 
US intelligence  service, digests geopo  liti cal events using a system known 
as cameo . Each moment of conflict on a newswire can be encoded into 
one of eleven categories, and  these codes can be used to forecast  future 
conflicts. One computer system it funded, embers , claims to have suc -
cessfully predicted the 2013 “Brazilian Spring” of protests by combin -
ing  these codes with open- source information: economic data, Twitter 
posts, disease outbreaks, even restaurant reservation cancellations. 1
DISAPPROVE
Minority Report , however, this is not. For as complicated as  these ef -
forts may be, they are also at some level mystifyingly  simple: one model 
within embers  just looks at how viral posts that contain variations on 
the word strike  have become. Realizing this, the US intelligence com -
munity is now funding research to understand  metaphors. As three 
exasperated experts on data mining for counterterrorism note: “lin -
guistic expressions have levels of meaning beyond the literal, which it 
is critical to address.” 2
COERCE
While the US military tends to spotlight its most futuristic weapons to 
its public, such as autonomous tanks and robotic spaceplanes, its real 
efforts are concentrated on a new phase: war as big data. 3 Put simply, 37.  World War II —  Star Wars —  
War as Big Data
Tung-  Hui Hu
 Tung-Hui Hu  283war in the twenty- first  century is less cinematic than computational 
and bureaucratic, a  matter of filtering data and recognizing statistical 
patterns. While poorly paid undergraduates coded early implemen -
tations of cameo , the intelligence community now spends millions 
of dollars trying to teach computers to read the news, to decide if a 
denial-  of- service attack is a coerce  (code 176, “attack cybernetically”) 
or a protest  (code 144, “obstruct passage, block, not specified”) or 
perhaps an exhibit military posture  (code 155, “mobilize or in -
crease cyber- forces”). T o help nonhuman readers of this essay, I have 
coded each section of this essay in cameo  format. Though the coding 
schema  doesn’t always fit the content, the increased reading efficiency 
should make up for it.
THREATEN
We have come a long way from the apocalyptic spectacle of the Strategic 
Defense Initiative ( sdi), which the  popular press nicknamed Star Wars. 
Instead of orbital  laser satellites, war is rooted in the set of ordinary 
(if often  pleasurable) chores that users do to individuate themselves— 
tagging photos; choosing what’s relevant to their interests; dismissing 
what’s irrelevant. This work makes data useful, not just for targeted 
marketing but for predicting patterns in  human be  hav ior or, more 
generally, for connecting the dots in counterterrorism. Y et consumers 
are not innocent victims of techno- science; rather, they are participants. 
 Whether by flagging spam or by authenticating oneself at  every turn, it 
is a constant feeling of vulnerability—of the breaching of an individual 
user’s bound  aries— that convinces a user to partake in a shared proj  ect 
of security. If  free content or  free access is the carrot, the stick is the 
nameless but continual threat of unfreedom: foreign hackers, spam -
mers, and terrorists.
REDUCE RELATIONS
The atomic age inaugurated a period of mutual and permanent 
 vulnerability that underpinned not just the geopo  liti cal system but 
the sustaining of life itself. That precarity came out of the strategy 
of mutually assured destruction and informed the Committee on 
Pre sent Danger’s term “win  dow of vulnerability” to refer to the (theo -
retical) risk of a Soviet strike whenever they held the technological 
284  Informatics of Dominationupper hand. And that sense of unending vulnerability is also what 
President  Reagan’s Strategic Defense Initiative, which envisioned 
shooting down incoming nuclear missiles from space, tried so des -
perately to end: to offer a scenario where the United States (and per -
haps the Soviet  Union, too) not only no longer lived  under a nuclear 
threat but also no longer needed to be dependent on other nations to 
chart its own fate. 4 It was a way of projecting the American vision of 
self- reliance outward. This vision held the body of each citizen to be 
a sovereign individual and, arguably, imprinted itself on the model 
of the user  today.
REJECT
The irony is that users are not individuals at all, but simply porous 
agglomerations of data. What feels personalized to a single person is 
derived from the data of one’s neighbors; as a result, the individual in 
an age of digital media is si  mul ta neously “the most lonely and most 
crowded place on earth.” 5 This is what explains the strange pathos of 
 today. We are constantly made vulnerable so that we can then shore up 
our sense of individuality, and yet we refer to that feeling of vulnera -
bility as privacy. 6
ENGAGE IN UNCONVENTIONAL MASS VIO LENCE
As the film scholar Linda Williams has argued, the exemplary form 
of American self- understanding is melodrama. 7 Its logic lies both 
in the presumed innocence at its core and also in its alternation 
between pathos and action. Thus melodrama results from the inter -
play between the victim’s “too late” and the rescuing hero’s “in the 
nick of time.” In this way, the big-  budget melodrama Star Wars  was 
a particularly apt moniker for Reagan’s sdi, which Senator T ed Ken -
nedy lambasted as a series of “reckless Star Wars schemes,” implau -
sible and fantastic as the movie itself. Descriptions of sdi portrayed 
missiles arriving too late for Americans to do anything but say their 
final farewells, and it was also the missile defense shield that would 
arrive just in time to forestall this fate. For sdi’s vision to succeed, 
Americans needed to imagine not just what it was like to win Star 
Wars, but also how it felt to lose. It made the coming apocalypse a 
 Tung-Hui Hu  285scenario that was not just imaginable or reversible, but also some -
thing you could repeat, rewind, and play again. T oo late, too late, 
then, fi  nally, “in the nick of time.” As the popularity of lists such as 
“40 Sad Movies to Make Y ou Ugly-  Cry” amply demonstrate,  there 
is a distinct  pleasure in feeling loss, feeling vulnerable, or feeling a 
 future slip out of reach.
ASSAULT
At least four video games followed in the wake of sdi, two of which 
 were named, simply, sdi. The one I’m drawn to is the version review -
ers describe as “arguably one of the worst Cinemaware games ever,” the 
one with the tag  line “The Screen Burns with Forbidden Passion and 
Global War!” 8 It imagines an American space ace who must defend the 
United States against nuclear attack and then board the space station 
V . I. Lenin  to rescue his Soviet counterpart held by rogue kgb  agents, a 
pneumatic love interest named Natalya. The look is Dr. No  meets pixel 
art; a spaceship screen transmits a threatening communiqu é from the 
archvillain, who scowls and threatens Amer i ca with the “iron hand of 
Victor Aliyev.” If the hero rescues Natalya in the nick of time, the game 
plays a cutscene of the two embracing a thousand miles above the earth 
he has saved. If you lose, it’s the same shot above the earth—  but too 
late: she’s not  there.
FIGHT
Rather than focusing on preventing or forestalling nuclear annihilation, 
games such as sdi  were the distant offspring of a Cold War mentality 
that encouraged private parties to begin “thinking about the unthink -
able,” to quote the title of the book by rand  Corporation futurist Her -
man Kahn. 9 (Also in the same category: board games such as Nuclear 
Wa r  [1965] or Ultimatum  [1979].) Indeed, the  future began to seem so 
radically de- linked from the past, even from probability, that Kahn 
began to borrow screenwriting techniques from Hollywood. 10 Scenario 
thinking directed that each person become a player so that they could 
“feel the  future in addition to comprehending it cognitively.” 11  These 
scenarios brought melodrama, even script- writing classes, into the heart 
of the Pentagon and the corporate boardroom.
286  Informatics of DominationEXHIBIT MILITARY POSTURE
But if melodrama was the dominant genre of the Cold War, perhaps the 
genre that best describes war as big data is the  process genre, exempli -
fied by Y ouTube clips that take tasks—  cooking, filing forms, furniture 
assembly—  and break them down into a series of easy- to- follow steps. 12 
This is  because even as  things get more automated,  human decision-  
making returns in other forms. As I wrote this, I signed onto an online 
tournament run by one of embers ’s potential successors, a hybrid 
human-  computer forecasting system named sage . sage  offered me 
a range of questions, such as  whether North  Korea would engage in a 
provocative military activity by June 1, 2020; what the price of Brent 
crude oil on April 15, 2020, would be; even when ruby choco  late—  a 
pink-  colored choco  late— would go on sale in the United States. For each 
question, it gave me access to relevant articles from LexisNexis and a 
time series plot it generated on the topic; it bore a striking resemblance 
to homework from an online course. If my predictions  were the most ac -
curate of the group, I would receive a digital badge and a higher rank on 
the leaderboard, and, in rare cases, an Amazon gift card. That’s the game 
now: guess a nuclear test correctly, get $25 to spend on pink choco  lates.
DEMAND
 After 9/11, Amer i ca’s leadership placed their faith in the idea that early 
warning systems can act in the nick of time— embers  claimed to be 
ahead of events by three to seven days—to anticipate and thus save us 
from the next terrorist attack. This belief is perhaps the fundamental 
myth of big data, even if they have not yet succeeded in predicting a 
single terrorist event in the last  decade. Among the vanishingly few per -
sons that have gone on trial due to an event predicted by big data is a 
group of Italian data scientists who failed to anticipate an earthquake. 13 
But  there is still time.
Notes
 1. Sathappan Muthiah et al. “ embers  at 4 Y ears: Experiences Operating an Open 
Source Indicators Forecasting System,” in kdd  ’16: Proceedings of the 22nd  acm sigkdd  
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining  (New Y ork: Associa -
tion for Computing Machinery, August 2016), 205–14.
 Tung-Hui Hu  287 2. Mathieu Guidere, Newton Howard, and Shlomo Argamon, “Rich Language 
Analy sis for Counterterrorism,” in Computational Methods for Counterterrorism , ed. 
Shlomo Argamon and Newton Howard (Berlin: Springer V erlag, 2009), 118, as quoted by 
Alexis Madrigal, “Why Are Spy Researchers Building a ‘  Metaphor Program’?,” Atlantic , 
May 25, 2011.
 3. See Tung- Hui Hu, A Prehistory of the Cloud  (Cambridge, MA: mit  Press, 2015), 
chapter 4.
 4. Edward Linenthal , Symbolic Defense: The Cultural Significance of the Strategic 
Defense Initiative  (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1989).
 5. Kris Cohen, Never Alone, Except for Now: Art, Networks, Populations  (Durham, 
NC: Duke University Press, 2017), 23.
 6. As Chun and Friedland write, “ New media  . . .  are leak . New media work by 
breaching, and thus paradoxically sustaining, the boundary between private and public. ” 
Wendy Chun and Sarah Friedland, “Habits of Leaking: Of Sluts and Network Cards,” 
differences  26, no. 2 (2015): 4.
 7. Linda Williams, “Melodrama Revisited,” in Refiguring American Film Genres: 
History and Theory , ed. Nick Browne (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1998), 
42–88.
 8. Underdogs, “S.D.I. (a.k.a. Strategic Defense Initiative),” review, Home of the 
Underdogs, accessed May 27, 2024, http:// www . homeoftheunderdogs . net / game . php  
? name  = S . D .I.
 9. Herman Kahn, Thinking about the Unthinkable  (New Y ork: Horizon Press, 
1962).
 10. Annie McClanahan, “  Future’s Shock: Plausibility, Preemption, and the Fiction 
of 9/11,” symploke  17, no. 1–2 (2009): 41–62.
 11. Paul Schoemaker, “Multiple Scenario Development: Its Conceptual and Behav -
ioral Foundation,” Strategic Management Journal  14, no. 3 (March 1993): 201, as quoted 
in McClanahan, “  Future’s Shock,” 44.
 12. Salomé Skvirsky, The  Process Genre: Cinema and the Aesthetic of  Labor  (Durham, 
NC: Duke University Press, 2020).
 13. Louise Amoore, “Security and the Incalculable,” Security Dialogue  45, no. 5 
(2014): 423–39.
The world is fucked. A mess of toxic exposures. From land and bodies 
unevenly marked by the legacies of industrial- scale petrochemical pro -
duction and the forms of “chemically altered living-  being” that it cre -
ates, to viral variants whose fast mutations outpace the distribution of 
tests, vaccines, and  political  will to protect  people over profits, to the 
resurgence of  actual neo- Nazis whose repugnant agendas spill into in -
formation ecosystems and onto the steps of parliament. 1
For Black feminist writer bell hooks, the phrase “white imperi -
alist cap  i tal ist patriarchy” gives a precise name to the source of all this 
fucked  ness. Originally coined at the height of the US civil rights move -
ment, the phrase helped to describe the intersecting dynamics that to -
gether compound to create a complex system of oppression that robs 
 people of dignity, income, safety, or any sense of change in one’s life 
chances. For hooks,  these dynamics are worthy of naming  because move -
ments that had so far mobilized themselves for freedom and emancipa -
tion from  these oppressive systems had failed to grasp the phenomena in 
full. In failing to name, they failed to account for the pernicious forms 
of racism, classism, sexism, and other forms of daily subjugation that 
define the experience of  those she called “the  silent majority”—  a de -
scriptor that has since been fucked by populist leaders but at the time 
she meant as “the  women who are most victimised by sexist oppres -
s io n .” 2 In fighting against the fuckedness of the world,  these movements 
 were themselves guilty of committing the same harms, reproducing the 
same logics of domination they so reviled. She writes, “Black activists 
defined freedom as gaining the right to participate as full citizens in 
American culture; they  were not rejecting the value system of that cul -
ture. Consequently, they did not question the rightness of patriarchy.” 3 38.  White Cap  i tal ist Patriarchy —  
Informatics of Domination
Thao Phan
 Thao Phan  289This was also true of dominant strands of feminism who, in her words, 
 were “paying lip  service to revolutionary goals” while being “primarily 
concerned with gaining entrance into the cap  i tal ist patriarchal power 
structure.” 4 She argued that many in the feminist movement had mis -
taken self- interest for collective strug  gle, using the radical rhe toric 
of  resistance and revolution to advance an essentially conservative 
and liberal agenda aimed at protecting their own class interests. For 
hooks, any movement that actively sought inclusion rather than lib -
eration from the white imperialist cap  i tal ist patriarchal system was 
“essentially corrupt. ” 5 In other words, its aims and ambitions  were ab -
solutely fucked.
So what can be done if every thing is fucked? If movements 
intended to protect and tools designed to unfuck this world are also 
undeniably fucked? How do we establish an ethical movement if the 
high bar of freedom from corruption and complicity is the starting 
point? What if corrupt tools are all that we have? T o stay oriented 
 toward justice in this context might just mean coming to terms with 
being fucked, feeling fucked, and trying one’s best not to fuck over 
 others even if the structure within which one operates compels and re -
wards us to do so. T o riff on Haraway, it demands a “staying with the 
fuckedness.” Of not surrendering to “abstract futurism and its affects of 
sublime despair and its politics of sublime indifference” but rather, to 
learn how to live better in a world that is unjust and corrupt. 6 T o start, 
not with an insistence on innocence and purity but with the harsh re -
alities of complicity and compromise.
Take, for instance, the informatics of domination. In Haraway’s 
original chart, it sits adjacent to white cap  i tal ist patriarchy. The move -
ment from one to the other, from white cap  i tal ist patriarchy on the left 
to informatics of domination on the right, does not signal a departure 
or end of one regime and beginning of the next, but is rather a prompt 
to discuss “white cap  i tal ist imperialist patriarchy in its con  temporary 
late versions.” 7 In this case, it’s how white cap  i tal ist patriarchy is inex -
tricably tied to the politics of informatics— how autonomous systems 
hide the global networks of exploitative  human  labor they are reliant 
upon, how the clean and weightless image of cloud infrastructure is 
materially dependent on the capitalist-  colonialist fantasy of infinite 
mineral extraction, and how smart tools designed to  counter historic 
wrongs like discrimination and bias have instead entrenched regimes of 
opaque, color-  blind racism. 8 The informatics of domination thus signals 
290  Informatics of Dominationthe emergence of a new set of circumstances through which to contend 
with the old challenges of white cap  i tal ist patriarchy.
But one of the ironies of this rhetorical move is that it begins 
to undo the vital work of naming that hooks had so assiduously in -
sisted upon. It unnames the dynamics of oppression. It displaces the 
question of power and responsibility. While domination continues as 
a key feature, it is no longer flagged as explic  itly white, cap  i tal ist, or 
patriarchal. Without  these anchors, the informatics of domination is 
open to interpretation and is suddenly amenable to the very logics it 
was intended to critique.
Consider ai ethics. Once an area centered on hy po thet  i cal in -
quiries into the very broad and abstract moral conundrums posed by 
machines that in many cases did not yet exist, it has now become a bona 
fide professional field of practice. Selling ethical clout and expertise to 
institutions and Big T ech corporations alike,  these ethics experts or 
ethics  owners capitalize on the promise to limit the harms caused by ai 
systems and technologies by operationalizing and integrating princi ples 
like fairness, accountability, and transparency. 9 In short, they promise 
to make ai less fucked by reprogramming and redeploying the struc -
tures and logics of informatics.
One example is Perspective api, an ai- powered tool designed 
to detect toxic comments online. Perspective api is an investment be -
tween two of Alphabet’s subsidiary companies: Jigsaw, an online safety 
tech incubator, and Google’s  Counter Abuse T echnology team. “T oxic -
ity online poses a serious challenge for platforms and publishers,” they 
write. “Online abuse and harassment silences impor tant voices in con -
versation, forcing already marginalized  people offline.” 10 T o  counter 
this, the Perspective api tool uses a machine learning model to iden -
tify abusive comments and give them a toxicity rating represented as a 
value between 0 and 1. The score can then be returned to commenters as 
feedback, assist moderators in their review pro  cesses, or filter out toxic 
content for readers. T oxicity  here is defined as “a rude, disrespectful or 
unreasonable comment that is likely to make someone leave a discus -
s io n .” 11 As a means to explain how their system works, the Perspective 
api website features an animation of a speech  bubble with the com -
ment “Shut up.  Y ou’re an idiot!” A user selects the attributes they wish 
to  measure— such as sexual explicitness, profanity, degree of threat—  
and the  bubble is then placed inside a box. The colors on the side of the 
box blink to  process the comment, spitting out a rating that identifies 
 Thao Phan  291it as 0.99 T oxic, 0.04 Sexually Explicit, 0.93 Profanity, 0.99 Insult, and 
0.15 Threat.
What does it mean to describe something as 0.99 T oxic? In this 
case, it means that a group of online crowd workers  were paid to label 
a dataset as containing specific attributes, including their belief that a 
comment or phrase is toxic. 12 Once labeled, the dataset was used to train 
a set of models—  a bert - based natu  ral language pro  cessing model and 
convolutional neural network. 13  These models  were then used to pro -
duce a probability score that reflects the patterns and trends of  these 
 human crowd workers and their likelihood of labeling a comment in 
a par tic u lar way. So, a score of 0.99 means that, based on the training 
data, ninety- nine out of one hundred  human crowd workers are likely 
to tag a comment with the specific label toxic .14
 There are obvious limitations to  these kinds of ethical ai proj -
ects. Perhaps the most basic is that the model contained explicit 
 biases against phrases used to describe marginalized groups. T erms 
like black , gay, Muslim ,  woman , feminist , and deaf  consistently received 
high toxicity ratings, something that Jigsaw attributed to a combina -
tion of “biases in the  human annotators creating the training data” and 
“over- representation in abusive and toxic comments” targeted at  these 
groups. 15 By training on a par tic u lar corpus of racist, sexist, homopho -
bic, nationalistic, and ableist data, the model effectively created a proxy 
relation between toxicity and identity. As one user discovered, the more 
identity terms used, the higher the toxicity rating. For instance, the phrase 
“I am a man” received a 20   percent toxicity rating, whereas the phrase “I 
am a black  woman” received an 85  percent toxicity rating. 16
 These kinds of tools allow white imperialist cap  i tal ist patriar -
chy to thrive. They make subtle substitutions: toxicity for racism, solu -
tions engineering for justice,  those who experience a prob  lem with the 
prob  lem itself. Each substitution forms part of a chain that abstracts 
the effects of domination and oppression away from its  causes. Unlike 
racism, sexism, or homophobia, which are experiences unique to mar -
ginalized groups, anyone can be a victim of toxic speech. T oxicity is 
the word that’s used when one does not want to name  white cap  i tal ist 
patriarchy: an informatics of domination practiced as an informatics 
of generic substitutions.
Indeed, terms like toxicity are arguably useful  because they are 
vague and apo  liti cal, and frame actions like harassment and abuse as 
discrete, external phenomena that, like material waste, can be cleaned 
292  Informatics of Dominationand removed to restore an existing structure to its pristine state. Fixing 
toxicity is  here framed as a return to purity. But like so many eugenic 
princi ples, purity is an ideal enforced through elimination and vio  lence.
Purity’s intolerance for anything labeled toxic manifests in the 
crude creation and policing of borders. A pure public discourse—  one 
 free of toxic language— necessarily imposes a set of values that deni -
grates any use of language that sits outside as something less than, a re -
spectability politics that finds its analogue in the colonial practices of 
British imperialism. T o use a trivial example, in Australian  English the 
word fuck  is considered a part of daily vernacular, the legacy of problem -
atic nation-  building efforts that heroicize white, male, working-  class fig -
ures like the soldier, convict, and bushranger. 17 In defining itself against 
British Imperial  English, uncouth words like fuck  are now common 
features in Australian parlance. It is used as an expression of jubilance 
(“fuck yeah!”), an admission of exhaustion or defeat (“I’m fucked”), a 
void of nothingness (“fuck all”), or even a resolute determination to get 
the job done (“I  didn’t come  here to fuck spiders”). The Perspective api 
online demo gave the opening line of this essay, “The world is fucked,” 
an 84.6   percent rating of likely to be toxic—  a rating that would flag it as 
unfit for public discourse. An informatics of domination expressed as 
an informatics of colonial, middle-  class manners.
But what if, instead of purity, we accept that “toxicity might 
just be our condition”? 18 Arguing “against purity,” Alexis Shotwell 
writes, “The slate has never been clean, and we  can’t wipe off the sur -
face to start fresh— there’s no ‘fresh start.’ . . .  All  there is, while  things 
perpetually fall apart, is the possibility of activating from where we are. 
Being against purity means  there is no primordial state we might wish 
to get back to.” 19 T o be against purity is to reject the individualization 
of responsibility that a personal score for toxicity implies. It means not 
hiding  behind vague and apo  liti cal terms  because one is uncomfortable 
or afraid to acknowledge the bad feeling of complicity that comes with 
naming racism for what it is. It means remembering that this is not an 
informatics of any- kind-  of- domination, but an informatics of white 
imperialist cap  i tal ist patriarchy.
So what can be done in lieu of unfucking this world? T o return 
to Shotwell, instead of pursuing purity, one might instead ask, “who 
benefits from the lie of purism”? 20 In this case, the promise to purify 
newsfeeds, comments sections, and even large language models allows 
corporations like Google to continue to profit from an economic model 
 Thao Phan  293based on territorial expansion, manufacturing user engagement, and 
an ideology of ai solutionism. 21  Here, ai is fetishized as the new, 
civilizing commodity; the agent of history that does the purification 
work to bring the toxic swamp of humanity into the glistening fron -
tier of the  future. 22 In this context, refusing the lie of purism means to 
refuse the lies of  these corporate empires and their crooked claims to 
innocence. It means acknowledging complicity, naming oppressive dy -
namics for what they are, and accepting that while we may not be able 
to unfuck this world, we can at least approach prob  lems like toxicity 
as more than just individual words, or bodies, but as a collective con -
dition that requires an honest reckoning with histories and practices 
that might make us angry or uncomfortable, but in  doing so, move us 
to demand for something more.
Notes
 1. Michelle Murphy, “Alterlife and Decolonial Chemical Relations,” Cultural An -
thropology  32, no. 4 (November 18, 2017): 497; Julia Kollewe, “Pfizer Accused of Pandemic 
Profiteering as Profits Double,” Guardian , February 8, 2022, sec. Business, https:// www  
. theguardian  . com / business / 2022 / feb / 08 / pfizer  - covid -  vaccine  - pill - profits -sales ; Lachlan 
Abbott and Ashleigh McMillan, “Two Arrested as Neo- Nazi Group Clashes with Police at 
Victorian Parliament,” Age, May 13, 2023, https:// www . theage . com  . au / national / victoria  
/ two  - arrested - as - neo  - nazi - group  - clashes - with - police  - at - victorian - parliament  - 20230513  
- p5d84b  .html .
 2. bell hooks,  Ain’t I a  Woman: Black  Women and Feminism , 2nd ed. (New Y ork: 
Routledge, 1981), 1.
 3. hooks,  Ain’t I a  Woman , 5.
 4. hooks,  Ain’t I a  Woman , 188.
 5. hooks,  Ain’t I a  Woman , 191.
 6. Donna J. Haraway, Staying with the Trou  ble: Making Kin in the Chthulucene  
(Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2016), 4.
 7. Nicholas Gane, “When We Have Never Been  Human, What Is to Be Done? 
Interview with Donna Haraway,” Theory, Culture and Society  23, no. 7–8 (December 1, 
2006): 150, https:// doi . org / 10  . 1177 /0263276406069228 .
 8. For more detailed analy sis, see Lilly Irani, “The Cultural Work of Mi -
crowork,” New Media and Society  17, no. 5 (May 2015): 720–39, https:// doi . org / 10  . 1177  
/1461444813511926 ; Thao Phan and Scott Wark, “What Personalisation Can Do for 
Y ou! Or: How to Do Racial Discrimination without ‘Race’—  Thao Phan and Scott Wark,” 
Culture Machine  20 (September 5, 2021): 1–29; and Sy Taffel, “Data and Oil:  Metaphor, 
Materiality and Metabolic Rifts,” New Media and Society  25, no. 5 (2023), https://  doi . org 
/ 10 . 1177 /14614448211017887 .
 9. Thao Phan et al., eds., Economies of Virtue: The Circulation of “Ethics” in  ai, 
Theory on Demand (Amsterdam: Institute of Network Cultures, 2022).
294  Informatics of Domination 10. “Perspective api, ” accessed June 5, 2023, https:// www . perspectiveapi . com / .
 11. “Perspective api — How It Works,” accessed June 5, 2023, https:// www  
. perspectiveapi . com / how - it  - works / .
 12. Perspective api identified the platform Appen as their provider. Appen is an 
Australian-  based com  pany that trades on an image of providing trusted and specialized 
crowd-  based  labor that pays above the market rate, but since mid-2023 the com  pany has 
been plagued by market crashes and accusations by workers of unfair dismissals for at -
tempts to  unionize against worsening conditions of  labor (see Gerrit De Vynck, “They 
Helped Train Google’s ai. Then They Got Fired  after Speaking Out,” Washington Post , 
June 15, 2023).
 13. Bidirectional Encoder Repre sen ta tions from Transformers ( bert ) is a machine 
learning framework for natu ral language pro  cessing. It is designed to help computers 
predict ambiguous words by reading surrounding text for context. It was trained using 
a corpus of data from Wikipedia refined using  human tuning.
 14. Perspective api, “ Model Cards,” accessed June 5, 2023, https:// developers  
. perspectiveapi . com / s / about  - the  - api - model -  cards ? language  = en _US .
 15. Lucy V asserman et al., “Unintended Bias and Identity T erms,” Jigsaw  (blog), Oc -
tober 12, 2021, https:// medium  . com / jigsaw / unintended -  bias -  and - names -  of - frequently  
- targeted -  groups -8e0b81f80a23 .
 16. Jessamyn West (@jessamyn), “Trying It with Some Visible/Invisible Disabil -
ities. The Man/Woman Division Is Concerning. Https:// T . Co /6zVb8v8b4O,” Twitter, 
August 26, 2017, https:// twitter  . com / jessamyn / status /901476036956782593 .
 17. See Amanda Laugesen, Rooted: An Australian History of Bad Language  (Sydney: 
New South Books, 2020).
 18. Alexis Shotwell, Against Purity: Living Ethically in Compromised Times  (Min -
neapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2016), 12.
 19. Shotwell, Against Purity , 4.
 20. Shotwell, Against Purity , 19. See also Donna J. Haraway’s afterword, “Pandem -
ics of Transformation for Livable Worlds,” in this collection for a reflection on “big lies. ”
 21. Soon  after the release of ChatGPT-4 in 2023, Jigsaw began promoting Perspec -
tive api as a tool to reduce the toxicity of large language models by detoxifying train -
ing data, evaluating models, and conducting live assessments of text outputs. See Lucy 
V asserman, “Reducing T oxicity in Large Language Models with Perspective api,” Jigsaw  
(blog), April 21, 2023, https:// medium  . com / jigsaw / reducing - toxicity - in - large  - language  
- models - with - perspective  - api -c31c39b7a4d7 .
 22. See Anne McClintock’s classic discussion of soap as an imperial technology 
of purification. Anne McClintock, Imperial Leather: Race, Gender, and Sexuality in the 
Colonial Contest  (New Y ork: Routledge, 1995).
Fake news, alt facts, alternate realities, crypto every thing, big lies. In this 
world, propaganda seems so old fashioned, a  thing of printing presses, 
radios, network news,  organized states, coherent movements, and, of 
course, Nazi media innovations. Old- fashioned propaganda at least 
seemed to require a shareable universe, however perverse or however 
desirable. I have always wanted to be able to write effective propaganda 
that contributes to the energy and intelligence of movements for jus -
tice, care, and flourishing. This kind of propaganda implies a strug  gle 
for worlds; but it does not allow systematic lying or, worse, relentless 
world- spinning that is indifferent to world-  building with and for rad -
ically di ff  er ent  others across kinds, who must live and die together or 
not at all.
 These are times of  great upheavals for all T errans of  whatever 
species and kinds, times of mass displacements of refugees across 
kinds, who have  little refuge. One of our most urgent tasks is to find 
and sustain refuges in the hurricanes of transformation everywhere in 
ways that build courage and hope for still pos  si ble, shareable, abundant, 
and compassionate worlds. Part of this work involves characterizing 
and confronting the informatics of domination of this  century,  these 
 decades, this year, when the technologies of no-  world are ubiquitous, 
power  ful, and frighteningly creative. My two-  column chart from 1985 
bleeds into many columns. It always did; but now the columns prolifer -
ate, mutate, and twist at dizzying speed. Perhaps the term I am looking 
for to characterize  these times is Pandemics of Informatics. From White 
Cap  i tal ist Patriarchy, to Informatics of Domination, to Pandemics of 
Informatics. It’s all in the variants.Afterword:  
Pandemics of Transformation for  
Livable Worlds
Donna J. Haraway
296  Informatics of DominationIn the early 1980s I wrote my “Cyborg Manifesto” with its 
clumsy two-  column chart as an “attempt at an epistemological and 
 political position.” I tried “to sketch a picture of pos  si ble unity, a pic -
ture indebted to socialist and feminist princi ples of design.” 1 Still as 
old- fashioned as an old  woman as I was as a young one, I hold to that 
proj  ect more than ever. The princi ples of design must be robustly anti -
racist, abolitionist, decolonial, innovative in bodies and kin, account -
able to Indigenous  peoples and lands, and much more besides. Feminist  
and socialist  cannot be unmarked universal categories. Still, my search 
remains for a fraught but shareable imagination and construction of 
evidence-  rich knowledge and politics for worlds that deserve a  future 
but are barely pos  si ble in the pre sent. In the jaws of so much old and 
new killing of ongoingness, or what Deborah Bird  Rose called “double 
death,” I want to be part of increasing the odds of possibility for worlds 
that deserve a  future. 2 I want to live and work in the proliferating fields 
of Pandemics of Transformation for Livable Worlds. That means, among 
many other  things, living and  dying well with each other in a thick pres-
ent without the solace of assured fixes, techno or other  wise.
Learning from my old slogan given to me by my former grad 
student Elizabeth Bird, Cyborgs for Earthly Survival, I want to be a 
propagandist for Holobiomes for Earthly Survival. Call that staying 
with the trou ble; call that, in the teeth of all the big lies, staying with 
each other, making kin.
Notes
 1. Donna J. Haraway, “A Manifesto for Cyborgs: Science, T echnology, and 
Socialist- Feminism in the 1980s,” Socialist Review , no. 80 (1985): 79.
 2. Deborah Bird  Rose, “What If the Angel of History  Were a Dog?,” Cultural 
Studies Review  12, no. 1 (2006): 67–78.
The diagrams below take up the unspecified prob  lem of information 
in the original Informatics of Domination chart. Information, as such, 
signifies differently in mathe  matics, biology, or hermeneutics, as well 
as computation. The first diagram spread (E.1) portrays a discursive 
fork that arises upon interpreting the meaning of information, de -
spite sharing an identical mathematical, formal root. One interpretive 
possibility is where information skews  toward novelty, rather than pre -
dictability; another is where its binary opposition to noise is unsettled. 
This creates a logical move that expands an understanding of computa -
tion beyond a strictly digital form. In the second diagram spread (E.2) 
I schematize information as dependent upon a cut in the Real, that is, 
as dependent on the filter of an organismic model.  Here, information 
is elaborated biosemiotically and sociohistorically, illustrating a cor -
relation between organismic sensitivity and environmental sensory 
overabundance (in the case of  humans, normative conditioning in the 
evaluation of information). The third diagram (E.3) considers blurred 
distinctions between data signs and natu  ral signs in a planetary epoch, 
wherein the  human is reembedded as a figure sutured to a ground. The 
final intervention rehearses Haraway’s chart as a commentary on the 
repre sen ta tional capacities of a chart unto itself compared to the af -
fordances of a diagram, wherein each form offers a distinct strategy of 
informational compression in visual form.Epilogue:  
Interpreting Information
Patricia Reed
>
E.1“The dividing line between information and 
noise now runs within entropy, rather than 
between entropy and its negation.” 2
Shannon
Discursive
InterpretationRamificationsCultural Concept
Ambiguity of Nonmathematical Concepts
WienerInformation1
Negentropy
Information = 
Opposite of Noise
Order = 
Opposite of Disorder
Revaluation
of Uncertainty
Information as Cut
Across UncertaintyForms of
Measurable
 Uncertainty
Dominant Techno-scientific Picture Negation of Contingency Mathematically Identical
Information
Entropy
Less MoreLogical Concept
Information as
ProcessLaw of Excluded Middle3
Unsettling of 
Information / Noise
Opposition 
Intuitionist
Perspective on 
ComputationConstructivist
Path Finding,
Uncommitted to 
First Act
Computation ≠ 
DigitalityUnsettling of 
Sense / Non-Sense
Opposition Unsettling of 
Picture That Science & 
Technology Are 
Reducible to Utility
Computational / Nonhuman
Creativity
Computational
Generativity
Novel Understanding 
of Intelligence via Procedures of 
Artifactual ExternalizationStatistical / Mathematical Formalization
Predictability
of Message
Reduction
of UncertaintyNovelty
of MessageInformatics of Domination Disciplinary Translation
Opposition between 
Culture and Technology
4
Freedom of Choice
Redundancy
“The dividing line between information and 
noise now runs within entropy, rather than 
between entropy and its negation.” 2
Shannon
Discursive
InterpretationRamificationsCultural Concept
Ambiguity of Nonmathematical Concepts
WienerInformation1
Negentropy
Information = 
Opposite of Noise
Order = 
Opposite of Disorder
Revaluation
of Uncertainty
Information as Cut
Across UncertaintyForms of
Measurable
 Uncertainty
Dominant Techno-scientific Picture Negation of Contingency Mathematically Identical
Information
Entropy
Less MoreLogical Concept
Information as
ProcessLaw of Excluded Middle3
Unsettling of 
Information / Noise
Opposition 
Intuitionist
Perspective on 
ComputationConstructivist
Path Finding,
Uncommitted to 
First Act
Computation ≠ 
DigitalityUnsettling of 
Sense / Non-Sense
Opposition Unsettling of 
Picture That Science & 
Technology Are 
Reducible to Utility
Computational / Nonhuman
Creativity
Computational
Generativity
Novel Understanding 
of Intelligence via Procedures of 
Artifactual ExternalizationStatistical / Mathematical Formalization
Predictability
of Message
Reduction
of UncertaintyNovelty
of MessageInformatics of Domination Disciplinary Translation
Opposition between 
Culture and Technology
4
Freedom of Choice
Redundancy
E.2World ModelSemiosis
Meaningful
Conjoinment with
Environment
InseparabilityParticular Sensorial AffordancesNature
Ontogeny
of Information6
Culture
Form MatterEmbedded Interaction
ArtifactualOrganismic
Internal
[Genes]
External
[Environment/Milieu]Information as
ProcessSemantic
Ascent 5
Expressivity
Program
From Truth 
to ProofAncestral
InheritanceGeneration World-Building
Organization of Sensitivity        Filter of Relevance       Space of ReasonAutonomy
NavigabilityHistory Path DependenceMediation of Relation
to RealitySemantic
CarrierEnvironment in Common General
Particular Uncommonly Lived
Sociogeny7
TechnogenyOntogenyPhylogeny
Information Is
Suprasubjective
Concrete Thinking / Conceptual MakingHomo Narrans8Speculative World-Building
Ideal Enablements Real ConstraintsRealizable World-Building
FabulationBodies as Data Carriers
World ModelSemiosis
Meaningful
Conjoinment with
Environment
InseparabilityParticular Sensorial AffordancesNature
Ontogeny
of Information6
Culture
Form MatterEmbedded Interaction
ArtifactualOrganismic
Internal
[Genes]
External
[Environment/Milieu]Information as
ProcessSemantic
Ascent 5
Expressivity
Program
From Truth 
to ProofAncestral
InheritanceGeneration World-Building
Organization of Sensitivity        Filter of Relevance       Space of ReasonAutonomy
NavigabilityHistory Path DependenceMediation of Relation
to RealitySemantic
CarrierEnvironment in Common General
Particular Uncommonly Lived
Sociogeny7
TechnogenyOntogenyPhylogeny
Information Is
Suprasubjective
Concrete Thinking / Conceptual MakingHomo Narrans8Speculative World-Building
Ideal Enablements Real ConstraintsRealizable World-Building
FabulationBodies as Data Carriers
E.3 Asemantic Reality World Model Sign Beyond Symbol
Signa NaturaliaSigna DataSelective Information Overabundant InformationWorld Model &
Subject-Independent RealityInformatics of Dissemination
Charts
Linear 
Naming
Identification of Things / TendenciesDiagrams
Nonlinear
Relationality
Icons + Language + Symbols
Demonstration of Systems Progression of Ideas
Descriptive Constructive
Comparative / Contrastive Associative / Feedback
Irreversible Mechanical
Concepts Terms
Reasoning Declaration
Speculation Actuality
Compression Elaboration
Design Alphabet
Cognitive Prosthetic Discourse
Abductive Hypothesis Inductive Logic
Category Theoretical Categorical
Genericity Component Parts
Spatial LinguisticEncoding
Causal InferenceEpistemological ObstacleConstruction of Environment
Technics
Mediation
of ImmediacyInhabitation
Practices
Umwelt
Embedded
Interpretant
Temporality
Stuffs and Processes Chemical Physical
Biological
Sensorial Affordance
Organismic MorphologySemantic World
Asemantic Reality World Model Sign Beyond Symbol
Signa NaturaliaSigna DataSelective Information Overabundant InformationWorld Model &
Subject-Independent RealityInformatics of Dissemination
Charts
Linear 
Naming
Identification of Things / TendenciesDiagrams
Nonlinear
Relationality
Icons + Language + Symbols
Demonstration of Systems Progression of Ideas
Descriptive Constructive
Comparative / Contrastive Associative / Feedback
Irreversible Mechanical
Concepts Terms
Reasoning Declaration
Speculation Actuality
Compression Elaboration
Design Alphabet
Cognitive Prosthetic Discourse
Abductive Hypothesis Inductive Logic
Category Theoretical Categorical
Genericity Component Parts
Spatial LinguisticEncoding
Causal InferenceEpistemological ObstacleConstruction of Environment
Technics
Mediation
of ImmediacyInhabitation
Practices
Umwelt
Embedded
Interpretant
Temporality
Stuffs and Processes Chemical Physical
Biological
Sensorial Affordance
Organismic MorphologySemantic World
304  Informatics of DominationNotes to Diagrams
 1. Diagram based on outline of “Information Entropy” from Cécile Malaspina, 
An Epistemology of Noise  (London: Bloomsbury, 2018).
 2. Malaspina, An Epistemology of Noise , 19.
 3. Classical logical scheme according to which a proposition is true, or its nega -
tion is true, fully in accordance with binary habits of thought.
 4. An intuitionist view of computation was proposed by AA Cavia in Logiciel: 
Six Seminars on Computational Reason  (Berlin: &&&, 2022), undoing a strictly binary 
view of computation as digitality, expressible only via Boolean logic, 0/1, true/false, as 
in algorithmic  recipe following.
 5. Cavia, Logiciel .
 6. “A proper view of ontogeny . . .  requires that the idea of ontogenesis apply not 
only to bodies and minds, but to information, plans, and all the other cognitive-  causal 
entities. ” Susan Oyama, The Ontogeny of Information: Developmental Systems and Evolu -
tion  (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2000), 3.
 7. Coined by Frantz Fanon in Black Skin, White Masks  (1952), and widely taken 
up by Sylvia Wynter, sociogeny accounts for the existential consequences of social in -
terpellation that are not ontologically nor phylologically given (i.e., the real existence 
of racism falls outside biological accounts of the  human). See Frantz Fanon, Black Skin, 
White Masks  (New Y ork: Grove Press, 1967).
 8. Sylvia Wynter deploys this term to account for the hybridity of humanness (Bio 
and Mythos) that enables autoinstituting capacities for constructing social  organization.
Bibliography
Abbing, Hans. Why Are Artists Poor? The Exceptional Economy of the 
Arts.  Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 2008.
Abbott, Lachlan, and Ashleigh McMillan. “Two Arrested as Neo- Nazi 
Group Clashes with Police at Victorian Parliament.” Age, May 13, 
2023. https:// www . theage . com  . au / national / victoria / two  - arrested  
- as - neo  - nazi - group  - clashes - with - police  - at - victorian - parliament  
- 20230513 - p5d84b  .html .
Ahmed, Sara. Queer Phenomenology: Orientations, Objects,  Others.  
Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2006.
Akomolafe, Bayo. “Black Lives  Matter, but to Whom? Why We 
Need a Politics of Exile in a Time of Troubling Stuckness (Part 
I).” Democracy and Belonging Forum. Othering and Belong -
ing Institute at uc Berkeley, January 19, 2023. https:// www  
. democracyandbelongingforum  . org / forum - blog / black  - lives - matter  
- but - to - whom - part  -1.
Alexander, Paul. “Walk for Me— Paul Alexander Feat.  Performance 
Kim Aviance.” Y ouTube, uploaded by Kim Aviance, April 9, 2006. 
https:// www .  youtube .  com / watch  ? v =A9OoPXSLBLM .
Allen, Amy. “Feminist Perspectives on Power.” In The Stanford Encyclo -
pedia of Philosophy , spring 2021 ed., edited by Edward N. Zalta and 
Uri Nodelman. Stanford, CA: Stanford University, 2021. https://  
plato  . stanford  . edu / Archives / spr2021 / entries / feminist  - power  
/ index  .html .
Amoore, Louise. “Security and the Incalculable.” Security Dialogue  45, 
no. 5 (2014): 423–39.
Anzald úa, Gloria. “Haciendo caras, una entrada.” In Making Face, 
Making Soul / Haciendo Caras: Creative and Critical Perspectives by 
306  BibliographyFeminists of Color , edited by Gloria Anzald úa. San Francisco: Aunt 
Lute, 1990.
Apolito, Aurora. “The Prob  lem of Scale in Anarchism and the Case for 
Cybernetic Communism.” Center for a Stateless Society, June 25, 
2020. https://  c4ss  . org / wp - content  / uploads  / 2020  / 06 / Aurora  
- ScaleAnarchy _ ful -  version  .pdf .
Appengine ai. “Cainthus | Computer Vision and ai for Dairy Farms.” 
Accessed June 23, 2024. https:// www . appengine . ai / company /
cainthus .
Araluen, Evelyn. “Resisting the Institution.” Overland Literary Journal , 
no. 227 (Winter 2017). https:// overland  . org . au / previous - issues  
/ issue  - 227 / feature  - evelyn -  araluen / .
Arellano, Annette B. Ram írez de, and Conrad Seipp. Colonialism, Cathol -
icism, and Contraception: A History of Birth Control in Puerto Rico . 
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2011.
Art in Amer  i ca. “Ryan Kuo Discusses Race as T echnology with Media 
Scholar Wendy Chun.” September 3, 2019. https://  www . artnews  
. com / art  - in - america / features / ryan - kuo  - race  - technology  - wendy  
- chun -  63653 / .
Artist, American (@a_____rtist). Instagram post, June 25, 2021. https://  
www .  instagram  . com / a _  _  _  _  _ rtist / p / CQjPZr2lQ7O /  ? img _ index  =6.
Artist, American. Veillance Caliper (Annotated) . 2021. https://  
americanartist  . us / works / veillance  - caliper  -annotated .
Atanasoski, Neda, and Kalindi V ora. Surrogate Humanity: Race, Robots 
and the Politics of Technological  Futures . Durham, NC: Duke Uni -
versity Press, 2019.
Atkinson, Ti-  Grace. Amazon Odyssey.  New Y ork: Links, 1974.
Avilez, GerShun. Black Queer Freedom: Spaces of Injury and Paths of De -
sire. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2020.
Bakare, Lanre. “Angela Davis: ‘We Knew That the Role of the Police Was 
to Protect White Supremacy.’ ” Guardian , June 20, 2020. https://  
www . theguardian  . com / us - news / 2020 / jun / 15 / angela  - davis - on 
- george  - floyd - as - long - as - the  - violence  - of - racism - remains - no - one 
- is -safe .
Ballard, Robert D. The Discovery of the Titanic.  New Y ork: Warner, 1987 .
Barad, Karen. Meeting the Universe Halfway: Quantum Physics and the 
Entanglement of  Matter and Meaning.  Durham, NC: Duke Univer -
sity Press, 2007 .
 Bibliography  307
Barker, F. G., II. “Phineas among the Phrenologists: The American 
Crowbar Case and Nineteenth-  Century Theories of  Cerebral Lo -
calization.” Journal of Neurosurgery  82, no. 4 (1995): 672–82.
Barthes, Roland. “The Death of the Author.” In Image-  Music-  Text , trans -
lated by Stephen Heath, 142–48. New Y ork: Hill and Wang, 1977 .
Battle- Baptiste, Whitney, and Britt Rusert, eds. W. E. B. Du Bois’s Data 
Portraits Visualizing Black Amer  i ca. Hampton, NY: Prince ton Ar -
chitectural Press, 2018.
Baynes, Ronald E., Kelly J. Dix, and Jim E. Riviere. “Distribution and 
Pharmacokinetics Models.” In Pesticide Biotransformation and Dis -
position , edited by Ernest Hodgson. London: Academic Press, 2012.
Beam, Joseph. “Making Ourselves from Scratch.” In  Brother to  Brother: 
New Writings by Black Gay Men , edited by Essex Hemphill. Wash -
ington, DC: RedBone Press, 1991.
Beecher, Catherine E. A Treatise on Domestic Economy, for the Use 
of Young Ladies at Home, and at School  [excerpts], rev. ed. Bos -
ton: T. H. Webb, 1842. http:// utc . iath  . virginia  . edu / sentimnt  
/ snescebhp  .html .
Bello, Walden. “The Asian Financial Crisis:  Causes, Dynamics, Pros -
pects.” Journal of the Asia Pacific Economy  4, no. 1 (1999): 33–55.
Bender, Emily, Timnit Gebru, Angelina McMillan-  Major, and Shmar -
garet Shmitchell. “On the Dangers of Stochastic Parrots: Can Lan -
guage Models Be T oo Big? 🦜” In FAccT ’21: Proceedings of the 2021  
acm  Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency , 610–
23. New Y ork: Association for Computing Machinery, March 2021.
Beniger, James. The Control Revolution: Technological and Economic Or -
igins of the Information Society.  Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univer -
sity Press, 1989.
Benjamin, Ruha. Race  after Technology: Abolitionist Tools for the New Jim 
Code.  New Y ork: Polity Press, 2019.
Berardi, Franco. “Baroque and Semiocapital.” In  After the  Future , edited 
by Franco Bifo Berardi, Gary Genosko, and Nicholas Thoburn. Ed -
inburgh: ak Press, 2011.
Berger, Peter L., and Hsin-  Huang Michael Hsiao, eds. In Search of an 
East Asian Development Model.  New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction, 
1988.
Bergson, Henri. Creative Evolution . Translated by Arthur Mitchell. Min -
eola, NY: Dover, 1998.
308  BibliographyBergson, Henri. Time and  Free  Will: An Essay on the Immediate Data of 
Consciousness . Translated by F. L. Pogson. London: George Allen 
and Unwin, 1921.
Bergson, Henri. The Two Sources of Morality and Religion . Translated by 
R. Ashley Audra and Cloudesley Brereton. 1932. Reprint, Garden 
City, NY: Doubleday, 1954.
Bernes, Jasper. “Planning and Anarchy.” South Atlantic Quarterly  119, 
no. 1 (January 2020): 53–73. https:// doi . org / 10 . 1215 / 00382876  
-8007653 .
Bertolote, Jos é. “The Roots of the Concept of  Mental Health.” World 
Psychiatry  7 (2008): 113–16.
Bier, Jess. “Bodily Circulation and the  Measure of a Life: Forensic Iden -
tification and V aluation  after the Titanic  Disaster.” Social Studies of 
Science  48, no. 5 (2018): 635–62.
Blas, Zach. “Informatics of Domination: A Lecture Series  Organized 
and Introduced by Zach Blas.” e- flux Conversations , January 17, 2017 . 
https:// conversations . e - flux  . com / t / informatics - of - domination - a 
- lecture  - series -  organized -  and - introduced -  by - zach -  blas /5890 .
Blas, Zach. Queer Technologies.  2008–12. https:// zachblas . info / works  
/ queer  - technologies / .
Blas, Zach. sanctum . 2018. https:// zachblas .  info / works / sanctum / .
Bonhomme, Edna. “What the Coronavirus Has Taught Us about 
 Inequality.” Al Jazeera , March 17, 2020. https:// www . aljazeera  . com  
/ indepth / opinion / coronavirus - taught  - inequality  - 200316204401117  
.html .
Boochani, Behrouz. No Friend but the Mountains: Writing from Ma  nus 
Prison.  Sydney: Picador Australia, 2018.
Boyer, Dominic, and Cymene Howe. “Ep. #39— Stacy Alaimo (Introduc -
ing Felix).” Cultures of Energy , 2016. Accessed November 20, 2017 . 
http://  culturesofenergy  . com  / ep - 39 - stacy  - alaimo  - introducing  - felix  /.
Braidotti, Rosi. Posthuman Knowledge.  London: Polity Press, 2019.
Bratton, Benjamin H. The Stack: On Software and Sovereignty.  Cam -
bridge, MA: mit  Press, 2016.
Braun, Bruce, and Stephanie Wakefield. “Destituent Power and Com -
mon Use: Reading Agamben in the Anthropocene.” In Handbook on 
the Geographies of Power , edited by Mat Coleman and John Agnew, 
259–72. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 2018. https:// doi .  org / 10 
. 4337 / 9781785365645  .00024 .
 Bibliography  309Brooks, Rodney. Flesh and Machines: How Robots  Will Change Us.  New 
Y ork: Pantheon, 2002.
Brower, Andrea. “From the Sugar Oligarchy to the Agrochemical Oli -
gopoly: Situating Monsanto and Gang’s Occupation of Hawai ʻi.” 
Food, Culture, and Society  19, no. 3 (2016): 587–614.
brown, adrienne maree. Emergent Strategy: Shaping Change, Changing 
Worlds.  Chico, CA: ak Press, 2017 .
Brown, DeForrest, Jr. “Social  Music.” ctm  Festival Magazine , April 2021. 
https:// www .  ctm - festival  . de / magazine / social -music .
Browne, Simone. Dark  Matters: On the Surveillance of Blackness.  Durham, 
NC: Duke University Press, 2015.
Bulley, Victoria Adukwei. “Interview with Saidiya Hartman.” White 
Review , June 2020. https:// www  . thewhitereview . org / feature  
/ interview - with - saidiya  - hartman / .
Busta, Caroline. “The Internet  Didn’t Kill Counterculture—  Y ou Just 
 Won’t Find It on Instagram.” Document Journal , January 2021. 
https:// www . documentjournal  . com / 2021 / 01 / the  - internet  - didnt  
- kill -  counterculture  - you - just  - wont  - find - it  - on - instagram / .
Butler, Octavia. Dawn.  New Y ork:  Popular Library, 1987 .
Cameron, James, dir. Titanic . Paramount Pictures/Twentieth  Century 
Fox, 1997 .
Campbell, Jillian, and David E. Jensen. “The Pressing Need for a Global 
Digital Ecosystem.” Medium , September 17, 2019. https:// medium 
. com / @UNDP / the  - pressing - need - for  - a - global -  digital -  ecosystem 
-aa10a9f8df56 .
Campt, Tina. Listening to Images: An Exercise in Counterintuition.  
Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2017 .
cárdenas, micha. Poetic Operations: Trans of Color Art in Digital Media.  
Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2022.
The  Cattle Site. “Smart Control: Maintaining Grazing Practices through 
Geofencing.” January 4, 2021. https:// www . thecattlesite . com / news  
/ 56359 / smart  - control - maintaining - grazing - practices - through  
- geofencing / .
Cavia, AA. Logiciel: Six Seminars on Computational Reason.  Berlin: 
&&&, 2022.
Chambr é, Susan Maizel. Fighting for Our Lives: New York’s  aids  Com -
munity and the Politics of Disease.  New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers 
University Press, 2006.
310  BibliographyChan, Anita Say. Networking Peripheries: Technological  Futures and the 
Myth of Digital Universalism.  Cambridge, MA: mit  Press, 2013.
ChaosTV. “Putting the cgi  in ikea : How V- Ray Helps Visualize Per -
fect Homes.” Posted on Y ouTube, March 22, 2018. https:// youtu  
. be /bJFlslL1wFI .
Cheng, Anne. Second Skin: Josephine Baker and the Modern Surface.  Ox-
ford: Oxford University Press, 2013.
Chun, Wendy Hui Kyong. “Race and/as T echnology; or, How to Do 
 Things with Race.” Camera Obscura  24, no. 1 (2009): 7–35.
Chun, Wendy Hui Kyong, and Sarah Friedland. “Habits of Leaking: Of 
Sluts and Network Cards.” differences  26, no. 2 (2015): 1–28.
Clarke, Bruce. Gaian Systems: Lynn Margulis, Neocybernetics, and the 
End of the Anthropocene.  Minneapolis: University of Minnesota 
Press, 2020.
Clarke, Bruce. “Information.” In Critical Terms for Media Studies , edited 
by W. J. T. Mitchell and Mark B. N. Hansen. Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press, 2010.
Clarke, Bruce, and S ébastien Dutreuil, eds. Writing Gaia: The Scientific 
Correspondence of James Lovelock and Lynn Margulis . Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2022.
Clover, Joshua. Riot. Strike. Riot: The New Era of Uprisings . London: 
V erso, 2019.
Cockshott, William Paul, and Allin Cottrell.  Towards a New Socialism?  
Nottingham, UK: Spokesman, 1993.
Cohen, Kris. Never Alone, Except for Now: Art, Networks, Populations.  
Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2017 .
Collins, Patricia Hill. Black Feminist Thought: Knowledge, Conscious -
ness, and the Politics of Empowerment.  New Y ork: Routledge, 1990.
Collins, Patricia Hill. Intersectionality as Critical Social Theory.  Durham, 
NC: Duke University Press, 2019.
Crawford, Chris. “Dosing Culture, Part One.” Damage , September 2020. 
https:// damagemag  . com / 2020 / 09 / 03 / dosing -  culture  - part  - one / .
Crawford, Kate. Atlas of  ai: Power, Politics, and the Planetary Costs of 
Artificial Intelligence.  New Haven, CT: Y ale University Press, 2021.
Creative Industries Working Group. Creative Industries Development 
Strategy: Propelling Singapore’s Creative Economy.  Singapore: Eco -
nomic Review Committee  Services Subcommittee, 2002.
Crenshaw, Kimberl é. “Demarginalizing the Intersection of Race and 
Sex: A Black Feminist Critique of Antidiscrimination Doctrine, 
 Bibliography  311Feminist Theory and Antiracist Politics.” University of Chicago  Legal 
Forum  1 (1989): 139–67 .
Crenshaw, Kimberl é. “Mapping the Margins: Intersectionality, Iden -
tity Politics, and Vio  lence against  Women of Color.” Stanford Law 
Review  43, no. 6 (1991): 1241–99.
Curtis, V alerie A. “A Natu  ral History of Hygiene.” Canadian Journal of 
Infectious Diseases and Medical Microbiology  18 (2007): 11–14.
Darwin, Charles. Journal of researches into the natu ral history and geology 
of the countries visited during the voyage of H.M.S. Bea gle round the 
world,  under the Command of Capt. Fitz Roy, R.N.  2nd ed. London: 
John Murray, 1845.
Decker, Erwin. The Viennese Students of Civilization: The Meaning and 
Context of Austrian Economics Reconsidered.  Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2016.
Deleuze, Gilles. Difference and Repetition.  New Y ork: Columbia Uni -
versity Press, 1994.
Deleuze, Gilles. The Fold: Leibniz and the Baroque . Translated by T om 
Conley. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1998.
Deleuze, Gilles. Foucault.  Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 
1986.
Deleuze, Gilles. “Postscript on Socie ties of Control.” In Negotiations, 
1972–1990.  New Y ork: Columbia University Press, 1995.
Deleuze, Gilles, and F élix Guattari. “Introduction: Rhizome.” In A 
Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and  Schizophrenia.  Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press, 1987 .
DeLillo, Don. Cosmopolis.  New Y ork: Scribner, 2003.
Demott, John. “A Case of Crony Capitalism.” Time , April 21, 1980.
De Vynck, Gerrit. “They Helped Train Google’s ai. Then They Got Fired 
 after Speaking Out.” Washington Post , June 15, 2023.
Dhaliwal, Ranjodh Singh. “The Cyber- homunculus: On Race and 
 Labor in Plans for Computation.” Configurations  30, no. 4 (2022): 
377–409.
D’Ignazio, Catherine, and Lauren F. Klein. Data Feminism.  Cambridge, 
MA: mit  Press, 2020.
Dillon, Grace L. “Introduction: Indigenous Futurisms, Bimaashi Bi -
idaas Mose, Flying, and Walking  towards Y ou.” Extrapolation  57, 
no. 1–2 (2016): 1–6.
Dominguez, Ricardo. Virtual Timeline.  1997 . https:// www . thing  . net 
/ ~rdom / VRtime .html .
312  BibliographyDominguez, Ricardo. Virtual Timeline . 1997 . Rhizome / ArtBase. 
Accessed March 10, 2024. https:// artbase . rhizome . org / wiki /
Q4149 .
Du Bois, W. E. B. “Of Our Spiritual Strivings.” In The Souls of Black Folk . 
Proj  ect Gutenberg, [1903] 1996. https:// www .  gutenberg  . org / files 
/ 408 / 408  - h / 408  - h .htm .
Dworkin, Andrea.  Women Hating.  New Y ork: E. P. Dutton, 1974.
Dyer-  Witheford, Nick, Atle Mikkola Kjosen, and James Steinhoff. In-
human Power: Artificial Intelligence and the  Future of Capitalism.  
London: Pluto Press, 2019.
Ehrlich, Paul R. The Population Bomb . New Y ork: Ballantine, 1969.
Einspahr, Jennifer. “Structural Domination and Structural Freedom: A 
Feminist Perspective.” feminist review  94 (2010): 1–19.
Elwood, Sarah. “Digital Geographies, Feminist Relationality, Black and 
Queer Code Studies: Thriving Other  wise.” Pro gress in  Human Ge -
ography  45, no. 2 (2020): 1–20.
Escobar, Arturo. Designs for the Pluriverse: Radical Interdependence, 
Autonomy, and the Making of Worlds.  Durham, NC: Duke Univer -
sity Press, 2017 .
Fanon, Frantz. Black Skin, White Masks . New Y ork: Grove Press, 1967 .
Fazi, M. Beatrice. Contingent Computation: Abstraction, Experience, and 
Indeterminacy in Computational Aesthetics.  Lanham, MD: Rowman 
and Littlefield, 2018.
Federici, Silvia. Wages against House  work.  Bristol: Falling Wall Press, 
1975.
Ferguson, Roderick A. “Sissies at the Picnic: The Subjugated Knowledges 
of a Black Rural Queer.” In Feminist Waves, Feminist Generations: Life 
Stories from the Acad emy, edited by Hokulani K. Aikau, Karla A. Er -
ickson, and Jennifer L. Pierce. Minneapolis: University of Minne -
sota Press, 2007 .
Firestone, Shulamith. The Dialectic of Sex: The Case for a Feminist Rev -
olution.  London: V erso, 2015.
Fisher, Mark. “Accelerate Management.” parse  Journal , no. 5 (Spring 
2017). https:// parsejournal  . com / article / accelerate  - management / .
Fisher, Mark. “Good for Nothing.” Occupied Times of London , March 19, 
2014.
Flanagan, Frances. “Climate Change and the New Work Order.” Inside 
Story , February 28, 2019. https:// insidestory  . org . au / climate  - change  
- and - the  - new - work  - order / .
 Bibliography  313Ford, Andrea. “Introduction: Embodied Ecologies.” Theorizing the 
Con temporary, Fieldsights , April 25, 2019. https:// culanth  . org 
/ fieldsights / introduction -  embodied -ecologies .
Foster, Susan Lee. “Choreographies of Protest.” Theatre Journal  55, no. 3 
(2003): 395–412.
Foucault, Michel. The Archaeology of Knowledge and the Discourse on 
Language.  New Y ork: Pantheon, 1972.
Foucault, Michel. Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison.  New 
Y ork: Vintage, 1995.
Foucault, Michel. The History of Sexuality , vol. 1: The  Will to Knowledge.  
London: Penguin, 1998.
Foucault, Michel. The Order of  Things: An Archaeology of the  Human Sci -
ences.  New Y ork: Vintage, 1994.
Foucault, Michel. “What Is an Author?” Translated by Donald Bouch -
ard and Sherry Simon. In Language, Counter-  Memory, Practice: Se -
lected Essays and Interviews , 113–38. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University 
Press, 1977 .
Fourier, Charles. The Hierarchies of Cuckoldry and Bankruptcy.  Cam -
bridge, MA: Wakefield Press, 2011.
Fox, Catherine T oth. “Thousands Turn Out to Fix a Huge Hole in This 
800-  Y ear-  Old He ʻeia Fishpond.” Honolulu Magazine , December 12, 
2015. https:// www . honolulumagazine . com / thousands - turn - out - to 
- fix - a - huge  - hole  - in - this - 800  - year  - old - heeia  - fishpond / .
Freedland, Jonathan. “The Onslaught.” Guardian , October 24, 2005. 
https:// www . theguardian  . com / media / 2005 / oct / 25 / advertising  
.food .
Freidberg, Susanne. Fresh: A Perishable History.  Cambridge, MA: Har -
vard University Press, 2010.
Freud, Sigmund. “Leonardo da Vinci and a Memory of His Childhood.” 
In The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund 
Freud , vol. 11, translated by James Strachey. London: Hogarth, 1957 .
Freud, Sigmund. Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality . Translated by 
James Strachey. New Y ork: Basic Books, 1962.
Frohlich, Thomas C. “Where Y ou’ll Pay the Most in Electric Bills.” 24/7 
Wal l St  (blog), January 24, 2019. https:// 247wallst  . com / special  
- report / 2019 / 01 / 24 / where  - youll - pay - the - most  - in - electric -  bills - 3 /.
Fujikane, Candace. Mapping Abundance for a Planetary  Future: Kanaka 
Maoli and Settler Cartographies in Hawai ʻi. Durham, NC: Duke 
University Press, 2020.
314  BibliographyGaboury, Jacob. “On Uncomputable Numbers: The Origins of 
Queer Computing.” Media- N  9, no. 2 (Summer 2013). https://  
median  . newmediacaucus . org / caa  - conference  - edition - 2013 / on 
- uncomputable  - numbers - the  - origins -  of - a - queer  - computing / .
Gabrys, Jennifer. “Becoming Planetary.” e- flux Architecture , Octo -
ber 2018. https:// www . e - flux  . com / architecture / accumulation  
/ 217051 / becoming -planetary .
Gabrys, Jennifer. “Powering the Digital: From Energy Ecologies to Elec -
tronic Environmentalism.” In Media and the Ecological Crisis , edited 
by Richard Maxwell, Jon Raundalen, and Nina Lager V estberg, 3–18. 
New Y ork: Routledge, 2015.
Gabrys, Jennifer. Program Earth: Environmental Sensing Technology and 
the Making of a Computational Planet.  Minneapolis: University of 
Minnesota Press, 2016.
Gabrys, Jennifer. “Smart Forests and Data Practices: From the Inter -
net of Trees to Planetary Governance.” Big Data and Society  7, no. 1 
(2020): 1–10.
Gabrys, Jennifer, Michelle Westerlaken, Danilo Urzedo, Max Ritts, and 
Trishant Simlai. “Reworking the  Political in Digital Forests: The 
Cosmopolitics of Socio- technical Worlds.” Pro gress in Environmen -
tal Geography  1, nos. 1–4 (2022): 58–83.
Galloway, Alexander R. Protocol: How Control Exists  after Decentraliza -
tion.  Cambridge, MA: mit  Press, 2006.
Galloway, Alexander R. “Uncomputer.” nyu  Department of Media, 
Culture, and Communication, February 9, 2020. http://  
cultureandcommunication  . org / galloway /uncomputer .
Galloway, Alexander R., and Eugene Thacker. The Exploit: A Theory of 
Networks.  Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2007 .
Gane, Nicholas. “When We Have Never Been  Human, What Is to Be 
Done? Interview with Donna Haraway.” Theory, Culture and Society  
23, nos. 7–8 (December 1, 2006): 135–58. https:// doi .  org / 10  . 1177 
/0263276406069228 .
Gilbert, Scott F., Emily McDonald, Nicole Boyle, Nicholas Buttino, 
Lin Gyi, Mark Mai, Neelakantan Prakash, and James Robinson. 
“Symbiosis as a Source of Selectable Epige  ne tic V ariation: Taking 
the Heat for the Big Guy.” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society B  365 (2010): 671–78.
Giles, Martin. “The GANfather: The Man Who’s Given Machines the Gift 
of Imagination.” mit  Technology Review , February 21, 2018. https://  
 Bibliography  315www . technologyreview . com / 2018 / 02 / 21 / 145289 / the  - ganfather  
- the  - man - whos -  given - machines - the  - gift - of - imagination / .
Gilmore, Ruth Wilson. Golden Gulag: Prisons, Surplus, Crisis, and Op -
position in Globalizing California.  Berkeley: University of Califor -
nia Press, 2007 .
Gilroy, Paul. The Black Atlantic: Modernity and Double Consciousness.  
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1993.
Glass, John. “First Minimal Synthetic Bacterial Cell.” J. Craig V enter 
Institute. Accessed May 23, 2024. https://  www  . jcvi . org / research  
/ first  - minimal - synthetic -  bacterial -cell .
Gómez- Barris, Macarena. The Extractive Zone: Social Ecologies and De -
colonial Perspectives.  Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2017 .
Goodfellow, Ian J., Jean Pouget-  Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David 
Warde- Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Y oshua Bengio. 
“Generative Adversarial Nets.” In Advances in Neural Information 
Pro cessing Systems 27 , edited by Z. Ghahramani, M. Welling, C. 
Cortes, N. Lawrence, and K. Q. Weinberger, 2672–80. NeurIPS 
Proceedings, 2014. http://  papers . nips  . cc / paper  / 5423  - generative  
- adversarial -nets .
Google Earth. “T our the Titanic in Google Earth.” Posted on Y ou -
Tube, April 13, 2012. https:// www . youtube . com / watch  ? v 
=2qT5fddzELU .
Goux, Jean-  Joseph. Symbolic Economies: After Marx and Freud . Trans -
lated by Jennifer Curtiss Gage. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University 
Press, 1990.
Gray, Mary, and Siddharth Suri. Ghost Work: How to Stop Silicon V alley 
from Building a New Global Underclass.  New Y ork: Houghton Mif -
flin Harcourt, 2019.
Grossman, Rachel. “  Women’s Place in the Integrated Cir  cuit.” Southeast 
Asian Chronicle  66 (1979): 2–17 .
Guardian.  “Robot Life of the  Future—  Archive, 1969.” September 11, 
2019. https:// www . theguardian  . com / technology / 2019 / sep / 11 
/ robot  - life  - of - the  - future  - archive  -1969 .
Guidere, Mathieu, Newton Howard, and Shlomo Argamon. “Rich Lan -
guage Analy sis for Counterterrorism.” In Computational Methods for 
Counterterrorism , edited by Shlomo Argamon and Newton Howard. 
Berlin: Springer V erlag, 2009.
Hamilton, Jennifer Mae. “The  Future of House  work: The Similarities 
and Differences between Making Kin and Making Babies.” Austra -
316  Bibliographylian Feminist Studies  34, no. 102 (2019): 1–22. https:// doi . org / 10 
. 1080 / 08164649 .  2019 .1702874 .
Hamilton, Jennifer Mae, and Astrida Neimanis. “Composting Femi -
nisms and Environmental Humanities.” Environmental Humanities  
10, no. 2 (2018): 501–27 .
Hamilton, Jennifer Mae, and Astrida Neimanis. “Five Desires, Five 
Demands.” Australian Feminist Studies  34, no. 102 (2019): 385–97 . 
https:// doi .  org / 10  . 1080 / 08164649 .  2019 .1702875 .
Hamilton, Jennifer Mae, T essa Zettel, and Astrida Neimanis. “Feminist 
Infrastructures for Better Weathering.” Australian Feminist Stud -
ies 36, no. 109 (2021): 237–59. https:// doi .  org / 10  . 1080 / 08164649 
. 2021 .1969639 .
Hammond, Joyce D. “Hawaiian Flag Quilts: Multivalent Symbols of a 
Hawaiian Quilt Tradition.” Hawaiian Journal of History  27 (1993): 
1–26.
Hamraie, Aimi, and Kelly Fritsch. “Crip T echnoscience Manifesto.” 
Catalyst  4, no. 1 (2019).
Han, Byung-  Chul. Psychopolitics: Neoliberalism and New Technologies of 
Power.  London: V erso, 2017 .
Haraway, Donna J. “The Biological Enterprise: Sex, Mind, and Profit 
from  Human Engineering to Sociobiology.” In Simians, Cyborgs, 
and  Women: The Reinvention of Nature , 58–59. New Y ork: Rout -
ledge, 1991.
Haraway, Donna J. “The Biopolitics of Postmodern Bodies: Constitu -
tions of Self in Immune System Discourse.” In Simians, Cyborgs, and 
 Women: The Reinvention of Nature.  New Y ork: Routledge, 1991.
Haraway, Donna J. “Biopolitics of Postmodern Bodies: Determinations 
of Self in Immune System Discourse.” differences: A Journal of Fem -
inist Cultural Studies  1, no. 1 (1989): 3–43.
Haraway, Donna J. “Crittercam: Compounding Eyes in Naturecultures.” 
In When Species Meet.  Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 
2008.
Haraway, Donna J. “A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, T echnology, and 
Socialist- Feminism in the Late Twentieth  Century.” In Simians, 
Cyborgs, and  Women: The Reinvention of Nature.  New Y ork: Rout -
ledge, 1991.
Haraway, Donna J. “A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, T echnology, and 
Socialist- Feminism in the Late 20th   Century.” In The International 
Handbook of Virtual Learning Environments , edited by Joel Weiss, 
 Bibliography  317Jason Nolan, Jeremy Hunsinger, and Peter Trifonas. Dordrecht: 
Springer, 2006.
Haraway, Donna J. “A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, T echnology, and 
Socialist- Feminism in the Late Twentieth  Century.” In Manifestly 
Haraway.  Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2016.
Haraway, Donna J. “A Manifesto for Cyborgs: Science, T echnology, and 
Socialist- Feminism in the 1980s.” Socialist Review , no. 80 (1985): 65–108.
Haraway, Donna J. “A Manifesto for Cyborgs: Science, T echnology, 
and Socialist- Feminism in the 1980s.” Australian Feminist Studies  
2, no. 4 (Autumn 1987): 1–42.
Haraway, Donna J. “A Manifesto for Cyborgs: Science, T echnology, and 
Socialist- Feminism in the 1980s.” In Feminism/Postmodernism , ed-
ited by Linda J. Nicholson. New Y ork: Routledge, 1990.
Haraway, Donna J. “A Manifesto for Cyborgs: Science, T echnology, 
and Socialist- Feminism in the 1980s.” In The Haraway Reader.  New 
Y ork: Routledge, 2004.
Haraway, Donna J. “Situated Knowledges: The Science Question in 
Feminism and the Privilege of the Partial Perspective.” Feminist 
Studies  14, no. 3 (1988): 575–99. https:// doi . org / 10 . 2307 /3178066 .
Haraway, Donna J. “Situated Knowledges: The Science Question in Femi -
nism and the Privilege of the Partial Perspective.” In Simians, Cyborgs, 
and  Women: The Reinvention of Nature.  New Y ork: Routledge, 1991.
Haraway, Donna J. Staying with the Trou  ble: Making Kin in the Chthu -
lucene.  Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2016.
Haraway, Donna J. “Universal V ampires in a Donor Culture.” In Mod -
est_Witness@Second_Millenium.FemaleMan©_Meets_Oncomouse™.  
New Y ork: Routledge, 1996.
Harding, Sandra. The Science Question in Feminism.  Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 1986.
Hartman, Saidiya. “V enus in Two Acts.” Small Axe  12, no. 2 (2008): 1–14.
Hau‘ofa, Epeli. We Are the Ocean: Selected Works . Honolulu: University 
of Hawai‘i Press, 2008.
Hayek, Friedrich August von. The Counter- revolution of Science: Studies 
on the Abuse of Reason.  Glencoe, IL:  Free Press, 1952.
Hayek, Friedrich August von. “The Use of Knowledge in Society.” Amer -
ican Economic Review  35, no. 4 (September 1945): 519–30.
Hayles, N. Katherine. How We Became Posthuman: Virtual Bodies in 
Cybernetics, Lit  er a ture, and Informatics.  Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1999.
318  BibliographyHayles, N. Katherine. How We Think: Digital Media and Con  temporary 
Technogenesis.  Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2012.
Hayles, N. Katherine. My  Mother Was a Computer: Digital Subjects and 
Literary Texts.  Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005.
Hayles, N. Katherine. Writing Machines.  Cambridge, MA: mit  Press, 2002.
Hayward, Eva S. “Sensational Jellyfish: Aquar ium Affects and the  Matter 
of Immersion.” differences: A Journal of Feminist Cultural Studies  23, 
no. 3 (2012): 161–96.
Heaivilin, Hunter. “Local Foods through Crisis.” In The V alue of Ha -
wai ʻi 3: Hulihia, the Turning , edited by Noelani Goodyear- Ka ʻōpua, 
Craig Howes, Jonathan Kay Kamakawiwo ʻole Osorio, and Aiko 
Y amashiro, 31–34. Honolulu: University of Hawai ʻi Press, 2020.
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich. Lectures on the Philosophy of History . 
Translated by John Sibree. Kitchener, CA: Batoche, 2001.
Higgins, David. Reverse Colonization: Science Fiction, Imperial Fantasy, 
and Alt-  Victimhood.  Iowa City: University of Iowa Press, 2021.
Ho, Rui An. “Crisis and Contingency at the Dashboard.” e- flux Journal  
90 (2018).
Hobbs, Robert, and Mark Lombardi. Mark Lombardi: Global Networks.  
New Y ork:  Independent Curators International, 2003.
Honda, Eiko. “The Emergence of Queer Nature in Modern Science: 
Minakata Kumagusu (1867–1941) and the Universe of Microbial 
Knowledge.” DPhil thesis, Oxford University, 2021.
Honolulu Advertiser . “Kalihi V alley Homes Has 373 Resident Families.” 
February 26, 1954.
Hood, Kate Lewis. “Industry/Forestry 4.0.” Logbooks  (blog). Smart 
Forests Atlas. https:// atlas . smartforests . net / en / logbooks  
/ fpinnovations - forestry  -40.
hooks, bell.  Ain’t I a  Woman: Black  Women and Feminism . 2nd ed. New 
Y ork: Routledge, 1981.
hooks, bell. The  Will to Change: Men, Masculinity, and Love.  New Y ork: 
Washington Square Press, 2004.
Hu, Tung-  Hui. A Prehistory of the Cloud.  Cambridge, MA: mit  Press, 2015.
Hudgins, Edward L. “Hayek vs. Asimov: Spontaneous Order or Failed 
Foundation.” Cato Institute, January 1, 1996. https://  www  . cato  
. org / white  - paper / hayek  - vs - asimov  - spontaneous - order  - or - failed  
-foundation .
Hughes, Zondra. “What Happened to the Only Black  Family on the 
Titanic ?” Ebony , June 2000, 148–54.
 Bibliography  319Huillet, Dani èle, and Jean-  Marie Straub, dirs. En rachâchant . Straub-  
Huillet, Diagonale, and L’Institut National de l’Audiovisuel 
(France), 1983. 7 min.
Hutton, Adam F. “Silicon V alley Rising Has a Plan to Improve the Lives 
of ‘T ech’s Invisible Workforce.’ ” San Jose Spotlight , September 1, 
2019. https:// sanjosespotlight  . com / silicon - valley  - rising - has - a - plan  
- to - improve  - the  - lives -  of - techs - invisible  - workforce / .
Imarisha, Walidah. “Introduction.” In Octavia’s Brood: Science Fiction 
Stories from Social Justice Movements , edited by Walidah Imarisha 
and adrienne maree brown, 3–6. Oakland, CA: ak Press, 2015.
Information School. “Informatics.” University of Washington. Accessed 
March 10, 2024. https:// ischool  . uw . edu / programs /informatics .
Irani, Lilly. Chasing Innovation: Making Entrepreneurial Citizens in Mod -
ern India.  Prince ton, NJ: Prince ton University Press, 2019.
Irani, Lilly. “The Cultural Work of Microwork.” New Media and Society  
17, no. 5 (May 2015): 720–39.
Jackson, Reginald T. “The Absence of Fear: An Open Letter to a 
 Brother.” In  Brother to  Brother: New Writings by Black Gay Men , 
edited by Essex Hemphill. Washington, DC: RedBone Press, 1991.
Jameson, Fredric. A Singular Modernity: Essay on the Ontology of the Pre-
sent.  London: V erso, 2012.
Jarman, Derek, dir. Blue . Basilisk Communications Ltd., 1993.
Jemisin, N. K. The Fifth Season.  New Y ork: Orbit, 2015.
Jemisin, N. K. “The Ones Who Stay and Fight.” In How Long ’til Black 
 Future Month? Stories , 1–13. New Y ork: Orbit, 2018.
Jerng, Mark C. Racial Worldmaking: The Power of  Popular Fiction.  New 
Y ork: Fordham University Press, 2017 .
Johnson, Chal  mers. miti  and the  Japanese Miracle: The Growth of Indus -
trial Policy, 1925–1975.  Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1982.
Johnson, Jessica Marie. “Markup Bodies: Black [Life] Studies and Slav -
ery [Death] Studies at the Digital Crossroads.” Social Text , no. 137 
(2018): 57–79.
Jones, Caroline A. “Anicka Yi: Biofiction and the Umwelt .” In Hugo Boss 
Prize 2016 . New Y ork: Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, 2016.
Jones, Caroline A. “Monads, Mycetes, and Mandalas: Inserting Jenna 
Sutela in Symbiontic Philosophies.” In Jenna Sutela:  no no nse nse , 
edited by Stefanie Hessler. London: Koenig, 2020.
Jones, Caroline A. “Siren Songs.” e- flux Architecture , July 2021. https:// 
www .  e - flux  . com / architecture / survivance / 400172 / siren - songs / .
320  BibliographyJones, Caroline A. “Swarming Symbionts.” In Agnieszka Kurant: Collec -
tive Intelligence , edited by Stefanie Hessler, Jenny Jaskey, and Ag -
nieszka Kurant. London: Sternberg, forthcoming.
Jones, Caroline A. “Symbiontics: A Polemic for Our Time.” In Symbi -
onts: Con  temporary Artists and the Biosphere , edited by Caroline A. 
Jones, Natalie Bell, and Selby Nimrod, 13–50. Cambridge, MA: mit  
List Visual Art Center and mit  Press, 2022.
Jones, Caroline A. “Virions: Thinking through the Scale of Aggrega -
tion.” Artforum , May/June 2020. https:// www . artforum  . com / print  
/ 202005 / caroline  - a - jones -82828 .
Jones, Caroline A. “We Symbionts.” In Olafur Eliasson: Symbiotic Seeing , 
edited by Esther Braun- Kalberer, Anna Engberg- Pedersen, Kristina 
Köper, and Mirjam V aradinis.  Zurich: Kunsthalle  Zurich, 2020.
Jones, Donna V. “Inheritance and Finitude:  T oward a Literary Phenom -
enology of Time.” elh  85, no. 2 (2018): 289–303.
Jones, Donna V. The Racial Discourses of Life Philosophy: Négritude, 
Vitalism, and Modernity.  New Y ork: Columbia University Press, 
2011.
Jones, Sarah. “Arresting Disabled Bodies.” New Republic , September 28, 
2 0 1 7.  https:// newrepublic . com / article / 145072 / arresting - disabled  
-bodies .
“Jordan Peele’s ‘Deepfake’ President Obama Video.” c- span , June 7, 
2019. https:// www .  c - span  . org / classroom / document /  ?9544 .
Jue, Melody. Wild Blue Media: Thinking through Seawater.  Durham, NC: 
Duke University Press, 2020.
Kafer, Alison. Feminist Queer Crip.  Bloomington: Indiana University 
Press, 2013.
Kahn, Herman. Thinking about the Unthinkable . New Y ork: Horizon 
Press, 1962.
Kang, Laura Hyun Yi. “The Uses of Asianization: Figuring Crises, 
1997–98 and 2007– ?” American Quarterly  64, no. 3 (2012): 411–36.
Kauanui, J. K ēhaulani. Paradoxes of Hawaiian Sovereignty: Land, Sex, 
and the Colonial Politics of State Nationalism.  Durham, NC: Duke 
University Press, 2018.
Keeling, Kara. “Queer os.” Cinema Journal  53, no. 2 (2014): 152–57 .
Keenan, Thomas, and Eyal Weizman. Mengele’s Skull: The Advent of a 
Forensic Aesthetics . Berlin: Sternberg Press / Portikus, 2012.
Keller, Evelyn Fox. “Feminism and Science.” Feminist Theory  7, no. 3 
(1982): 589–602.
 Bibliography  321Kelley, Lindsay. Bioart Kitchen: Art, Feminism and Technoscience.  Lon -
don: I. B. Tauris, 2016.
Kent, George. “Food Security in Hawai‘i.” In Food and Power in Hawai‘i: 
Visions of Food Democracy , edited by Aya Hirata Kimura and Kris -
nawati Suryanata, 28–45. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press, 2016.
Kittler, Friedrich A. Discourse Networks, 1800/1900.  Stanford, CA: Stan -
ford University Press, 1990.
Kittler, Friedrich A. Gramophone, Film, Typewriter.  Stanford, CA: Stan -
ford University Press, 1999.
Klein, Melanie. “Infantile Anxiety Reflected in a Work of Art.” In The 
Selected Melanie Klein , edited by Juliet Mitchell, 84–94. New Y ork: 
 Free Press, 1986.
Kofler, Natalie, and Fran çoise Baylis. “T en Reasons Why Immunity 
Passports Are a Bad Idea.” Nature  581 (2020): 379–81.
Kollewe, Julia. “Pfizer Accused of Pandemic Profiteering as Profits 
Double.” Guardian , February 8, 2022. https:// www . theguardian  
. com / business / 2022 / feb / 08 / pfizer  - covid -  vaccine  - pill - profits -sales .
Konings, Martijn. Capital and Time: For a New Critique of Neoliberal 
Reason.  Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press, 2018.
Krauss, Rosalind. “Grids.” October  9 (Summer 1979): 50–64.
Krenak, Ailton. Ideas to Postpone the End of the World . T oronto:  House 
of Anansi Press, 2020.
Lacan, Jacques. The Ethics of Psychoanalysis: The Seminar of Jacques Lacan, 
Book VII . Translated by Dennis Porter. New Y ork: W. W. Norton, 1986.
Lamoreaux, Janelle. “What If the Environment Is a Person? Lineages 
of Epige  ne tic Science in a T oxic China.” Cultural Anthropology  31, 
no. 2 (2016). https://  journal  . culanth  . org / index  . php  / ca / article  
/ view / ca31  . 2 . 03 /357 .
Laplanche, Jean. “The Unfinished Copernican Revolution.” In Essays on 
Otherness , 53–85. London: Routledge, 1999.
Laugesen, Amanda. Rooted: An Australian History of Bad Language.  
Sydney: New South Books, 2020.
Leistert, Oliver. “The Revolution  Will Not Be Liked.” In Critical Perspec -
tives on Social Media and Protest , edited by Lina Dencik and Oliver 
Leistert. London: Rowman and Littlefield International, 2015.
LeMenager, Stephanie. “Skilling Up for the Anthropocene.” In Feminist, 
Queer, Anticolonial Propositions for Hacking the Anthropocene: Archive , 
edited by Jennifer Mae Hamilton, Susan Reid, Pia van Gelder, and 
Astrida Neimanis. London: Open Humanities Press, 2020.
322  BibliographyLeslie, Esther. “Nature of Disruption, Disruption of Nature: During and 
 after the Pandemic.” Philosophy World Democracy , May 23, 2022.
Lieberman, Charlotte. “Why Y ou Procrastinate (It Has Nothing to Do 
with Self-  Control).” New York Times , March 25, 2019.
Linden, Robin Ruth, Darlene R. Pagano, Diana E. H. Russell, and Susan 
Leigh Star, eds. Against Sadomasochism: A Radical Feminist Analy -
sis. San Francisco: Frog in the Well, 1982.
Lindtner, Silvia. Prototype Nation: China and the Contested Promise of 
Innovation.  Prince ton, NJ: Prince ton University Press, 2020.
Linenthal, Edward. Symbolic Defense: The Cultural Significance of the 
Strategic Defense Initiative.  Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 
1989.
Lipton, Mark. “The Condom in History: Shame and Fear.” In Culture 
and the Condom , edited by Karen Anijar and Thuy DaoJensen. Lau -
sanne: Peter Lang, 2005.
Lochlann, Jain. Malignant: How Cancer Becomes Us.  Berkeley: Univer -
sity of California Press, 2013.
Loke, Matthew K., and PingSun Leung. “Hawai‘i’s Food Consumption 
and Supply Sources: Benchmark Estimates and  Measurement Is -
sues.” Agricultural and Food Economics  1, no. 1 (2013). https:// doi  
. org / 10  . 1186 / 2193 - 7532  - 1 -10 .
Lord, Walter. A Night to Remember.  New Y ork: r&w  Holt, 1955.
Lorde, Audre.  Sister Outsider: Essays and Speeches.  Berkeley, CA: Cross -
ing Press, 1984.
Lothian, Alexis. Old  Futures: Speculative Fiction and Queer Possibility.  
New Y ork: New Y ork University Press, 2018.
Lugones, Mar ía. “Heterosexualism and the Colonial/Modern Gender 
System.” Hypatia  22, no. 1 (2007): 186–219. https:// doi .  org / 10  . 1111 
/ j . 1527  - 2001  . 2007  . tb01156  .x.
Madrigal, Alexis. “ ‘Why Are Spy Researchers Building a ‘  Metaphor 
Program’?” Atlantic , May 25, 2011.
Malaspina, C écile. An Epistemology of Noise.  London: Bloomsbury, 2018.
Mann, Steve. “V eillance and Reciprocal Transparency: Surveillance 
versus Sousveillance, ar Glass, Lifelogging and Wearable Com -
puting.” In 2013  ieee  International Symposium on Technology and 
Society ( istas ), 1–12. T oronto: ieee , 2013.
Margulis, Lynn, and Ren é Fester, eds. Symbiosis as a Source of Evolu -
tionary Innovation: Speciation and Morphogenesis . Cambridge, MA: 
mit  Press, 1991.
 Bibliography  323Marinetti, Filippo T ommaso. Mafarka the Futurist: An African Novel.  
London: Middlesex University Press, 1998.
Marx, Karl. Capital , vol. 1. New Y ork: Penguin, 1990.
Marx, Karl. Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844.  Mineola, 
NY: Dover, 2007 .
Marx, Karl. Grundrisse.  New Y ork: Penguin, 1993.
Massumi, Brian. The Power at the End of the Economy.  Durham: Duke 
University Press, 2015.
Mattison, Sara. “Refrigerator, Freezer Stock Impacted by covid- 1 9.” 
khon 2, September 16, 2020. https:// www . khon2  . com / coronavirus  
/ refrigerator  - freezer  - stock  - impacted -  by - covid - 19 / .
McBean, Sam. “Feminist Diagrams.” Feminist Theory  22, no. 2 (2021): 
206–25.
McClanahan, Annie. “ Future’s Shock: Plausibility, Preemption, and the 
Fiction of 9/11.” symploke  17, no. 1–2 (2009): 41–62.
McClintock, Anne. Imperial Leather: Race, Gender, and Sexuality in the 
Colonial Contest.  New Y ork: Routledge, 1995.
McDonald, Danny. “ mfa  Apologizes  after Students from Dorches -
ter School Subjected to Racism during Field Trip.” Boston Globe , 
May 22, 2019. https://  www . bostonglobe  . com / metro / 2019 / 05 / 22 
/ mfa  - apologizes - after  - students - from - dorchester  - school - subjected  
- racism -  during - field - trip / TzY cdDirBvoDE81q65TOKN / story  .html .
McGlotten, Shaka. “Black Data.” In No Tea, No Shade: New Queer of 
Color Critique , edited by E. Patrick Johnson, 262–86. Durham, NC: 
Duke University Press, 2016.
McHale, Brian. Constructing Postmodernism.  New Y ork: Routledge, 
1992.
McKittrick, Katherine. “Mathe  matics Black Life.” Black Scholar  44, 
no. 2 (2014): 16–28.
McLauchlan, Laura. “Wild Disciplines and Multispecies Erotics: On 
the Power of Wanting Like a Hedgehog Champion.” Australian 
Feminist Studies  34, no. 102 (2019): 1–15. https:// doi . org / 10 . 1080  
/ 08164649 .  2019 .1682457 .
Mead, Margaret. Sex and Temperament in Three Primitive Socie ties. New 
Y ork: William Morrow, 1935.
Mejias, Ulises Ali. Off the Network: Disrupting the Digital World.  Min -
neapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2013.
Melamed, Jodie. “Racial Capitalism.” Critical Ethnic Studies  1, no. 1 
(Spring 2015): 76–85.
324  BibliographyMerry, Sally Engle. Colonizing Hawai ʻi: The Cultural Power of Law.  
Prince ton, NJ: Prince ton University Press, 2000.
Milburn, Colin. Nanovision: Engineering the  Future . Durham, NC: Duke 
University Press, 2008.
Milne- Edwards, Henri. Outlines of Anatomy and Physiology . Boston: 
C. C.  Little and J. Brown, 1841.
Mirowski, Philip. More Heat Than Light: Economics as Social Physics, 
Physics as Nature’s Economics.  Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2000.
Mitchell, David, and Sharon Snyder. “Disability as Multitude: Rework -
ing Nonproductive  Labor Power.” Journal of Literary and Cultural 
Studies  4, no. 2 (2010): 179–94.
Mitman, Gregg. “Reflections on the Plantationocene: A Conversation 
with Donna Haraway and Anna Tsing.” Edge Effects , June 18, 2019. 
https:// edgeeffects .  net / haraway  - tsing - plantationocene / .
Mohamad, Mahathir. “Speech on the 10th Session of the Islamic Sum -
mit Conference.” Putrajaya Convention Centre, Malaysia, Octo -
ber 16, 2003.
Moore, Jason W. Capitalism in the Web of Life: Ecol ogy and the Accumu -
lation of Capital.  London: V erso, 2015.
Morozov, Evgeny. To Save Every  thing, Click  Here: The Folly of Techno -
logical Solutionism.  New Y ork: PublicAffairs, 2013.
Morrison, T oni. “ ‘I Wanted to Carve Out a World Both Culture Specific 
and Race- Free’: An Essay by T oni Morrison.” Guardian , August 8, 
2019. https:// www . theguardian  . com / books / 2019 / aug / 08 / toni  
- morrison - rememory  -essay .
Morton, Timothy. Dark Ecol ogy: For a Logic of  Future Coexistence.  New 
Y ork: Columbia University Press, 2016.
Morton, Timothy . Humankind: Solidarity with Non-  human  People.  
London: V erso, 2019.
Muñoz, Jos é Esteban. “From Surface to Depth, between Psychoanalysis 
and Affect.”  Women and  Performance: A Journal of Feminist Theory  
19, no. 2 (2010): 123–29.
Murphy, Michelle. “Against Population,  towards Alterlife.” In Making 
Kin, Not Population , edited by Adele Clarke and Donna Haraway. 
Cambridge: Prickly Paradigm Press, 2018.
Murphy, Michelle. “Alterlife and Decolonial Chemical Relations.” Cul-
tural Anthropology  32, no. 4 (2017): 494–503. https:// doi  . org / 10 
. 14506 / ca32  . 4 .02.
 Bibliography  325Muthiah, Sathappan, Patrick Butler, Rupinder Paul Khandpur, Parang 
Saraf, Nathan Self, Alla Rozovskaya, Liang Zhao, et al. “ embers  
at 4 Y ears: Experiences Operating an Open Source Indicators Fore -
casting System.” In kdd  ’16: Proceedings of the 22nd  acm sigkdd  
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Min -
ing, 205–14. New Y ork: Association for Computing Machinery, 
August 2016.
National Arts Council.  Renaissance City Report: Culture and the Arts in 
 Renaissance Singapore.  Singapore: mita , 2000.
Neimanis, Astrida. Bodies of  Water: Posthuman Feminist Phenomenology.  
London: Bloomsbury, 2017 .
Neimanis, Astrida. “Introductory Talk: The Missing Keyword.” The 
Camille Diaries Symposium, ArtLab Berlin, September 2020. 
http:// www . artlaboratory  - berlin  . org / html / eng - Camille  - Diaries  
- Symposium  .htm .
Neimanis, Astrida. “The Weather Underwater: Blackness, White Femi -
nism, and the Breathless Sea.” Australian Feminist Studies  34, no. 102 
(2019): 1–19. https:// doi .  org / 10  . 1080 / 08164649 .  2019 .1697178 .
Newitz, Annalee. “When  Will White  People Stop Making Movies 
Like Avatar ?” Gizmodo , December 18, 2009. https:// io9 .  gizmodo 
. com / when - will - white  - people  - stop  - making - movies - like  - avatar  
-5422666 .
Niermann, Hannah C. M., and Anouk Scheres. “The Relation between 
Procrastination and Symptoms of Attention- Deficit Hyperactivity 
Disorder ( adhd ) in Undergraduate Students.” International Journal 
of Methods in Psychiatric Research  23, no. 4 (2014): 411–21.
Noble, Safiya, Jessica Marie Johnson, and Mark Anthony Neal. “Week 
3: Race and Black Codes (Main Thread).” ccs  Working Group , 
January 2018. https:// wg  . criticalcodestudies . com / index  . php ? p =  
/ discussion / 42 / week  - 3 - race  - and -  black  - codes - main -thread .
Nuku, Maia. Atea: Nature and Divinity in Polynesia . Metropolitan Mu -
seum of Art Bulletin 76, no. 3. New Y ork: Metropolitan Museum 
of Art, 2019. Exhibition cata  log.
Nyong’o, Tavia. “T oo Black, T oo Queer, T oo Holy: Why  Little Richard 
Never Truly Got His Dues.” Guardian , May 12, 2020.
Obama, Barack. “Remarks by President Obama to the Australian Parlia -
ment.” November 17, 2011, Washington, DC. Transcript, the White 
 House. https:// obamawhitehouse . archives . gov / the  - press - office  
/ 2011 / 11 / 17 / remarks - president  - obama  - australian -parliament .
326  BibliographyOdell, Jenny. How to Do Nothing: Resisting the Attention Economy.  New 
Y ork: Melville  House, 2019. ePub.
Olsen, Ole Andkjaer. “Depression and Reparation as Themes in Melanie 
Klein’s Analy sis of the  Painter Ruth Weber.” Scandinavian Psycho -
analytic Review  27 (2004): 34–42.
Oxford English Dictionary . S.v. “cataclysm.” Oxford University Press. 
Accessed June 29, 2023. https:// www . oed  . com / view / Entry  
/28673 .
Oxford  English Dictionary . S.v. “diagram.” Accessed March 10, 2024. https://  
www .  oed . com / dictionary / diagram _ n  ? tab =etymology#6917294 .
Oxford  English Dictionary . S.v. “information.” Accessed March 10, 2024. 
https:// www .  oed . com / dictionary / information _n .
Oyama, Susan. The Ontogeny of Information: Developmental Systems and 
Evolution.  Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2000.
Parisi, Luciana. Contagious Architecture: Computation, Aesthetics, and 
Space.  Cambridge, MA: mit  Press, 2022.
Parisi, Luciana. “Reprogramming Decisionism.” e- flux Journal  85 
(October 2017). https:// www . e - flux  . com / journal / 85 / 155472  
/ reprogramming -  decisionism / .
Perrier, Maud, and Elaine Swan. “Foodwork: Racialised, Gendered 
and Classed  Labours.”  Futures of Work , December 9, 2019. https:// 
futuresofwork  . co . uk / 2019 / 12 / 09 / foodwork  - racialised - gendered  
- and -  class - labours / .
Perspective api.  Accessed June 5, 2023. https://  www  . perspectiveapi  
. com / .
Perspective api.  “How It Works.” Accessed June 5, 2023. https:// www 
. perspectiveapi .  com / how - it  - works / .
Perspective api . “Model Cards.” Accessed June 5, 2023. https://  
developers . perspectiveapi . com / s / about  - the  - api - model - cards  
? language  = en _US .
Phan, Thao, Jake Goldenfein, Declan Kuch, and Monique Mann, eds. 
Economies of Virtue: The Circulation of “Ethics” in  ai. Theory on De -
mand. Amsterdam: Institute of Network Cultures, 2022.
Phan, Thao, and Scott Wark. “What Personalisation Can Do for Y ou! 
Or: How to Do Racial Discrimination without ‘Race’—  Thao Phan 
and Scott Wark.” Culture Machine  20 (2021): 1–29.
Phillips, Rasheedah, ed. Black Quantum Futurism: Theory and Practice . 
V ol. 1. Philadelphia:  House of  Future Sciences Books/AfroFuturist 
Affair, 2015.
 Bibliography  327Phongpaichit, Pasuk, and Chris Baker. Thailand’s Crisis.  Chiang Mai: 
Silkworm, 2000.
Precarity Lab. Technoprecarious.  London: Goldsmiths Press, 2020.
Preciado, Paul B. Testo Junkie: Sex, Drugs, and Biopolitics in the Pharma -
copornographic Era . New Y ork: Feminist Press, 2013.
Puar, Jasbir K. “ ‘I Would Rather Be a Cyborg Than a Goddess’: 
Becoming- Intersectional in Assemblage Theory.” philoSOPHIA: A 
Journal of Continental Feminism  2, no. 1 (2012): 49–66.
Radin, Joanna. “The Secret Weapon for Distributing a Potential Covid-
19 V accination.” Washington Post , November 12, 2020. https://  
www . washingtonpost  . com / outlook / 2020 / 11 / 12 / secret  - weapon  
- distributing - potential -  covid - 19  - vaccine / .
Radin, Joanna, and Emma Kowal. Cryopolitics: Frozen Life in a Melting 
World.  Cambridge, MA: mit  Press, 2017 .
Ranci ère, Jacques. The Politics of Aesthetics . London: Bloomsbury Ac -
ademic, 2006.
“Reading List: Resources for  Resistance.” Ta nk , June 2020. https://  
tankmagazine .  com / tank / 2020 / 06 / resources - for  -resistance .
Reagan, Ronald. “Remarks and a Question-  and-  Answer Session with 
the Students and Faculty at Moscow State University.” Moscow, 
May 31, 1988. https:// www . reaganlibrary  . gov / research / speeches  
/053188b .
Redmond, Sean. “ Titanic : Whiteness on the High Seas of Meaning.” In 
The Titanic in Myth and Memory: Repre sen ta tions in Visual and Lit -
erary Culture , edited by Tim Bergfelder and Sarah Street, 197–204. 
London: I. B. Tauris, 2004.
Redstockings Collective. “Redstockings Manifesto.” Redstockings , 1969. 
https:// www .  redstockings .  org / index  . php / rs -manifesto .
Reed, Patricia. “Diagramming the Common.” Lecture, KunstAllmend 
(Artistic Commons) Symposium, Dampfzentrale, Bern, Switzer -
land, April 23, 2014. https:// www . aestheticmanagement  . com / wp 
- content / uploads / 2014 / 05 / reed _ diagramming _ the _ common  .pdf .
Rees, Jonathan. Refrigeration Nation: A History of Ice, Appliances, and 
Enterprise in Amer  i ca. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University 
Press, 2013.
Rhee, Jennifer. The Robotic Imaginary: The  Human and the Price of Dehu -
manized  Labor.  Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2018.
Rich, Adrienne. “Contradictions: Tracking Poems, N. 28.” In Your Na -
tive Land, Your Life.  New Y ork: W. W. Norton, 1986.
328  BibliographyRieder, John. Colonialism and the Emergence of Science Fiction.  Middle -
town, CT: Wesleyan University Press, 2008.
Riggs, Marlon. “Black Macho Revisited: Reflections of a snap ! Queen.” 
In  Brother to  Brother: New Writings by Black Gay Men , edited by 
Essex Hemphill. Washington, DC: RedBone Press, 1991.
Riley, Boots, dir. Sorry to Bother You . Annapurna Pictures/Focus Fea -
tures/Universal Pictures, 2018.
Rising Tide  People’s Blockade. https:// www . risingtide . org . au / blockade  
-updates .
Roberge, Jonathan, and Michael Castelle. “  T oward an End- to- End So -
ciology of 21st-  Century Machine Learning.” In The Cultural Life of 
Machine Learning: An Incursion into Critical  ai Studies , edited by 
Jonathan Roberge and Michael Castelle, 1–29. London: Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2021.
Roberts, Elizabeth F. S. “Exposure.” In Theorizing the Con  temporary, 
Fieldsights , June 28, 2017 . https://  culanth  . org / fieldsights  /exposure .
Roberts, Elizabeth F. S. “Petri Dish.” Somatosphere , March 31, 2014. 
https:// somatosphere .  com / 2014 / petri -  dish  . html / .
Rockstr öm, Johan,  Will Steffen, Kevin Noone, Åsa Persson, F. Stuart 
Chapin III, Eric Lambin, Timothy M. Lenton, et al. “Planetary 
Bound  aries: Exploring the Safe Operating Space for Humanity.” 
Ecol ogy and Society  14, no. 2 (2009). https:// www .  jstor  . org / stable 
/26268316 .
 Rose, Deborah Bird. “What If the Angel of History  Were a Dog?” Cul-
tural Studies Review  12, no. 1 (2006): 67–78.
Ross, Eric B. The Malthus  Factor: Poverty, Politics and Population in Cap -
i tal ist Development . New Y ork: Zed, 1998.
Rossi, Michael. The Republic of Color: Science, Perception, and the Mak -
ing of Modern Amer  i ca. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
2019.
Rubin, Gayle S. “Thinking Sex: Notes for a Radical Theory of the Poli -
tics of Sexuality.” In The Gay and Lesbian Studies Reader , edited by 
Henry Abelove, Michele Aina Barale, and David M. Halperin. New 
Y ork: Routledge, 1993.
Russell, Legacy. Glitch Feminism: A Manifesto.  New Y ork: V erso, 2020.
Safire, William. “On Language: Crony Capitalism.” New York Times , 
February 1, 1998.
Sagan, Lynn. “On the Origins of Mitosing Cells.” Journal of Theoretical 
Biology  14 (1967): 225–74.
 Bibliography  329Sanabria, Emilia. Plastic Bodies: Sex Hormones and Menstrual Suppression 
in Brazil . Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2016.
Sandoval, Ch éla. “Re-  entering Cyberspace: Sciences of  Resistance.” 
Dispositio/n  19, no. 46 (1994): 75–93.
Sanger, Margaret.  Woman and the New Race.  Scotts V alley, CA: Cre -
ateSpace, 2018.
Schoemaker, Paul. “Multiple Scenario Development: Its Conceptual 
and Behavioral Foundation.” Strategic Management Journal  14, no. 3 
(1993): 193–213.
School of Informatics. “What Is Informatics?” University of Edinburgh. 
Accessed March 10, 2024. https:// www . ed . ac . uk / sites / default / files  
/ atoms / files// what20is20informatics .pdf .
School of Information Sciences. “What Is Informatics?” University of 
Illinois at Urbana-  Champaign. Accessed March 10, 2024. https:// 
informatics .  ischool  . illinois .  edu / home / what  - is - informatics / .
Selyukh, Alina. “Why It’s So Hard to Buy a New Refrigerator  These 
Days.” Hawai ʻi Public Radio, September 22, 2020. https:// www  
. hawaiipublicradio  . org / post / shortage  - new - refrigerators - leaves  
- appliance  - shoppers -  out - cold#stream /0 .
Shanmugaratnam, Tharman. “Inclusive Prosperity: Making It Pos  si-
ble.” Lecture, London School of Economics and  Political Science, 
London, January 30, 2017 .
Sharpe, Christina. In the Wake: On Blackness and Being.  Durham, NC: 
Duke University Press, 2016.
Shepard, Paul. Nature and Madness.  San Francisco: Sierra Club Books, 
1982.
Shinawatra, Thaksin. “Next Generation Asia.” Speech at Fortune Global 
Forum, Hong Kong, May 9, 2001.
Shotwell, Alexis. Against Purity: Living Ethically in Compromised Times.  
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2016.
Skvirsky, Salom é. The  Process Genre: Cinema and the Aesthetic of  Labor.  
Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2020.
Smith, Chris. “The Titanic : A Case Study of Religious and Secular Atti -
tudes in African American Song.” In Saints and Sinners: Religion, Blues 
and (D)evil in African-  American  Music and Lit  er a ture , edited by 
Robert Sacr é, 213–27 . Li ège: Soci été Liégeoise de Musicologie, 1996.
Snead, James A. “On Repetition in Black Culture.” Black American Lit-
er a ture Forum  15, no. 4 (1981): 146–54. https:// doi . org / 10 . 1353 / afa  
. 2017  .0114 .
330  BibliographySobchack, Vivian. “Bathos and Bathysphere: On Submersion, History 
and Longing in Titanic .” In “Titanic”: Anatomy of a Blockbuster , ed-
ited by Kevin Sandler and Gaylyn Studlar, 189–204. New Bruns -
wick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1999.
Solomon, Rivers. An Unkindness of Ghosts.  New Y ork: Akashic Books, 
2 0 1 7.
Song, Jesook. South Koreans in the Debt Crisis: The Creation of a Neo -
liberal Welfare Society.  Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2009.
Sontag, Susan. Illness as  Metaphor and  aids  and Its  Metaphors.  London: 
Picador, 1989.
Starosielski, Nicole. The Undersea Network.  Durham, NC: Duke Uni -
versity Press, 2015.
Stockholm Resilience Centre. “Planetary Bound  aries.” https:// www  
. stockholmresilience .  org / 4  . 1fe8f33123572b59ab80007039 .html .
Stone, Deborah A. The Disabled State.  Philadelphia:  T emple University 
Press, 1984.
Stop lapd  Spying Co  ali tion and  Free Radicals. “The Algorithmic Ecol -
ogy: An Abolitionist T ool for  Organizing against Algorithms.” 
Medium , March 2, 2020. https:// stoplapdspying  . medium  . com / the  
- algorithmic  - ecology  - an - abolitionist  - tool  - for - organizing  - against  
- algorithms -14fcbd0e64d0 .
Suchman, Lucy. “Swords to Ploughshares.” Robot  Futures , January 20, 
2016. https:// robotfutures . wordpress . com / 2016 / 01 / 20 / swords - to 
- ploughshares / .
Sulloway, Frank J. “Darwin and His Finches: The Evolution of a Legend.” 
Journal of the History of Biology  15, no. 1 (1982): 1–53.
Sutela, Jenna. “ I Magma  generative poetry proj  ect.” In Jenna Sutela:  no 
no nse nse , edited by Stephanie Hessler. London: Koenig, 2020.
Syms, Martine. Notes on Gesture . 2015. Video, 10:30.
Szlauderbach, Kent. “Alien and Sedition: Ryan Kuo Interviewed.” 
Bomb , July 18, 2018. https:// bombmagazine . org / articles / alien - and 
- sedition - ryan - kuo  - interviewed / .
Szumer, Zacharias. “Instead of Choking on Smoke, Sydney Workers Are 
Walking off the Job.” Jacobin , December 15, 2019. https:// jacobin  
. com / 2019 / 12 / sydney  - australia  - bushfires - air - smoke  - dockworkers  
-walkouts .
Taffel, Sy. “Data and Oil:  Metaphor, Materiality and Metabolic Rifts.” 
New Media and Society  25, no. 5 (2023). https:// doi  . org / 10 . 1177  
/14614448211017887 .
 Bibliography  331Tai, Hung-  chao, ed. Confucianism and Economic Development: An Orien -
tal Alternative?  Washington, DC: Washington Institute for V alues 
in Public Policy, 1989.
T erranova, Fabrizio, dir. Donna Haraway: Storytelling for Earthly Sur -
vival . Atelier Graphoui, 2017 .
Thompson, Clive. “We Need Software to Help Us Slow Down, Not 
Speed Up.” Wired , August 25, 2018. https:// www . wired  . com / story 
/ software  - to - help  - us - slow -  down - not  - speed - up / .
Thomson, William. “On a Universal T endency in Nature to the Dis -
sipation of Mechanical Energy.” Proceedings of the Royal Society of 
Edinburgh , April 19, 1852.
T oupin, Louise. Le salaire au travail ménager: Chronique d’une lutte 
féministe internationale (1972–1977) . Montreal: Les Éditions du 
remue-  ménage, 2014.
Trump, Donald. “Remarks by President Trump at apec ceo  Summit, 
Da Nang, Vietnam.” November 10, 2017, Washington, DC. Tran -
script, the White  House. https://  trumpwhitehouse . archives  . gov 
/ briefings - statements / remarks - president  - trump  - apec - ceo - summit  
- da - nang -vietnam .
Tsing, Anna Lowenhaupt. The Mushroom at the End of the World: On 
the Possibility of Life in Cap  i tal ist Ruins.  Prince ton, NJ: Prince ton 
University Press, 2015.
Tu Wei-  ming, ed. The Triadic Chord: Confucian Ethics, Industrial East Asia, 
and Max Weber.  Singapore: Institute of East Asian Philosophies, 1991.
Tuck, Eve, and C. Ree. “A Glossary of Hauntings.” In Handbook of Au -
toethnography , edited by T ony E. Adams, Stacy Holman Jones, and 
Carolyn Ellis, 630–58. London: Routledge, 2015.
Turing, A. M. “On Computer Numbers, with an Application to the 
Entscheidungsproblem.” Proceedings of the London Mathematical 
Society  2, no. 42 (1936): 230–65.
Uncertain Commons. Speculate This!  Durham, NC: Duke University 
Press, 2013.
Underdogs. “S.D.I. (a.k.a. Strategic Defense Initiative).” Review. 
Home of the Underdogs. Accessed May 27, 2024. http:// www  
. homeoftheunderdogs .  net / game . php ? name  = S . D .I.
USA  Today . “Hawaii May Be the Happiest State, but It Also Has the 
Highest Food Prices.” March 21, 2019.
US Department of State. A  Free and Open Indo-  Pacific: Advanc -
ing a Shared Vision . November 4, 2019. https://  www  . state  . gov 
332  Bibliography/ wp - content / uploads / 2019 / 11 / Free  - and - Open - Indo  - Pacific  
- 4Nov2019 .pdf .
V aroufakis, Y anis. “Something Remarkable Just Happened This 
 August: How the Pandemic Has Sped Up the Passage to Postcapi -
talism.” Y anis V aroufakis: Thoughts for the Post-2008 World , August 21, 
2020. https:// www . yanisvaroufakis . eu / 2020 / 08 / 21 / something  
- remarkable  - just  - happened - this - august  - how - the  - pandemic  - has 
- sped - up  - the  - passage  - to - postcapitalism - lannan - institute  - virtual  
- talk / .
V asserman, Lucy. “Reducing T oxicity in Large Language Models with 
Perspective api.” Jigsaw  (blog), April 21, 2023. https:// medium  
. com / jigsaw / reducing - toxicity  - in - large  - language  - models - with  
- perspective  - api -c31c39b7a4d7 .
V asserman, Lucy, John Li, C. J. Adams, and Lucas Dixon. “Unintended 
Bias and Identity T erms.” Jigsaw  (blog), October 12, 2021. https://  
medium  . com / jigsaw / unintended - bias - and - names - of - frequently  
- targeted -  groups -8e0b81f80a23 .
V entura, Anya. “Finding the Love Hormone in a Stressed Out World.” Arts 
at mit , March 29, 2021. https:// arts .  mit . edu / jenna  - sutela  - love / .
Vickers, Ben, and Jenna Sutela. “Moving Consciousness around the 
Body.” In Jenna Sutela:  no no nse nse , edited by Stephanie Hes -
sler, 27–40. London: Koenig, 2020.
Vincent, James. “Robot Butlers Operated by Remote Workers Are Com -
ing to Do Y our Chores.” Verge , May 9, 2019. https:// www .  theverge 
. com / 2019 / 5 / 9 / 18538020 / home  - robot  - butler  - telepresence  - ugo  
- mira  - robotics / .
Virilio, Paul, Friedrich Kittler, and John Armitage. “The Information 
Bomb a Conversation.” Angelaki  4, no. 2 (1999): 81–90.
V ora, Kalindi. Life Support: Biocapital and the New History of Outsourced 
 Labor.  Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2015.
Wade, Robert. “The US Role in the Long Asian Crisis of 1990–2000.” 
In The  Political Economy of the East Asian Crisis and Its Aftermath: 
Tigers in Distress , edited by Arvid J. Lukauskas and Francisco L. 
Rivera- Batiz, 195–226. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 2001.
Waitzkin, Howard, and Ida Hellander. “The History and  Future of Neo -
liberal Health Reform: Obamacare and Its  Predecessors.” Interna -
tional Journal of Health  Services  46, no. 4 (2016): 747–66.
Walker, Jeremy, and Melinda Cooper. “Genealogies of Resilience: From 
Systems Ecol  ogy to the  Political Economy of Crisis Adaptation.” 
 Bibliography  333Security Dialogue  42, no. 2 (April 2011): 143–60. https:// doi . org 
/ 10 . 1177 /0967010611399616 .
Wang, Phillip. This Person Does Not Exist.  December 2019. https://  
thispersondoesnotexist  .com .
Wasi, Prawase. Bangkok Post , December 28, 1997 .
Wernimont, Jacqueline. Numbered Lives: Life and Death in Quantum 
Media.  Cambridge, MA: mit  Press, 2018.
West, Jessamyn (@jessamyn). “Trying It with Some Visible/Invisible 
Disabilities. The Man/Woman Division Is Concerning. Https:// T 
. Co / 6zVb8v8b4O  .” Tweet. Twitter , August 26, 2017 . https:// twitter  
. com / jessamyn / status /901476036956782593 .
The White  House. Indo-  Pacific Strategy of the United States . Febru -
ary 2022. https:// www . whitehouse . gov / wp  - content / uploads / 2022  
/ 02 / U  . S .  - Indo  - Pacific - Strategy  .pdf .
The White  House. Pacific Partnership Strategy of the United States . Sep -
tember 2022. https:// www . whitehouse . gov / wp  - content / uploads  
/ 2022 / 09 / Pacific - Partnership  - Strategy  .pdf .
Wiener, Norbert. The  Human Use of  Human Beings: Cybernetics and 
Society.  Rev. ed. 1954. Reprint, Cambridge, MA: Da Capo, 1988.
Williams, Linda. “Melodrama Revisited.” In Refiguring American Film 
Genres: History and Theory , edited by Nick Browne, 42–88. Berke -
ley: University of California Press, 1998.
Williams, Liza K. “The Politics of Paradise: T ourism, Image and Cul -
tural Production in Hawai ʻi.” PhD diss., New Y ork University, 2015.
Wilson, Kalpana. Race, Racism and Development: Interrogating History, 
Discourse and Practice . New Y ork: Zed, 2012.
Winterson, Jeanette. Frankissstein: A Love Story.  London: Jonathan 
Cape, 2019.
World Bank. The East Asian Miracle: Economic Growth and Public Policy.  
New Y ork: Oxford University Press, 1993.
Wright, Katherine. “Place Remembered: Unearthing Hidden Histo -
ries in Armidale Aboriginal Community Garden.” Australian Hu -
manities Review  65 (2019). http:// australianhumanitiesreview .  org 
/ 2019 / 11 / 30 / place  - remembered - unearthing - hidden - histories - in 
- armidale  - aboriginal -  community  - garden / .
Wu, Nina. “A Single Person Earning Less Than $67,500 Now Quali -
fies as ‘Low Income’ in Urban Honolulu.” Star Advertiser , May 28, 
2019. https://  www . staradvertiser  . com  / 2019  / 05 / 28 / hawaii  - news  
/ newswatch / low - income  - threshold - rises - to  - 67500  - in - honolulu / .
334  BibliographyWynter, Sylvia. “Unsettling the Coloniality of Being/Power/Truth/Free -
dom:  T owards the  Human,  After Man, Its Overrepresentation—an 
Argument.” New Centennial Review  3, no. 3 (2003): 257–337 .
Yusoff, Kathryn. A Billion Black Anthropocenes or None.  Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press, 2018.
Contributors
Dalida María Benfield , PhD (Panama/United States/Finland) is an 
artist-  researcher, filmmaker, and theorist. Her practice is focused on 
decolonial feminist rearrangements of the geopolitics of knowledge. 
She is the cofounder and research and program director of the Center 
for Arts, Design, and Social Research (Boston), an international plat -
form for research and  popular education. Her work, often collectively 
produced, includes films and video installations, experimental writing 
and publications, curatorial proj  ects, and activist pedagogical interven -
tions. She has co- initiated numerous autonomous  organizations and 
programs, such as Video Machete (1994–2007), the  Women’s Interna -
tional Information Proj  ect (1998–2002), and the Institute of (im)Pos-
si ble Subjects (2013– pre sent).
Zach Blas  is an artist, filmmaker, and writer whose practice draws out 
the philosophies and imaginaries residing in computational technologies 
and their industries. Working across moving image, computation, instal -
lation, theory, and  performance, Blas has exhibited at venues including 
Vienna Secession, Los Angeles County Museum of Art, kanal — 
Centre Pompidou, Whitney Museum of American Art, Twelfth Berlin 
Biennale for Con  temporary Art, Walker Art Center, Twelfth Gwangju 
Biennale, zkm  Center for Art and Media, and Museo Universitario Arte 
Contemporáneo. In 2021, his artist monograph Unknown Ideals  was 
published by Sternberg Press and Edith- Russ- Haus für Medienkunst. 
Blas is assistant professor of visual studies at the University of T oronto.
Ama Josephine Budge Johnstone  is a British-  Ghanaian speculative 
writer, artist, scholar, and  pleasure activist whose praxis navigates what 
336  Contributorsshe terms Intimate Ecologies  to explore Blackness, aesthetics, and queer, 
 pleasurable, interspecies  futures. Ama’s writing was shortlisted for the 
2023  Future Worlds Prize and the 2021 Arts Foundation Environmental 
Writing Award. She has had essays, short fiction, and art writing pub -
lished and translated internationally. Her video and installation work 
has been exhibited across  Europe and on the traditional lands of the 
Munsee and Muhheaconneok  people. Ama is an associate lecturer at 
Central Saint Martins (University of the Arts London), an mfa  tutor 
at the Sandberg Institute (Amsterdam), a research associate at viad  
(University of Johannesburg), and is completing her PhD at Birkbeck, 
University of London.
micha cárdenas , PhD, mfa , is an artist and associate professor of crit -
ical race and ethnic studies and  performance, play, and design at the 
University of California, Santa Cruz, where she directs the Critical 
Realities Studio. Her debut novel, Atoms Never Touch  (2023), imagines 
trans Latina love crossing multiple quantum realities. Her academic 
monograph Poetic Operations: Trans of Color Art in Digital Media  (Duke 
University Press, 2022) was the cowinner of the Gloria Anzaldúa Book 
Prize in 2022 from the National  Women’s Studies Association.
Amy Sara Carroll ’s books include secession ; fannie  + freddie : The 
Sentimentality of Post-9/11 Pornography , chosen by Claudia Rankine for 
the 2012 Poets Out Loud Prize; and remex :  Toward an Art History of 
the nafta  Era. With other members of Electronic Disturbance Theater 
2.0, she coproduced the Transborder Immigrant Tool  and coauthored 
[({})] The Desert Survival Series / La serie de sobrevivencia del desierto , 
which was published  under a Creative Commons license and widely re -
distributed. Previously she taught at The New School in New Y ork City. 
Currently, she is an associate professor of lit er a ture and literary arts at 
the University of California, San Diego.
Shu Lea Cheang  is an artist and filmmaker who engages in genre-  
bending, gender- hacking art practices. Celebrated as a net art pioneer 
with brandon  (1998–99), the first web art commissioned and collected 
by the Guggenheim Museum, New Y ork, Cheang represented Taiwan at 
the V enice Biennale in 2019 with the mixed- media installation 3 × 3×6. 
Crafting her own genre of Scifi New Queer Cinema, she has made four 
feature films, fresh kill  (1994), I .K .U . (2000), fluid ø (2017), and 
 Contributors  337uki  (2023). In 2024, she received the LG Guggenheim Art and T ech -
nology Award. http:// mauvaiscontact  .info .
Jian Neo Chen  (he/they) is associate professor of queer studies in 
 women’s, gender and sexuality studies at The Ohio State University. 
His research focuses on transgender and queer aesthetics and embod -
ied practices in lit er a ture, visual culture, and territorial ecologies—  and 
their reconstruction of social relations and movements. His first book 
Trans Exploits: Trans of Color Cultures and Technologies in Movement  
(Duke University Press, 2019) was awarded a 2021 Association for 
Asian American Studies Book Award and was a 2020 Lambda Literary 
Award Finalist. Chen is coeditor of the asterisk  book series at Duke 
University Press with Susan Stryker and Eliza Steinbock.
Heather Dewey- Hagborg  is a New Y ork–  based artist and biohacker 
who is interested in art as research and technological critique. Heather 
has shown work internationally at venues including the World Eco -
nomic Forum, the Daejeon Biennale, Guangzhou Triennial, Walker 
Center for Con  temporary Art, Philadelphia Museum of Art, and ps1 
MoMA. Her work is held in public collections of Centre Pompidou, 
Victoria and Albert Museum, and sfmoma , among  others, and has 
been widely discussed in the media, from the New York Times  and the 
bbc  to Artforum  and Wired . Heather has a PhD in electronic arts from 
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.
Ranjodh Singh Dhaliwal  is associate professor of digital humanities, 
artificial intelligence, and media studies at Universität Basel. His cur -
rent book proj  ect, Rendering: A  Political Anatomy of Computation , shows 
how our sociocultural and politico-  economic formulations get crys -
tallized into hardware and software architectures. His award- winning 
research—  spanning media theory, science and technology studies, and 
literary criticism—  can be found in Critical Inquiry , Configurations , 
American Lit  er a ture , and Design Issues , among other venues. He is also 
the coauthor, with Lucy Suchman and Théo Lepage- Richer, of Neural 
Networks  (2023).
Stephanie Dinkins  is a transmedia artist who creates proj  ects that fos -
ter dialogue about race, gender, aging, and our  future histories. Her art 
practice centers emerging technologies, documentary practices, and 
338  Contributorssocial collaboration, working  toward technological ecosystems based 
on care and social equity. In 2023, Dinkins was named one of Time Mag -
azine ’s “100 Most Influential  People in ai” and the inaugural recipient 
of the lg Guggenheim Award for artists working at the intersection of 
art and technology. Dinkins teaches at Stony Brook University, where 
she holds the Kusama Endowed Chair in Art. She exhibits and publicly 
advocates systems of care and generosity internationally.
Ricardo Dominguez  was a cofounding member of Critical Art Ensem -
ble and a cofounder of Electronic Disturbance Theater 1.0, a group who 
developed virtual sit-in technologies in solidarity with the Zapatista 
communities in Chiapas, Mexico, in 1998. His Electronic Disturbance 
Theater 2.0/b.a.n.g. lab proj  ect with Brett Stalbaum, micha cárdenas, 
Amy Sara Carroll, and Elle Mehrmand was the Transborder Immigrant 
T ool, a gps  cell phone safety net tool for the Mexico-  US border and 
winner of the Transnational Communities Award (2008). Dominguez 
is a professor and chair of the Department of Visual Arts at the Univer -
sity of California, San Diego.
Ashley Ferro-  Murray  is the program director for the arts at the Doris 
Duke Foundation. Previously, Ferro-  Murray was the  senior curator of 
theater and dance at the Curtis R. Priem Experimental Media and Per -
forming Arts Center ( empac ) at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. Her 
research has been published most recently in the Drama Review  and 
in collections published by Bloomsbury Press. Ferro-  Murray currently 
serves on the International Presenting Commons and turba : The Jour -
nal for Global Practices in Live Arts Curation  advisory board. She holds 
a PhD from the University of California, Berkeley, in  performance 
studies with a designated emphasis in new media.
Matthew Fuller ’s books include How to Sleep: The Art, Biology and Cul -
ture of Unconsciousness  (2018); How to Be a Geek: Essays on the Culture 
of Software  (2017); with Olga Goriunova, Bleak Joys: Aesthetics of Ecol-
ogy and Impossibility  (2019); and, with Eyal Weizman, Investigative 
Aesthetics: Conflicts and Commons in the Politics of Truth  (2021). He has 
collaborated with Shu Lea Cheang on several proj  ects, including The 
Sleep Series  (2017–  ongoing) and uki  (2023), and is professor of cultural 
studies at Goldsmiths, University of London.
 Contributors  339Jacob Gaboury  is associate professor of film and media at the Univer -
sity of California, Berkeley, specializing in the seventy- year history of 
digital image technologies and their impact on con  temporary visual 
culture. His first book is titled Image Objects: An Archaeology of Com -
puter Graphics  (2021) and explores a prehistory of 3 d graphics and their 
widespread influence on the shape of our lived environment. His work 
has appeared across  popular and academic publications including Grey 
Room , Journal of Visual Culture , Rhizome , and Camera Obscura . He is 
coeditor of the 2023 special issue of Critical Inquiry  titled “Medium/
Environment. ”
Jennifer Gabrys  is chair in media, culture and environment in the De -
partment of Sociology at the University of Cambridge. She leads the 
Planetary Praxis research group and is principal investigator on the 
 European Research Council– funded proj  ect Smart Forests: Transform -
ing Environments into Social- Political T echnologies. Her publications 
include Citizens of Worlds: Open-  Air Toolkits for Environmental Strug -
gle (2022), How to Do  Things with Sensors  (2019), Program Earth: Envi -
ronmental Sensing Technology and the Making of a Computational Planet  
(2016), and Digital Rubbish: A Natu ral History of Electronics  (2011). Her 
work can be found at planetarypraxis . org and jennifergabrys . net.
Alexander R. Galloway  is a writer and computer programmer working 
on issues in philosophy, technology, and theories of mediation. Professor 
of media, culture, and communication at New Y ork University, Galloway 
is author of several books on digital media and critical theory, including 
most recently Uncomputable: Play and Politics in the Long Digital Age  
(2021). For several years he has worked with rsg  on Carnivore, Krieg -
spiel, and other software proj  ects.
Jennifer Mae Hamilton ’s research is on weather, affect, and  house  work. 
Since 2018, she has lived and worked in Anaiwan Country in Australia, 
teaching  English and gender studies at the University of New  England. 
She has an ongoing local collaboration called the Armidale Climate and 
Health Proj  ect. At the time of this publication, she’s writing two books, 
one with Astrida Neimanis called How to Weather Together: Feminist 
Practice for Changing Climates , and the other is a work of autotheory 
called A List of Needs .
340  ContributorsDonna J. Haraway  is distinguished professor emerita in the History of 
Consciousness Department at the University of California, Santa Cruz. 
Attending to the intersection of biology with culture and politics, Har -
away’s work explores the string figures composed by science fact, science 
fiction, speculative feminism, speculative fabulation, science and technol -
ogy studies, and multispecies worlding. She is the author of Staying with 
the Trou  ble: Making Kin in the Chthulucene  (Duke University Press, 2016), 
Manifestly Haraway  (2016), When Species Meet  (2008), The Companion Spe -
cies Manifesto  (2003), The Haraway Reader  (2004), Modest_Witness@Sec -
ond_Millennium  (1997, 2nd ed. 2018), Simians, Cyborgs, and  Women  (1991), 
Primate Visions  (1989), and Crystals, Fabrics, and Fields  (1976, 2004).
Eva Hayward  is a lecturer at the University of New Mexico. She has also 
taught at Utrecht University and the University of Arizona. A Fulbright 
Scholar (Austria), she has held postdoctoral fellowships at Duke Uni -
versity and Uppsala University (Sweden). Her scholarship focuses on 
ecol  ogy, art, and trans and sexuality studies.
Stefan Helmreich  is professor of anthropology at mit  and author of A 
Book of Waves  (Duke University Press, 2023) and Alien Ocean: Anthro -
pological Voyages in Microbial Seas  (2009). His essays have appeared in 
Critical Inquiry , Repre sen  ta tions , American Anthropologist , Cabinet , The 
Wire ,  Women’s Studies Quarterly , and Public Culture .
Kathy High  is an interdisciplinary artist, curator, and scholar. She 
collaborates with scientists and activists, and considers living systems, 
animal sentience, and the ethical dilemmas of biotechnology and med -
ical industries. She is professor in the Department of Arts at Rensselaer 
Polytechnic Institute, Troy, New Y ork, and director of the BioArt and 
T echnology Laboratory in rpi’s Center for Biotechnology and Inter -
disciplinary Studies. She is the coordinator of the community science 
proj  ect nature  Lab with the Sanctuary for  Independent Media. She 
is committed to queer and feminist approaches to diy  science, environ -
mental justice, and collaborative action.
Leon J. Hilton  is assistant professor of theater arts and  performance 
studies at Brown University, where he is also a faculty affiliate with the 
Gender and Sexuality Studies Program and the Science and T echnology 
 Contributors  341Studies Program. He is also the co-  convener of Brown’s Disability Stud -
ies Working Group. His first book, forthcoming from the University of 
Minnesota Press, examines how neurodivergence has been represented, 
sensed, and materialized through  performance. He is a member of the 
editorial collective of the journal Social Text  and is on the advisory board 
of Spectrum Theatre Ensemble, a neurodiverse theater com  pany based 
in Providence, Rhode Island.
Hiʻilei Julia Kawehipuaakahaopulani Hobart  (Kanaka Maoli) is as -
sistant professor of native and Indigenous studies at Y ale University 
and author of Cooling the Tropics: Ice, Indigeneity, and Hawaiian Refresh -
ment  (Duke University Press, 2022). An interdisciplinary scholar, she 
researches and teaches on issues of settler colonialism, environment, 
and Indigenous sovereignty.
Ho Rui An  is an artist and writer working in the intersections of con-
temporary art, cinema,  performance, and theory. Through lectures, essays, 
and films, his research examines the relations between  labor, technology, 
and capital across di ff  er ent systems of governance in a global age. He 
lives and works in Singapore.
Tung- Hui Hu  is a poet and a media theorist. He is the author of five 
books, most recently Digital Lethargy: Dispatches from an Age of Discon -
nection  (2022), A Prehistory of the Cloud  (2015), and Green  houses, Light-
houses  (2013). He was awarded the 2022–23 Rome Prize in Lit er a ture 
from the American Acad  emy in Rome and is an associate professor of 
 English at the University of Michigan.
Caroline A. Jones  is professor at mit , teaching in history, theory, and 
criticism and serving as associate dean of the School of Architecture 
and Planning. Her research focuses on art and its technological modes 
of production, as well as its interfaces with science. Jones’s essays have 
appeared in journals ranging from Artforum  to Critical Inquiry . Her solo 
author and coedited books examine technology and the senses, art and 
neuroscience, and art history and history of science as parallel inqui -
ries. Jones cocurated the 2022–23 exhibition Symbionts: Con  temporary 
Artists and the Biosphere  at the List Visual Arts Center and coedited its 
accompanying publication.
342  ContributorsMelody Jue  is associate professor of  English at the University of Cali -
fornia, Santa Barbara. She is the author of Wild Blue Media: Thinking 
through Seawater  (Duke University Press, 2020) and Coralations  (2025) 
and the coeditor, with Rafico Ruiz, of Saturation: An Elemental Poli -
tics (Duke University Press, 2021). Her recent essays on oceans, science 
fiction, and technology have been published in Grey Room , Configura -
tions , Media +Environment , asap  Journal , Plant Perspectives , Foundry , 
Resilience , and Fieldwork for  Future Ecologies .
Homay King  is professor in the Department of History of Art and Pro -
gram in Film Studies at Bryn Mawr College. She is the author of two 
books, Lost in Translation: Orientalism, Cinema, and the Enigmatic Signi -
fier, and Virtual Memory: Time-  Based Art and the Dream of Digitality . She 
is currently working on a book manuscript titled Go West: A My  thol ogy 
of California’s Silicon V alley .
Larissa Lai  is the author of nine books including The Tiger Flu , Salt 
Fish Girl , and most recently The Lost  Century , and a critical monograph, 
Slanting I, Imagining We . Recipient of the Jim Duggins Novelist’s Prize, 
the Lambda Literary Award, the Astraea Award, and the Other  wise 
Honor Book, she has also been shortlisted for the Association for Cana -
dian and Québec Lit er a tures Gabrielle Roy Prize in Literary Criticism. 
She is currently the Richard Charles Lee Chair of Chinese Canadian 
Studies at the University of T oronto.
Lawrence Lek  is a London-  based artist, filmmaker, and musician 
known for his ongoing series of films, soundtracks, and immersive vir -
tual worlds set within a Sinofuturist cinematic universe. Often featur -
ing interlocking narratives and the recurring figure of the wanderer, his 
work explores the myth of technological pro  gress in an age of artificial 
intelligence and social change. Recent solo exhibitions include nox , 
las  Art Foundation, Berlin (2023); Black Cloud Highway , Sadie Coles 
hq, London (2023); and Post-  Sinofuturism , ZiWu the Bund, Shanghai 
(2022). Soundtrack releases include  Te mple  ost  (Vinyl Factory, 2020) 
and aidol ost  (Hyperdub, 2020). Lek is represented by Sadie Coles 
hq, London.
Esther Leslie  is professor of  political aesthetics at Birkbeck, Univer -
sity of London. Her books include vari ous studies of Walter Benjamin, 
 Contributors  343Hollywood Flatlands: Animation, Critical Theory and the Avant Garde  
(2002); Synthetic Worlds: Nature, Art and the Chemical Industry  (2005); 
Derelicts  (2014); Liquid Crystals: The Science and Art of a Fluid Form  
(2016); and The Rise and Fall of Imperial Chemical Industries: Synthetics, 
Sensism and the Environment  (2023). Work on the biopo  liti cal econ -
omy of dairy, with Melanie Jackson, includes Deeper in the Pyramid  
(2018/2023). Written with Sam Dolbear in 2023, Dissonant Waves: Ernst 
Schoen and Experimental Sound in the Twentieth  Century  is a study of 
antifascist radio pioneer Ernst Schoen.
Alexis Lothian  is associate professor in the Harriet Tubman Depart -
ment of  Women, Gender, and Sexuality Studies at University of  Maryland, 
College Park. Her research centers on speculative fiction, digital media, 
and fan culture and their relationships to gender, race, and disability 
justice. She is the author of Old  Futures: Speculative Fiction and Queer 
Possibility  (2018) and has published in American Quarterly , Feminist 
Studies , Transformative Works and Cultures , International Journal of Cul -
tural Studies , Cinema Journal , and Camera Obscura , among other venues.
Isadora Neves Marques  is a film director, visual artist, and writer. Her 
short films  were awarded numerous prizes, including the Ammodo 
Tiger Short Award at iffr — International Film Festival Rotterdam in 
2022. She was the Portuguese Official Representation— Portugal Pa -
vilion at La Biennale di V enezia in 2022 and was awarded a Pinchuk 
 Future Generation Art Special Prize and the Pre sent  Future Art Prize 
for her art  career. Her artworks and films have been exhibited globally. 
She is cofounder of the film production com  pany Foi Bonita a Festa. She 
is also cofounder of the poetry press Pântano Books, as well as being a 
regular contributor to e- flux Journal  and other magazines and publica -
tions on art and theory.
Radha May  is an artist collective whose work explores forgotten and 
hidden histories, peripheral sites, and their relation to gender, sexu -
ality, and race. Radha May uses tools borrowed from anthropologists, 
historians, and journalists to conduct their research. They work in 
the field, meticulously sifting through historical and social archives, 
making what they find available to anybody; they also distill the ma -
terial into critical and fictional scenarios that complicate assumptions 
about history, borders, and cultural and social formations. Radha May 
344  Contributorsis Elisa Giardina-  Papa, Bathsheba Okwenje, and Nupur Mathur. They 
collaborate and work between New Y ork, Palermo, Kampala, Kigali, 
and New Delhi.
Shaka McGlotten  is professor of media studies and anthropology at 
Purchase College– suny , where they also serve as chair of the gender 
studies program. An anthropologist and artist, their work stages en -
counters between black study, queer theory, media, and art. They have 
written and lectured widely on networked intimacies and messy compu -
tational entanglements as they interface with queer-  of- color lifeworlds. 
They are the author of Dragging: Or, in the Drag of a Queer Life  (2021) 
and Virtual Intimacies: Media, Affect, and Queer Sociality  (2013). They 
are also the coeditor of two edited collections, Black Genders and Sex -
ualities  (with Dána-  ain Davis, 2012) and Zombies and Sexuality  (with 
Steve Jones, 2014).
Mahan Moalemi  is a critic, curator, and doctoral candidate in film and 
visual studies at Harvard University. He is the coeditor of Ethnofuturisms  
(2018), and his writing has appeared in Art in Amer  i ca, Cabinet , e-flux 
Criticism , and Frieze , among other periodicals, anthologies, exhibition 
cata  logs, and artist monographs.
madison moore  is an artist- scholar, dj, and assistant professor of mod -
ern culture and media at Brown University. His first book, Fabulous: 
The Rise of the Beautiful Eccentric  (2018), offers a cultural analy sis of 
fabulousness as a practice of refusal. madison has performed interna -
tionally at a broad range of art institutions and nightclubs, including 
the Kitchen, sfmoma , and the Bemis Center for Con  temporary Arts. 
In February 2023, he guest coedited a special issue of e- flux Journal  on 
Black rave with Mc Ken zie Wark. madison is currently writing a book 
about Black queer nightlife as a method of living.
Astrida Neimanis  (she/they) writes about  water, weather, and bod -
ies at the intersection of feminism and environmental change. Their 
most recent book is Bodies of  Water: Feminist Posthuman Phenome -
nology . They are associate professor and Canada Research Chair of 
feminist environmental humanities at University of British Columbia–  
Okanagan, on unceded Syilx territories, where they are also director 
of the FEELed Lab.
 Contributors  345Bahar Noorizadeh  looks at the relationship between art and capitalism. 
Her research investigates the technological and intellectual histories 
of economics, from cybernetic socialism to neoliberal finance, and ac -
tivist strategies against the financialization of life and the living space, 
asking what redistributive historical justice might look like for the pre -
sent. Noorizadeh is the  founder of Weird Economies, a coauthored and 
socially connected proj  ect that traces economic imaginaries extraordi -
nary to financial arrangements of our time. She is an associate lecturer 
at rca  School of Architecture and a tutor in Geo- Design at the Design 
Acad  emy Eindhoven.
Luciana Parisi  is a professor at the Program in Lit er a ture and Compu -
tational Media Art and Culture at Duke University. She was a member 
of the Cybernetic Culture Research Unit and is currently a cofounding 
member of Critical Computation Bureau. Her research is a philosophi -
cal investigation of technology in culture, aesthetics, and politics. She is 
the author of Abstract Sex: Philosophy, Biotechnology and the Mutations 
of Desire  (2004) and Contagious Architecture: Computation, Aesthetics, 
and Space  (2013). She is completing a monograph on alien epistemolo -
gies and the transformation of logical thinking in ai.
Thao Phan  is a feminist science and technology studies researcher who 
specializes in the study of gender and race in algorithmic culture. Her 
writing appears in journals such as Big Data and Society ; Catalyst: Femi -
nism, Theory, Technoscience ; Science as Culture ; and Cultural Studies . She 
is a lecturer in sociology ( sts) at the Australian National University, 
based on Ngunnawal and Ngambri country.
Ana T eixeira Pinto  is a writer and cultural theorist based in Berlin. 
She is a professor of art theory at the Hochschule für Bildende Künste 
Braunschweig and a theory tutor at the Dutch Art Institute. Her writ -
ings have appeared in publications such as Third Text , Afterall , e- flux 
Journal , Artforum , and Texte zur Kunst . She is the editor of the book 
series On the Antipo  liti cal, published by Sternberg Press, and the author 
of the forthcoming publication Entropy and Chronopo  liti cal Allegory .
Luiza Prado de O. Martins  is an artist and writer. Her work moves 
between installation and sculpture, using  performance and ritual as a 
way of invitation and activation for audiences. Her practice explores 
346  Contributorsanticolonial and more- than- human strategies in relations and knowl -
edge between food, fertility, infrastructures, and technology, and ques -
tions what structures and pro  cesses are needed for collective concerns 
of care. She has exhibited and performed at the Museum of Modern Art 
Warsaw, Haus der Kulturen der Welt, Savvy Con  temporary, and Mu -
seum Ostwall. Her work is part of the collection of the Art Institute of 
Chicago. She is based in Berlin.
Rita Raley  is professor of  English at the University of California, 
Santa Barbara. Her recent collaborative and single-  authored publi -
cations about ai/machine learning have appeared in pmla ; Digital 
Humanities Quarterly ; American Lit  er a ture ; symplokē ; Understanding 
Flusser, Understanding Modernism ; Critical Inquiry Forum ; and Poetics 
 Tod ay . This work has informed her contributions to an ongoing collab -
orative proj  ect on critical machine learning first funded by the Univer -
sity of California Humanities Research Institute.
Patricia Reed  is a theorist, artist, and designer based in Berlin. She 
is co- head of the Critical Inquiry Lab at the Design Acad  emy Eind -
hoven. Recent writings have been published in Navigation beyond Vi -
sion,  Ceremony: Burial of an Undead World , The Unmanned , Model Is 
the Message , The New Normal , and e- flux Journal . She co  wrote the Xe-
nofeminist Manifesto  as Laboria Cuboniks, which was republished by 
V erso in 2018. Reed is an affiliate researcher in the Antikythera program 
and has been awarded an Agent of Change grant from the International 
Architecture Biennale Rotterdam. She is preparing a monograph titled 
Figuring Planetary Space  and a compilation of her essays in Spanish 
translation (forthcoming).
Jennifer Rhee  is associate professor of  English and director of the ai 
 Futures Lab at  Virginia Commonwealth University. Her research focuses 
on artificial intelligence across technology, art, and speculative fiction. 
She is the author of The Robotic Imaginary: The  Human and the Price 
of Dehumanized  Labor  (2018) and coeditor of The Palgrave Handbook 
of Twentieth-  and Twenty-  First  Century Lit  er a ture and Science  (2020) 
as a member of the Triangle Collective. Her research has also been 
published in journals including American Lit  er a ture , Science Fiction 
Studies , Camera Obscura , Configurations , Mosaic , asap , and Postmodern 
Culture , as well as in vari ous edited volumes.
 Contributors  347Bassem Saad  is a writer and artist born in Beirut. Her work explores no -
tions of historical rupture, spontaneity, and surplus through film and vi -
sual art, alongside essays and fiction. Bassem’s work has been presented 
and screened at MoMA, cph :dox , Triangle-  Asterides (Marseille), 
Busan Biennale, Swiss Institute (Rome), Ludwig Forum (Aachen), Cab -
aret V oltaire (  Zurich), and transmediale. Her writing appears in The 
New Inquiry , Protean , Spike Art , Jadaliyya , FailedArchitecture , X-TRA , 
and The Funambulist .
Ashkan Sepahvand  is an artist, writer, and researcher. He was born in 
T ehran, Iran, grew up in Tulsa, Oklahoma, and since 2006 lives and 
works between London and Berlin. His practice takes time. An inter -
est in words and bodies shapes his inquiries. Proj  ects take the form of 
 performances, publications, and regular collaboration with friends. 
T ogether with Natascha Sadr Haghighian, he founded the institute for 
incongruous translation in 2010, a framework for their shared studies. 
He is one half of ssssSssssssss, a study- friendship with Virgil B/G Taylor.
Justin Talplacido Shoulder  is a shape- shifting artist and storyteller, 
working primarily in  performance, sculpture, video, and collective 
events. Also known as Phasmahammer, their practice is an eco-  
cosmology of alter personas based on queered ancestral myth. Creatures 
birthed are embodied through hand-  crafted costumes and prosthesis 
and animated by their own gestural languages. The artist uses their body 
and craft as an instrument of metaphysics  toward a queer Filipinx futur -
ism. Shoulder believes in  performance and shared ceremony as commu -
nal medicine for difficult times. Shoulder’s theater and visual artworks 
have been presented across Australia and internationally, where they 
work between gallery, nightclub, and theater contexts.
Lucy Suchman  is professor emerita of the anthropology of science and 
technology at Lancaster University in the UK. Before taking up that 
post, she was a principal scientist at Xerox’s Palo Alto Research Center 
(parc ), where she spent twenty years as a researcher. Her current re -
search extends her long- standing critical engagement with the fields of 
artificial intelligence and human-  computer interaction to the domain of 
con temporary militarism. She is concerned with the question of whose 
bodies are incorporated into military systems, how and with what con -
sequences for social justice, and the possibility for a less violent world.
348  ContributorsOllie Zhang  researches, writes, edits, curates, and (sometimes!) 
speaks. Their interests include innovative forms of property and 
owner  ship, equitable infrastructure design, emergent governance 
practices, community- led housing, and regenerative agriculture. Cur -
rently, they are researching and developing a new  legal standard for an 
affordable land tenure model. Before, they edited and curated  things 
largely to do with cultural infrastructure for Berlin’s ctm  Festival. They 
are based in London.
absolution, 99, 100 –102
Abya Y ala, 169
academia, 169. See also  pedagogy
accumulation, 9, 153; capital, 185–86, 
274 ; strategy of, 54
actualization, 260 –62
act up  demonstration, 55
adapt , 52
aesthetics and politics, 31n74
affirmative speculation, 29n54
Affordable Care Act, 53–55
 Afghanistan, 197
Afrotopias, 193–94
“Against Population,  towards Alterlife” 
(Murphy), 103
agency, 12–13, 20, 69, 122, 170, 258–62; 
agential cut, 20
ai capitalism, 48–50. See also  informa -
tion capitalism
aidol  爱道  (Lek), 90–98
aids , 1, 55, 59
Akomolafe, Bayo, 105
algorithms, 12–14, 29n49 , 36, 49–50, 
94–95, 141, 147, 182, 195, 227, 242 , 
245–46; algorithmic care, 242 , 
245–46; Algorithmic Ecol ogy, 14
“All Directions at Once” (Martins), 169, 
173
Allen, Amy, 25n19
AlphaGo, 34
Amer i ca, Mark, 23n5
animal- human- machines, 154–56
animals, 80–81, 86–88, 138, 176–78. 
See also  cows; crows; tardigrades; 
vulturesanonymity, 96
antinomianism, 101–2
anti-  Semitism, 207 , 209n9
Anzaldúa, Gloria, 15
apathy, 67–69
application programming interfaces 
(apis), 38–39, 290
Arab Spring, 116
Aristotle, 100
art, 85, 212–16, 220 ; conceptual, 1, 21; 
modern, 24n8 ; organismic, 211–16. 
See also  art history; bioart;  
museum;  performance art;  
visual art
art history, 257, 260
artificial intelligence ( ai), 34–38, 48–
49, 84, 90–97, 129, 139–42, 144 , 
153, 215, 228, 241–48, 272 , 274 , 
276 –80, 290 –91. See also  genera -
tion; generative adversarial net -
work ( gan ); simulation
Artist, American, 21
artistic practice, 27n43 , 169, 178. See also  
art;  performance art; visual art
Asian Tigers, 203–4. See also  capitalism: 
and Asian values; China
Atanasoski, Neda, 272
Atkinson, Ti-  Grace, 15, 31n66
attention, 67–68
augmented real  ity ( ar), 33
authorship, 242 , 259. See also  gen -
eration; generative adversarial 
network
automation, 153, 157, 182–85, 271–72
autopoiesis, 216n5Index
350  IndexAvatar  (Cameron), 64n14
Avilez, GerShun, 254
Barad, Karen, 20
Barthes, Roland, 259
bdsm , 7, 26n23
Beam, Joseph, 249
Beer, Stafford, 115
Beniger, James, 187n8
Benjamin, Ruha, 12
Berardi, Franco “Bifo,” 68
Bergson, Henri, 260 –62
Bernes, Jasper, 115
Bervin, Jen, 228
Biden, Joe, 198
Bier, Jess, 61
bioart, 211–13
biodigital, 153, 155–56
biological determinism, 179, 181
biological function, 264
biological sex, 168
biological weapon, 199
biology, 11, 54, 77–82, 85–86, 154, 
216n4 , 216n5 , 297 ; evolutionary, 
150n1 , 200 , 278; synthetic, 213, 243
birth, 50, 176, 178, 257, 277.
birth control, 170–73, 175n2 . See also  
contraception
Black Atlantic, 60
Black Feminist Thought  (Collins), 8
Black Lives  Matter, 54
“Black Lives  Matter, but to Whom?” 
(Akomolafe), 105
Black Panthers, 116, 190–91
Black Star Line, 60
Black Student  Union, 191
Blas, Zach, 13, 23n5 , 24n13 , 26n24 , 
29n50
Blue  (Jarman), 59
bodies: bodily production, 20, 77–82; 
devaluation of, 244 –45; as ma -
chines, 83–84, 126, 178–79; quan -
tification of, 85–86; vulnerability, 
54;  wholeness of, 176. See also  ani-
mals, disability;  humans
body burdens, 131–35
Bonhomme, Edna, 174
Braidotti, Rosi, 232
Braun, Bruce, 116
Brazil, 137
Brazilian Spring, 282Broken Earth, The  (Jemisin), 43, 45
Brooks, Rodney, 272
brown, adrienne maree, 41, 46
Brown, DeForrest, Jr., 67
Browne, Simone, 21
Buehler, Markus, 211, 211, 216n2
Bush, George W., 21
Busta, Caroline, 68
Butler, Judith, 15
Butler, Octavia, 43, 191–93
Cainthus, 87
Camdessus, Michel, 207
Cameron, James, 57, 64n14
capitalism: and artificial intelligence 
(ai), 48–50; and Asian values, 
203–4, 208n1 ; crises of, 53–54, 
206 ; and the cyborg, 24n11 , 206 ; 
and disability, 54–55; and disaster, 
45; and finance, 123; and gender, 
218–19, 224 , 233; logics of, 9, 41, 45, 
136, 155–56, 205–6; and nonhuman 
 labor, 140 –41, 271, 274 ; and pa -
triarchy, 73; periodization of, 1–3, 
25n17 ; and standardization, 146–47. 
See also  crony capitalism; gig econ -
omy; industrial capitalism; infor -
matics; informatics of domination; 
information capitalism;  labor; late 
capitalism; neoliberalism; platform 
capitalism; racial capitalism; rac -
ism; technocapitalism
cárdenas, micha, 12–13, 29n49 , 46
care, 43, 71, 73–74, 174, 181, 242 , 246 . 
See also  algorithms: algorithmic 
care, health care
Carolina Islands, 197
Carrion  (Shoulder), 176–81
Castells, Manuel, 26n17
Cato Institute, 112
 cattle breeding, 72, 74
cgi, 90–91
“chart of transitions” (Haraway), 2–6, 
10, 13–22, 25n17 , 29n54 , 30n62 , 
30n63 , 172, 193, 289, 295–96.  
See also  charts; informatics of dom -
ination; white cap  i tal ist patriarchy
charts, 1–6, 10, 13–22, 24n8 , 194, 
297 –300 . See also  diagrammatic 
thought; lists
Cheng, Anne, 60
 Index  351China, 197–99. See also aidol  爱道  
(Lek): capitalism: and Asian val -
ues; sinofuturism
chronic illness, 77. See also  disability
Chun, Wendy Hui Kyong, 51, 67, 287n6
circulation, 61–62
cisgender men, 26n20 ; 250
cisgender  women, 25n19
citational practice, 234
citizenship, 226 –27; environmental, 184
civil rights. See rights
Clarke, Bruce, 26n27 , 217n26
class: and capitalism, 204 –6; and dom -
ination, 6, 8; identity, 61–62, 171, 
244 , 250, 292; and  labor, 139–41, 155
climate change, 42–43, 142–43, 178, 183, 
198 233, 237, 273; as crisis, 173–74, 
183, 233
code, 11–13, 26n27 , 27n43 , 27n44 , 
29n49 , 39, 48, 83–85, 153–57, 184, 
227, 241, 264 –65, 282–83; ances -
tral, 247 ; fashion and, 249 ; hand -
kerchief, 12–13; moral, 49; and sex, 
269 ; translation into, 54; world as, 
276 , 278, 280 . See also  computa -
tion; New Jim Code; software
code- switching, 12
coldness, 59, 71–74
Cold War, 57–58, 112, 198, 204 , 233, 285, 
286
Collins, Patricia Hill, 8, 11
colonialism, 5, 71–72, 103, 152, 171, 197–
98, 201; anti- , 233–34; coloniality, 
168–69; neo- , 11; settler, 42–43, 45, 
195. See also  Global South
Combahee River Collective, 191
composting, 235–37
computation, 1, 7–8, 13, 28n44 , 35, 38, 
114–15, 137, 142–43, 146–50, 182–
87; and robotics, 271. See also  code; 
environmental sensing; informatics
computer science, 8, 147. See also  
informatics
consumerism, 88, 174, 203 , 233, 264 –65
content moderators, 137
contraception, 130, 169–73. See also  
birth control
“Contradictions” (Rich), 134
control socie ties, 25n17
Cosmopolis  (DeLillo), 110, 113, 115
Costa, Mariarosa Dalla, 138Council for Inclusive Capitalism, 209n4
counterfeit currency, 39n6
covid -19 pandemic, 41, 71, 89, 113–14, 
152–53, 174, 211, 232, 239n26 , 254 , 
261, 295–96. See also  wet markets
cows, 86–69
Creating a New Civilization  (T offler), 112
Creative Evolution  (Bergson), 260
Crenshaw, Kimberlé, 10–11, 15, 29n49
critical race theory, 10–11. See also  
intersectionality
Cronenberg, David, 110
crony capitalism, 206 , 209n6
Crowe, Steward, 62
crows, 126–29
Cuba, 197
cuckolds, 65–69
currency, 39n6 , 207. See also  money
Customs and Border Patrol, 227
cybernetics, 55, 57, 62, 74, 112, 115, 132, 
137–43, 147, 150, 278, 283; of  labor, 
136–42
Cybersyn, 115
cyborg, 2–3, 6, 24n11 , 74, 164 , 206 , 
226 –31, 233–37, 271, 296 . See also  
feminism
Cyborg Manifesto. See “Manifesto for 
Cyborgs, A” (Haraway)
Daewoo, 203
“Dark Ages” (Nomeansno), 102
dark sousveillance, 21. See also  
surveillance
Darwin, Charles, 146, 150n1 , 200
da Vinci, Leonardo, 258
Davis, Angela, 222
Dawn  (Butler), 191, 193
“Death of the Author, The” (Barthes), 
259
deepfakes, 35–36
Deleuze, Gilles, 23n3 , 25n17 , 29n53 , 69, 
100
DeLillo, Don, 110, 113
demilitarization, 237. See also  
militarization
diagrammatic thought, 2–3, 5–6, 13–15, 
29n53 . See also  charts
die- ins, 52–56
digital, 1, 50, 66, 83–86, 182–88, 276 ; 
media, 136, 284 ; object, 148. See also  
biodigital; digitality; virtuality
352  Indexdigitality, 66, 304n4
Dillon, Grace, 45–46
Dinkins, Stephanie, 241–48
diorama, 218–24
disability, 52–56, 56n8 , 121. See also  
bodies
discipline, 7, 25n17 , 29n53 , 47n10 , 66, 
118, 169, 204 , 207 , 238n7
discourse networks, 25n17
disinformation, 39
dna , 26n27 , 85, 132, 152, 169–70, 
264 –66
domesticity, 71–73, 136, 138, 207 , 219, 
272
domination, 2–11, 23, 25n19 , 26n20 , 
31n66 , 42–43, 58, 64n14 , 118, 123, 
216, 233, 235, 249 –50, 261, 290 –92; 
colonial, 46, 169, 171; patriarchal, 
6–7, 10, 25n19 , 31n66 , 42, 290 .  
See also  informatics of domination; 
matrix of domination; patriarchy; 
power
Dominguez, Ricardo, 1–2, 16, 20, 23n2 , 
23n5
Dostoyevsky, Fyodor, 101
double consciousness, 156
drag, 166, 252
Dream Time Village, 23n5
Du Bois, W. E. B., 14
Dworkin, Andrea, 7
dystopianism, 33
economic planning, 110–11, 114–15
Ehrlich, Paul, 174
Einspahr, Jennifer, 25n19
Electronic Disturbance Theater 2.0, 
226–31
Elwood, Sarah, 13
emasculation, 66
emotional  labor. See  under   labor
endocrinology, 130–33
Eng, David L., 258
entropy, 211, 277 –78, 281n10 , 298–99
environmentalism, 173, 178, 182–83, 
233–37
environmental sensing, 182–87
epigenet  ics, 132
Ethics of Psychoanalysis, The  (Lacan), 
260
eugenics, 45, 103–9, 168, 170–73
exile, 105exploitation, 6, 42–44, 50, 233, 271; 
class, 208 , 274 ; colonial, 154; sex -
ual, 205
exuberance, 252–53
fabulousness, 250 –53, 255
Fanon, Frantz, 224 , 258
fashion, 249 –55
Federici, Silvia, 138, 142, 145n5
feminism: and colonialism, 171; design 
princi ples, 3, 5, 296 ; and diagrams, 
3, 5–6, 14–15, 19–20, 30n59 ; and 
domination, 25n19 ; and envi -
ronmentalism, 232–37, 238n5 ; 
materialist, 138; and revolution, 
66; second wave, 25n19 ; and self-  
interest, 289; and sex, 7; third 
world, 222. See also  cyborg
“Feminism and Science” (Keller), 7
feminist objectivity, 19
feminist science and technology studies, 
2, 6–7, 296 . See also  situated knowl -
edges, feminist objectivity
feminist standpoint theory, 7. See also  
situated knowledges
Fifth Season, The  (Jemisin), 43–45
film, 37–38, 57, 59, 90, 115–16, 150n3 , 
284 –85
Firestone, Shulamith, 15
Fisher, Carrie, 37
Fisher, Mark, 119
Floyd, George, 41, 46, 115
Forestry 4.0, 185–86
Foucault, Michel, 24n8 , 25n17 , 29n53 , 
259
4chan, 66
Fourier, Charles, 65–66
FPInnovations, 185
fragility, 106
Frankissstein  (Winterson), 270
 Free Radicals, 14
 free  will, 260
Freud, Sigmund, 257–58
From Hierarchy to Holarchy  (Sutela),  
214
Fujikane, Candace, 72
function, 146, 150n2
functional specialization, 146–47, 150n2
 Future Shock  (T offler), 111–12
futurity, 190, 277. See also  possibility, 
speculation, Uncertain Commons
 Index  353Gaboury, Jacob, 28n44
Gage, Phineas, 150n1
Gall, Franz Joseph, 146, 150n1
Galloway, Alexander R., 23n5, 25n17 , 
28n44
Galtier, Brigitte, 138
gamification, 84–85
Garvey, Marcus, 60
gender, 3, 86; and citizenship, 227; con -
struction of, 200 , 207 , 257; and 
domination, 6–8, 26n19 ; essential -
ism, 26n19 , 26n20 ; genderqueer 
identities, 258; and governmental 
vio lence, 154; imposition of binary, 
172–73, 218, 223; and  labor, 138–39, 
141, 204 , 207 , 218–19, 274 ; models 
of, 200 , 257;  presentation of, 12, 
250 –55; public judgements of, 62; 
racial gender class wars, 198; and 
racialization, 278, 280 ; transition -
ing, 131
generation, 34–36, 37–39, 139.  
See also  artificial intelligence ( ai); 
simulation
generative adversarial network ( gan ), 
34–38. See also  artificial intelli -
gence ( ai); neural network
Geomancer  (Lek), 90–98
gestural ecol ogy, 178–79
Gibson, William, 25n17
gig economy, 118–19, 140 . See also  capi -
talism;  labor; neoliberalism
Gilbert, Scott, 216n5
Gill, William Booth, 199
Gilmore, Ruth Wilson, 46n9
Gilroy, Paul, 60
glitch feminism, 250
globalization, 25n17 , 71–72, 138–40; de-
globalization, 152
Global North, 140 , 172, 174
Global South, 136–37, 143, 152, 272 , 274 . 
See also  colonialism
“Glossary of Hauntings, A” (Tuck and 
Ree), 104
Google Earth, 57–58
Gorbachev, Mikhail, 112
Goux, Jean-  Joseph, 276 –77
graffiti, 41
graph theory, 16, 18, 30n64 . See also  net -
work science
grassroots  organizing, 46 Great Kings of Africa , 190
Grossman, Rachel, 204
Guam, 197
Guattari, Félix, 23n3
Han, Byung-  Chul, 118, 123
handkerchief codes. See code
Haraway, Donna: 58, 226, 289; and com -
mon language, 11, 27n43 , 28n44 , 
234–35; compound eyes, 5; and 
earthly justice, 236–37; feminist 
methods of, 15; fields of difference, 
235; legacy of, 2–5, 9, 25n17 , 41, 
72, 217n10 , 236, 289; making kin, 
238n6 ; narrative modes of, 41; and 
science fiction, 42; and sympoiesis, 
216n5 . See also  “chart of transi -
tions” (Haraway); cyborg; infor -
matics of domination; “Manifesto 
for Cyborgs, A” (Haraway); Plan -
tationocene, situated knowledges, 
sympoiesis
Harding, Sandra, 7. See also  feminist 
standpoint theory
Hardt, Michael, 25n17
hardware, 9, 138
Hartman, Saidiya, 245 , 253
Hawai‘i, 71–74, 197, 198, 200
Hawaiian flag quilts, 12
Hayek, Friedrich, 110–11, 114
Hayles, N. Katherine, xii, 9, 33n27 , 141, 
279
health care: 12, 53; experiences of, 77–
82; privatization of, 55; routines 
of, 110
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, 257, 
278; Hegelianism, 280
Heidegger, Martin, 102; being- toward-  
death, 260
Hierarchies of Cuckoldry and Bankruptcy, 
The  (Fourier), 65
Higgins, David, 42
Hippocrates, 83
Holling, C. S., 112
Hong Kong, 116, 203–4, 228
Honolulu Advertiser , 73
hooks, bell, 10, 288–89, 290
horizontality, 61
housing, 73, 155, 194; proj ects, 73, 192; 
public, 73; universal, 145
How to Do Nothing  (Odell), 68
354  Index human: and animals, 80–81; bound-
aries of, 44, 49; concept of, 304n7 , 
304n8 ; and cows, 86–87; essence 
of, 102; hybridity of, 304n8 ; and 
 labor, 137–38, 140 –41, 280 ; and 
machines, 39, 50, 273; and nature, 
278; sociality, 45; and subjectivity, 
258. See also  bodies
 human rights, 55
Hunt, Victoria, 179
Hurricane Sandy, 116
Hurston, Zora Neale, 191
hygiene, 122, 123n10
ikea , 146, 148–50
Imarisha, Walidah, 41–43
Immigration and Customs Enforcement 
(ice), 227
imperialism, 196–97, 200 , 292. See also  
neo- imperialism
imposter syndrome, 120
incomputable, 150. See also  uncomputable
Indigenous knowledges, 72, 169, 185–86, 
133, 223, 234
individuality, 95, 131, 267, 284
Indonesia, 203–4, 206 , 207
industrial capitalism, 146–47, 204 .  
See also  capitalism
informatics, 74, 297 –304 ; concept of, 
8–10, 27n43 ; and ecologies, 184–
87; etymology of, 8; and sensing 
technologies, 188n13 . See also  capi -
talism; informatics of domination
informatics of domination, 33, 42, 55, 
60, 187n8 , 227, 228; and code, 11; 
and discipline, 204 ; and  labor, 
48–50, 138–39; 157; relations of, 
154, 289; structure of, 10–11, 22–23, 
289–90, 295–96; theorization of, 
2–5, 6, 15, 27n35 , 27n41 , 248 , 291–
92, 298. See also  capitalism; “chart 
of transitions” (Haraway); domi -
nation; informatics; power; white 
cap i tal ist patriarchy
information, 297. See also  informatics; 
informatics of domination
information capitalism, 3, 153. See also  
capitalism
information overload, 187n8
informed consent, 79, 171
International Monetary Fund ( imf ), 207intersectionality, 8, 10–11, 15, 29n49 .  
See also  matrix of domination
In the Wake  (Sharpe), 60, 61
in vitro fertilization ( ivf), 87, 130
Iran, 198
Irani, Lilly, 273
Iraq, 197
irrationality, 96
iteration, 23, 38, 100. See also  repetition
Jackson, Reginald T., 253, 255
James, Selma, 138
Japan, 197, 198, 203–4
Jarman, Derek, 59
J. Craig V enter Institute, 85
Jemisin, N. K., 43–46, 46n9 , 47n10
Jenner, Edward, 88
Johnson, Jessica Marie, 11–12, 24n8
Jones, Donna V., 280
Jue, Melody, 24n14 , 63n8
Kafer, Alison, 56n8
Kahn, Herman, 285
Kang, Laura, 207
Kapital, Das  (Marx), 136
Kauanui, J. Kēhaulani, 73
Keller, Evelyn Fox, 7, 26n20
Kennedy, T ed, 284
Kittler, Friedrich, 25n17 , 145n11 , 150n3
Klein, Melanie, 258
knowledge(s), 111, 112, 133, 169, 220 , 
243 , 246 ; economies, 119; folk, 219; 
object of, 19, 20; oriented, 24n13 ; 
regimes of, 63n6 ; subject of, 19, 20. 
See also  Indigenous knowledges; 
situated knowledges
Konings, Martijn, 111
Krauss, Rosalind, 24n8
Kuo, Ryan, 67
 labor, 136–45, 145n3 , 155–57, 211–12, 
216n2 ; and ai, 49–50, 289, 294n12 ; 
creative  labor, 119–20; and emo -
tions, 122, 137; gendered division 
of, 204 , 218–19; feminist  labors, 
236; global  labor, 48–49; inden -
tured  labor, 220 ; laboring body, 
54–55;  labor management, 122–23; 
 labor power, 50, 56, 115, 137;  labor 
 unions, 116; navigational 22; re -
productive  labor, 50, 73, 74; and 
 Index  355robotics 25n16, 270 –74. See also  
capitalism; gig economy
Lacan, Jacques, 257, 258, 260 –61
La Mano NegreX, 192
Lamoreaux, Janelle, 133
Lantz, Frank, 144
Laplanche, Jean, 258
Laroche, Joseph, 62
late capitalism, 25n17 , 67, 139–40, 205. 
See also  capitalism
Lee, Bruce, 228–29
Lek, Lawrence, 90–91
libertarianism, 101
Lieberman, Charlotte, 120
Lin, Candace, 213
Linden Lab, 33
link analy sis, 21
lists, 237
literary postmodernism, 42
Lombardi, Mark, 21
London School of Economics, 111
Lucretius, 101
Lugones, María, 223
Mad Max: Fury Road  (Miller), 101
Mafarka the Futurist  (Marinetti), 277 –78
magic realism, 192
Magritte, René, 35
Mahathir Mohamad, 207 , 209n9
Malaysia, 203–4, 206
Malaysia Airlines Flight 370, 63n6
Malcolm X, 222
male consciousness, 7
male supremacy, 25n19
Malthus, Thomas, 174
managerialism, 119
Mandel, Ernest, 25n17
Manifestly Haraway  (Haraway), 15
“Manifesto for Cyborgs, A” (Haraway), 
2–3, 6, 24n11 , 30n62 , 234 , 296 ; and 
disability, 56
Mann, Steve, 21
Maoli, Kanaka, 72
Mapping Abundance for a Planetary 
 Future  (Fujikane), 72
Marcolli, Matilde, 115
Margulis, Lynn, 216, 217n16
Mariana Islands, 197, 199
Marinetti, Filippo T ommaso, 277 –79
Marshall Islands, 197–99
Marx, Karl, 113, 137Matrix, The  (Wachowskis), 33, 36
matrix of domination, 8, 11. See also  
domination; intersectionality
May, Radha, 51
McBean, Sam, 13, 15
McConnell, Mitch, 52
McCormick, Katherine, 171
McHale, Brian, 42
Mead, Margaret, 200
Mechanical Turk, 137, 273–74
Mejias, Ulises Ali, 18
melodrama, 284 –86
memory, 107–8, 133
 mental health, 119, 122
Merry, Sally Engle, 73
meshwork, 213
metaphysics, 60, 99, 101, 102, 154–55, 
276 –78
Micronesia, 197–98
militarism, 24n11 , 233
militarization, 54, 152, 154, 197–99.  
See also  demilitarization; milita -
rism; war
militarized industrial logic, 235
military postindustrial complex, 228
Milne- Edwards, Henri, 83
Minakata Kumagusu, 214
Minakata Mandala  (Sutela), 214
Mind  Children  (Moravec), 279
Min Tanaka, 180
Mira Robotics, 271–72
Mirowski, Philip, 111
Modern art, 24n8
modernity, 42, 72–73, 100 , 120, 132, 133. 
See also  postmodernism
money, 39n6 , 110, 113, 206
Monterey Bay Aquar ium, 59–60
Moravec, Hans, 279
mortality bills, 24n8
Morton, Timothy, 217n6
Muñoz, José Esteban, 258
Murphy, Michelle, 103
museum, 218–24
 music, 93
mutual aid, 69
Narrative Structures  (Lombardi), 21
nature, 168, 174, 278; conceptions of, 
132–33, 150, 232–33, 277 ; domina -
tion of 7; feminization of, 7, 26n20 , 
77; and the market, 111, 113
356  Indexnatureculture, 232–34, 273, 300
Neal, Mark Anthony, 11–12
necropo  liti cal, 74, 153, 160, 227
Negri, Antonio, 25n17
Neimanis, Astrida, 238n8
neoclassical economics, 111
neo- imperialism, 189–90. See also  
imperialism
neoliberalism, 55, 110–11, 114, 118–19, 
122, 233. See also  capitalism; gig 
economy
neoliberal psychopolitics, 118
network, 3, 6, 16, 21, 83–84, 115, 154, 
206 –8, 271; information, 182, 204 –
5, 242 ; of  labor, 289; of relations, 
74, 119; society, 25n17 , 85
network science, 16, 18, 21, 30n64 .  
See also  graph theory
neural network, 34, 154, 291. See also  
generative adversarial network 
(gan )
neurodiversity, 120
New Historicism, 258
New Jim Code, 12, 190. See also  code
New York Times , 120
Nietz sche, Friedrich, 101
9/11, 286
Noble, Safiya, 11–12
noise, 65–69
Nomeansno, 102
North  Korea, 198
nuclear testing, 199
Nyong’o, Tavia, 251
Obama, Barack, 36, 197
Obamacare. See Affordable Care Act
object orientation, 146–51
Occupy Wall Street, 115
ocean, 57–62, 196; Atlantic, 60, 197, 199; 
depth, 57–58; Pacific, 196–201, 
232; smart, 183
Oceania, 197–201
Ochoa, Marcia, 227
Octavia’s Brood  (Imarisha and brown), 
41
Odell, Jenny, 68
Oedipus complex, 257
optimization, 99–100 , 118, 168, 172–73
organismic art, 211–16
Orgs  (Sutela), 213–14
Oxford  English Dictionary , 20Pacific Ocean. See ocean
Paepae o He‘eia, 76n20
Palau, 199
pandemic, 41, 113–14, 152–53, 157, 174, 
239n26 , 261, 295–96
Papua New Guinea, 196, 200
paranodal space, 18
Parisi, Luciana, 28n44
patriarchy, 26n19 , 234 , 288; cispatriar -
chy, 172; heteropatriarchy, 11.  
See also  domination; white cap  i-
tal ist patriarchy; white imperialist 
cap i tal ist patriarchy
patterns, 34, 110–11, 153–55, 260 , 283, 
291; patterning, 49, 216
pedagogy, 189, 191–93, 252, 257–63
Peele, Jordan, 36
 performance art, 176–81, 213–14
periodization, 25n17
Perspective api, 290 –92, 294n12
Philippines, 137, 197, 206
phrenology, 89, 146, 150n1 , 150n2 , 190
physiology, 83–89
Pincus, Gregory, 171
placebo, 78–79
planetary: bound  aries, 183–84; crises, 
184–85, 187n8 ; computation, 143; 
emergency, 152; epoch, 296 ; gov -
ernance, 184, 186, 187n1 ; as praxis, 
186; survival, 153
Plantationocene, 72
platform capitalism, 48, 95
platform economy, 91, 205
poetics, 13, 61; Black feminist, 238; of 
self, 253
police, 55, 88, 191, 254 ; police surveil -
lance, 14; police vio  lence, 41, 52–
54; predictive policing, 14
Politics of Aesthetics, The  (Rancière), 31n74
population, 45, 88, 103, 150n2 , 152–53, 
171, 174, 208
Population  Matters, 174
 populism, 101, 114, 208 , 289
pornography, 7, 35; post- porn, 269
possibility, 3, 22, 23n2 , 29n54 , 228, 241, 
245–46, 248 , 259, 278, 295–96; 
and affective failure, 68; and being, 
224 ; and the end of the world, 41–
42, 45; and optimization, 100 –101
postmodernism, 1–2, 25n17 , 42, 100.  
See also  modernity
 Index  357potentiality, 1–2, 13–15, 23, 41, 46, 259
poverty, 119, 121, 171, 174, 272
power, 1–11, 13–15, 19, 21, 24n8 , 26n19 , 
26n24 , 29n53 , 30n59 , 31n66 , 33–34, 
43–46, 49, 68, 72, 101–2, 168–69, 
184, 197–98, 204 –5, 208 , 212, 216, 
233, 235–36, 238n7 , 240n30 , 244 , 
290 ; biopower, 133, 169; colonial, 
44, 46n9 ; computational, 114; in-
stitutional, 245;  labor, 50, 115, 137; 
patriarchal, 7, 289; relations, 6, 
10, 13, 14–15, 20, 25–26n19, 29n53 ; 
state, 208 ; structures, 4, 169, 232, 
234 , 262 , 289;  will to, 277, 279.  
See also  domination; informatics of 
domination
precarity, 69, 118–20, 141, 155, 157, 244 , 
261, 274 , 283; techno- precarity, 137
prediction, 112, 143, 155, 168, 172, 286
predictive; melody, 94; pattern mining, 
111; policing, 14, 154; scanning, 153; 
simulation, 38
privilege, 19, 46, 69, 118–20, 235, 261, 
274 ; immunoprivilege, 89
procrastination, 118–23
propaganda, 35–36, 143, 295
protest, 52–56, 115–16, 122, 194, 228, 
282–83
protocol, 63, 152–53, 213
Protocol  (Galloway), 25n17
Proust, Marcel, 23n3
psychoanalysis, 257–62
psychopolitics, 118, 123
psychosocial, 37, 131
Puar, Jasbir, 29n49
Puerto Rico, 171, 197, 199
punctum, 53
quality: of life, 265; and optimization, 
100 ; qualitative difference, 37
quantification, 84–87; and anti-  
Blackness, 190
queer, 161; aesthetics, 249 –56; code, 12–
13; computing, 28n44 ; fiction, 42, 
180–81; nature, 214; theory, 233–34
race: and domination, 6–7, 224 , 280 ; 
visibility of, 12; vocal  performances 
of, 155–56. See also  racial capital -
ism; racism; sinofuturism; white -
ness; white supremacyracial capitalism, 10, 41, 72, 156–57, 206 . 
See also  capitalism
racial chain of being, 190, 194
racialization, 60, 64n14 , 204 –6
racial profiling, 170
racism: 62, 188, 192, 220 , 291–92; anti -
racism, 194. See also  imperialism; 
race; white supremacy
Radin, Joanna, 73
Rancière, Jacques, 31n74
Reagan, Ronald, 276 , 284
real, 32–37, 107–8
realism, 42, 180; magic realism, 192; 
neo- surrealist, 212; photorealis -
tic, 148
real  ity, 301–2; augmented, 33; bodily, 
74; lived, 273; virtual, 84
recognition: facial technologies of, 84, 
87–89, 170; pattern, 153, 283; voice, 
270
reconfiguration, 14, 31n14 , 147, 231, 
238n5
Ree, C., 104
Reed, Patricia, 5
Reed College, 191
Rees, Jonathan, 72
refrigeration, 70–74, 75n3
relation: to artificial intelligence, 270 –
75; between terms, 6; differential, 
36;  labor, 144 ; to real  ity, 224 , 301; 
to positionality, 19–20; social, 137
relationality, 9, 16
relational structures, 148
 Renaissance City Proj ect, 208 , 210n13
repetition, 23n3 , 100 , 193. See also  
iteration
replication, 152–58
repre sen  ta tion, 9–10, 33–39, 59, 203 , 
226, 250. See also  simulation
reproduction, 150, 152–58, 168; biologi -
cal, 168, 172; of domination, 3, 42, 
46; social, 206
residence time , 57–64
resilience, 176, 112–13, 194
resilient dispositif , 116
 resistance, 11, 22, 29n53 , 68, 169, 273; 
eradication of, 11–13; Black, 21; 
bodily, 54–56
Rhee, Jennifer, 25n16 , 273
rhizome, 23n3
Rich, Adrienne, 15, 134
358  IndexRiggs, Marlon, 251
rights, 2; civil, 14, 53–54, 288; disability, 
52–56; reproductive, 169; workers’, 
48. See also  social justice, 234 , 273
Roberts, Elizabeth, 131–32
robotics, 6, 18, 270 –75
Rock, John, 171
Roe v. Wade , 169
Ross, Eric, 174
Rothschild, Lynn Forester de, 209n4
Rubin, Gayle S., 7, 26n23
Russell, Legacy, 250
Rus  sia, 198
Sandoval, Chela, 222
Sanger, Margaret, 171, 174
satellites, 182
Saudi Arabia, 227
scarcity, 72, 174
Schuld , 102
science: biological, 216n4 ; cogni -
tive, 154; computer, 8, 147, 151n4 ; 
 human, 150; network, 30n64 ; tech -
no- , 131, 133, 283
science fiction, 41–46, 64n14 , 279
scientific: discourse, 50; knowledge, 111, 
169; management, 204 –10; objec -
tivity, 19, 170; socialism, 114
scientism, 110
sculpture, 21, 213
Second Life, 33
Second Skin  (Cheng), 60
Second- wave feminism, 25, 25–26n19
Sedol, Lee, 34
self, 20, 86, 107, 140 , 249 , 252,  
258–59, 289; - determination,  
258; - expression, 255,  
259; - generating, 55,  
265; - improvement,  
122; - organizing, 154,  
242 ; - perpetuating,  
118; - preservation,  
120; - regulating, 55,  
152; - sovereign, 261–62
sex: and autonomy, 172; and difference, 
200 ; and ge  ne tic engineering, 265–
69; history of sexuality, 24n8 ; lan -
guage of, 66; and liberation, 170; 
theories of, 7, 257; wars, 7–8
sexism, 172, 288, 291
sex role specialization, 168–75sexualization, 204 –5
sexual vio  lence, 103
Shanmugaratnam, Tharman, 209n4
Sharpe, Christina, 60–61
Shinawatra, Thaksin, 208
Shotwell, Alexis, 292
Shoulder, Justin Talplacido, 176–80
Silberman, M. Six, 273
silence, 69
Silicon V alley, 101
Silicon V alley Rising, 274
Silverman, Kaja, 260
Simians, Cyborgs, and  Women  (Haraway), 
15, 19, 30
simulacrum, 33, 36–37. See also  
simulation
simulation, 33–40, 63n12 , 147–48, 203 , 
271; logic of, 150; simulated value, 
123. See also  artificial intelligence 
(ai); generation; real  ity; repre sen-
ta tion; simulacrum; virtuality
Singapore, 203–4
singularity, 38, 279 –80
sinofuturism, 92, 94–95, 98. See also 
aidol  爱道  (Lek); Asian Tigers; 
China
situated knowledges, 7, 19, 27n35 .  
See also  feminist standpoint theory
slave codes, 12, 28n45
slavery, 24n8 , 60, 145n3 , 169, 271–72, 
278; capital and, 153; legacies of, 
220 , 171; and speculative fiction, 
43–46
Slim, Carlos, 112
smallpox, 88. See also  vaccination
smart sensors, 182–83
Smith, Adam, 83
Snead, James, 67
socialism: scientific, 114; planning, 109–
10, 114–15; state, 24
socialist feminism, 3, 296
software, 9, 13, 85, 137. See also  code; 
computer science; hardware
Solomon, Rivers, 107
solutionism, 8–9; ai, 293
Soros, George, 207 , 209n9
Sorry to Bother You  (Riley), 155–57
South  Korea, 203–4, 208
sovereignty, 12, 25n17 , 259–62, 284
Soviet  Union, 111–12, 114–15
spatiality, 1, 21, 303. See also  temporality
 Index  359spectacle, 37, 54, 59, 152, 178–79.  
See also  theatricality
speculation, 110–17; affirmative, 29n54 ; 
ai, 37, 279, 281n13 . See also  predic -
tion, possibility
speculative fiction, 41–47, 77–82, 
103–109, 124–129; 180, 192. See also  
world-  building; possibility
Spencer, Richard, 173
Spillers, Hortense, 191
standardization, 146–47
Star Wars  (Lucas), 37
Stone, Deborah, 54–55
Stop lapd  Spying Co  ali tion, 14
Stranger Visions  (Dewey-  Hagborg), 
170–71
Strategic Defense Initiative ( SDI), 
283–85
strategy: activist, 54, 273; of contain -
ment, 33; development, 204 , 
210n13 ; of domination, 271; of 
emotional  labor management, 
123; Indo- Pacific, 197–98; of 
necropo  liti cal control, 153; opti -
mal ge  ne tic strategies, 168, 172–73; 
self- regulating, 152; strategic 
 withdrawal, 68; of survival, 12, 
252–53; of techno-  capitalist ex -
ploitation, 274 ; viral strategy of 
extraction, 154
stress management, 118–23
structural critique, 26n19
structuralism, 261–62
structure of feeling, 112
students, 191–93, 257–63. See also  
pedagogy
Styles, Harry, 250
style, 249 –56
StyleGAN, 36. See also generative adver -
sarial network ( gan )
super- industrial society, 112
supply chains, 71–72, 189
surface, 57–64
surfing the internet, 63n4
surrogacy, 153, 155–57, 272–73; repro -
ductive, 168, 172
surrogate humanity, 153
surveillance, 7–8, 14, 21, 26n24 , 87, 92, 
169–70, 183, 215. See also  recogni -
tion; dark sousveillance
sustainability, 120, 181, 232, 273Sutela, Jenna, 213–16, 221
symbiontics, 213
symbiosis, 193, 212–17
sympoiesis, 216n5
Syria, 197
tardigrades, 176–81
Taylorism, 147
technocapitalism, 162
 television set, 203
temporality, 1, 14, 302; circular, 155; of 
domestic care, 73; logics, 21; scales, 
42. See also  spatiality
Thailand, 203–4, 206 , 208
theater practice, 179–81. See also  
 performance art
theatricality, 53. See also  spectacle
Thiel, Peter, 228
Third Wave, The  (T offler), 112
third- wave feminism, 25n19
This Person Does Not Exist  (StyleGAN), 
36
Thomson, William, 277
Three Essays on a Theory of Sexuality  
(Freud), 257
Titanic  (Cameron), 57
T offler, Alvin, 111–12
T offler, Heidi, 112
Total Disaster  (Dominguez), 23n5
toxic exposure, 130–35, 288
toxicity, 290 –93
transCoder  (Blas), 13
translatability, 11, 28n44
Trump, Donald, 198, 201n2 , 227
Tsing, Anna, 72
Tuck, Eve, 104
Turing, Alan, 28n44
Turkopticon, 273–74
2008 financial crisis, 113, 209n7
Umbrella Movement, 228
Uncertain Commons, 29n54
uncomputable, 28n44
unconscious, 258, 261
Under ground Railroad, 192, 220
United Nations, 182, 190
unite  here  Local 19, 274
universalism, 147, 257
Universal Paperclips  (Lantz), 144
University of Chicago, 111
University of Edinburgh, 8
360  IndexUniversity of Washington, 9
Unkindness of Ghosts, An  (Solomon),  
106
utopianism, 8–9, 38, 180
vaccination, 73–74, 88, 216, 288
value, 123, 137–38, 155–57, 218–19
V aroufakis, Y anis, 113
Veillance Caliper  (Artist), 21
“V eillance Plane” (Mann), 21
V enezuela, 227
verticality, 1, 61
Vinge, V ernor, 279
Virilio, Paul, 145n11
virtuality, 1–2, 3n3, 23n3 , 33, 49, 57–58, 
84. See also  digital; simulation
Virtual Timeline  (Dominguez), 1–2, 16, 
23n2 , 23n5
virus, 79, 216n1 , 217n15 , 265–69; viral: 
code, 153, 269 ; matching, 268 ; 
posts, 282; regime, 155; recombina -
tion, 266 ; replication, 152; strains, 
88; strategy, 154; variants, 288; vid -
eos, 192, 211; virions, 211–12, 213, 
216n1 . See also  aids ; covid -19 pan -
demic; smallpox; vaccination
visibility, 58–60
visionary fiction, 41–43
visual art, 20–21, 24n8 , 92, 97, 211–17, 
220 , 257–63. See also  art; art his -
tory; film;  performance art
vitalism, 279 –80
Vogue , 251
von Neumann, John, 279
V ora, Kalindi, 272
vultures, 80–82
Wakefield, Stephanie, 116
war, 152, 197, 282–87; as big data, 286 ; 
gaming, 38, 285; protests against, 
54, 282. See also  Cold War, milita -
rism, militarization, war on terror, 
World War I, World War IIwar on terror, 198
Weber, Ruth, 258
Weeks, Kathy, 25n17
wet markets, 124–29
Wet-  on- Wet  (Sutela), 211–12
“What Is an Author?” (Foucault), 259
white cap  i tal ist patriarchy, 6, 10–13, 
27n35 , 27n41 , 289–90, 295; white 
cap i tal ist cis- heteropatriarchy, 199. 
See also  patriarchy; white imperial -
ist cap  i tal ist patriarchy; whiteness; 
white supremacy
white imperialist cap  i tal ist patriarchy, 
288–89, 292. See also  patriarchy; 
white cap  i tal ist patriarchy
whiteness, 8, 64n14 , 67–68, 156, 193, 
228, 276 , 290 . See also  race; racial 
capitalism; racism; white cap  i tal ist 
patriarchy
White Review , 253
White Star Line, 60–62
white supremacy, 10, 62, 173, 194,  
252
Wiener, Norbert, 278, 281n10 , 298
wildfires, 182, 187n1 , 232
Williams, James, 68
Williams, Linda, 284
Williams, Raymond, 112
Winterson, Jeanette, 270
world-  building, 192–93, 295–96, 301.  
See also  possibility; speculative fic -
tion; worlding
worlding, 14, 29n54 , 46n9 , 235. See also  
possibility; speculative fiction; 
world-  building
World War I, 62
World War II, 25n17 , 54–55, 197
Wynter, Sylvia, 154–55, 304nn7–8
Yi, Anicka, 212–13
Zhao Ziyang, 112
zone of indistinction, 119
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
