ATTACK  
OF THE  DIFFICULT  POEMS
ESSAYS AND INVENTIONS
Charles Bernstein
The University of Chicago Press
Chicago and London
CHARLES BERNSTEIN  is the Donald T. Regan Professor of English and 
Comparative Literature at the University of Pennsylvania. Among his forty 
publications are All the Whiskey in Heaven: Selected Poems, and With Strings and Girly Man, the last two published by the University of Chicago Press.  
He cofounded and edits PennSound (http://writing.upenn.edu /pennsound) and the Electronic Poetry Center (http://epc.buffalo.edu).
Acknowledgments: Initial publication of these works (mostly in variant 
versions) is noted alongside individual texts; thanks to the editors and publishers. Conversations with Susan Bee, Felix Bernstein, and Emma Bee Bernstein percolate through these works. Carol Saller’s copyediting was acute and always apt. To Alan Thomas and Randy Petilos of the University of Chicago Press: continuing gratitude. 
The University of Chicago Press, Chicago 60637
The University of Chicago Press, Ltd., London© 2011 by Charles BernsteinAll rights reserved. Published 2011.Printed in the United States of America.
20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11  1 2 3 4 5
isbn-13: 978-0-226-04476-7 (cloth)
isbn-13: 978-0-226-04477-4 (paper)isbn-10: 0-226-04476-9 (cloth)isbn-10: 0-226-04477-7 (paper)
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Bernstein, Charles, 1950–
 Attack of the difﬁcult poems : essays and inventions / Charles Bernstein.
   p. cm.
 isbn-13: 978-0-226-04476-7 isbn-10: 0-226-04476-9 isbn-13: 978-0-226-04477-4 (alk. paper) isbn-10: 0-226-04477-7 (alk. paper)1. Poetry—Explication. 2. Poetry—Appreciation. I. Title.
 pn1042.b 475 2011
 808.1—dc22
 2010044223
a The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements  
of the American National Standard for Information Sciences— Permanence of Paper for Printed Library Materials, ansi z39.48-1992.
In the Middle of the Way
In the middle of the way was a stone
was a stone in the middle of the waywas a stonein the middle of the way was a stone.
Never, me I’ll never forget that that happened
in the life of my oh so wearied retinas.Never, me, I’ll never forget that in the middle of the waywas a stonewas a stone in the middle of the wayin the middle of the way was a stone.
CARLOS DRUMMOND DE ANDRADE (TRANS. CH. B.)
CONTENTS
I
PROFESSING POETICS  1
The Difﬁcult Poem 3
A Blow Is Like an Instrument: The Poetic Imaginary and 
Curricular Practices 7
Against National Poetry Month as Such 27Invention Follies 33Creative Wreading & Aesthetic Judgment 43Wreading, Writing, Wresponding 49Anything Goes 59Our Americas: New Worlds Still in Progress 65The Practice of Poetics 73
II
THE ART OF IMMEMORABILITY  81
Every Which Way but Loose 83The Art of Immemorability 91Making Audio Visible: Poetry’s Coming Digital Presence 107The Bound Listener 121Hearing Voices 123Objectivist Blues: Scoring Speech in Second Wave Modernist 
Poetry and Lyrics 131
III
THE FATE OF THE AESTHETIC  159
McGann Agonist 161Poetry and/or the Sacred 171The Art and Practice of the Ordinary 173Electronic Pies in the Poetry Skies 181
Poetry Plastique: A Verbal Explosion in the Art Factory (with Jay  
Sanders) 187
Speed the Movie or Speed the Brand Name or Aren’t You the  
Kind That Tells 193
Breaking the Translation Curtain: The Homophonic  
Sublime 199
Fraud’s Phantoms: A Brief Yet Unreliable Account of Fighting  
Fraud with Fraud 206
Fulcrum Interview 227
Radical Jewish Culture / Secular Jewish Practice 231
Poetry Scene Investigation: A Conversation with Marjorie  
Perloff 239
Is Art Criticism Fifty Years Behind Poetry? 257Poetry Bailout Will Restore Conﬁdence of Readers 267
IV
RECANTORIUM  269
Recantorium (a bachelor machine, after Duchamp after Kaf ka) 271
“I’m not joking, and if I seem to talk in circles, it just seems that  
way. It all ties together—everything. Geiger and his cute little  
blackmail tricks, Brody and his pictures, Eddie Mars and his rou-lette tables, Canino and the girl Rusty Regan didn’t run away with.  
It all ties together. ”
RAYMOND CHANDLER, THE BIG SLEEP
I
Professing  
Poetics
One of the Fathers, in great severity, called poesy vinum daemonum, 
because it ﬁlleth the imagination; and yet it is but with the shadow of a lie. But it is not the lie that passeth through the mind, but the lie that sinketh in and settleth in it, that doth the hurt.
FRANCIS BACON, “OF TRUTH”
It is a ridiculous demand which England and America make, that you shall speak so that they can understand you. Neither men nor toad-stools grow so. As if that were important, and there were not enough to understand you without them. As if Nature could support but one order of understandings, could not sustain birds as well as quadrupeds, ﬂying as well as creeping things, and hush and whoa, which Bright can under-
stand, were the best English. As if there were safety in stupidity alone. I fear chieﬂy lest my expression may not be extra-vagant  enough, may not 
wander far enough beyond the narrow limits of my daily experience, so as to be adequate to the truth of which I have been convinced.
HENRY DAVID THOREAU, WALDEN
Still, how to bear such loss I deemedThe insistent question for each animate mind,And gazing, to my growing sight there seemedA pale yet positive gleam low down behind
THOMAS HARDY, “GOD’S FUNERAL”
THE DIFFICULT POEM
All of us from time to time encounter a difﬁcult poem. Sometimes it is the 
poem of a friend or family member and sometimes it is a poem we have writ-
ten ourselves.
The difﬁcult poem has created distress for both poets and readers for 
many years. Experts who study difﬁcult poems often tie the modern preva-
lence of this problem with the early years of the last century, when a great deal of social dislocation precipitated the outbreak of 1912, one of the best-
known epidemics of difﬁcult poetry.
But while these experts have offered detailed historical discussions of dif-
ﬁcult poems and while there is a great deal of philosophical speculation and 
psychological theory about difﬁcult poetry, there are few practical guides for handling difﬁcult poetry. What I want to do in this essay is explore some ways to make your experience with the difﬁcult poem more rewarding by exploring some strategies for coping with these poems.
You may be asking yourself, how did I get interested in this topic? Let 
me be frank about my situation. I am the author of, and a frequent reader of, difﬁcult poems. Because of this, I have the strong desire to help other readers and authors with hard-to-read poems. By sharing my experience of 
over thirty years of working with difﬁcult poems, I think I can save you both 
time and heartache. I may even be able to convince you that some of the most difﬁcult poems you encounter can provide very enriching aesthetic experiences—if you understand how to approach them.
But ﬁrst we must address the question—Are you reading a difﬁcult 
poem? How can you tell? Here is a handy checklist of ﬁve key questions that can help you to answer this question:
 1 Do you ﬁnd the poem hard to appreciate?
 2 Do you ﬁnd the poem’s vocabulary and syntax hard to understand?
Harper’s, June 2003.
4 PROFESSING POETICS
 3 Are you often struggling with the poem?
 4 Does the poem make you feel inadequate or stupid as a reader? 5 Is your imagination being affected by the poem?
If you answered any of these questions in the afﬁrmative, you are probably  
dealing with a difﬁcult poem. But if you are still unsure, look for the pres-ence of any of these symptoms: high syntactic, grammatical, or intellec-tual activity level; elevated linguistic intensity; textual irregularities; initial withdrawal (poem not immediately available); poor adaptability (poem un-suitable for use in love letters, memorial commemoration, etc.); sensory overload; or negative mood.
Many readers when they ﬁrst encounter a difﬁcult poem say to them-
selves, “Why me?” The ﬁrst reaction they often have is to think that this is an unusual problem that other readers have not faced. So the ﬁrst step in dealing with the difﬁcult poem is to recognize that this is a common prob-lem that many other readers confront on a daily basis. You are not alone!
The second reaction of many difﬁcult-poem readers is self-blame. They 
ask themselves, “What am I doing to cause this poem to be so difﬁcult?” So the second step in dealing with the difﬁcult poem is to recognize that you are not responsible for the difﬁculty and that there are effective methods for responding to it without getting frustrated or angry.
The writers of difﬁcult poems face the same troubling questions as read-
ers, but for them the questions can be even more agitating. Often a poet will ask himself, if he is man, or herself, if a woman (transgendered individuals also ﬁnd themselves asking these questions): “Why did my poem turn out like this? Why isn’t it completely accessible like the poems of Billy Collins, which never pose any problems for understanding?” Like readers of difﬁ-cult poems, these writers of difﬁcult poems must ﬁrst come to terms with the fact that theirs is a common problem, shared by many other authors. And they must come to terms with the fact that it is not their fault that their poems are harder to understand than Billy Collins’s, but that some poems just turn out that way.
Difﬁcult poems are normal . They are not incoherent, meaningless, or hos-
tile. Well-meaning readers may have suggested that “something must be 
wrong” with the poem. So let’s get a new perspective. “Difﬁcult” is very 
different from abnormal. In today’s climate, with an increasing number of poems being labeled “difﬁcult, ” this is an important distinction to keep in mind.
The Difﬁcult Poem 5
Difﬁcult poems are like this because of their innate makeup.  And that makeup 
is their constructed style . They are not like this because of something you as 
readers have done to them. It’s not your fault.
Difﬁcult poems are hard to read.  Of course, you already know this, but if 
you keep it in mind then you are able to regain your authority as a reader. 
Don’t let the poem intimidate you! Often the difﬁcult poem will pro-voke you, but this may be its way of getting your attention. Sometimes, if you give your full attention to the poem, the provocative behavior will  stop.
Difﬁcult poems are not popular . This is something that any reader or writer 
of difﬁcult poems must face squarely. There are no three ways about it. But just because a poem is not popular doesn’t mean it has no value! Unpopular poems can still have meaningful readings and, after all, may not always be unpopular. Even if the poem never becomes popular, it can still be special to you, the reader. Maybe the poem’s unpopularity will even bring you and the difﬁcult poem closer. After all, your own ability to have an intimate relation with the poem is not affected by the poem’s popularity.
Once you have gotten beyond the blame game—blaming yourself as a 
reader for the difﬁculty or blaming the poem—you can start to focus on the relationship. The difﬁculty you are having with the poem may suggest that there is a problem not with you the reader nor with the poem but with the relation between you and the poem. Working through the issues that arise as part of this relation can be a valuable learning experience. Smoothing 
over difﬁculties is not the solution!  Learning to cope with a difﬁcult reading 
of a poem will often be more fulﬁlling than sweeping difﬁculties under the carpet, only to have the accumulated dust plume up in your face when you ﬁnally get around to cleaning the ﬂoor.
Readers of difﬁcult poems also need to beware of the tendency to ideal-
ize the accessible poem. Keep in mind that a poem may be easy because it is not saying anything. And while this may make for undisturbed reading at ﬁrst, it may mask problems that will turn up later. No poem is ever really difﬁculty-free. Sometimes working out your difﬁculties with the poem is 
the best thing for a long-term aesthetic experience and opens up the pos -
sibilities for many future encounters with the poem.
I hope that this approach to the difﬁcult poem will alleviate the frustra-
tion so many readers feel when challenged by this type of aesthetic experi-ence. Reading poems, like other life experiences, is not always as simple as it may seem to be from the outside, as when we see other readers ﬂipping 
6 PROFESSING POETICS
happily through collections of best-loved verse. Very often this picture of 
readerly bliss is not the whole story; even these now-smiling readers may 
have gone through difﬁcult experiences with poems when they ﬁrst en-
countered them. As my mother would often say, you can’t make bacon and eggs without slaughtering a pig.
A BLOW IS LIKE AN INSTRUMENT:  
THE POETIC IMAGINARY  
AND CURRICULAR PRACTICES
I shall not see—and don’t I know ’em?
A critic lovely as a poem.
DOROTHY PARKER
Recently, I went to a talk by Stanley Cavell at a bookstore in New York City. 
A crowd of perhaps ﬁfty people gathered into the upstairs space of the store to hear the distinguished philosopher talk about Hollywood melodramas of a bygone era. The question period that followed Cavell’s initial presentation was characterized by a mix of erudition and over-the-top enthrallment in these ﬁlms, both by Cavell and the audience members. While I had seen some of the ﬁlms being discussed, I had only the haziest recall of any of the details being pored over by the group as if they were a familiar part of a shared culture of those participating—a culture I also shared with them, but had fallen out of, at least to a degree. Toward the end, someone asked Cavell to talk about Blond Venus,  and in the course of his remarks he noted that 
in the ﬁlm Marlene Dietrich sings in both a gorilla costume and in a white tuxedo; he said one of the questions the ﬁlm raised is whether the Dietrich ﬁgure can appear in these ways and still be taken for a responsible mother. I heard this question as reﬂecting on what Cavell himself was doing: Can you do philosophy in a gorilla suit or a white tuxedo and still be responsible to the profession and to the activity of philosophy (not the same thing)?
An early version of this essay was published in Daedalus 126.4 (Fall 1997), a special issue on 
the academic profession, based on presentations made at a seminar at the American Academy 
of Arts and Sciences. A later version was published in Beyond English, Inc., edited by David 
Downing, Mark Hurlbert, Paula Mathieu (Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook Heinemann, 2002). The essay was adapted for The Poetry and Cultural Studies Reader , edited by Maria  
Damon and Ira Livingston (Champaign-Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2009).
8 PROFESSING POETICS
Stanley Cavell is no guerrilla warrior in the trenches of the canon wars. 
And his suits, while appearing tailored, tend to be blue or gray. Nonetheless, 
what counts for him as an activity of philosophy, at least in this instance, is barely recognizable in terms of the ostensive subject matter of his talk. Because what is philosophical about his project is not the content but his mode of thinking, by which I don’t mean a set of philosophical issues that he applies to a discussion of the subject, but rather an attitude of inquiry, a manner of listening, a mode of recognizing what is signiﬁcant and proceed-ing from there to identifying networks of signiﬁcance. So the answer to the question Can philosophy still be philosophy if it is performed in a guer-rilla suit or a white tuxedo? is that philosophy can be philosophy only if it acknowledges the suits it is wearing and also that these suits are not (only) what are issued to us in central casting but (also) ones that we fashion and refashion ourselves.
There are no core subjects, no core texts in the humanities, and this is 
the grand democratic vista of our mutual endeavor in arts and letters, the source of our greatest anxiety and our greatest possibilities. In literary stud-ies, it is not enough to show what has been done but also what it is possible to do. Artworks are not just monuments of the past but investments in the present, investments we squander with our penurious insistence on taking such works as cultural capital rather than capital expenditure. For the most part, our programs of Great Books amount to little more than lip service to an idea of Culture that is encapsulated into tokens and afﬁxed to curricular charm bracelets to be taken out at parties for display—but never employed in the workings of our present culture. Ideas are dead except in use. And for use you don’t need a preset list of ideas or Great Works: almost any will do if enactment not prescription is the aim.
I often teach works that raise, for many students, some of the most basic 
questions about poetry: What is poetry? How can this work be a poem? How and what does it mean? These are not questions that I always want to talk about nor ones that the works at hand continue to raise for me. What-ever questions I may have of this sort, I have either resolved or put aside as I listen for quite different, much more particular, things. My own familiarity with the poetry I teach puts me at some distance from most students, who are coming to this work for the ﬁrst time. And yet, when I overcome my resistance and engage in the discussion, which I often ﬁnd becomes con-tentious and emotional, I am reminded that when a text is dressed in the costume of poetry, that, in and of itself, is a provocation to consider these 
A Blow Is Like an Instrument 9
basic questions of language, meaning, and art. Inevitably, raising such ques-
tions is one of the uses of the poetry to which I am committed; that is, po-etry marked by its aversion to conformity, to received ideas, to the expected or mandated or regulated form. These aversions and resistances have their history; they are never entirely novel nor free of traditions, including the traditions of the new; that history is nothing less than literary history. But the point of literary history is not just that a selected sequence of works was created nor that they are enduring or great (or deplorable and hideous) nor that they form a part of a cultural fabric of that time or a tradition that  extends to the present. All that is well and good, but aesthetically second-ary. The point, that is, is not ( not just) the transcendental or cultural or his-
torical or ideological or psychoanalytic deduction of a work of art but how that works plays itself out: its performance not (just) its interpretation. But as history is written by the victors, so art (as a matter of professional impera-tives) is taught by the explainers.
It needn’t be so, for we are professors, not deducers: our work is as much 
to promote as to dispel, to generate as much as document. I am not—I know it sounds like I am—professing the virtue of art over the deadness of criti-cism but rather professing the aversion of virtue that is a ﬁrst principle of the arts and an inherent, if generally discredited, possibility for the humani-ties.
I suspect part of the problem may be in the way a certain idea of philoso-
phy as critique, rather than art as practice, has been the model for the best defense of the university. Critique, not as opposed to aesthetics but with-
out aesthetics—that is, the sort of institutionalized critique that dominates the American university—is empty, a shell game of Great Books and Big Methods full of solutions and cultural capital, signifying nothing. That is, Professionalized Critique dogs every school of criticism when as a matter of routine (and perhaps against its most radical impulses), it turns art into  artifact, asking not what it does but what it means; much as its own meth-ods are, and quicker than a wink, turned from tools to artifacts. Like I told the man at the agency, if you want the guy to talk maybe you need to remove your hand from his throat, even if it looks to you like that’s the only thing keeping him upright.
Poetry and the arts are living entities in our culture. It is not enough to 
know the work of a particular moment in history, removed from the context of our contemporary—our public—culture; such knowledge risks being transmitted stillborn. Just as we now insist that literary works need to be 
10 PROFESSING POETICS
read in their sociohistorical context, so we must also insist that they be read 
into the present aesthetic context. So while I lament the lack of cultural and historical information on the part of students, I also lament the often proud illiteracy of contemporary culture on the part of the faculty.
I do not suggest that the (contemporary) practice of poetry should eclipse 
literary history (as, for a time, the contemporary practice of analytic philos-ophy eclipsed the history of philosophy). I do believe, however, that literary history or theory uninformed by the newly emerging forms of poetic prac-tice is as problematic as literary criticism or literary history uninformed by contemporary theoretical or methodological practices. I realize that my insistence on the aesthetic function of poetry and the signiﬁcance for liter-ary studies of contemporary literature has an odd echo with some of the tenets of the New Critics. But I point this out mainly to debunk the dogma that works that “create linguistic difﬁculty and density and therefore make meaning problematic” have remained, or were ever, the center of atten-tion of literary studies from the New Critics until the present, as Catherine Gallagher suggests.
1 As far as English literary studies of this century is con-
cerned, The Waste Land and Ulysses have had to bear most of the weight of 
this claim. But these cease to be difﬁcult texts insofar as they are fetishized as Arnoldian tokens of “bestness, ” a process that replaces their linguistic, aesthetic, and sociohistorical complexity with the very unambiguous status of cultural treasure; in any case, they have not been contemporary texts for well over half a century. Despite the homage, “difﬁcult” or “ambiguous” lit-erature has not, as a rule, meant teaching disorienting or unfamiliar works of literature to college students, and especially not works that challenged the professor’s critical or ideological paradigms or were written in unfamil-iar or disruptive dictions, dialects, or lexicons. Rather it has meant turning a narrow range of designated difﬁculties into puzzles resolvable by check-ing off the boxes on the “Understanding Poetry” worksheet, while reject-ing ways of reading poetry that do not produce “understanding” but rather response, questions, disorientation, interaction, more poems. In fact, if you look at the anthologies of English and American literature that have been used in humanities classes over the past ﬁfty years, you will see that if “dif-ﬁculty” is a criterion at all, it is as likely to be one for the exclusion of a work as for its inclusion; a tendency that has only accelerated in recent years as “accessibility” and moral uplift have taken on both a political and pedagogic 
1. “The History of Literary Criticism, ” in Daedalus 126.1 (Winter 1997), 133–53.
A Blow Is Like an Instrument 11
imperative. In the end, despite their defense of difﬁculty, the New Critics 
were primarily responsible for defanging radical modernism and enthron-ing its milquetoast other, High Antimodernism (a reference to their own work certainly, but also bringing to mind the work they abjured). Moreover, as Gallagher accurately points out, and it is also a point made with synoptic brilliance by Jed Rasula in The American Poetry Wax Museum ,
2 the New Crit-
ics and their heirs actively discounted much of the demotic, folk, vulgar, idiosyncratic, ethnic, erotic, black, “women’s, ” and genre poetry for which their reading methods were inadequate. This is not, I would insist, because this work was not ambiguous or difﬁcult enough, but because it posed the wrong kind of difﬁculties and ambiguities.
The academic profession is not a uniﬁed body but a composite of many 
dissimilar individuals and groups pursuing projects ranging from the val-iantly idiosyncratic to the proscriptively conventional. Most of the popular generalizations about what professors do or don’t do are unsupported by facts; for example, it turns out that, as a whole, professors work very long hours, generally beyond anything required of them. Moreover, there is a disturbing trend to equate classroom hours with work hours, leading to a fundamental misrepresentation of the nature of academic labor. It’s as if you measured the work of a lawyer only by the hours spent in her client’s presence, or the work of a cook by how long it takes to eat his soufﬂé, or the work of a legislator by the number of pages of legislation he or she has written. Yet comparable misrepresentations of the academic profession are having dire consequences, most speciﬁcally in abetting the increase in non-tenured part-time employment that is eroding not only the working condi-tions of the university but also the quality of education that universities can provide.
Misinformation feeds on misinformation, so it is particularly unfortu-
nate that political expediency has encouraged many of those who speak in the name of the university to abandon any vision of the radically democratic role the university can, but too often does not, play in this culture. That is to say, tenure and academic freedom are not primarily valuable because they provide job security to individual faculty members but because they serve the public good. There is no conﬂict between the public interest and full-time tenured employment: short-term cost savings cannot justify the 
2. The American Poetry Wax Museum: Reality Effects 1940–1990 (Urbana, IL: NCTE, 1996).
12 PROFESSING POETICS
long-term economic folly of compromising one of the most substantial in-
tellectual and cultural resources this society has created. The question is not whether our society can afford to maintain the intellectual and cultural space of the university at present levels but whether it can afford not to.
The greatest beneﬁt of the university is not that it trains students for any-
thing in particular, nor that it imbues in them a particular set of ideas, but that it is a place for open-ended research that can just as well lead nowhere as somewhere, that is wasteful and inefﬁcient by short-term socioeconomic standards but practically a steal as a long-term research-and-development investment in democracy, freedom, and creativity—without which we won’t have much of an economic future or the one we have won’t be worth the ﬂesh it’s imprinted on. At its most effective, the university is not oriented toward marketplace discipline and employment training, but rather toward maximizing the capacity for reﬂection and creativity. When it is most fully achieving its potential, university classes are not goal-oriented or preprofes-sional but self-deﬁning and exploratory. Attempts to regulate the university according to market values only pervert what is best and least accountable about these cultural spaces. We cannot make education more efﬁcient with-out making it more deﬁcient.
My plea then is for enriched content, especially aesthetic and conceptual 
content, over a streamlined vocational goal orientation. There is a educa-tional payoff, but it has to do with degrees of intellectual resonance and creativity not measurable (always) in immediate job readiness (for which, as Silicon Valley has shown, college may be unnecessary). Almost everyone agrees there is a practical value in students’ being able to write in conven-tional business English, but minimum standards are notoriously hard to achieve, as even those who emphasize basic skills realize. To create good writers you need to create good readers. There is no shortcut. A correction-oriented expository writing drill might produce barely competent writers (it often doesn’t), but such competence may come at the cost of alienat-ing students from their own language practices (talking and writing and reading). Taking an image from Rousseau’s Émile, if we swaddle the young 
scholar in the strictures of grammatical correctness, we may induce im-mobility while fostering uprightness. And mobility is a practical skill for a “people in transition, ” to use a phrase from Langston Hughes that speaks to our American social space at the beginning of the twenty-ﬁrst century. In correcting a perceived deﬁcit, we must keep in mind that teachers, just as doctors, need to be sure to do no harm.
A Blow Is Like an Instrument 13
Arthur Levine, then president of Teachers College, suggested, at the meet-
ing where I ﬁrst presented this essay, that we imagine our relation to our constituents on the model of a bank’s relation to its depositors.
3 With a 
bank, you deposit something you have already acquired. With education, you are seeking to acquire something you don’t already have. For at its best, education delivers nothing—it enables, animates. That is, the information imparted is embedded in an interaction. Information stripped of this inter-action is largely inert: it is as if you are given the database but not software to use it, or, perhaps more accurately, you are given the data and the software but not tools to question the collection method, reframe the categories, or collect new data. Let the buyer beware: the new “consumer-oriented” edu-cation may be cheap, but it also may not be worth very much.
The university I envision is more imaginary than actual, for everywhere the 
tried and sometimes true pushes out the untried but possible.
Within the academic profession, ﬁghts are often intramural as new dis-
ciplinary and methodological projects threaten older ones, the new and old both claiming to be the victims of unprecedented dogmatism, bad faith, and lack of intellectual or cultural values. In literary studies, these conﬂicts tend to be among three different conceptions of the ﬁeld. One group deﬁnes literary studies in terms of its traditional subject matter, that is, the liter-ary works that have traditionally served as the principal object of study in the ﬁeld. This group maintains relative consensus among its constituents. A second group accepts the idea of the ﬁeld as deﬁned by its subject mat-ter, but proposes a new range of subject matters—from works underrepre-sented in traditional literary study to works that challenge the very idea of the literary. There is consensus among the constituents of this second group on broadening the subject matter of the ﬁeld but necessarily no consensus on exactly what the new subjects should be. A third group consists of those who deﬁne the ﬁeld primarily in terms of a particular method of analysis, critique, or interpretation. There is little consensus among the constituents of this third group, since the approaches adopted are often seen to be mutu-ally exclusive. No doubt many in the profession are sympathetic, to varying degrees, with all three of these conceptions of the ﬁeld. The danger for the academic profession is not that one side or another will “win”—that the new barbarians will become the old boys or the traditionalists will block in-novation. Rather, the problem is the idea that consensus should prevail. The 
3. “How the Academic Profession Is Changing, ” in Daedalus 126.4 (Fall 1997): 6–7.
14 PROFESSING POETICS
manufacturing of consent always involves the devaluing or exclusion of that 
which doesn’t ﬁt the frame. What I value is not temperance but tolerance, for an insistence on temperance can mark an intolerance not only of the intemperate but also of unconventional—or unassimilated—forms of ex-pression. We don’t need to agree—or even converse—so long as we tolerate the possibility of radically different approaches, even to our most cherished ideas of decorum, methodology, rationality, subject matter. The university that I value leaves all of these matters open, undecided—and not just open for debate, but open for multiple practices. The point is not to replace one approach with another but to reorient ourselves toward a kind of inquiry in which there are no ﬁnal solutions, no universally mandated protocols—an orientation that is fundamental to the essays collected in this book. The point is not to administer culture but to participate in it.
In discussions about the state of the university, complaints about “tenured 
radicals” abound. I am more worried about tenured smugness and tenured burnout. While I respect the authority of scholarship, I reject the authori-tativeness of any prescribed set of books, methods, experts, standards. The problem is not that there has been too much reform but that there has hardly been any at all: the content has shifted, but this reﬂects demographic changes more than ideological ones; the structure of authority remains the same. Given the passionate engagement with their research shown by most of the graduate students I know, the often deanimating mandates of per-ceived professional success are the surest symptom of the problem. From the time they enter graduate school, the passions, commitments, and cre-ativity of young scholars are routinely reoriented toward a cynical profes-sional wiliness that emphasizes whom it is opportune to quote or what best ﬁts market prospects rather than what the young scholars are most capable of doing or what best suits their passions or aesthetic proclivities. The pro-fession, both panicked by the market and temperamentally conservative (even in its apparently nonconservative guises) seems bent on shaping young scholars in its own image rather than encouraging the production of new and unexpected images. In these circumstances, professors—some-times unintentionally, sometimes with the best intentions—often seem less inclined to offer themselves as aids to the young scholar’s research than to act as living roadblocks.
While specialization is appropriate for a scholar’s own work—and there 
is nothing more sublime about the university than those obsessive scholars who seems to know everything about a speciﬁc subject, writer, or period—
A Blow Is Like an Instrument 15
specialization is too often projected on students at large, as the same few 
books get taught over and again, while the vast wealth of new books and old books remain “outside my ﬁeld” (why not take a walk on the adjacent ﬁelds from time to time?). The problem may well be that many professors do not feel they have the authority to teach or supervise work in which they do not have expertise. I suppose imagining I have no expertise at all may be my greatest advantage: I can consider teaching or discussing almost anything if a student makes a compelling proposal for its necessity. My subject is con-temporary poetry, but I ﬁnd it stretches from there to almost anywhere—by which I mean to say that whatever time students have in the university, in college or graduate school, should be a time of indiscriminate, prodi-gal, voracious reading and searching: one text must lead directly to the next . 
Against the mandated hypotactic, rationalized logic of conventional syllabi, I suggest we go avagabonding: let our curriculums spin out into paratactic sagas. I propose we focus less on adducing the meaning of a homogenous sequence of works and more on addressing the relation of heterogeneous series of works (Li Po next to Oulipo, “Jabberwocky” with Newton’s Optics). 
Nor is this another appeal to interdisciplinarity, which assumes the con-stituent disciplines that are already established and carefully preserves their distinctness through the process. Indeed, I’ve come to realize that poetry is one of the most infra- or transdisciplinary ﬁelds in the humanities, but this is because—since well before Lucretius—poetry already potentially encom-passes all the disciplines of the humanities.
I realize my approach will not be to everyone’s taste, nor do I wish to 
impose my sensibilities on the academic profession at large. What I ask for is greater tolerance for such approaches in a university that allows for the multiple and even incommensurable not just in its theories but in its practices.
It’s not that I overstate my case; I am making a case for overstatement.
This wild adventure in learning is surely what inspired many of us to make the arts or humanities our calling, yet we lose the passion as we go from this adventure in texts to administering culture by teaspoon. And this is very like what we do when we imagine our graduate programs primarily in terms of vocational training in narrowly predeﬁned ﬁelds, rather than opportunities for open-ended research, centers for the study of the arts, lavish emporiums of further thinking. Does anyone doubt that we deaden the potential of fu-ture research and future teaching with our cramped, vocational/preprofes-sional disciplinary fantasies? And what a travesty, in particular, this training 
16 PROFESSING POETICS
for jobs that do not even exist—though we must all do all we can to reverse 
the pernicious trend toward poorly paid adjunct work in place of full-time, tenured employment. Yet I must disagree with those who, with great pro-bity, advise that we reduce graduate programs to make them conform more precisely to the job market so as to avoid overproduction of PhDs. Rather we should welcome into our graduate programs those whose goal is not to have the same job as their teachers, but who, for a number of reasons, want to take one, two, or ﬁve years, modestly funded in exchange for some teaching, to pursue their studies, in ways they must be primarily responsible to deﬁne.
And what of academic standards? Aren’t these the dikes that protect us from 
the ﬂood of unregulated thought? Or are they like the narrow Chinese shoe that deforms our thinking to ﬁt its image of rigor? When I examine the formats and implied standards for peer-reviewed journals and academic conferences, they suggest to me a preference for a lifeless prose, bloated with the compulsory repetitive explanation of what every other “impor-tant” piece on this subject has said. Of course, many professors will insist that they do not subscribe to this, but the point is not what any one of us does, but the institutional culture we accept. It seems to me that the aca-demic culture of the humanities places more emphasis on learning its ropes, on professional conformity, than it does on any actual research, writing, thinking, or teaching of the people who make up the profession. Indeed, it doesn’t really matter what constitutes this conformity: the distinction being made is in an important sense antipathetic to substance. This is the chief function of anonymous peer review: ensuring not quality or objectivity but compliance.
Anonymous peer reviewing enforces prevalent disciplinary standards, 
especially standards about the tone or manner of an argument, even while permitting the publication of a wide range of ideas— as long as the ideas are 
expressed in the dominant style . While it might seem that anonymous review 
would encourage greater textual freedom, in practice the submission of an anonymous article to multiple anonymous readers ends up favoring work that comes closest to conforming to accepted norms of argument and writ-ing style—indeed such a procedure is one of the best ways to determine what these norms are. Of course, it’s not a big surprise that institutions perpetuate their institutional styles. But perhaps what may make what I am saying sound—to some in the profession—exaggerated is that I ﬁnd it deplorable that the academic profession is, well, too academic. Maybe this is 
because I am more accustomed to a form of cultural exchange and produc-
A Blow Is Like an Instrument 17
tion among poets and through independently produced “small press” books 
and magazines that seems more vital, and more committed to the values often ascribed to the academic profession—that is, more committed to fo-menting imagination than controlling imagination—than is the academic profession itself. The academic profession has a lot to learn from such com-munities of independent artists and scholars. I also feel that the academic profession has an obligation to provide a sanctuary for the arts, especially in a period of devastating defunding of government support for the arts.
What I object to is disciplinarity for the sake of disciplinarity and not in 
the service of inquiry. Too often, the procedures developed by the academic profession to ensure fairness and rigor end up creating a game that rewards routinized learning over risk. Blind peer reviewing, like its cousins stan-dardized testing and evaluation, is certainly an advantage when it comes to discouraging preferential treatment for individuals, but the price it often pays for this is bolstering preferential treatment for the most acceptable types of discourse and fostering the bureaucratization of knowledge pro-duction. Anonymous peer review, like standardized testing and uniform as-sessment, encourages blandness and conformity in the style of presentation and response, leading those whose futures are dependent on such reviews and evaluations to shy away from taking risks with their writing styles or modes of argument or ideas. The policy is to reward the best test-takers but not necessarily the most engaging or culturally signiﬁcant achievements. The result is that academic prose, like the career patterns it reﬂects, tends to avoid animation in favor of caution and to defer exuberance in favor of interminable self-justiﬁcation and self-glossing that are unrelated to the needs of documentation or communication, research or teaching. I am not saying there is no place for anonymous peer reviewing, nor that it should be abolished, but that there is far too much deference given to a system that in trying to eliminate one kind of bias actually institutes another kind. In con-trast, not enough recognition is given to those activities of the members of the academic profession who question the rules of the game, who champion rather than adjudicate, who see universities as places for wild questions and not just the prescribed answers.
Emphasis on conventional testing is antipathetic to an aesthetically charged 
encounter with art. Testing students on their ability to memorize names or dates or on their skill at identifying passages taken out of context encour-ages them to focus on mastering information rather than on reading literary works: the two goals are in opposition.
18 PROFESSING POETICS
The best way I can describe how I teach is by calling it a reading work-
shop, for I am less concerned with analysis or explanation of individual 
poems than with ﬁnding ways to intensify the experience of poetry, of the poetic, through a consideration of how the different styles and structures and forms of contemporary poetry can affect the way we see and under-stand the world. No previous experience with poetry is necessary. More important is a willingness to consider the implausible, to try out alterna-tive ways of thinking, to listen to the way language sounds before trying to ﬁgure out what it means, to lose yourself in a ﬂurry of syllables and regain your bearings in dimensions otherwise imagined as out of reach, to hear how poems work to delight, inform, redress, lament, extol, oppose, renew, rhapsodize, imagine, foment . . .
The stigmatization of the poetic and the aesthetic in writing is a founda-
tional component of the judgment of academic prose, to the detriment of students and teachers alike. As something of a prank, call it empirical re-search, I submitted my essay “What’s Art Got to Do with It: The Subject of  the Humanities in the Age of Cultural Studies, ” which was written as the  keynote speech for the annual convention of the Northeast Modern Lan-guage Association (and subsequently collected in My Way: Speeches and 
Poems),
4 to PMLA, since I was aware that the ﬂagship publication of the 
profession welcomes talk about poetic function as long as it doesn’t involve actively engaging in poetic acts. That is, I was aware that the publication committees of PMLA  might support some of what I say “in theory” but 
never in practice, never as a writing practice. I mention this not because PMLA  is an important place of publication for a poet or essayist, but because 
its attitudes set a tone of conformism and hypocrisy that governs the profes-sion and sharply delimits the possibilities for the writing styles of graduate students and untenured faculty—that is, the groups most likely to do inno-vative work. And the reason for this is that the accrediting and legitimating function of the literary academy rests not on a particular subject matter or political view or methodology but rather on the control of the means of expression. In short, legitimation lies in the control over the means of representation.
4. “What’s Art Got to Do with It” was published in American Literary History and anthologized 
in The American Literary History Reader , edited by Gordon Hutner (New York: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 1995) and in Beauty and the Critic: Aesthetics in an Age of Cultural Studies, edited by 
James Soderholm (Birmingham: University of Alabama Press, 1997). I collected the essay in 
My Way: Speeches and Poems (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999).
A Blow Is Like an Instrument 19
Consider, for a start, PMLA’s statement on the form for readers’ reports 
that submissions are to be evaluated for “importance of the subject, origi-
nality of thought, accuracy of the facts, clarity and readability of style . . . ”  Readability of style? PMLA? Compared to what? Importance of subject? 
That phrase is expected to be understood only in the narrowest professional sense; that is, in terms of the concerns of specialization and scholarly detail that in most other contexts would argue against the “importance of the sub-ject” of most PMLA articles but should not, I would argue, undermine their 
legitimate place in this publication. For the PMLA of the 1990s to hold onto 
“originality” as a criterion, given the decisive eroding of that concept in articles it has sponsored, suggests the problem to which my irritable charge of “hypocrisy” gives vent. I suppose I am naïve enough to believe that bad faith does not have to be mandated. So the “clarity” of which the editorial policy statement speaks becomes, in this context, an entirely disciplinary affair, an empty marker of legitimation that confers value on outmoded and indefensible principles of writing.
Both PMLA readers rejected my essay—and I suspect that few of you who 
have gotten this far in this essay will wonder why. One rejection, anony-mous, says that the essay “is provocative” but “not appropriate for PMLA. I 
would suggest the author rewrite it—tightening it up, clarifying the argu-ment—for submission elsewhere. ” The essay should be rejected because it (1) “lacks focus, ” (2) has an “inconsistency of tone, ” (3) “is disjointed, loose, in need of revision to make it more ‘punchy.’ The reader wonders at times what the point is. ” And (4) “Many readers will consider self-indulgent the author’s reference to writing his essay ‘lying down on the couch, the pad propped up by my knee.’ ” (As I write this coda I am standing upside down 
ﬂoating over Manhattan in a helium balloon.) The referee goes on: “The au-
thor makes intriguing assertions, with sweeping generalizations, which he or she does not support with any evidence. In order to convince the reader that he or she is not simply expressing eccentric opinions on literary mat-ters, the author ought to explain in greater depth the reason for which he or she has come to a particular conclusion. ”—But I am expressing eccentric 
opinions on literary matters, without PMLA ’s brand of “clarity” and “evi-
dence”: eccentric, indulgent, disjointed, loose, inconsistent—and proud. But evidently not punch-drunk: though I do wonder what articles in recent PMLAs the professor ﬁnds stylistically “punchy”? While it is easy to poke fun at this sort of Elements of Style  fundamentalism, such a constrained approach 
to reading has dire effects in the classroom, where it alienates students from writing and reading. That is something our culture cannot afford.
20 PROFESSING POETICS
The other rejection, signed by Richard Ohmann, a prominent progres-
sive whose critical work on the English profession I admire, makes a witty 
reply suggesting that it’s not so much that the essay is “not recommended for PMLA ” but that “ PMLA  not recommended for this essay. ” (I quote Profes-
sor Ohmann with his permission.) Still, Ohmann thinks I am being unfair to cultural studies, which may be true, but fails to register that the essay subsumes cultural studies in a much broader polemic in which many indi-vidual practitioners of cultural studies come out ahead. Indeed, I imagine my poetry and essays are themselves forms of cultural studies. Ultimately, the reviewer, famous for his own sharp and useful critiques of the academy in decades past, feels that my essay falls outside “the academic humanities” since it doesn’t “refer speciﬁcally to texts, generalize about them, construct an historical framework of analysis, all that academic stuff. ” He concludes, “I don’t think the author wants to write this kind of article. I’d go for the aphorism and provocations and some other venue. ” I feel like a dance-hall performer in Gunsmoke  being thrown out of town by Marshal Dillon. 
“That may be awright for Paree or SoHo, but we don’t cotton to that around here. ”—“But, Marshal, I have as much right to be in this territory as you and so maybe I just won’t mosey along!”
In contrast to the sciences, in the humanities we shrink from teaching dif-
ﬁcult or hard-to-grasp material in a desperate, self-defeating effort to make literature and art accessible. From an educational point of view, it might be better to insist that what is inaccessible or impossible to grasp is exactly what needs to be taught in our schools. This is why I feel that, with all the attention to radical changes in the humanities, we have not changed nearly enough. The focus on teaching representative and expressive works, where representation and expression are understood in an almost entirely unrelated sense, marks a continuity from 1890s to the 1990s. If the earlier 
phase of humanism marked literature as expressive of mankind, the new 
humanism of identity politics condemns the universalization but adopts the underlying structure: literary works are expressive or representative not of mankind but particular subsets of human beings (by means of which their basic humanity shines forth). The almost total absence of poetry from primary and secondary school curriculums certainly suggests the problem. Light ﬁction seems to be the best vehicle for the new humanism, and if poetry comes into the picture at all it is almost surely going to be sincere, sentimental, instructive, and uplifting. This entails reading poetry not for its aesthetic values, which is to say as aesthetic construction, but as moral 
A Blow Is Like an Instrument 21
sentiment; or else recognizing that as moral discourse poetry will often 
seem inaccessible, immoral, without values, decadent.
Moreover, I can’t help but feel that the unwillingness to teach difﬁcult or 
challenging or unconventional work is based less on good intentions than on condescension: the false belief that students are not smart enough to understand anything other than the most artless art. (Just between you and me, it turns out that lots of students get enthusiastic about much of the poetry that most high school and college English teachers have long since redlined, but are bored to tears by the poetry of uplift foisted on them.)
shorty petterstein interview (Henry Jacobs and Woodrow Leafer)
How would you compare the kind of music you play with a, how would you com-
pare that with art, you know, what kind of art, artistic . . . ?
Man like I think Art blows the most, I mean, uh, he came with the band 
about three years ago, man, dig, and, uh, like, he was a real uh you know small town cat—and I mean he was swinging, man, but he was a small time cat. And I mean he started to blow with us and he was a real nut, you know, cool. . . .
What would you advise the young artist, the young musician, to do? Would 
you advise him to get an academic education or strive immediately for self- expression?
Well, man, I mean, I’m a musician, dig. And I mean to me the most impor-
tant thing is that you should blow, you know. . . . If a cat wants to blow and he wants to blow, and uh then he’s got to have a scene where he can blow.
That would apply to the artists playing horns and wind instruments—they would 
have to blow. What about those, for example, who are playing string instruments? Or would you say, how’s the picture there?
Well, I mean, you know, it’s, uh, pretty much all the same, man. A blow is 
like an instrument, you know.
5
5. My transcription from Howls, Raps & Roars: Recordings from the San Francisco Poetry Renais-
sance (Berkeley: Fantasy Records 4FCD-4410–2, 1993), disc 1; produced by Bill Belmont, 
compiled by Ann Charters. Originally released as Henry Jacobs & Woody Leafer, “Two Inter-views” (Fantasy EP 4051, 1955) and later on Interviews of Our Times (Fantasy F-7001, 1958). 
22 PROFESSING POETICS
The arts and sciences of this century have shown that deductive methods of 
argument—narrow rationalizing—hardly exhaust the full capacity of rea-son. Induction and discontinuity are slighted only at the cost of slighting reason itself. There is no evidence that the conventional expository prose that is the ubiquitous output of the academic profession produces more insights or better research than nonexpository modes. There is no evidence that a tone of austere probity rather than tones that are ironic or raucous furthers the value of teaching or inquiry. It may be true that standard aca-demic prose permits dissident ideas, but ideas mean little if not embodied in material practices, and, for those in the academic profession, writing is one of the most fundamental of such practices. Writing is never neutral, never an objective mechanism for the delivery of facts. Therefore the re-pression of writing practices is a form of suppressing dissidence—even if it is dissidence, I would add, for the sake of dissidence.
So while my attitude to the academic profession is highly critical, I want 
to insist that one of the primary values such a profession can have results from its constituents challenging authority, questioning conventional rhe-torical forms, and remaining restless and quarrelsome and unsatisﬁed, es-pecially with the bureaucratizing of knowledge that is the inertial force that pulls us together as a profession. Which is to say: The profession is best when it professionalizes least.  As negative as I am about the rhetorical rigidity of 
the academic profession, comparison with journalism, corporate commu-nications, or technical writing will show that these other professions police writing styles far more completely than the academic profession. That is why it is vital to raise these issues about rhetorical and pedagogic practices: because universities remain among the few cultural spaces in the United States in which there is at least a potential for critical discourse, for viola-tion of norms and standards and protocols, in which a horizon of poetics remains possible.
At the SUNY-Buffalo, I am the director of the Poetics Program, cofounded 
in 1991 by Robert Creeley (our ﬁrst director), Susan Howe, Raymond Feder-man, Dennis Tedlock, and myself.
6 The program has its roots in the forma-
6. I came to Buffalo as Butler Chair visiting professor in the fall  of 1989; Susan Howe had 
been Butler Chair the year before. I had scant teaching experience. I ﬁrst taught in the winter 
quarter of 1987 at the University of California–San Diego’s writing program. In the sum -
mer of 1988, I taught my ﬁrst literature class at Queens College. I also had taught a class in Princeton’s Creative Writing Program for two semesters (spring 1989 and spring 1990). I was 
A Blow Is Like an Instrument 23
tion of the English Department at Buffalo in the early 1960s by Albert Cook. 
Cook had the idea that you could hire literary artists to teach not creative writing but literature classes, and in particular literature classes in a PhD program. It was with this in mind that he hired Creeley, Charles Olson, and others; it marked a decisively other path from far more prevalent graduate (usually MA and MFA) “creative writing” programs that emerged at the same time.
By formalizing this concept in the early nineties, shortly after Howe and 
I came to UB, we were suggesting an alternative model for poets teaching in graduate, but also undergraduate, programs. The Poetics faculty teaches in the English Department’s doctoral program, supervising orals and directing scholarly/critical dissertations, even if our license to this is more poetic than formal. A frequent question I get from students applying to the program is whether they can write a creative dissertation. I always do a double take: “I hope it will be creative, but it can’t be a collection of poems or a novel. ” For the fact is that Poetics students have the same requirements as all other graduate students and are admitted by the same departmental committee. And while we encourage active questioning of the conventions of critical and scholarly writing, we remain committed to the practice of poetics as something distinct from, even though intersecting with, the practice of poetry. The implications of this perspective are perhaps more pragmatic, not to say programmatic, than theoretical: while the “creative writing” ap-proach at universities often debunks the signiﬁcance of critical reﬂection, sometimes pitting creativity against conceptual thinking, the Poetics Pro-gram insists that scholarship, historical research, and critical writing are at the core of graduate education.
This is not to say that a PhD program is appropriate for most poets. I 
tend to discourage people who ask my advice from pursuing this degree at any institution, partly to ensure that they have considered the limitations of the academic environment in terms of artistic freedom, compensation, and 
appointed David Gray Professor of Poetry and Letters in the fall of 1990 (Creeley had been 
the ﬁrst Gray Chair, but had been promoted to the Capen Chair a couple of years earlier). We hired Susan Howe and she came back to Buffalo in the fall of 1991. In Buffalo that ﬁrst year, Bob and I cooked up the idea for the Poetics Program, though Bob had wanted to secede from the English Department and move to the Center for the Arts then under construction. I argued that we should use the administrative support of the English degree and have our students receive the more generic English PhD. In 2003, I was appointed Donald T. Regan Professor of English at the University of Pennsylvania.
24 PROFESSING POETICS
future employment. But if this is the choice they make, it is likely because 
they want to be teachers, editors, and writers and because their writing is as likely to be criticism or poetics as poetry.
The Poetics Program is fully integrated into the English Department, 
presenting seminars and sponsoring events within that context, even while marking such offerings as our own. We also provide modest funding to stu-dents to publish magazines and books (print and electronic) as well as to organize their own poetry readings, talks series, and conferences: over the past decade, this has resulted in dozens of magazines, scores of books, and numerous visitors, not to mention our website, the Electronic Poetry Cen-ter, created by Loss Pequeño Glazier (http://epc.buffalo.edu).
While many doctoral programs in English expect students to choose  
between being poets and scholars, we suggest that the one activity may en-hance the other, for those so inclined. The poets, as I’ve suggested, do their poetry and their editing on their own: it informs their graduate work but is never the explicit content of it. And, equally signiﬁcant, the Poetics gradu-ate students form a vital community among themselves, where their shared interest in criticism and scholarship, editing and publishing, poetry writing, and teaching makes for an active bond. As it turns out, this mix seems to produce PhDs who are eager and well qualiﬁed to teach literature as well as writing.
The status of dialect, or nonstandard English, is another politically charged 
issue for the academic profession. Indeed, the issues raised by the contro-versies that rage around standardized language go to the heart of the ideol-ogy of education and the kinds of language practices sanctioned by the aca-demic profession. At the same time, the controversy illustrates the either/or thinking that, as I have suggested, also plagues discussions of issues such as the core curriculum, academic standards, and objectivity.
In the most visible form of the conﬂict, black English is reviled by the 
conservative mainstream as deformed English and celebrated by Afrocen-trics as the mother tongue. What’s sanctiﬁed as ordinary for one group is derided as spurious by the other. The very ordinariness of black English is what makes it seem of self-evident value to its speakers, and rightly so, but this ordinariness is a red herring to conservatives because it is not ordinary to them. The problem is that there is no one ordinary language, but many ordinary languages. All language are social constructions—black English as much as standard English. In this case, there is paradoxical conﬂict between 
A Blow Is Like an Instrument 25
the ordinary and the conventional, between the dialect and the standard, 
between the normal and the spoken, between the intelligible and the ver-nacular. It’s the ordinary versus the really ordinary. Conventional, standard English derives its authority from being perceived as the normal, the intel-ligible, and also the transparent. “It must be ordinary ’cause it’s what I un-derstand. ” Dialect, however, casts the conventional or standard as artiﬁcial or other or learned or imposed—“it’s not my ordinary”—while sometimes claiming to be authentic or natural or spoken.
In this situation, the academic profession ﬁnds itself caught in a double 
bind that turns it against itself, for authenticity and normalcy both mis-conceive the dynamic and essentially rhetorical or trop(e)ical social fact of language. Black English is just as rich a language as standard English, just as valid (all languages are equally valid). The point is not to go from fetishizing (or naturalizing) the standard to fetishizing (or naturalizing) the authentic, but to acknowledge the multiple possibilities, and different social valances, of language. And to recognize that the ordinary lies not in any one type of language but in the between.
The most salient values of the university are reﬂected by the fact that it 
is the largest and most vibrant noncommercial quasi-public space in the United States. As others in this collection note, this is changing as uni-versities are increasingly governed on output-driven consumer-oriented business principles. Yet at its best, education delivers nothing—it enables, animates. That is, the value imparted is embedded in an interaction not measurable by output alone. The bright ideas of managers and politicians to adopt commercial decision making on campus are almost always an ero-sion of the immutable value of the institution, destructive beyond measure. To put it more bluntly, we must move beyond what the editors of Beyond 
English provocatively call “English, Inc. ”
Yet, it is no longer taken for granted that immersion in the literature, art, 
and philosophy of the past and present has any practical beneﬁt for society, and this too often has had the perverse effect of making those who would believe otherwise respond with a narrow, and often shrill, insistence on the necessity of one list or other of treasured or representative works that must be taught (since we can’t ensure that they will be read or understood). The boat is sinking and we spend our time debating which pieces of furniture ought to go into the main dining room—instead of ﬁxing the leaks. But, the value of the noncommercial space of the university is independent of any 
26 PROFESSING POETICS
particular work or method, no matter how much any one of us loves the 
works or methods we have chosen to profess. For the values taught are read-ing values: critical thinking, reﬂection, social and bibliographic contexts of meaning, the relation of forms, styles, dictions, and genres in determining what any work has to say. While distance learning and large lecture classes are efﬁcient on cost-per-student terms, for most students, who come out of media-intense but breathtakingly narrow cultural conﬁnes, they are ineffec-tive. Teaching in our culture at this time is more than ever a labor-intensive activity. It requires prolonged engagement with individual students: gauging their reactions and responding to each one, individually. The answer is never in the technology—audiovisuals, web connections, books included—but how we learn to use these technologies.
My commitment is to public education: the education of the public at 
large and an education about the public, how it is constituted. Yet we are writing off our large public institutions of learning with the cynical as-sumption that graduates of such colleges have no practical need for the sort of open-ended education in the arts and sciences that most of us in the humanities support. “I never learned anything in college so why should they. ” Indeed, from a corporate point of view, having too many people in the workforce who think too much may be detrimental if they ﬁnd themselves in dead-end jobs that require little thought. Such ideas are fundamentally antidemocratic of course; they are a breeding ground for a passive and mal-
informed citizenry that is unable to make sense of the complex issues that 
confront the nation. What price do we have to pay for an informed citizenry, one that can understand the complex multiplicity of American culture, can read into events, not simply register them as a series of fated accomplish-ments? What sort of investment are we willing to make in the intellectual and cultural development of our citizens so that we can remain, as a country, innovative, vibrant, socially responsible? How can we prepare ourselves for the unexpected, the difﬁcult, the troubling events that are sure to lie ahead for all of us? Will we spend billions for defense while begrudging any money spent on what we are defending? The great experiment in mass education is not even a hundred years old: it has had virtually no downside. That we teeter on abandoning this commitment now is a testament to a smallness, to a lack of generosity, and to a contempt for noncommercial values that can only make us poorer—not only cultural, but economically.
AGAINST NATIONAL POETRY  
MONTH AS SUCH
And they say
If I would just sing lighter songsBetter for me would it be,But not is this truthful;For sense remoteAdduces worth and gives itEven if ignorant reading impairs it;But it’s my creedThat these songs yieldNo value at the commencingOnly later, when one earns it.
GIRAUT DE BORNELH (12TH CENTURY, TRANS. CH. B.)
April is the cruelest month for poetry.
As part of the spring ritual of National Poetry Month, poets are symbolically 
dragged into the public square in order to be humiliated with the claim that their product has not achieved sufﬁcient market penetration and needs to be revived by the Artiﬁcial Resuscitation Foundation (ARF) lest the art form collapse from its own incompetence and irrelevance, and as a result of the general disinterest among the broad masses of the American People.
The motto of ARF’s National Poetry Month is: “Poetry’s not so bad, really. ”National Poetry Month is sponsored by the Academy of American Poets, 
an organization that uses its mainstream status to exclude from its promo-tional activities much of the formally innovative and “otherstream” poetries that form the inchoate heart of the art of poetry. The Academy’s activities on 
University of Chicago Press website, April 1999.
28 PROFESSING POETICS
behalf of National Poetry Month tend to focus on the most conventional of 
contemporary poetry; perhaps a more accurate name for the project might be National Mainstream Poetry Month. Then perhaps we could designate August as National Unpopular Poetry Month.
Through its “safe poetry” free verse distribution program, the Academy of 
American Poets’ major initiative for National Poetry Month is to give away millions of generic “poetry books” to random folks throughout the country. This program is intended to promote safe reading experiences and is based on ARF’s founding principle that safe poetry is the best prophylactic against aesthetic experience.
Free poetry is never free, nor is free verse without patterns.Oscar Wilde once wrote, “Only an auctioneer admires all schools of art. ” 
National Poetry Month professes to an undifferentiated promotion for “all” poetry, as if supporting all poetry, any more than supporting all politics, you could support any.
National Poetry Month is about making poetry safe for readers by promot-
ing examples of the art form at its most bland and its most morally “posi-tive. ” The message is: Poetry is good for you. But, unfortunately, promoting 
poetry as if it were an “easy listening” station just reinforces the idea that poetry is culturally irrelevant and has done a disservice not only to poetry deemed too controversial or difﬁcult to promote but also to the poetry it puts forward in this way. “Accessibility” has become a kind of Moral Im-perative based on the condescending notion that readers are intellectually challenged, and mustn’t be presented with anything but Safe Poetry. As if poetry will turn people off to poetry.
Poetry: Readers Wanted . The kind of poetry I want is not a happy art with 
uplifting messages and easy-to-understand emotions. I want a poetry that’s 
bad for you. Certainly not the kind of poetry that Volkswagen would be comfortable about putting in every new car it sells, which, believe it or not, is a 1999 feature of the Academy’s National Poetry Month program.
The most desirable aim of the Academy’s National Poetry Month is to in-
crease the sales of poetry books. But when I scan some of the principal 
Against National Poetry Month as Such 29
corporate sponsors of the program of the past several years, I can’t help 
noting (actually I can but I prefer not to) that some are among the major institutions that work actively against the wider distribution of poetry. The large chain bookstores are no friends to the small presses and independent bookstores that are the principal supporters of all types of American po-etry: the chains have driven many independents out of business and made it more difﬁcult for most small presses (the site of the vast majority of poetry publishing) to get their books into retail outlets. I also note this year that the New York Times  is a major sponsor of National Poetry Month; but if the 
Times would take seriously the task of reviewing poetry books and readings, it would be doing a far greater service to poetry than advertising its sup-port for National Poetry Month. The whole thing strikes me as analogous to cigarette makers sponsoring a free emphysema clinic. Indeed, part of the purpose of the Academy’s National Poetry Month appears to be to advertise National Poetry Month and its sponsors—thus, the Academy has taken out a series of newspaper ads that mention no poets and no poems but rather announce the existence of National Poetry Month with a prominent listing of its backers, who appear, in the end, to be sponsoring themselves.
The path taken by the Academy’s National Poetry Month, and by such foun-
dations as Lannan and the Lila Wallace– Reader’s Digest , has been misguided 
because these organizations have decided to promote not poetry but the idea of poetry, and the idea of poetry too often has meant almost no poetry at all. Time and time again we hear the ofﬁcial spokespersons tell us they want to support projects that give speedy and efﬁcient access to poetry and that the biggest obstacle to this access is, indeed, poetry, which may not provide the kind of easy reading required by such mandates.
The solution: ﬁnd poetry that most closely resembles the fast and easy read-
ing experiences of most Americans under the slogans Away with Difﬁculty! Make Poetry Palatable for the People! I think particularly of the ﬁve-year plan launched under the waving banners of Disguise the Acid Taste of the Aesthetic with NutraSweet Coating, which emphasized producing poetry in short sound bites, with MTV-type images to accompany them, so the People will not even know they are getting poetry.
This is the genius of the new Literary Access programs: the more you dilute 
art, the more you appear to increase the access. But access to what? Not to 
30 PROFESSING POETICS
anything that would give a reader or listener any strong sense that poetry 
matters, but rather access to a watered-down version that lacks the cultural edge and the aesthetic sharpness of the best popular and mass culture. The only reason that poetry matters is that it has something different to offer, something slower on the uptake, maybe, but more intense for all that, and also something necessarily smaller in scale in terms of audience. Not better than mass culture, but a crucial alternative to it.
The reinvention, the making of a poetry for our time, is the only thing that 
makes poetry matter. And that means, literally, making poetry matter, that 
is making poetry that intensiﬁes the matter or materiality of language—acoustic, visual, syntactic, semantic. Poetry is very much alive when it ﬁnds ways of doing things in a media-saturated environment that only poetry can do, but very much dead when it just retreads the same old same old.
As an alternative to National Poetry Month, I propose that we have an In-
ternational Anti-Poetry Month. As part of the activities, all verse in public places will be covered over—from the Statue of Liberty to the friezes on many of our government buildings. Poetry readings will be removed from radio and TV (just as they are during the other eleven months of the year). Parents will be asked not to read Mother Goose and other rimes to their children but only . . . ﬁction. Religious institutions will have to forego read-
ing verse passages from the liturgy and only prose translations of the Bible will be recited, with hymns strictly banned. Ministers in the black churches will be kindly requested to stop preaching. Cats will be closed for the month 
by order of the Anti-Poetry Commission. Poetry readings will be replaced by self-help lectures. Love letters will have to be written only in expository paragraphs. Baseball will have to start its spring training in May. No vocal music will be played on the radio or TV or sung in the concert halls. Chil-dren will have to stop playing all slapping and counting and singing games and stick to board games and football.
As part of the campaign, the major daily newspapers will run full-page ads 
with this text:
Go ahead, don’t read any poetry.
You won’t be able to understand it anyway: the best stuff is all over your 
head.
Against National Poetry Month as Such 31
And there aren’t even any commercials to liven up the action.
Anyway, you’ll end up with a headache trying to ﬁgure out what the poems 
are saying because they are saying NOTHING .
Who needs that.Better go to the movies.
INVENTION FOLLIES
I think Pound was a sort of prototypical American writer. Another would be Edward Dahl-
berg, another in obvious ways Williams, another Emily Dickinson, or Marianne Moore, or H.D., all of these. What’s interesting about them, variously and as a company, is that they all have the necessity of inventing not only themselves but the literature they purport to be a fact of. They have to invent everything. That’s why I love Williams’ In the American Grain, which is absolutely vivid instance of creating anew thoughts for oneself to be fact of.
ROBERT CREELEY
1. Noise That Stays News
Make it noisy.
NATHANIEL MACKEY
Radical formal innovation in modernist and contemporary art has, at times, 
been seen as undermining the aesthetic, but it is more accurate to say that such work reinvents the aesthetic for new readers and new contexts. While modernist art remains a crucial site for any consideration of the aesthet-ics of poetic invention, I want to ground the discussion in the vicinities of the immediate present, where innovation, the new, ingenuity, and original-ity, perhaps even more than the aesthetic, are vexed terms, jinxed, perhaps ironically, by their own historical weight.
American Ofﬁcial Verse Culture operates on the premise that innovation 
and originality are not criteria of aesthetic value, and while not an abso-lute barrier to quality, are something to be held against a work, as if there were something unpleasantly immodest about any poetry that trades in the untried, something that smacks of elitism or arrogance or vulgarity. This 
Ward Phillips Lecture, Notre Dame, November 27, 2006, subsequently published in The Con-
sequence of Innovation: 21st Century Poetics, edited by Craig Dworkin (New York: Roof Books, 
2008).
34 PROFESSING POETICS
attitude, while relatively easy to ridicule, has deeper roots than might be 
apparent on ﬁrst blush (the blush that comes over the cheek after the ﬁrst few slaps).
Innovation is not so much an aesthetic value as an aesthetic necessity. 
Nevertheless, I understand full well the great suspicion with which claims to innovation and originality are now held. Indeed, there is, at present, an enormous circumspection about the necessity of the new, even among many whose work is fresh and adventurous. Some of this suspicion is a jus-tiﬁed response to progressivist ideas in modernism (and modernization) that value the new over any other aesthetic quality, with the concomitant beliefs that the new replaces the old or that the new is better than the old. Too often claims for innovation seem to mime the marketing (and genera-tional) imperative for “new and improved” (cultural) products. But such claims fail to recognize that poetic innovation is not necessarily related to improvement; at its most engaged, it is a means of keeping up with the pres-ent, grappling with the contemporary. We have to constantly reinvent our forms and vocabularies so that we don’t lose touch with ourselves and the world we live in. The need for change in art is prompted by changes in the social and economic environment. The responses of the past are not always able to engage the present.
But such arguments for aesthetic innovation too often fall on deafened 
ears. For example, it is now fashionable to attack innovative poetry as frivo-lous, as the product of privileged individuals who do not have to face the harshest realities of poverty, war, or social injustice. This attitude, while often morally motivated, is aesthetically and ethically treacherous. For one thing, it risks denying the extraordinary innovations made by poets in the grip of just these harsh realities, without which the poetries of the Ameri-cas, for example, could not have developed as dynamically as they have. More accurate would be to say that innovation comes as a response to the human crisis: innovation is the mark of rethinking, trying to break out of the obsessive repetition-compulsion that we see all around us, whether in an individual or a family, or politically (in the conﬂict between states or groups). The idea that innovation is a luxury for the privileged or those who remove themselves from struggle creates, at best, a Romantic, at worst, a demagogic nostalgia for the greater authenticity of the experience of the imagined less well-off “other, ” as if only severe forms of oppression can cre-ate “relevant” poetry, as if we are so well off ourselves, with so many things to keep us company.
Invention Follies 35
You might say that severe forms of oppression rob a people of its right to 
poetry—and the crisis for poetry, for the aesthetic, is to create a space for 
poetry again and again.
For that, anything less than invention falters. Sometimes that faltering 
can be exquisitely beautiful and sometimes the fall away from faltering can seem crass or crude. But the human need to create anew is no less strong than our need for lamentation. And even lamentation is not safe from the erosion of our consuming culture; even lamentation must be reinvented lest the dead be mocked and the living become ghost walkers, zombies of the tried and no longer true.
For well over a hundred years, we have been living through a period of 
aesthetic disruption, which is to say, shifting and readjusting to, reeling and spinning from, the social and technological changes of the long twentieth century. Of course, the risk for invention is that your invention fails; it usu-ally fails, since most art produces failure, no matter its successes. The risk of not inventing is to succeed—at little or nothing. So these are poles: it can admirable to succeed at nothing (I have made a point of it) just as it can be illuminating to fail at innovation.
According to Henry Petroski, in The Evolution of Useful Things , his great 
study of inventions, from paper clips to zippers, form follows not function but 
failure .
1 According to Petroski, it is the frustration with existing things that 
produces innovation. I am interested in thinking through how this applies to poetic invention and originality, where the motivation may be less to produce the new than a frustration with aspects of existing work, not just in terms of form or content, but also means of reproduction and distribution. Petroski states his central idea succinctly:
The form of made things is always subject to change in response to their real 
or perceived shortcomings, their failures to function properly. This principle governs all invention, innovation, and ingenuity; it is what drives all inven-tors, innovators, and engineers. And there follows a corollary: Since noth-ing is perfect, and indeed, since even our ideas of perfection are not static, 
1. The Evolution of Useful Things : How Everyday Artifacts—From Forks and Pins to Paper Clips and 
Zippers—Came to Be as They Are (New York: Vintage Books, 1994). Chapter 2 is entitled “Form 
Follows Failure. ” I am grateful to James Shivers for underscoring the relevance of Petroski’s 
work in Charles Bernstein: American Innovator (Doctoral dissertation, Université de Lausanne, Switzerland, 2002).
36 PROFESSING POETICS
everything is subject to change over time. There can be no such thing as a 
“perfected” artifact; the future perfect can only be a tense, not a thing. (22)
Petroski’s engineering perspective is remarkably free of the self- 
conscious unease that is the occupational hazard of the American poet 
working against accepted practices. Not surprising, Edgar Poe, in “The Philosophy of Composition” (1846) anticipates this peculiarly American 
struggle both for and against invention and originality along with Petroski’s 
negation of the famous Bauhaus slogan, form follows function:
My ﬁrst object (as usual) was originality. The extent to which this has been 
neglected, in versiﬁcation, is one of the most unaccountable things in the world. Admitting that there is possibility of variety in mere rhythm, it is 
still clear that the possible varieties of metre and stanza are absolutely in-ﬁnite—and yet, for centuries, no man, in verse, has ever done, or ever seemed 
to think of doing, an original thing. The fact is, originality (unless in minds of 
very unusual force) is by no means a matter, as some suppose, of impulse or intuition. In general, to be found, it must be elaborately sought, and although a positive merit of the highest class, demands in its attainment less of inven-tion than negation.
2
What’s needed is a transvaluation of the concept of innovation, so that 
we can think of innovation in a modest and local way, as responses to histor-
ical and contemporary particulars—as situational, not universal. More like the weather—and one’s everyday adaptation to it—than like the forward march of scientiﬁc knowledge. Very often innovation comes in reaction to a sense of the perceived failure of the artwork that precedes it (no matter how innovative it may appear to be). That sense of perceived failure creates a space for the new in the sense of the now. And it may often look like a swerve away from the innovations of the past, which, quicker than a wink, seem historical, fossilized. Innovation is a constant process of invention in the face of the given. From the outside, some of the innovations may seem very minor or technical, but in poetry the minor is the major and the major is often a bit tedious, like the windbag that keeps bellowing even after the air conditioning has been installed. Sometimes, the best thing you can do is stall, bunt, pass, loop, dodge, or just sit down and take a load off your feet.
2. Edgar Allan Poe, “The Philosophy of Composition, ” in Poetry, Tales, & Selected Essays (New 
York: Library of America College Edition, 1996), 180–81.
Invention Follies 37
I am particularly interested in the ways that inventive poetries can be 
disruptive not only to forms of poems but also to reading habits, audiences, 
and distribution systems. And how a poetics of invention can be seen in contrast to a poetics of reﬁnement—not one better than the other, but one with radically different aesthetic and social concerns in a given point in time.
I am interested, that is, in what business theorist Clayton Christensen 
calls “the innovator’s dilemma. ”
3 In literary terms (my own highly conten-
tious translation of Christensen’s theory), the dilemma has to do with the desire of some practitioners to produce reﬁned and improved works based on the perceived expectation of the “best” readers, what Christensen calls the “sustaining” approach. The alternative model is to abandon the needs of these “best” readers and produce works that are disruptive of perceived ideas of quality, understood in terms of reﬁnement (one might also speak of skillfulness, craft, ﬂuency). That alternative may require ﬁnding new read-ers, as Whitman insists, or having no readers, as Dickinson found. In any case, if the art form changes, then that which was out of it, impossible to read, may end up somewhere quite else, though where this elsewhere is I have a hard time saying.
Poetic innovations are often noisy, messy, disruptive, disorienting. They 
do not form a neat line with the innovations of the past, but often seem to swerve from a progressivist course. This may be because they are not only reconceiving the nature of the poem but reconstituting the audience for the poem, reevaluating the contexts that give the poem not only its meaning but its social force. On this model, you can contrast disruptive innovation with reﬁnement. Very often the reﬁned work that comes after disruptive innovation is “better” than the originals but may lack some of the initial en-ergy. On a vertical (or diachronic) axis, Louis Zukofsky’s “Poem Beginning ‘The’  ” and “ A” are reﬁnements of, respectively, Eliot’s “The Waste Land” 
and Pound’s Cantos ; at the same time, on a horizontal axis, vis-à-vis Ofﬁ-
cial Verse Culture of the period, Zukofsky’s poems are surely examples of disruptive innovation. For this reason, the terms need to be contextualized 
rather than treated as true or absolute values. While movements toward reﬁnement are especially useful to consider across generations, you can also see such shifts in a single poet’s work, say the difference between early and late Eliot, or early and late Ginsberg for that matter.
3. The Innovator’s Dilemma: When New Technologies Cause the Great Firms to Fail (Boston: Har-
vard Business School Press, 1997). 
38 PROFESSING POETICS
Still, it’s important not to accept the reﬁnement of initially disruptive 
innovation as innovation while losing sight of actually existing innovation 
because it doesn’t look like you think it “should. ”
After all, my own motto is still “should never say should. ”Should you?I realize I may appear to be valuing innovation over reﬁnement, or at 
least registering my sense of how important inventiveness and indeed  ingenuity have been for American poetry in the past century. But I want to suggest that the innovations of American poetry have not necessarily been toward improvement, but, in contrast, have worked to disrupt the ascent of an American poetry of reﬁnement and assimilation. At the same time, I want to ﬂag the danger of morally coding either end of this spectrum of  disruption or reﬁnement. Great works certainly exist in both modalities, and bad ones too, nor can the modalities always be differentiated. I am  talking relative direction, not absolute qualities.
Inventive poetries, each in its own way, often very explicitly, abandon 
models for reﬁning and improving poetry, avert meeting the expectations of existing poetry audiences with more beautifully articulated poems that consolidate the innovations of the prior generations. They resist assimila-tion. Such poetries may be willing to discard the existing poetry audience by creating works—and imagining alternative poetic lineages—that call into being new kinds of language reproduction technologies, new constel-lations of readers, new methods of reading, and new methods of distribu-tion: by reconstituting the ﬁeld. As in the business model of innovation, inventive poetry is disruptive of existing values and indeed may appear to be—may actually be—messier, noisier, and cruder than other available po-etic works.
Christensen’s business model provides an uncomfortably accurate 
description, especially since discourse about the arts often goes to great lengths to distance itself from market models. Yet categories such as “main-stream” and “fringe” are familiar to both discourses, as is the underlying no-tion of received historical value. And aren’t the poetry products of Ofﬁcial Verse Culture served up to customers expecting a certain kind of product performance that innovative poetries fail to provide, often because the work either doesn’t register as poetry or because it lacks (or rejects) expected lit-erary values? In any case, Christensen is a relief from tiresome clichés de-rived from Peter Bürger’s and Renato Poggioli’s theories of the avant-garde as well as Harold Bloom’s theory of inﬂuence:
Invention Follies 39
What all sustaining technologies have in common is that they improve per-
formance of established products, along the dimensions of performance that mainstream customers in major markets have historically valued. . . . Oc-casionally, however, disruptive technologies  emerge: technologies that result 
in worse  product performance, at least in the near-term. Ironically, in each 
of the instances studied in this book, it was disruptive technology that pre-cipitated the leading ﬁrm’s failure. Disruptive technologies bring to a market a very different value proposition than had been available previously. Gen-erally, disruptive technologies underperform established products in main-stream markets, but they have other features that a few fringe (and generally new) customers value. (Innovator’s Dilemma, xv)
A good recent example of a disruptive and messy new technology is the 
digitalization of poetry, which is not just reproducing but producing new 
possibilities for both the art of poetry and the archive of poetry. There has been much fuss made in the press about copyright issues concerning the exchange over the web of digital sound ﬁles, but I am far more interested in the implications of MP3 ﬁles for poetry, since we are now witnessing a transvaluation in poetry from the printed book to the sound ﬁle of an  individual poem.
Poetry doesn’t improve nor do new modes of poetry replace existing 
modes; indeed, the new may bring back into play previous and even appar-ently outmoded styles, forms, contents, and dictions. In insisting on a poet-ics of invention, invention more than innovation, I am imagining a poetry that is not progressivist or developmental or even evolutionary, not about replacement, not us/them; a poetics that is based more on dissatisfaction with previous inventions than any distinction between new/old, conven-tional/experimental, mainstream/outsider.
“What’s new” can be an oppressive market constraint that stiﬂes poetic 
work, but it can also be a form of human exchange as when we say to one  another “What’s new?” meaning “What’s up?” or “What’s happening?” What allows for a sense of opening, of a blank page that is not already com-pletely inscribed? The problem here may be the rote evocation of Emerson, more than Michael Fried or Clement Greenberg or Ron Silliman; but the discourse of the avant-garde is too thick to cut through even with the new electric ideology weeder I bought last week at X-Mart.
The invention of which I speak is not a matter of choice, not one among 
many possibilities, but a necessary probe of perception for grappling not 
40 PROFESSING POETICS
only with things as they are but also things as they might be. For that task, 
words such as innovation and invention may be inadequate; perhaps better to invoke the aesthetic force of 
NO: a resistance to the given state of things 
as not working or not working right or not working anymore. That doubt, that refusal, refusal especially of innovation, may be the mark of any such endeavor so conceived and so dedicated.
As blank may be its space.
2. We Cannot Retrace Our Steps
A phenomenology of invention would suggest a poetry’s particularizing responses to shifting conditions. This would be a poetics of the temporal or processural, of contemporaneity, as Stein has it in her key work of poet-ics, “Composition as Explanation, ” where she insists that poets are neither “ahead” of their time nor “behind” their time but in or out of  their time. 
Readers are mostly “out of it”: their problem is not the difﬁculty of compre-hending the advanced, but the inability to grapple with the present.
4 This, 
then, is not newness or the new, but news: “news that STAYS  news” is Pound’s 
formulation in ABC of Reading.5 William Carlos Williams puts it best in “As-
phodel, that Greeny Flower”—
It is difﬁcult
 to get the news from poems        yet men die miserably every day                      for lack of what is found there.
6
As Stein writes in The Mother of Us All  (in the voice of Susan B.  
Anthony)—“We cannot retrace our steps, going forward may be the same as 
going backwards. ”7 And she adds: “Life is strife. I was a martyr all my life not 
to what was won but to what was done. ” It’s this distinction between done and won that I am counting on here.
4. “Composition as Explanation, ” in  Selected Writings  of Gertrude Stein , edited by Carl Van 
Vechten (New York: Vintage Books, 1972).
5. ABC of Reading (New York: New Directions, 1934), 29.
6. Collected Poems, vol. 2, 1939–1962, edited by Christopher MacGowan (Princeton: Prince-
ton University Press, 2001), 337.7. The Mother of Us All , in Last Operas and Plays, edited by Carl Van Vechten (New York: Vin-
tage Books. 1975), 87. The quotation is the next sentence is from page 88.
Invention Follies 41
And also the idea that moving forward may always be moving backward. 
The more involved I become in twenty-ﬁrst-century digital production and 
reproduction, the more I feel compelled to consider earlier histories of ma-terial textualization, from the invention of the Greek alphabet through the Gutenberg revolution and onto the era of photo/electronic language repro-duction, in which we now ﬁnd ourselves.
CREATIVE WREADING &  
AESTHETIC JUDGMENT
I am professor of poetry. I take that term quite literally. I profess poetry in a 
society, and often a classroom, where poetry is at best a half-forgotten thing, something conﬁned to the peripheries of cultural imagination, a once grand enterprise perhaps, but today eclipsed by more compelling media. Many readers—current students and long ago graduates alike, those who have never been to school and those who teach school—have no experience at all with poetry and certainly little contact with poetry as an active contem-porary art form. Indeed, college is a crucial site for the introduction, the continuing reintroduction, to poetry in both its historical and contempo-rary particulars.
A poem is a work of art using words (or related verbal materials). New 
poems often challenge prior deﬁnitions or understandings of poetry. An-other way of saying this is that a poem is any verbal construction that is designated as a poem. The designation of a verbal text as poetry cues a way of reading but does not address the work’s quality. Disagreement over the nature of what poetry is, or what constitutes a poem, is as much a part of the history of poetry as disputes about what makes a good poem. The most contentious of these disputes are fundamental to poetry’s continuing social and aesthetic signiﬁcance.
Confronted with a poem, many seem to go silent, or what they say tends 
to treat the poem as if it were not a poem at all but a statement of opinion, experience, or sentiment—or a cultural artifact of a time more benighted than our own that can perhaps give us a glimmer of the dim consciousness that guided those in days gone by. It’s as if these readers were trying to ac-cess a Windows program with DOS tools, not realizing that you can click on the icons, not just scroll up and down and type in commands at a prompt 
Adapted from an essay in Poetry and Pedagogy: The Challenge of the Contemporary , edited by 
Joan Retallack and Juliana Spahr (New York: Palgrave, 2006).
44 PROFESSING POETICS
line. Or it is as if the poems, with sound and in color, were being viewed 
with a silent monochrome screen.
My response to this chronic poetic aporia (CPA) is to provide intensive 
poetry immersion courses, something like teaching poetry as a second lan-guage. That means I try to immerse the class in a wide yet distinct variety of poetic forms, sounds, dictions, and logics.
I am committed to bringing into play the performance of poetry—both 
the reader’s performance of the printed poem and the poet’s performance at a reading, in this way also bringing into the discussion the histories of performed poetry. At PennSound (http://writing.upenn.edu/pennsound) and other websites, sound ﬁles of poetry readings are available to use in conjunction with printed texts. Still, there is nothing like having live read-ings and discussions with poets as part of the class. (I ﬁnd it helpful to as-sign a book by the visiting poet before the visit and have that form the basis for an active conversation either before or after the reading.) There is no more powerful way to bring home the materialities of voice or the speciﬁci-ties of the contemporary than through a reading. Readings offer a concrete countermeasure to the relentless abstraction and reiﬁcation of the poem as something existing disembodied in an anthology. The lessons of the live poetry reading are signiﬁcant for historical and contemporary poetry, since they provide a model for imagining poems not just as meaning formations but as social productions and material texts, and can provide a very concrete introduction to the study of literary works through both their bibliographic and performance contexts.
As for the art of reading, I try to create possibilities for reading as creative 
performance and as a ground for subsequent critical interpretation, based on the aesthetic principle that you can’t interpret what you don’t experience . 
Many new, but also many highly experienced, readers of poetry have a dif-ﬁcult time accessing the poetic strata of a work, that is, those elements that make a piece of writing a poem as opposed to . . . well let’s just say prose. To counter this anaesthesia, I have a threefold plan.
First, I ask students to do interactive and creative responses to assigned 
readings, including imitations, memorizations, rearrangements, word or phrase substitutions, homolinguistic (English to English) translations/transpositions, and other “wreading” experiments that involve reordering or rearranging a poem’s words, lines, or stanzas, as well as locating or iso-lating certain key linguistic, ﬁgurative, and rhetorical features of the poem. 
(A list of wreading experiments is available at http://writing.upenn.edu/
bernstein/wreadiing-experiments.html.) The point here is both to investi-
Creative Wreading & Aesthetic Judgment 45
gate the recombinant structure of a poem—to what extent it retains its 
identity through modiﬁcation of its constituent elements—and also to allow for a more intuitive, even visceral, contact with the materials of the poem, call it “sounding” the poems, as Thoreau speaks of sounding Walden Pond.
The Poem Proﬁler (http://writing.upenn.edu/library/Bernstein-Charles_ 
Poem-Proﬁler.html) is the second fold of Creative Wreading. The Poem Pro-ﬁler is a delirious extension of New Criticism, one of whose signiﬁcant vir-tues was a focus on the formal and linguistic features of a poem. I developed the proﬁler in response to the paucity of terms many students, not to say readers, have for discussing poems. In reading a poem, I ask students to as-sess the levels of a wide range of rhetorical features. “The Poem Proﬁler” has ten overall categories and over 125 individual features: “Stylistic Textures and Poetic Diction” includes such items as ambiguity, humor, eloquence, plainness, sincerity, smoothness (versus roughness, bumpiness, stria-tion), and subtlety (versus bluntness). “Content” assesses the main types of subject matter in the poem. “Developmental/Temporal/Compositional Structures” assesses what holds the poem together—is it fragmentary or ex-pository, stream of consciousness or dream-like/surreal, fast paced or jerky, procedural or employing traditional forms? The proﬁler also inventories “Devices, ” from irony to hyperbole, simile to metonymy. The “Mood/Tone” features are given as contrasting pairs, as in scary/reassuring, dark/light, impersonal/emotional, turbulent/calm. “Counting” is a way to note vari-ous features of a poem that are organized by number, while “Visual Shape/Form” asks for an account of the physical arrangement of the poem on the page. In “Sound, ” the acoustic elements of the poem are assessed, while “Point of View” assesses whether there is a narrator, persona, ﬁrst-person, and the like. Finally, in the most explicitly un–New Critical gesture, I have a list of sociohistorical contexts to consider.
The Poem Proﬁler is a guide for the perplexed and hopefully not a per-
plexing guide. The proﬁler is not meant to be applied to every poem or else it could become a tool for rote, laborious, microanalysis of a given poem. For that reason, I suggest doing comprehensive proﬁling on only a couple of poems. After that, the proﬁler should be used as a resource to add speciﬁc-ity to more open-ended responses to poems, through journal responses and interactive experiments and performances. For the Poem Proﬁler is not just a delirious form of close reading, it is also an approach to literary criticism as a form of thick description, in several senses of the term: dense (you don’t get it do you, huh?), richly detailed, and opaque. Criticism should be at least as opaque as the poem and twice as opaque as the reader.
46 PROFESSING POETICS
In the ﬁrst class, I ask the students to run the proﬁler on themselves, 
to gauge their current preferences. In going over the results, hours can 
be spent deﬁning, expanding, and détourning the terms. I go through the whole proﬁler, asking students not only to give their rating for each term but also to make up an example to illustrate what the term means. I am fascinated by the occasional student who marks everything “5, ” since it’s close to unimaginable that anyone would like all the possible qualities of a poem equally, irreverence as much as piety. Such a response suggests a lack of engagement with, or conﬁdence in, one’s own aesthetic judgment. The value of the exercise is that it makes explicit the set of aesthetic values each reader brings to a poem and helps to explore how these affect the evalua-tion of, and more important, the response to, a poem. For this reason, the proﬁler may enable some students to appreciate that a poem achieves, to a signiﬁcant degree, something that he or she rated very low on the proﬁler.
The proﬁler also can provoke a discussion of why some poets choose 
poetic values that are not necessarily highly rated on an individual student’s initial self-assessment. Indeed, the different ratings students give to the same poetic feature make palpable that there is no consensus in the class on what factors are valued in a poem. In the Wreading Workshop, disagreement is encouraged as a way of generating exchange rather than as an obstacle that needs to be overcome. Disagreement is not a means to a consensus (or the imposed consensus of the professor’s judgment): dissensus is the goal of the Wreading Workshop. I always try to give extended attention to the nega-tive reactions that students have to a poem or set of poems. By emphasizing the range of disagreements in the initial self-assessment via the proﬁler, it becomes apparent at the start that disagreement is as much a product of initial orientation as of the qualities of any given poem studied. Since I often ask students to rank the poems they read for a given week in order of their preference, the proﬁler provides a means to pursue the basis of these initial judgments. Asking about preferences is just a beginning, however; the more useful question is asking students to articulate (if necessary with the help of the proﬁler) the criteria for their preference. The next step is to explore the relation between initial preferences and quality assessment by asking whether a student’s initial preferences for one set of poetic textures is a sufﬁcient basis for determining the aesthetic value of a poem. After a while, most students will acknowledge the value of a poem whose proﬁle is aversive to their own initial preferences. Some students may even, as the class progresses, choose to reset the factory preset aesthetic preferences in the options menu of their Imaginary.
Creative Wreading & Aesthetic Judgment 47
(Beyond the second fold, which is not a school activity, is to reconﬁgure 
that options menu so that it works as a dynamic, nonlinear system. Basic 
reprogramming skills are required.)
As with all wreading exercises, the value of the Poem Proﬁler dimin-
ishes when the work it generates ceases to be engaging and exploratory. The point is not that all poetic study needs to be fun, but that thematic or formal analysis needs to be connected with the experiential dimension of the poem. In many cases, it would be better to have a student read a poem out loud, type it out, or repeatedly play a recording of it than to write a paper trying to ﬁgure out its meaning. I don’t see much use, in poetry teach-ing, of exams, test identiﬁcations, or traditional theme-based papers. By experience  I mean a movement away from a summary of what the poem 
is about or a catalog of its devices or images or conceits and toward the sound and tone and mood of the poem perceived intuitively, as one hears a song without necessarily concentrating on it or being able to say what it is about. Concentration may be an obstacle to the sort of ambient reading that is a fundamental prerequisite to accessing the experiential dimension of a poem. Without access to this dimension, analysis is worthless: it may say something about the “idea” of a poem but cannot engage a poem’s inner life. Scholarship and interpretation are of tremendous value, but they need to be informed by tone and rhythm as much as theme.
Favorite poems I have read and taught many times remain opaque to 
me or I forget whatever conclusions I may have come to upon earlier read-ings. It’s often the case that I have no idea what a line means or why ex-actly it appeals to me. In the Wreading Workshop, such nonunderstanding ﬂourishes. Reading ambiently and associatively rather than rationally and systematically, a poem may come to life even as it remains out of our grasp. Paradoxically, the harder we try to grasp a poem’s meaning, the more elusive it may become. Given that most students are drilled to think in a linear and logical manner and to express themselves in directly expressive or exposi-tory prose, the Wreading Workshop becomes one of the very few sites at a university that encourages and explores intuitive thinking and writing; its not that such poetic work is better than rationalistic or directly expressive work, but it provides a necessary counter to the dominance of one type of knowledge over others.
The ﬁnal, or third, fold of Creative Wreading is weekly intensive journal 
entries in which the students respond to each week’s assigned readings, and to the supplemental material posted on the online syllabus. As with the wreading experiments and the Poem Proﬁler studies, I ask that all student 
48 PROFESSING POETICS
work be posted directly to a common class e-mail list or web log. In this 
way, everything that I see as the teacher is also seen by all students. Noth-ing is private. The most radical result of the public postings is that students direct their comments to each other, rather than to the professor/authority ﬁgure. The class discussion extends and intensiﬁes online; it might even be more accurate to say that class discussion is an extension of the online discussion.
I emphasize to students that the week’s responses are meant to be spon-
taneous, informal, and unedited. These notebooks entries are not drafts for papers, nor are they necessarily expository. Fragments, lists, incomplete thoughts are ﬁne—in the service of noting reactions and thoughts. The pur-pose of the writing is to encourage interaction with the poems and also serve as a record of individual reading.
Creative Wreading actively counters the fear that “difﬁcult” or “negative” 
poetry is harder for students to engage than simple or afﬁrmative poetry. In a Creative Wreading environment, difﬁculty means more layers with which to grapple and therefore more opportunities for a multilevel engagement with a poem. When reading poetry is not directed to the goal of deciphering a ﬁxed, graspable meaning but rather encourages performing and respond-ing to overlapping meanings, then difﬁculty ceases to be an obstacle and is transformed into an opening.
WREADING, WRITING, WRESPONDING
1. Writing
Laptops are open and everyone’s online and chattering away at the same 
time. I pass around a yellow pad and it circulates from one person to the next, in zigzag order, for the length of the seminar. The participants are writing an ongoing serial collaboration and will continue to work on this, during the class, for the full fourteen weeks we meet. Each week one stu-dent takes the pages home and posts a verbatim transcription and an edited version. From my laptop I project, on the large LCD display screen, the index of the class e-mail list, to which everyone has posted their work for the week.
Each week students write works based on the experiments list (http://
writing.upenn.edu/bernstein/experiments.html), a set of constraints and procedures, which has served as a foundation for much my undergradu-ate teaching over the past twenty years. You could call this class “creative writing, ” but I resist the label, since it comes with all the weight of the pro-totypical poetry workshop, which is often focused on content-based exer-cises rather than experiments in form. Write a poem about the ﬁrst time you 
saw your Dad shaving : “the blood dripped down his face / and I trembled 
in the corner, / unseen, whimpering. ” Not being particularly interested in sincerity, description, or traditional craft, I’ve long made a point of teaching modernist and contemporary poetry classes rather than writing classes, but the twist is that these literature classes—what I call “creative (w)reading” workshops—are run as if they were creative writing classes (students write creatively in response to the readings, but the focus is entirely on poems assigned).
Teaching Modernist Poetry , edited by Peter Middleton and Nicky Marsh (London and New 
York: Palgrave/Macmillan, 2010).
50 PROFESSING POETICS
Over time, you see, I’ve become more interested in small seminars de-
voted just to the students’ experiments, and so, through a kind of trap back-
door I’ve fallen through, tripping up my apparent prejudices, I’ve ended up in a very common space of creative writing (poetry), which I simply call “Writing Experiments Seminar”—or English 111, after the number of the room in which we meet.
My phobia to creative writing poetry workshops, like all phobias, is exag-
gerated and no doubt unfair to the eccentric range offered under the rubric; but I cling to it as to an untrustworthy friend. But then again I know what I don’t like. I am so stubborn that I am sure if someone advised me on how to improve a poem I’d probably do the opposite, just out of sheer contrariness. From the get-go I tell 111 participants that writing good poems, or learning to write better poems, or learning the craft of poetry, or improving your work, is not the focus or goal of the seminar (but it may happen as a by-product). I think of 111 as a nonexpository writing class, or a course in anti- or para- or pluricomposition, something that, if I had my way (and not just a 
book by that name), I would require as an antidote to Freshman Comp. The class has its value not for budding poets, only, or primarily, or exclusively, but also for all writers. It’s less a workshop than a lab, with experiments in mutant forms conducted on the textual body of the living language. (I play the role of a kinder, gentler Frankenstein.) Still, as an elective course, the students who enroll in it think of the class as a poetry class, since that is the only academic slot associated with what one of the students likes to call abnormal writing, but I prefer to think of as r & d (research and develop-ment). I ﬁgure the more you know how to take words apart and put them together, the more aspects of language you’ve turned up, down, left, right, inside out, and outside in, the better you will be able to respond to the many contingencies, screwballs and curve balls and monkey wrenches that language will inevitably throw your way. Like my main man says, “Whose in control, me or the words?” ( Whose is, that’s who.) And then—I am slowly 
getting around to the subject of teaching modernist poetry—an approach like this makes for proactive readers by potentiating proactive approaches to writing. So, yeah, busted again: this is just another kind of lit’r’ture class, a reading workshop not so much in disguise as in drag.
Let me circle back to the question of craft and improvement. The scene: 
my grossly caricatured creative writing workshop, led by a teacher who (un-like me) knows good from bad and (also unlike me) prefers the good. A teacher who’s not afraid to tell a student what she’s doing wrong and how to ﬁx it. I have my tastes too, but am wary of legislating them, since I know 
Wreading, Writing, Wresponding 51
they are minority tastes, particular and eccentric tastes, and I don’t expect 
students to share them, much less adopt them. I try as much as possible to steer discussions away from good or bad and don’t, as a rule, give my opin-ions about quality or improvement. I do the best I can to direct attention to what is happening in the work, alternative means of construction, and the possibilities of the form.
And I encourage distractions and digressions. Something reminds some-
one of a cartoon on the web so they turn their laptops around and play that. That reminds me of my boyhood in ancient Greece, so I carry on about ety-mologies. And I do tend to wax aesthetic and philosophical about any or all of the forms employed; and have a trigger ﬁnger ready to ﬁre off examples from modernist and contemporary poetry, many of which I have linked to the web syllabus. Someone laughs, after reading something funny on the yellow-pad collaboration being passed around, or maybe in a text message sent from one class member to another, or maybe just at one of my innu-merable, problematic jokes. Laughter is the necessary yeast of good class conversation and opens the possibility for listening, not just hearing.
The best advice I can give to the student in a conventional creative writ-
ing workshop is that if your peers or teacher tell you not to do something, because that something doesn’t make sense to them, appears as a blur, then probably the thing you need to do is not cut it out  but pursue it: develop. 
(But then some teachers in a more conventional workshop will tell you that, and others in a more experimental one won’t.) Something germinal in a young writer isn’t necessarily, or even usually, going to make sense even to the most open-minded teacher or generous classmate. Often the most problematic things about a germinal work have the greatest potential for development. That is why the typical workshop environment, with cross-comments toward creating a “better” piece of writing, that is, one that a group will agree is “better” (more ﬂuid, less awkward, clearer, more logical or expressive, more direct) runs counter to poetic invention and aesthetic process, which will more likely (but not necessarily) produce work that is not legible by such workshop criteria. But you can rely on something: the quizzical, puzzled, and overtly negative responses are signs you are on to something.
How many creative writing workshop members does it take to change 
a well-crafted light bulb?: Three—One to screw it in (the student), one to hold the ladder (the peer), and one to block the light (the teacher).
I block the light too. But I try to use that as a point of rhythmic oscilla-
tion, as I move in and out of the rays.
52 PROFESSING POETICS
The Writing Experiments seminar focuses on transformation, metamor-
phosis, substitution, and deformation. It has a typical order (you can see 
a recent example of the syllabus at http://writing.upenn.edu/bernstein/syllabi/111.html), starting with a reading of Raymond Queneau’s brilliant variations of the “same” story in Exercises in Style :
 1 Substitution
 2 Homolinguistic translation 3 Recombination 4 Homophonic & dialect translation 5 Ekphrasis 6 Chance operation & the aleatoric 7 Without rules, (k)not!, or is free writing free? 8 Short lines / short poems (attention) 9 Memory 10 Novel forms 11 The art of constraint 12 Flarf & conceptual poetry: web-generated poems, found poems, appro -
priation
 13 Digital & visual poetry 14 Performance 15 Class anthology / chapbooks /web site
The syllabus itself is subject to deformative performance; as a ﬁnal as-
signment, Kimberly Eisler (a Penn freshman at the time) did a set of sub-
stitutions for the experiments, making something of a bestiary of possible modernist forms. Here’s my edited version:
 § Homolinguistic transduction: Take a pretense (someone else’s or your 
own) and traverse/rewrite/rate it by substituting warp for word, phase 
for phrase, load for line, or “free” troupe as repose to each phantom or sentence. Or: traditionalize the poem into another, or severely other,  illegitimate style.
 § Recombination (1): Write a piece and crack it somewhere in the middle, 
then recharge with the “best” part following the enjoyable part.
 § Reposition (2)—Doubling: Starting with ominous sentence, write a series 
of penitentiaries each doubling the number of sexes in the punitive para-graph and including all the words used previously.
Wreading, Writing, Wresponding 53
 § Homophonic translation: Take a poem to a foreign country that you can 
pronounce but not necessarily understand and never make it back. Take 
the sound of their lips before the clouds.
 § Use the wet dream engine. § Acrostic charades: Pick a book at random and use the title to feather your 
pinkie nails and scratch off your wings. For each letter, create a pore and cover every faucet in your multiverse.
 § Poem is made according to the order in which it swells like icicles. Solo: 
pick a series of ferns or vines from your closet to put in the vat.
 § Dream work: Use the moon to sweep every fur coat under the couch for 
30 days. Double the length of each diamond. Borrow a friend and apply these techniques to him or her.
 § Write a poem just when you are on the verge of being forced into the back 
of a police car.
 § Read the Bible with a stranger’s chapped lips. § Bring your brain storm into a bomb shelter. § Fertilize your pipe dreams. § Write a poem in which all the events never happen. § Write a poem made up entirely of hydrogen. § Let the morning come and tell each of your addled minds a lie. § Do something ﬁve times, then pray. § Create a blueprint of the way thoughts speak like tiger lilies at the center 
of gravity.
 § Bite your tongue until it bleeds. § Write a poem in the form of the future.
& the moral of that is: the syllabus is an imaginary map to a constantly trans-
mogrifying place: the process begins with the readings and assignments but ultimately engulfs every aspect of the class and perhaps the psychic spaces beyond. The syllabus (like the pronouncement of the teacher) is subject to its own mandates to question and reorder. & the moral of that is: students in an “experiments” class are as likely to play follow the teacher as students in a traditional forms class. & the moral of that is: leave no turn unstoned.
2. Reading
Modernist poetry projects futures, even if that means concatenating the present as if it were a future. The modernist poem is always in the future 
54 PROFESSING POETICS
because that’s where you catch it, just beyond the poem, in Wallace Stevens’s 
“what’s after” (“Thirteen Ways of Looking at a Blackbird”). And once you catch it, it dissolves into air; the butterﬂy net is empty. In other words, the more I try to pin the poem down, the more it eludes me and elates me. I come to the poems I know best as an enigma comes to a weigh station. I’m the enigma, the poem’s my grounding.
In the 1970s, many of us, batty as hornets in a bee’s nest, spoke of reader’s 
response, the reader not the poem makes the meaning. This was true in a deliciously magical sense of “makes, ” as in my favorite Lenny Bruce joke, where the kid comes into the candy store, where the genie is behind the counter while the owner’s out: “Make me a malted. ” “ you’re a malted!” 
But as readers, and teachers, we all know that not all readings are equally good; that for all the range of readings some can be entirely off-base, while others, off-beat, offer new horizons for interacting with the poem. In the end, the poem makes malteds of us all.
But even so, there is no one meaning to a poem, and the poems I know 
best, like Stevens’s “The Plain Sense of Things, ” have no plain sense. It’s less the heresy of paraphrase than the paraphrase of heresy.
I remain mystiﬁed by the culture of testing in modernist and contempo-
rary poetry classes. I couldn’t pass a multiple-choice test of one of my own poems. A friend once sent me a passages-identiﬁcation quiz and I couldn’t quite remember if the passage in question, which the written record will show that I wrote, was by David Antin, Moses Maimonides, Madonna, or me. Confusion can be more productive than adjudication. If we ask the mind to wonder in reading the poems, let’s accept some collateral drift too.
“The student is always right. ” No that’s not quite an adoption of the 
corporate ethos for the classroom, where we don’t teach but offer client services. I mean if a student says something, within the context of the class-room, she can’t be wrong about her perception, though it may not correlate with the poem at hand. So the question is: what about this poem evoked this apparently unsupported response? And how does that relate to what is 
going on in the poem? A misperception can be just as generative for engag-ing a poem as a supposedly correct perception, especially one grounded in schooling, in rational analysis. The ﬁrst thing to learn (you can’t quite teach it) about modernist and contemporary poetry is that you have to get the hang of it, trust your intuitions before your analytic faculties come into (and try to keep in) play.
At the University of Pennsylvania, I teach two basic undergraduate  
twentieth-century poetry classes: one focused on U.S. poetry (http://writing 
Wreading, Writing, Wresponding 55
.upenn.edu/bernstein/syllabi/88.html) and one focused on poetry outside 
the United States (http://writing.upenn.edu/bernstein/syllabi/62.html). I’ve become increasingly agitated about the Anglomania of our literature classes. I see no problem with actively reading poetry in other languages, working through our own translations in class, or reading multiple transla-tions, together with the originals, where possible. Listening to the sounds and rhythms of the poem, even in the absence of knowing the language, can be exhilarating.
The web syllabus is a key part of the course, as I have moved away from 
photocopied course packs and anthologies and toward greater reliance on web materials, many of which I have compiled for this purpose. I do use print anthologies, but I see these more as background information and fur-ther readings than at the center of the class. Wherever possible, I make available sound ﬁles of the poets reading their work (together with texts of the poems), something that has been a central focus for Al Filreis and me in starting PennSound (http://writing.upenn.edu/pennsound/), our huge sound recording archive. (And we are working on developing select record-ings of non-English language poetry.) The Electronic Poetry Center (http://epc.buffalo.edu), which I edit with Loss Pequeño Glazier and Jack Krick, provides additional digital resources for many of the poets in the syllabi. And fundamental to the project is to make as much of this material as pos-sible available not just to the students registered in the class, but to anyone who accesses our web pages (all free both of charge and advertising).
I developed the Poem Proﬁler (discussed above in “Creative Wreading 
& Aesthetic Judgment”) to expand the range of possible responses to the poems, so I use that to generate the ﬁrst-order response.
Second, I ask that each week students do “creative wreading” experi-
ments on the poem—a set of deformations, transformations, and imita-tions that involve doing things with the poems rather than analyzing them (http://writing.upenn.edu/bernstein/wreading-experiments.html). These exercises are designed to provide interactive engagement with the assigned reading. I also ask that for each experiment, the student provide a short commentary on the process, the results, the relation to the original, and an assessment of the value of the experiment. The point of these wreadings is not to create “original” poems of value, though that may well happen. Rather, these exercises are designed to create a greater engagement with the assigned reading and a greater understanding of the structures of, and possibilities for, poetic composition. Indeed, before you can discourse about a poem you need to think with it, get it inside your ears; for that, typing it, or 
56 PROFESSING POETICS
hand-writing it, or reciting it over and again, or putting the poet’s reading on 
our iPod playlist, might be a better ﬁrst encounter with a poem than a the-matically uniﬁed composition explaining it. The poem cries out: I don’t want 
to be understood—just listened to!  For a last class, there is nothing better than 
having students recite memorized poems from the syllabus. Imitation and memorization are as old-fashioned, and future-directed, as poetry itself.
Third, I ask students to keep an intensive journal of their responses to 
the readings. I emphasize that these journals are to be, as far as possible, integrated with the ﬂow of everyday life. Often students include the com-ments of their roommates or the responses of their friends. At Penn, read-ing a poem out loud or playing a sound ﬁle of a poem is bound to seem odd and provoke quizzical responses; these too become part of the journal. I ask the students to consider a speciﬁc set of questions and instructions:
What do you think of the poem? Give as much detail as you can as to why 
you feel the way you do. What does the poem sound like, what does it remind you of? Quote speciﬁc lines or phrases that seem relevant. Being speciﬁc is the hardest part of this assignment and I almost always request descriptions of the form and style of the different poems: which can be as simple as a de-scription of the visual shape of the poem, its length, the type of lines (long, short, metrical, enjambed), the sort of style or rhetoric or vocabulary (un-usual, common, pastoral, urban, urbane, fast-paced, slow-moving, pictorial, bombastic, introspective, descriptive, narrative, fragmentary, etc.).
The point is not for you to analyze or explain the poem but rather to try 
to react to it. Cataloging the features of the poem won’t explain it but it may enable you to enter into the poem more fully.
Of the poems read for this week, which is your favorite? Why? Which is 
the best. Why? Are favorite and best the same? Rank the poems in your order of preference.
Of the poems read for this week, which did you like least? Why?Of the poems read for this week, which is the worst. Why? What are your 
criteria for deciding the quality of poem. Can poems that you don’t like or understand still be good poems?
If you have heard the audio performance, describe the performance and 
how it extends or contradicts the written version of the poem.
Issues of quality are foregrounded while remaining provisional. The 
point is not to compare my judgment, or literary history’s, with those of 
Wreading, Writing, Wresponding 57
students who are perennially new not only to the difﬁculties of poetry but 
also to the pleasures attendant to these difﬁculties.
The responses to the poems might be mixed with a list of things to do 
(as in Ted Berrigan’s “Things to Do in New York”), with dream entries, with comments on other classes, or with more typical diary entries.
So what then of the class meetings? Student discussion is central, but 
with the online forum I pick up themes, concerns, interpretations and take off from there. I try less to lecture and more to be a respondent to the stated (and unstated) responses of the students, as expressed in their journals, wreading experiments, and poem proﬁles. My motto as a teacher comes from Dominique Fourcade’s “tout arrive, ” which he, in turn, found on Ma-net’s stationery. The class time is a blank page on which a composition takes place: everything happens. Like an upside-down Boy Scout, Fourcade coins 
my pedagogic method in a phrase: “Be ready but not prepared. ”
1 This stands 
for nothing less than the multitrack improvisation of possibility. “Let, and not force to happen” (Fourcade again) is not the idea but a method played out in each class. “The light is in the dark. ”
A few weeks into the class, after a spirited discussion of Mallarmé’s Un 
coup de dés, one of the students half asked, half interjected—“So you’re say-ing this is art?!”
Or, better (as Carolee Schneemann put it in an e-mail): “a perfection of 
the unexpected. ”
1. Everything Happens, translated by Stacy Doris (Sausalito, CA: Post Apollo Press, 2000).
ANYTHING GOES
Al Filreis’s Counter-Revolution of the Word: The Conservative Attack on Modern 
Poetry 1945–1960 is less a work of literary interpretation than a penetrating 
historical and sociological study.1 As such, it is comparable to such now- 
classic studies as Jed Rasula’s The American Poetry Wax Museum: Reality 
Effects , Alan Golding’s From Outlaw to Classic: Canons in American Poetry , 
Robert Von Hallberg’s American Poetry and Culture, 1945–1960 , and Cary 
Nelson’s Repression and Recovery: Modern American Poetry and the Politics of 
Cultural Memory , 1910 –1945. I mention these works as context because of 
their archival and historical focus. For Filreis’s book is chock full of fascinat-ing, yet disconcerting and often puzzling, quotations and accounts. Filreis shows the very real devils in the details.
Against the grain of received history, Filreis reveals the deep engagement 
of many of the left poets of the 1930s with modernist poetic innovation (the converse is also true: in an earlier book Filreis reads the putatively conserva-tive Wallace Stevens within the sociocultural context of the 1930s). He also tracks a number of thirties poets, showing the dire effect of McCarthyite red-baiting on their careers. However, his principal focus is on the conﬂa-tion of anticommunism with antimodernism in the immediate postwar pe-riod. Such a conﬂation might seem counterintuitive, since the left is often associated with populist styles that reject modernist difﬁculty, while radical modernism is often associated with an aesthetic at odds with explicit left political content. But the toxic mix of what Filreis calls “anticommunist antimodernism” is not only pervasive in the 1950s but also provides an ideo-logical foundation for the Ofﬁcial Verse Culture of the 1970s onward.
Filreis’s book is ﬁlled with telling examples of how the aesthetic and po-
litical right denounced nonconventional poetry as if it were a part of the communist menace. Such poetry was smeared as unnatural and corrupting, 
1. Counter-Revolution of the Word  (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2007).Boston Review 33.4 (July–August 2008).
60 PROFESSING POETICS
as an affront to moral values as expressed in proper grammar, and, more-
over, as foreign and therefore un-American. “The vocabulary of thirties-bashing was cast in the idiom of incurability; tropes of cancer and mass death abounded. Leftist writing of the 1930s was dismissed ‘in a phrase: it was an alien growth’ . . . ‘a poison’ ” (36, 37), while, by extension, modernist 
poetry was denounced as “barbarous dissonance” (170) fomenting “death 
and decay” (169). Writing in the  New York Times in 1949, Howard Devree 
was already warning of the conﬂation of communism and modernism, both “possessed of the devil . . . and dangerous to American culture and realism” (169):
Another curious, disconcerting and, in fact, frightening part of the new at-
tack has been the tendency of the attackers to refer to modern art in practi-cally the same terms used by Hitler and the Communist hierarchy. It is called “degenerate art, ” and there are thinly veiled accompanying demands for its suppression and censorship.
2
Filreis is not alone in relating these images of the alien and nonhuman 
to the imagery of Don Siegel’s 1956 movie, The Invasion of the Body Snatch-
ers. In the charged environment, the lyric became a symbol for antimod-
ernist resistance, clearly “identiﬁed with the postideological moment, ” a bulwark against what Col. Cullen Jones, in a 1951 article, “Abnormal Po-ets and Abnormal Poetry, ” derided as modernist effeminacy and its “sexual  abnormalities. ”
3
One thing the anticommunist antimodernists had right was that the po-
etic form of radical modernist work was political; Filreis calls this the “cold war politics of poetic form” (288). A perfect example is a 1953 article by Donald Davidson in which he targets parataxis in poetry for its “treacherous political irresponsibility in the act of eschewing relations of cause and ef-fect while letting the related elements stand in unordered, unsubordinated lists” (Filreis, 292). Just a few years earlier, Robert Hillyer, in the widely cir-
2. Howard Devree, “Modernism under Fire, ” New York Times, September 11, 1949, sec. 10, p. 6. 
3. “Abnormal Poets and Abnormal Poetry, ” in Stanton Coblentz, The Music Makers: An Anthol-
ogy of Recent American Poetry (New York: Bernard Ackerman, 1945), quoted by Filreis (245–
46). Based on the evidence from a headnote in Coblentz’s anthology, Jones would certainly qualify as part of the Ofﬁcial Verse Culture of his time, given that he published thirty-ﬁve poems in 1944 in such widely circulated publications as the  New York Times and the Atlantic 
(Coblentz, 122).
Anything Goes 61
culated Saturday Review of Literature  had assailed modernism in poetry as an 
“illusion of independent thought” and a “propaganda” machine of “the pow-
ers of darkness” (“Poetry’s New Priesthood, ” June 18, 1949). Writing in the Bulletin of the Poetry Society of America , Hillyer accused modernists of “a cold 
conformity of intellectualism” that eliminated “diversity” and insisted on “a critical censorship, in its effects like that of the Kremlin” (Filreis, 165).
Filreis documents the smearing of modernist poets as perpetuators of 
the “Big Lie” (that it’s really poetry), who, if they capture the free world, would enforce their worldview by means of “secret police, concentration camps, and execution squads, ” in the words of Stanton Coblentz in 1950 (Filreis, 166). Coblentz, a central ﬁgure in the study, had been featured in the New York Times Magazine  in 1946 with his article “What Are They?—Po-
ems or Puzzles?” In a later essay, Coblentz casts modernism in the role of a “mosquito that sucks your blood”; in other words, a “parasite that must be contained” (Filreis, 207). Images of purity versus degeneration abound. Consider Ben Lucien Burman’s “The Cult of Unintelligibility, ” published in the November 1, 1952, issue of the Saturday Review. The inﬂuences of Ger-
trude Stein, Burman says, “still to be found in many strategic strongholds, like the lurking genius of yellow fever, . . . must be constantly fought and sprayed with violent chemicals lest the microbes develop again and start a new infection” (Filreis, 205–6).
As Filreis shows, it gets worse:
The editors of Pinnacle, the magazine of the League for Sanity in Poetry, de-
scribed modernism as genocide: poets were being exterminated (“The actual mandate, to be precise, prescribes not that all poets be exterminated, but only those who respect the literary traditions of three thousand years”). To this murderous “revolution, ” wrote another antimodernist, “there must be a counterrevolution. . . . The world has no . . . use for any kind of bigotry and regimentation. ” It was “futile . . . to seek the cause of the rise of our poetic dictators in any agency or factor outside their own little, warped minds and hearts, ” a conservative editor wrote, and so, she continued, “the only way to eliminate the trouble is to eliminate them. ” By imposing a “tabu against beauty, modern poets . . . have unwittingly signed their own death sen-tence. ” (166)
If the connection of radical formal innovation to genocide strikes con-
temporary sensibilities as bizarre, it’s important to note that these ideas 
62 PROFESSING POETICS
were mainstreamed in the immediate postwar period and that they under-
write the allegorical unconscious of the antimodernist factions of Ofﬁcial Verse Culture in our time.
While the postwar polemic takes a sometimes apocalyptic turn, there is 
nothing new about such viscerally negative responses to radical modernism. Russian futurist poets allied themselves to the 1917 revolution while Italian futurists allied themselves with the right; either way, those who rejected radical change expressed shock and dismay at the new art and the social dis-ruption to which it was symbolically, and actually, attached. The confusion as to whether radical formal innovation is leftist or rightist, ethical or ni-hilistic, persists. In the United States, during the ﬁrst decades of the twen-tieth century, the modernist “revolution of the word, ” and even the simple practice of free verse, were more often debunked than celebrated. Nowa-days, we take Whitman and Dickinson as canonical, but the contemporary responses to their work were chilling and pre-emptive. In “The Philosophy of Composition, ” Poe located the problem as quintessentially American, as a phobia of the aesthetic; a fear that sensation undermines morality. The battle erupts on many fronts, historical and contemporary. Eugene O’Neill epitomizes the modernist-as-degenerate credo in Tyrone’s famous blast at his too-poetic son in Long Day’s Journey into Night (1942):
That damned library of yours! . . . Voltaire, Rousseau, Schopenhauer, Nietz-
sche, Ibsen! Atheists, fools, and madmen! And your poets! This Dowson, and this Baudelaire, and Swinburne and Oscar Wilde and Whitman and Poe! Whoremongers and degenerates!
4
Brian Reed, in his recent study Hart Crane: After His Lights , is able to 
chart how both the body of this poet and the body of his work remain a site 
of acute aesthetic and political struggle, which plays out, in what must seem an odd passion play to the uninformed, in contemporary responses from the 1920s and 1930s and also in reviews of his work in our time.
What is signiﬁcant about Filreis’s study is that he traces how these anti-
modernist dynamics, fully alive in the ﬁrst half of the century, morphed into effective, and even necessary, tools for Cold War hegemony. In this context it becomes harder to shrug off such now peripheral ﬁgures like Peter Viereck, who writing in Political Science Quarterly  in 1952, “argued that the modern 
‘anything goes’ aesthetic led to communist (and fascist) mass murder” (Fil-
4. Long Day’s Journey into Night (New Haven: Yale University Press,) 135.
Anything Goes 63
reis, 250). Filreis associates this noxious doctrine with the emergence of 
neoliberalism as articulated by Daniel Bell. “Bell’s social narrative telling of the convergence of communism and modernism led him to propose a ‘vital center’—in Arthur Schlesinger Jr.’s celebrated term—where limits could be placed on the urge toward ‘anything goes,’ an attitude symptomatic of both communists and modernists” (250).
While the anticommunist antimodernists claimed that modernist obscu-
rity and unintelligibility constituted an elitist betrayal of the general reader, they failed to recognize that this general reader was the pure product of an elitist Cold War ideology. But the greater irony is that much of what the anti-
communist antimodernists rejected in radical modernist poetry was also 
reviled by the totalitarian governments that they opposed. In the defense of human freedom as articulated by the individual poet in the lyric poem, these cold warriors hollowed the lyric of its enunciative and sonic richness and undermined the articulation of human freedom through unfettered  expression.
The demonization of the aesthetic left in poetry does not end in the ﬁf-
ties or expire with the end of the Cold War; it persists, often in defensive, if not farcical, form, in the teaching and writings of those who, ironically, may sense they are on the wrong side of history. As with anticommunist anti-
modernism, dogmatic protest against the dogmatism of others is the stan-
dard operating procedure. The intellectual heir of anticommunist antimod-ernism is a post- or neoliberalism that underwrites its defense of dominant aesthetic values as common sense. Critiques are dismissed as unjustiﬁable agonism (the ideology of the avant-garde), part of a struggle that is deemed outmoded. The postpartisan creed is that the avant-garde, like the left, has won its battles and now it’s time to return to kinder, gentler forms; poetry with a human face. It’s the end of ideology all over again. On these Cold War terms, the only way not to be divisive is to accept the dominant poetic val-ues as inevitable and natural, as craft rather than ideology, sincerity rather than artiﬁce.
The kookiness of much “anticommunist antimodernism” can make it 
seem blithely dismissible, as if Filreis is ﬂogging a possibly never living horse. And I have to confess to a ghoulish delight, mixed with the smug-ness of ridicule,  to cruising Filreis’s extreme detail. And yet, I can’t help 
feeling that the underlying literary values articulated by anticommunist antimodernism remain central to a still contemporary dogma of conform-ism, masked as compulsory humanism, that constrains the reception of new poetry while repressing the dialectics of literary history that Filreis 
64 PROFESSING POETICS
charts. Looking back, what’s perhaps most striking is that American poetic 
invention ﬂourished despite—indeed was fueled by—its detractors. For the perverse result of such attacks in postwar American culture is that they encouraged the development of an alternative poetry infrastructure that persists to this day.
Filreis provides a vivid lineage for a literary culture that promotes anti-
intellectualism in the pursuit of monovalent “core values” (traditional form, the authentic subjective voice, legibility, the common reader) that are still claimed as fundamental literary virtues. The ideology of the ﬁfties anticom-munist antimodernists is now embedded in the mainstream; it has come to shape common assumptions of popular taste about poetry.
While it may be tempting to mock the antimodernist claims documented 
in Counter-Revolution of the Word , Filreis’s sober approach acknowledges the 
social cost for many poets. Ludicrous attacks on formal innovation become ominous when they cost someone a job or erase signiﬁcant poets from cul-tural memory. But beyond the individual price paid by poets, there is also a high social cost for demonizing aesthetic invention and poetic difference. We pay that price with the diminished intellectual fare served up daily by the mediocracy and with the stunted conception of literature promoted in too many school classrooms.
Those who do not want to repeat poetic history in the form of farce are 
condemned to study it. Counter-Revolution of the Word  does just that.
OUR AMERICAS: NEW WORLDS  
STILL IN PROGRESS
The conceited villager believes the entire world to be his village.
JOSÉ MARTÍ, “OUR AMERICA”
Sou um tupí tangendo um alaúde!
(I am a Tupí strumming a lute!)
MÁRIO DE ANDRADE, “O TROVADOR” (THE TROUBADOUR)
Tupy, or not tupy that is the question.
OSWALD DE ANDRADE, “ANTHROPOPHAGITE MANIFESTO”
1.
One day I want to write an essay called The Americas Still in Process. In this 
essay, I would explore the still-imaginary cultural space of a “poetics of the 
Americas” in terms of José Martí’s “Our America” and Emerson’s “moral perfectionism. ” My discussion of moral perfectionism, indebted to Stan-ley Cavell, would no doubt lead to a declaration of interdependence: that the poetics of the Americas cannot be complete, for if we ever arrive at its end, we will have destroyed its promise to be ongoing, regenerating, and  self-cannibalizing.
In this essay, I would proclaim, like a Dada Edgar Poe dreaming of Nicolàs 
Guillén doing Google searches, that the poem of the Americas does not exist. For the Americas is an imaginary cultural space whose mutant and multi-form manifestations are as evanescent as the last breaths of a dying tongue.
& then I’d say that this is why the imperative for the poets of the Ameri-
cas—contra conventional wisdom—has been to tell rather than show. For telling is the task, as Langston Hughes calls us, of a people “in transition. ”
First published in a Spanish translation by Ernesto Livon-Grosman in S/N: New World Poetics 1  
(2010).
66 PROFESSING POETICS
2.
In his 1972 anthology Shaking the Pumpkin: Traditional Poetry of the Indian 
North Americans , Jerome Rothenberg makes a modest proposal: let’s study 
the indigenous epics of the Americas rather than those of Europe—the 
Popol Vuh in place of The Odyssey.1 Rothenberg here echoes the sentiments 
of José Martí in “Our America, ” eighty years earlier:
The history of America, from the Incas to the present, must be taught in its 
smallest detail, even if the Greek Archons go untaught. Our own Greece is preferable to the Greece that is not ours; we need it more.
2
Rothenberg’s two early anthologies, Technicians of the Sacred  (1967) and 
Shaking  the Pumpkin  (1972) insisted on the immediate (rather than sim-
ply historical or anthropological) relevance of the “tribal” poetries of Na-
tive Americans (on both American continents), Africans, and peoples of Oceania. As such, they should be read as crucial poetic documents of the 1960s and ’70s, works that accelerated a reconceptualization of American poetry as a poetics of the Americas. Rothenberg presented a concerted as-sault on the primacy of Western high culture and an active attempt to ﬁnd, in other, non-Western/non-Oriental cultures, what seemed missing from  our own.
3.
The singular, unitary idea of American literature is based on a set of often violent Anglonormative erasures: of pre-Conquest cultures, of the Middle Passage, of the languages of immigration, and of newly emerging tongues.
4.
In 1951, Charles Olson’s visit to the Yucatan inspired a signiﬁcant and in-ﬂuential move toward a Poetics of the Americas, the most important, among U.S. poets, in the years immediately following the Second World War. Olson’s expansive rejection of the trap of what Robin Blaser, in an es-
1. Pre-Faces & Other Writings (New York: New Directions, 1981), 175.
2. “Our America, ” in Selected Writings of José Martí , translated by Esther Allen (New York: 
Penguin, 2002), 291.
Our Americas: New Worlds Still in Progress 67
say on Olson,3 calls “The Western Box, ” both echoes Martí and anticipates  
Rothenberg:
It is not the Greeks I blame. What it comes to is ourselves, that we do not 
ﬁnd ways to hew to experience as it is, in our deﬁnition and expression of it, in other words, ﬁnd ways to stay in the human universe, and not be led to partition reality at any point, in any way. For this is just what we do, this is the real issue of what has been, and the process, as it now asserts itself, can be exposed. It is the function, comparison, or its bigger name, symbology. These 
are the false faces, too much seen, which hide and keep from use the active intellectual states, metaphor and performance.
4
Olson went on to articulate a poetics of place that rejects the metaphysical 
in favor of the historical and particular. Coming into direct contact with our Americas, he realized that the way in is not by analogy but through a process of active juxtaposition that produces a third term.
Our Americas is a performance.
5.
I want to insist on the word Americas,  not just to encompass North and 
South America, but also as a way to register the multiplicity of our senses of America, as a way of registering this multiplicity, not comparison, as foun-dational for the poetics of our Americas.
In Ül: Four Mapuche Poets , Cecilia Vicuña quotes Jorge Teillier: “My 
weapon against the world is another vision of the world. ”
5 What poetry lacks 
in efﬁcacy it makes up for in conceptual power—Blake’s “Mental Fight, ” or, as Martí puts it in “Our America, ” “weapons of the mind, which conquer all others. Barricades of ideas are worth more than barricades of stones. ”
No issue has dogged poetry so much in the past two decades as iden-
tity—national, social, ethnic, racial, and local. Like the Americas, identity 
3. “The Violets: Charles Olson and Alfred North Whitehead, ” in The Fire: Collected Essays of 
Robin Blaser , edited by Miriam Nichols (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2006); a 
digital version is available at PEPC Library, http://writing.upenn.edu/library/Blaser-Robin_
The-Violets.html, accessed May 15, 2010. 4. “Human Universe, ” in Collected Prose of Charles Olson , edited by Benjamin Friedlander 
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1997), 157.5. Ül: Four Mapuche Poets, edited by Cecilia Vicuña, translated by John Bierhorst (Pittsburgh: Poetry in Indigenous Languages Series, Latin American Literary Review Press, 1998), 21.
68 PROFESSING POETICS
is always plural. And like the Americas, identity is necessarily, a priori, syn-
cretic and braided, indeed, self-cannibalizing, as surely as the DNA that 
ﬂows in our psyches and concatenates our mental projections.
In developing our thinking of a poetics of the Americas and also, far more 
importantly, in our activities in creating a poetics of Americas, we would do well to keep in mind Teillier’s remark that we are creating another vision of the world, one that in its globalism does not follow the dictates of the World Trade Organization and World Bank and in its localism does not become the site of the creation of strange fruits for export, but rather commits itself to a cannibalizing process of self-creation, as ﬁrst defense against the “Western Box. ” A possibility never better set out than in Oswald de Andrade’s 1928 Anthropophagite—cannibalism—Manifesto:
Only anthropophagy unites us . . .
Against all importers of canned consciousness. The palpable existence of 
life. And the study of prelogical mentality left to Mr. Levy-Bruhl . . .
Against the truth of the missionary nations, deﬁned by the wisdom of  
an anthropophagous, the Viscount of Cairu:—It is a lie repeated over and 
over . . .
But there came no crusaders. There came fugitives from a civilization we 
are eating up, because we are as strong and as vengeful as the Tortoise.6
6.
Martí again: “The trees must form ranks to block the seven-league giant!” 
(289).
An ever intriguing model for our global/local/loco poetics is the Scots 
poet Hugh MacDiarmid, not the name he was born with but the name he aspired to, who was thrown out of the Scots nationalist party, despite his po-etic work in synthetic Scots dialect, for being too international; and thrown out of the Communist Party for being too localist.
In the collection of Mapuche poets, Elicura Chihuailaf writes that “po-
etry does not merely safeguard the cultural identity of a people, it gener-ates it. ” In this way, Chihuailaf emphasizes the productive forces of poetry in contrast to the reproductive reﬂexes of cultural theory. A poetics of the 
6. “Anthropophagic Manifesto, ” translated by Maria do Carmo Zanini, in Sibila, http://sibila 
.com.br/index.php/sibila-english/395-anthropophagic-manifest o, accessed May 17, 2010.
Our Americas: New Worlds Still in Progress 69
Americas would be less concerned with analyzing the themes and cultural 
narratives produced in Spanish and English ﬁction than in listening for—and composing—a collage of distinct language practices across the Ameri-cas. In replacing theme and system—“comparison” and “symbology” in  Olson’s terms—with overlays, palimpsests, and collage, I am suggesting that we conceptualize our Americas as a hypertextual or syncretic constellation, with alphabetic, glyphic, and a/oral layers. A constellation is an alterna-tive model for understanding what is often characterized as fragmentation, parataxis, isolation, insularity, atomization, and separate development.  Hypertextuality maps a syncretic space that articulates points of contact and that potentiates both spatial connections among discrepant parts and temporal overlays that merge or melt into one another.
The Mapuche volume’s palimpsestic approach emerges directly from the 
material conditions of the poetics of the Americas: not multiculturalism, but what Chihuailaf usefully calls (in John Bierhorst’s English translation of the original Spanish text of this Mapudungun-speaking poet): intercultural-ism. Indeed, this book is in three languages: English, Spanish, and Mapu-
dungun (the language of the Mapuche). Mapudungun is the most recent of the three language to be alphabetized, that is, to be transliterated into writ-ing. At ﬁrst I was confused as to why no translator was listed for the Span-ish, but then I realized it was taken for granted that the poets represented in Mapudungun had made their own translations, or more likely worked bilingually, perhaps moving back from the Spanish into Mapudungun as much as going from a fully original Mapudungun and translating into Span-ish, as if it were a foreign language. Perhaps what makes this indigenous for 
our Americas is not the single strand of the Mapudungun but the braided layers of the aboriginal, the colonial, the immigrant: speciﬁcally the joining of any two against a third, which is perceived to be the greater threat.
Martí speaks of us as laboring with “English trousers, Parisian waistcoat, 
a North America overcoat, and Spanish bullﬁghter’s cap [as the] Indian circles about us, mute, ” and goes on to emphasize the necessity of rejecting  racism by acknowledging not only those here before the Europeans but also those who were violently wrenched from Africa for a rough landing in a New World, those who sojourn alone and unrecognized among the rivers and wild animals (293). Martí is at pains not to erase the personhood of 
those brought to the Americas as slaves. But he also registers that the new 
worlds of our Americas require an ecopoetics, as Jonathan Skinner proposes 
in his magazine of that name.
70 PROFESSING POETICS
In the imaginary space of our Americas, none has sovereignty, either of 
suffering or land, for sovereignty is reserved for the ghosts and the wind, 
which are forever lost both to and in time.
7.
The poetics of the Americas has for hundreds of years been creating syn-cretic indigenous languages distinct from the received dictions of the  languages of conquest or emigration: indigenous in the sense of born in a region, originating in a place. The place of here, the time of now: necessarily  a crossroads.
That’s why I would stress, in looking for the threads that interconnect the 
poetries of the Americas, innovation and over reﬁnement, as a way to regis-ter how important ingenuity has been for our Americas. That is, the points of contact that we may ﬁnd in our mutual inhabitations of the Americas may not be in how we have extended and reﬁned a poetic language we have inherited, for example from Europe, from London’s English or Madrid’s Spanish, or Lisbon’s Portuguese, but rather how these poetries have worked to disrupt the ascent of a literature of reﬁnement and assimilation.
I hope this may suggest a response to a criticism, often heard, to propos-
als for expanding the study of American literature to the literature of the Americas. If American, in the sense of U.S., literature is understood as an extension or development of earlier, primarily British literature, then we need, necessarily, to look ﬁrst to the earlier literature of England to under-stand our own. This is a primary rationale behind the structure of the En-  
glish department, where the teaching of U.S. literature was itself a hard-won battle in the earlier part of the last century. I say U.S., not North American, literature because U.S. English departments have paid scant attention to either Canadian or Mexican literature, which are seen, at best, as collateral to, rather than foundational for, the development of U.S. literature.
In a recent essay, Frank Davey points out how few points of contact there 
have been between U.S. and Canadian poets and that these have come al-most entirely after 1950. When they have occurred, these conﬂuences have allowed poets on both sides of the border to put forward a set of shared aesthetic and political engagements against more conservative, if not nativ-ist, poetic positions in their own countries. At the same time, the ofﬁcial narratives of the national poetries of each country have largely been traced as separate and disconnected:
Our Americas: New Worlds Still in Progress 71
Always latent in Canadian culture are the facts that Canada’s roots began in 
dissent from the U.S., and that Canada has been repeatedly re-afﬁrmed by U.S.  citizens themselves as the alternate North American nation. . . . Canada’s ﬁrst wave of English-speaking immigrants were United Empire Loyalist refugees from the American Revolutionary War. Canada’s formation as a nation in 1867 was in part a response to the large U.S. armies created by the Civil War. Just as Canadian governments have been restricted by this complex cultural history in the extent to which they have been able to afﬁliate themselves with U.S. policies, Canadian poets have necessarily been both unconsciously and consciously selective in their associations with U.S. poetries and poetics. In general, Canadian poets have avoided association with hegemonic U.S. poet-ries or poetries that have celebrated the U.S. nation.
7
As Roland Greene argues, the need to reform the disciplinary boundar-
ies of literary study and move toward what he calls “New World Studies” 
is urgent. See especially his essay “New World Studies and the Limits of National Literatures” (from which I have taken the epigraph from Andrade’s “O trovador”). Greene writes:
For new world studies the contact zone is not only the literal places of cultural 
encounter, but the concatenated spaces where worlds—that is, intellectual or spiritual systems represented by versions through which they can be under-stood or evaluated—move into critical relation with each other; the coming into play of the term and the concept of “world” is vital to the enterprise.
8
8.
A syncretic poetics of ingenuity and invention, of collage and palimpsest, 
is averse to the accumulative and developmental model of literature still reigning in the U.S. literary academy (and elsewhere in the Americas). If we think of literature as developing through cross-fertilization and cannibal-ization, toward the invention of a synthetic indigenous, of new worlds, then 
7. Frank Davey, “Canadian Poetry and Its Relationship to U.S. Poetry, ” in The Greenwood En-
cyclopaedia of American Poets and Poetry , edited by Jeffrey Gray (Westport, CT: Greenwood 
Press, 2006), 229.
8. Roland Greene, “New World Studies and the Limits of National Literatures, ” in Stanford 
Humanities Review  6:1 (1998), http://www.stanford.edu/group/SHR/6-1/html/greene.html, 
accessed May 17, 2010.
72 PROFESSING POETICS
we may ﬁnd it necessary to consider parallel poetries rather than causal 
poetries: coincidence will become more signiﬁcant to us than lineage, points of contact more resonant than common origin. Or anyway: as sig-
niﬁcant. This is why Ernesto Livon-Grosman’s notation of the synchronicity of New York’s L=A=N=G=U=A=G=E  (1978–1981) and Buenos Aires’s Xul 
(1980–1997) is so appealing: it makes no claim to inﬂuence, to cause and effect; these are simultaneous developments, yet structurally and poetically related, even twined.
9
The poetics of the Americas that I am imagining is not about compari-
sons: it is about encounter, and change through the encounter; for if you are the same after such a meeting, then there was no encounter.
9.
The project of America—of the Americas—is a process not yet complete, a process that shall never be ﬁnished.
For when it’s ﬁnished, it’s over.Our Americas is still in progress: as a talk, an experiment, an essay. Then 
again perhaps our Americas is a formal procedure, a hypothesis or condi-tional, requiring aesthetic intervention, seat-of-the-pants ingenuity, and otherworldly reinvention. And this is why, it could just be, that we see the possibilities of our Americas most acutely in poetry: our poetics viewed under the sign of our exchange.
9. See Livon-Grosman’s “The Questioning of the Americas, ” in 99 Poets/1999: An International 
Poetics Symposium, which I edited for boundary 2 in 1999, and which is the starting point for 
my reﬂections here.
THE PRACTICE OF POETICS
1.
While poetics brings to mind a long history of laws of composition, poetics 
can also stress poiesis—the actual making or doing: poetry as process. Ev-ery doing carries the potential of something new, emergent, something not already predicated by poetics. Practice overtakes theory, practice changes theory. And not just writing practice but also performance.
2.
To practice poetics is to acknowledge the inevitability of metaphor, the lin-guisticality of perception, the boundedness of thought, the passion of ideas, the beauty of error, the chains of logic, the possibilities of intuition, and the uncanny delight of chance. In contrast to the syllogistic rationality of expository writing, poetics is situational, shifts with the winds, courts con-tradiction, feeds on inconsistency.
3.
The profession is best that professionalizes least.
The sociologist C. Wright Mills got this just right when he wrote, “The 
aim of the college, for the individual student, is to eliminate the need in his life for the college; the task is to help him become a self-educating man. For only that will set him free. ”
1
1. “Mass Society and Liberal Education, ” in Power, Politics and People  (New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1963), 367–68. Thanks to Joel Kuszai for bringing this quotation to my  
attention. See also William Carlos Williams’s The Embodiment of Knowledge (New York: New 
Directions, 1974).Introduction to Scholarship in Modern Languages and Literature, edited by David Nicholls (New 
York: Modern Language Association, 2007).
74 PROFESSING POETICS
4.
In a culture that too often derides learning, complexity, and nuance, and 
where the demand for intelligibility is consistently used as a weapon to suppress unwelcome or difﬁcult ideas: there is no higher aspiration than scholarship. But students caught up in the “major, ” just as faculty caught up in the “profession, ” often act as if scholarship requires adherence to a set  of norms, either in subject matter or style, that deﬁne the ﬁeld. Consistency of tone, standardization of documentation formats, and shopworn modes of analysis are more likely to anesthetize a required paper than allow entry for the aesthetic. Rewriting may be admirable, but not if it means stating a rote idea more clearly: rewriting should add reﬂection to a paragraph, not strip it of its unresolved thoughts. Felt inconsistency is preferable to mandated rationalization.
To state the obvious: an unorganized (or “differently” organized) essay 
that suggests active thinking is often more useful in response to a literary work than a paper of impeccable logic that has little to say. I realize that I am setting up a false dichotomy: It is not a question of choosing logic versus thinking but rather of understanding the value, and implications, of each. And yet, for the young scholar, the demands of expository normalcy may compete with the demands of poetics.
2 Shall we demand all students be extravagant? 
No doubt, this would be rash. But shall we continue to demand that all stu-dents curb their writing, as if composition were a dog and not a god?
I prize the adventure of learning: scholarship not as a predetermined 
ride to selected port of calls but as an exploration by association, one per-ception leading to the next, a network of stoppages, detours, reconnais-sance. Not double majors with extra requirements and ever more protocols, but multicentered minors , connected by peripheral routes, less-traveled 
passages, hunches.
Art students used to be told that the fundamental requirement for draw-
ing or painting was to accurately render ﬁgures. But this confused one mo-dality of representation with the entire process of visual aesthesis. It might have been better to say you can’t draw if you can’t see , but it would be even 
better to say you can’t draw if you can’t perceive . Correlatively, we might say, 
you can’t write if you can’t think. Scholarship requires poetics.
2. Emerson’s essays, and in particular “The American Scholar, ” his address to the Phi Beta 
Kappa Society, at Cambridge, on August 31, 1837; and “The Poet, ” remain foundational for American poetics. See especially Stanley Cavell’s extensive writing on Emerson. And behind Emerson, think, for the purposes of this brief for poetics, of Montaigne and Pascal.
The Practice of Poetics 75
Paratactic writing, thinking by association, is no less cogent or persua-
sive than hypotactic exposition, with its demands that one thought be sub-
ordinated to the next. Poetics reminds us that the alternate logics of poetry are not suited just for emotion or irrational expression; poetics lies at the foundation of all writing.
Poetry is a name we use to discount what we fear to acknowledge.The accurate documentation of information used in a work is a vital 
principle of scholarship. Similarly, scholarship requires writers to consider challenges to their views: but this too often is assumed to mean considering challenges to the content of what is being said while ignoring challenges to the style and form. The importance of poetics for scholarship is not to de-cree that anything goes, but rather to insist that exposition is an insufﬁcient guarantor of reason. Poetics makes scholarly writing harder, not easier: it complicates scholarship with an insistence that the way we write is never neutral, never self-evident.
Clarity in writing is a rhetorical effect, not a natural fact. One man’s elo-
quence can be another’s poison; one woman’s stuttering may be the closest approximation of truth that we will ever know.
5.
As a literary genre, poetics  refers to works on the philosophy of composition, 
from Aristotle’s Poetics to many contemporary works on the poetics of one thing or another, from scholarship to architecture. Poetics also is the term used for works about poetry written by poets. There is a long and storied history of both kinds of poetics, but this is to be an account not of the his-tory of a literary form but rather of the signiﬁcance of poetics for literary scholarship. With that in mind, it is important to note a distinction among literary theory, philosophy, and poetics. Literary theory can be described as the application of philosophical, political, or psychoanalytical principles or methods to the study of literary or cultural works. Theory suggests a predi-lection for consistency and explanation and, like philosophy, may take the form of stand-alone arguments. Poetics, in contrast, is provisional, context-dependent, and often contentious. Theory will commonly take a scientiﬁc tone; poetics will sometimes go out of its way to seem implausible, to ex-aggerate, or even to be self-deprecating.
3 (Since this is a work of poetics, I 
3. There are, of course, many theories about theory. Two of the best overviews of this topic, 
both of which suggest useful parallels between theory and the argument for poetics made 
76 PROFESSING POETICS
won’t note that poetics can also take a form directly opposite to what I am 
proposing; like politics, poetics is plural.)
In some ways, literary theory, in its many forms, has displaced poetics as 
a model for scholarship. Anthologies of literary theory, while often includ-ing statements by poets from earlier centuries, largely turn their attention to literary theorists and related philosophers when they come to the twenti-eth century.
4 Perhaps this seems a more sensible choice as a model for both 
scholarship and literary criticism. Poetics, in this system, becomes another form of poetry—something to be subjected to criticism and analysis but not the model for the practice of criticism, scholarship, or interpretation that it, nonetheless, continues to be.
6.
One of the two most important lessons of poetics is that the contemporary practice of poetry informs all readings of poetry. Poetry begins in the pres-ent moment and moves backward and forward from there. With no ori-entation in contemporary poetry and poetics, young scholars will remain ungrounded, without a direct connection to how works of literature are engendered in their own time. Without this knowledge, it will be all the harder to understand the relation of older works to their own times or to ours, or, for that matter, future works to the times yet to come. The absence of this visceral connection to poetic practice may be disguised by the de-meanor of disinterested or clinical professionalism, but it will be betrayed in the body of the text of any scholarship produced.
The second fundamental lesson of poetics is that literary works do not 
exist only, or even primarily, on the page. Alphabetic writing in books re-mains the dominant medium for poetry in our time, as it has been over the past many hundreds of years; but there was poetry and poetics before the invention of the alphabet, just as new poetries and new poetics will emerge from our postalphabetic environment of digital and electronic language  
here, are Jean-Michel Rabaté, The Future of Theory  (Oxford: Blackwell, 2002); and Herman 
Rappaport’s The Theory Mess  (New York: Columbia University Press, 2001).
4. For example, Critical Theory Since Plato , edited by Hazard Adams, rev. ed. (Fort Worth: 
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1992). Works of poetics (by poets) dominate the book up until 
the twentieth century, when the contribution by poets almost entirely disappears; nonethe-less, this anthology remains a useful collection of poetics and indeed of the twentieth century “critical theory” that has been closely connected with the work of the most socially engaged and innovative poetics of the same period. 
The Practice of Poetics 77
reproduction. Indeed, the now, as well as the archive of poetry, is as likely to 
be found on the web as in books. Modern reproduction technologies have 
also made available recordings of poets reading their work. These record-ings, together with live performances, are a crucial part of any critical or scholarly approach to poetry over the past hundred years.
5
New poetry is being created and performed every day. All scholarship in 
poetry occurs against this backdrop. Poetry readings and poetry on the web are directly relevant to literary scholarship of any type and of all periods. In this sense, poetry and poetics, as I am imagining them here, are a core value of the literary academy. It is exhilarating to see new poetics emerg-ing in literary magazines and small press books, in local reading series and electronic discussion lists and websites and blogs. The ongoing creation of new poetics offers us a glimpse into how literature is made in response to ever-changing conditions. And it offers us a chance not just to observe the unfolding story but to change it.
7.
Read globally, write locally.
Narrowing down a “ﬁeld” to one period, genre, or method inhibits one 
of the most important possibilities for scholarship: making connections across these divides. Lots of knowledge about a speciﬁc area of interest is admirable and sometimes invaluable; knowledge about lots of different ar-eas is invaluable and sometimes admirable. It is not a question of being eclectic, but of developing your senses of association.
8.
What is the aim of literary scholarship? What is the purpose of a literature class? For some, it may be the accumulation of veriﬁable information that can be extracted from the literary work—social, political, historical, linguistic, or psychoanalytic. I have no wish to undermine such approaches to scholarship and teaching. Rather, I want to suggest an equally signiﬁcant, but distinct, motivation for literary scholarship and teaching, a motivation for which thematic approaches to interpretation may prove detrimental. This “other”  
5. Close Listening: Poetry and the Performed Word  (New York: Oxford University Press, 1998), 
which I edited, provides a set of essays on the signiﬁcance of the poetry reading for poetry 
and poetics. 
78 PROFESSING POETICS
approach to reading centers on the aesthetic experience of the literary work; 
thus, it presents an epistemological dilemma for thematic criticism. For if a literary work is not experienced aesthetically, the reader will not experience what makes it a work of art; this, in turn, will compromise any thematic read-ing. Poetics is a prerequisite for literary study.
9.
Everybody talks about the crisis in the humanities but nobody takes respon-sibility for it.
It is often lamented that humanists make a poor case for their values in 
the face of the powerful claims by those who advocate, on the one hand, invariant, often religiously derived, principles and those who advocate, on the other, technorationality—the idea that knowledge must be observer-independent and reproducible. I want to propose poetics as the foundation for a realm of values that is neither scientistic nor moralistic.
Poetics is an ethical engagement with the shifting conditions of everyday life. 
If it is poetic license to contrast ethics, as a dialogic practice of response in civil society, with morality, as a ﬁxed code of conduct and belief, then poetic license I will happily claim.
Ethics is ironic, morality sincere. Ethics secular, morality religious. Poetics is 
the ethical refusal of morality in the name of aesthetics.
Poetics is an activity, an informed response to emerging circumstances. 
As such, it cannot claim the high ground of morality or systematic theory. Poetics is tactical, not strategic. Indeed, it is the lack of strategy, the aver-sion to the high ground, that often causes poetics to appear weak or con-fused or inconsistent or relativistic.
Yet, in the struggle between ethics and morality, ethics has the advantage 
even when it appears to be wandering in the wilderness. This advantage is too rarely taken advantage of. What is needed is a poetics of poetics ; that is, 
a defense of the ethical grounding of poetics. A poetics of poetics would al-low for a greater self-awareness of the history and value of poetics. In that sense, my approach is closely related to what George Lakoff argues in Moral Politics : that we must be as strong in our advocacy of our values, what he 
calls the values of nurturing parents, as the moralists are for their values, what he calls the values of the strict father.
6
6. Moral Politics: How Liberals and Conservatives Think (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
2002).
The Practice of Poetics 79
A poetics of poetics refutes the charge of relativism, just as a philosophy 
of aesthetic judgment refutes the idea that tastes are merely personal.7 In-
deed, a poetics of poetics makes the case that value judgments are better 
when they take into account multiple, and often competing, factors and refuse the simple solution of pre-existing rule.
10.
I want a visceral poetics that articulates the value of the particular over and against the rule of the universal; that refuses to sacriﬁce the local in the name of the national or corporate; that is dialectical rather than monologic, situational rather than objective; and that prizes knowing and truthfulness more than knowledge and truth.
I want a social poetics that is embodied rather than neutral, that actively 
acknowledges context dependence as a counter to the appearance of objec-tivity. Social poetics, like what Kenneth Burke calls “sociological criticism, ” begins with a conception of the poem as an action to be read in relation to its social motivation, not its intention.
8 The motive or design is the under-
lying reason for a work to come into being in the world, its orientation or trajectory; in contrast, intention is the calculated effect of style and tech-nique. Social poetics acknowledges the agency of a work of art, not simply its historicity, where agency is recognized in the work’s response to particu-lar conditions.
11.
How can such aesthetic or poetic readings be accomplished? So much literary training directs us toward the themes and content of a work as if they were the meaning, that we have almost come to believe, against our-selves, that all the rest is window dressing. Perhaps we’ve lost the hang of listening; perhaps we just don’t hang in long enough. Perhaps we’ve lost the  hankering.
7. See Ludwig Wittgenstein, Lectures & Conversations on Aesthetics, Psychology, and Religious 
Belief (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1972). For a full account of the relation of 
Wittgenstein to poetics, see Marjorie Perloff’s Wittgenstein’s Ladder: Poetic Language and the 
Strangeness of the Ordinary (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999).
8. See Kenneth Burke’s “Literature as Equipment for Living, ” in The Philosophy of Literary Form  
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1973). See also Burke’s A Rhetoric of Motives (New 
York: Prentice-Hall, 1950).
80 PROFESSING POETICS
But maybe it is just a matter of practice.
The aim of a course in poetics is not the memorization of facts but the 
engagement with works—and not so much with the themes of work as with their material emanations as sound and form. Tests in such an environ-ment are counterproductive. And the emphasis on undergraduate essays that mimic the style of professional academic conference papers is replaced by interactive “wreadings” that echo, distort, translate, reform, and imitate the poems that are under active consideration. What is called for is not so much analysis as responsiveness, for it is only after the work has gotten under the skin that there is a basis for an analysis.
II
The Art of  
Immemorability
But knowing not love nor change nor wrath nor wrong,
No more we knew of song.
ALGERNON CHARLES SWINBURNE, “ON THE CLIFFS”
. . . to communicate you must speak clear . . . ﬁrst of all . . .  though I soon learned that immediacy and force take priority . . .
LARRY EIGNER
EVERY WHICH WAY BUT LOOSE
I am writing this sentence in Word for Windows 95: the 12-point Times 
New Roman letters are white dropout against a blue background, and when I ﬁrst typed “blackground” a wavy red line automatically appeared under it until I corrected it with a word found in the Microsoft vocabulary list that comes with the program.
In the book, the one I imagine you to be holding in your hands, the text 
is printed in black ink on white-like sheets, and the light needed to read the letters is coming from above or to the side of the book and is reﬂected off the opaque surface of the paper.
But is it even the “same” text?If I chose to put this piece up on the web (but not without the editors’ 
permission in writing, for which a signed fax would be OK but e-mail would not), the light would come from the back of the document, toward you as you read the text on (or is it off?) the screen. For an HTML version, I would need to make a number of additional decisions. First I would need to choose a background color or image, something few writers have had much choice about in the past ﬁve hundred years. If I pick an image—say a blowup of the holograph text of Blake’s Jerusalem—I risk making my text illegible, or, 
to put it a different way, risk making my text into an image as I efface the contrast between ﬁgure (that is, the text) and ground (that is, the underly-ing image). As much as I want to tease at the idea of the text melting into an image, I also want each of my words to be identiﬁable, so I take the image into Photoshop and tone it down, ensuring that the letters I superimpose on it will be readable. Although I am interested in the merging of text and 
Reimagining Textuality: Textual Studies in the Late Age of Print, edited by Elizabeth Bergmann 
Loizeaux and Neil Fraisat (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 2002). This essay was adapted from my response to several essays in the collection. I used the ﬁnal section of the original essay on Arakawa and Madeline Gins (not included here) for a preface to With Strings (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001).
84 THE ART OF IMMEMORABILITY
image in HTML, the mark-up language itself allows for clear differentiation 
between the two, treating the text as a layer separable from the background. Even if a text is illegible in the browser view, I can copy it and paste it into another ﬁeld with a neutral background and read it, now without interfer-ence (or was it enhancement?). If I want to fuse the text and image I need to make a single graphic ﬁle of the layers, “ﬂatten” them is the term of art, but then the text loses many of its unique user-friendly digital features: the reader/viewer can’t change the font or size or color, can’t copy it and paste it into another document—can’t, that is, treat the text as we have come to expect texts to be treatable in an electronic environment. Ironically, con-verting (or is it translating?) a text into an image ﬁle re-creates just the immutability (materiality?) of text that we assumed before the advent of electronic textuality.
The new computer technology—both desktop publishing and electronic 
publishing—has radically altered the material, speciﬁcally visual, presenta-tion of text. It begins to seem as natural to think of composing screen by screen or link by link as page by page. Many text-based works now exist pri-marily for the screen rather than as transcriptions from another medium. The printed versions of such works might be considered the reproduction and not the other way around, though reciprocity is a better way than hier-archy to understand the relation among textual media.
For the generation now learning to read and write on computers, the 
medium of writing has radically and inalterably changed in ways that can be called hyperalphabetic if not postalphabetic. The association of picture, font, color, sound, link, and design creates a writing space that is closer to William Blake’s or Arakawa and Madeline Gins’s or Johanna Drucker’s practice than it is to the school notebooks I grew up with. Their primary pictorial feature was the tiny holes I created in the paper from rubbing the eraser too hard in one spot (or maybe from just making the same correction over and over and never getting it right). The ineradicable stubbornness of writing is one of the most powerful qualities of nonelectronic writing me-dia, and it is therefore understandable that with the partial eclipse of these media we have come to appreciate this feature of writing more and more.
In her essay in Reimagining Textuality , Drucker explores the implications 
of the premise that electronic textuality may be a technical realization of what had previously been an idealization of the literary work (for example, in G. Thomas Tanselle’s textual theory, as discussed in Reimagining Textual-
ity by Morris Eaves) or geometry (for example, in Husserl’s philosophy, as 
discussed by Drucker), because digitalized text appears to exist in a form 
Every Which Way but Loose 85
that is separate from and prior to any given embodiment. Insofar as binary 
coding produces virtual texts, alphabetic sequences exist in an immaterial form for which any visible manifestation displayed on screen or printed “out” on paper is a second-order phenomenon. After thinking through these textual conditions, Drucker rejects the dematerialization of electronic tex-tuality, pointing to the materiality not only of format and conﬁguration but also of the emplacement of the digital code. The coding is not the anteced-ent original but an anoriginal source from which multiple versions emerge (to pursue a concept I develop in Close Listening: Poetry and the Performed 
Word ).
1
Drucker’s speculations make for some suggestive parallels between anal- 
phabetic and postalphabetic language environments. Like oral performance, virtual textuality creates an original material work in each presentation. The computer screen provides a stage for the transformation of texts into works. Writers become language environment designers—textual architects—who need to foresee how the texts they write will be brought to life in particular-ized enactments. This entails anticipating the inevitable variances made by the different systems on which the work will be displayed. It also allows for creating variants in the conﬁguration of the work; for example, randomiz-ing the sequence of a hypertext so that each time it is viewed it is read in a different order. Moreover, readers can participate in the constitution of the work (and not only in its interpretation) by taking advantage of options for determining the graphic and acoustic environment in which they experi-ence a work and for altering the text of works whose conﬁguration allows for, or indeed mandates, variance.
Electronic textuality is expanding the pool of linguistic signs while at 
the same time “ﬂattening” the alphabetic into an intensely and undeniably visual medium. In the West, alphabets replaced more icon-heavy writing systems because of their technical efﬁciency: Alphabets utilizing twenty-six or a few more characters replaced writing systems that required memo-rizing dozens of characters. With electronic textuality, however, icons can once again proliferate because there is almost no limit on the capacity of the computer to unzip (decode, translate) these icons to meet the needs of par-ticular readers (one example of this is the context-sensitive help provided by a mouse-over on an unfamiliar pictogram on your screen). James Sherry recently pointed out to me that in the world of ﬁnancial computing words 
1. Charles Bernstein, ed., Close Listening: Poetry and the Performed Word (New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1998).
86 THE ART OF IMMEMORABILITY
are beginning to be characterized as too slow, at least in comparison with 
the amount of information that can be transmitted with semiotically packed icons. Twenty-ﬁve hundred years ago, the verdict was in: the alphabet is swifter than the hieroglyph. In 1999, the reverse appears possibly to be the case. In Briggﬂats, Basil Bunting laments, “Pens are too light. / Take a chisel to write. ”
2 Is this something we are now in a position to understand? Or is it 
just another modernist shibboleth, as in—pens are not light enough? In any case, the more disembodied our language environment becomes, the more we may learn to value the materiality of writing. The aura of the prior stages of linguistic production and reproduction increases as each is displaced.
Art media emerge from culture and from the activities of the produc-
ers of culture; they are not intrinsic projections of materials or technolo-gies. Pigment and canvas (or cave walls) do not necessitate the invention of painting as an art medium, any more than the alphabet prescribes the emergence of writing as a medium of art.
As a poet interested in the material and social dimension (you might 
also say social material) of writing, I ﬁnd many of the most exciting ideas suggested by the new explorers of hypertext well worked out in the radically paratactic explorations of both modernist and contemporary work that have been aversive to the “humanist” ideology dominant within the university and also in the mass media. To be reductive about it: On the level of mass culture, humanist values emphasize mimesis of human presence and con-ventional modes of “realistic” representation as a means of maximizing the audience for cultural products by maximizing consumer passivity. On the level of high culture, humanist ideology works to maintain control of those free-ﬂoating value sectors not determined by market dominance. In this sense, the radical art of the modernist and contemporary periods is both anti-mass-consumer art—trying instead to create works that require the active participation and critical reﬂection of viewers and readers—and anti-high art, critiquing the ideological assumptions and cultural biases behind the valuation of the Great Books, the Core Curriculums, Cultural Literacy, and the like. For this reason, it is fascinating that John Unsworth, in his essay “Electronic Scholarship; or, Scholarly Publishing and the Public, ” de-votes so much of his space to a critique of Sven Birkerts as representative of the criticism of scholarly work in the electronic medium.
3 Unsworth under-
2. Briggﬂats (London: Fulcrum Press, 1966), 14.
3. “Electronic Scholarship; or, Scholarly Publishing and the Public, ” http://village.virginia 
.edu/~jmu2m/mla-94.html, accessed May 1, 2010; but by late August, the link did not work for 
Every Which Way but Loose 87
scores Birkerts’s fear of the new computer technology as engendering “de- 
personalization, of inauthenticity, of substitution to the mechanical, and . . .  substitution of quantity for quality”—exactly the charges that Birkerts and others typically make against the sort of poetry and art to which I am allud-ing. Indeed, a version of Birkerts’s critique that Unsworth cites was featured in the newsletter of the Associated Writing Programs, home of self-styled “anti-theoretical” imaginative writing so much at odds with those poetries that foreground their materiality and social construction. I bring this up as a way of noting that fears associated with computer media, including the often-stated concern about a loss of materiality, are often in the service of an intensively antimaterialist, which is to say idealist, assertion of cultural authority and legitimacy.
In his essay in Reimagining Textuality , Eaves shows that a continuing 
value of Blake’s work is the anxiety it has caused over issues like this, issues we are just now, it sometimes seems, confronting for the ﬁrst time. Swin-burne’s book on Blake was instrumental in gaining recognition of Blake’s signiﬁcance and, as a result, preserving his work. But Eaves has another story to tell, one that in many ways brings to mind Harold Bloom’s thesis in The Anxiety of Inﬂuence .
4 For Blake’s work is designed to be misread, but 
its singular value is manifest only when we come to recognize the misread-ing, albeit with yet another misreading. Eaves’s discussion of Blake points to our culture’s need to assimilate an artist’s work into a well-established art medium: painter or poet, but not, as Blake insisted, painter and poet. Swinburne the poet claimed Blake for poetry, inducting him into an insur-gent literary tradition at the apparent expense of adequately acknowledging the graphical body of his work. The burden of Swinburne’s Critical Essay
5 
was to associate Blake with Whitman and Baudelaire, and implicitly with Swinburne’s own poetry—all aesthetically revolutionary projects marked by a refusal to be absorbed into the norms of the contemporary moral order. Blake’s verbo-visual excess is Swinburne’s exalted example of a visionary art unconstrained by the shackles of propriety (including the constraints of genre). Yet because Blake’s project involves redundancy and contradiction, both within and between the layers of his work, much of the force of his aesthetic is evident even in monodimensional samplings. Nonetheless, the 
the copyeditor, who provided a new URL: http://www3.isrl.illinois.edu/~unsworth//mla-94 
.html.
4. The Anxiety of Inﬂuence: A Theory of Poetry  (New York: Oxford University Press, 1973).
5. William Blake: A Critical Essay (1868; rpt. New York: Benjamin Bloom, 1986).
88 THE ART OF IMMEMORABILITY
full complexity of his work can be experienced only cross-sectionally—not 
as a synthesis or ﬂattening of levels but, on the contrary, in the clash of lev-els. Blake’s work is not a singular whole, a totality, but a complex of incom-mensurable layers.
It has never been easier than now to ﬁnd graphical reproductions of 
Blake’s work, which can be downloaded from the web as JPEG ﬁles. These ﬁles allow for a viewing that in some ways exceeds what is possible with the originals because of the ability to enlarge small sections of a page in order to see more clearly the ravishing details that comprise these works. In the past, the cost and accuracy of color reproduction limited access to the picto-rial dimension of Blake’s work, at least in comparison with the ubiquitous text-only dubs. Yet even as these images become more available, they will not replace those textual dubs. For who among of us has not secretly read our paperback, graphics-expurgated, Blake with the glee of a schoolchild high on Cliff Notes, even after many professions of born-again faith in the only truth of his visualized hypermedia? Not to mention giving one too many lectures starting “You haven’t read it at all if you’ve read it without the pictures”—the most recent, in my case, pressed on one of three Japanese tourists asking for directions to Niagara Falls, whom I stopped with just this message on a foggy night not long ago, only to be spurned—“Now get thee hence, though grey-beard Loon! / Or my Staff shall make thee skip. ”
The question of misleading editions of Blake (or Dickinson) turns us 
all into loons, whether we hold out for extralexical meaning or tenaciously insist that words are words. Or if not loons then cormorants, diving into the inky waters of our deep blue amnesias. As if we could be woken to words while asleep to language. If we imagine (begin to reimagine) that works of poetry always exist as versions, that there is no singular original but an ar-ray of realizations, then the relations between versions is not a moral one of right and wrong but an ethical one of reciprocity. Versions become transla-tions in the sense that all works of poetry are translations, which is to say that writing itself is a form of translation and transformation, spinning and respinning, positioning and repositioning, transcribing and eliding. Edi-tions may redress the wrongs of previous editions, but they also address the songs those editions set in time.
It’s not that words exist prior to or independently from the world, but 
rather that we know the world through the words that initiate us into it. Just as we know words through the world in which we learned them. Poets actualize these potentialities: the worldness of words, the wordness of the 
Every Which Way but Loose 89
world. This is why poetry is not a matter of “understanding”: one does not 
wish to stand under, and in that sense outside, but to move into, within; or perhaps move back and forth: under, inside, on top.
Translation implies a conversion from one set of terms to another. This 
is a process that is continuous within one’s own language and its many lay-ers as well as between different languages. The process is less atomic than contextual: not a matter of identifying individual words or even individual meanings but a matter of attuning oneself to systems of meaning, clusters of signs, contexts of utterances: to scale and shape as much as format and conﬁguration; to sounds and sights as much as lexicon.
In his Critical Essay, Swinburne writes, “All that was accepted for art, all 
that was taken for poetry, [Blake] rejected as barren symbols, and would fain have broken up as mendacious idols” (3). Much the same could be said 
of Arakawa and Gins, the focus of Mary Ann Caws’s essay in Reimagining 
Textuality . Arakawa and Gins have resisted, with increasing scale, the ability 
of readers/viewers to absorb their work as painting or poetry—or indeed as 
art. While they may be described as architects of the “Reversible Destiny” projects, the point is not to make aesthetic objects to be appreciated but to construct “stations” that will transform perception. Caws details the tempo-ral modeling of Arakawa and Gins’s visual and architectural projects, show-ing how they are conﬁgured to warp and reform the space-time continuum. Language is embedded into these works not as something to be read, as on a page or even a screen, but as something to interact with in an unfold-ing/enfolding web. The constructed “landing sites” of Reversible Destiny challenge rote perceptual patterns and activate underutilized cognitive  paths.
The idea that genres, if not the aesthetic itself, are a barrier to perceptual 
transformation connects the projects of Arakawa and Gins and Blake to a range of practitioners from Mallarmé and Williams to Duchamp and Cage, all of whose antifoundational investigations have a visual and verbal compo-nent. In retrospect, we might say that these artists do not so much abolish the aesthetic as extend and transform it, partly because the boundaries of the aesthetic—our willingness or ability to see something as a work of art—are surprisingly mobile. But if the aesthetic is not a static category, then it may be possible for the “same” object to be viewed, alternately, as aesthetic and not aesthetic. Indeed, aesthetic oscillation is potentially a rhythmic dynamic in a work; that is, a work may be conﬁgured in a way that pops out of the aes-thetic and then is sucked back in, creating a “hyperaesthetic” environment,  
90 THE ART OF IMMEMORABILITY
to extend an idea of Miško Šuvakovic ´’s.6 Such a work would be as far from 
the heightened aestheticism of Mallarmé as from the postaesthetic of Con-
ceptualism. In the case of Reversible Destiny, the goal is neither to aes-theticize the nonaesthetic nor to deaestheticize the aesthetic, but rather to create a zone that is no longer subject to this oscillation. But this is no more possible than transcending the textual condition, which turns and spins us every which way . . . but loose.
6. Pas Tout: Fragments on Art, Culture, Politics, Poetics and Art Theory, 1994–1974  (Buffalo: Meow 
Press, 1994).
THE ART OF IMMEMORABILITY
In the January 1999 issue of the almost unreadably hyperdesigned Wired  
magazine, a quote from the poet and Zen abbot Norman Fischer is splashed 
across three full-color pages: “The real technology—behind all of our other technologies—is language. ”
1 This useful motto, echoing as it does the sense 
of language as tekhne suggested by Jerome Rothenberg in his preface to Tech-
nicians of the Sacred  thirty years ago, appears in a paperbound journal of the 
new electronic communications technologies, a strangely amphibian publi-cation with one foot ﬁrmly planted in the print past and the other ready to kick the ball into a digital future. But what ball? What past? What future?
And anyway, who invented language? While that question may have to 
be left to anthropologists and theologians, the question of the invention of writing in the West is quite a different matter, with a long and well-documented prehistory of inscriptions on rock faces and cave walls, an opening act consisting of Sumerian cuneiform and Egyptian hieroglyphs (emerging about 5,000 years ago) and a second act of North Semitic, Phoenician, and Hebrew consonantal scripts (as early as 3,700 years ago) followed by the Greek alphabet (2,700 to 2,800 years ago).
The technological signiﬁcance of each of these phases of writing cannot be 
overestimated. North Semitic, Phoenician, and Hebrew (proto)alphabetic scripts, consisting of twenty-two letters, all consonants, eliminated the need to memorize the hundreds of characters necessary to decipher earlier writing and created a means of representing the sound of spoken language that remains fundamental to Western conceptions of literature. The Greeks built upon and improved this already revolutionary system, creating a set 
1. “The Wired Diaries, ” in Wired 7.01 (January 1999), http://www.wired.com/wired/ 
archive/7.01/diaries.html?pg=15&topic=&topic_set=, 15, accessed July 4, 2010.A Book of the Book: Some Works & Projections about the Book & Writing , edited by Jerome 
Rothenberg and Steve Clay (New York: Granary Books, 2000).  Thanks to Tan Lin, Jerome 
Rothenberg, and Thomas McEvilley.
92 THE ART OF IMMEMORABILITY
of twenty-four letters, of which seven were vowels. The Greek alphabet was 
easy to form, decipher, and pronounce. In The Muse Learns to Write: Reﬂec-
tions on Orality and Literacy from Antiquity to the Present , Eric Havelock tells 
the story of the evolution this alphabet, noting that the civil society of clas-sical Greece controlled its own transition from primary orality to writing by using a system that they had invented and that was particularly suited to represent the sounds of spoken Greek.
2 The genius of the Greek alphabet 
was the invention of subsyllabic units that break sound down into “atomic elements” that can be combined to represent “any linguistic noise” (60). This was not quite wysiwyg (what you see is what you get), but close—what 
you see is what you hear; and the alphabet’s simpliﬁcation and superses-sion of previous systems of writing is not unlike the transformations from Fortran to DOS to Windows. Never before had writing been able to so  efﬁciently represent the full sound sensorium of spoken language. The Greek alphabet was, in Havelock’s words, the “ﬁrst and last instrument to reproduce the range of previous orality” (60).
For those accustomed to rating computer technology in terms of storage 
memory and processing speed, the alphabetic revolutions can be measured in analogous terms: a remarkably accessible user interface and an enor-mous capacity to store retrievable information. In the West, Greek-style alphabets would dominate writing technology until the present; though no doubt there is a value in “thinking different, ” as the current Apple computer ads insist. The Hebrew alphabet showed a remarkable resiliency when re-vived midcentury as the ofﬁcial language of Israel. And the Chinese written character remains the longest-running show in the writing business. But just as current digital technology is eclipsing the alphabet, it is also forc-ing changes in Chinese writing as Asian language users converge on the Internet and try to ﬁnd ways to adapt to the limitations of the alphabetic computer keypad.
While the Greek alphabet, and Greek verbal art, has had an enormous 
inﬂuence on the subsequent Western literature, it is not necessary to argue for the uniqueness of classical Greek literary culture or for the cultural su-premacy of the Greek alphabet when considering the value of Havelock’s claims. Havelock provides a richly suggestive case study of the effect of writ-ing technology on poetry. In Havelock’s view, the greatness of the verbal art in the period from Homer to Plato is signiﬁcantly the result of the major technological shift that occurred during this time, when alphabetic writing 
2. The Muse Learns to Write (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1986).
The Art of Immemorability 93
was emerging in an a/literate culture. Thus Homer, Hesiod, and Euripides 
are not the product of a fully literate culture; rather, they capture by alpha-betic technology the existing and dominant oral culture. Yet to capture is also to misrepresent (all representation is also misrepresentation) and to misrepresent is, of course, also to change.
Havelock’s perspective runs counter to transcendental humanist claims 
often made for classical Greek “literature, ” since he argues that the greatness of this work is partly the result of its not being the product of a fully literate 
culture and partly the result of technological innovation. While early Greek oral and performance art had an aesthetic and entertainment value, Havelock sees the primary function of such works as encyclopedic and memorial: to store for reuse the customs and manners of the culture. For a/literate verbal art to have this capacity, listeners must be able to memorize, remember, and echo. As a result, the language must be memorable. And, indeed, the works whose function is (at least in part) to store cultural memory are repeated over and over again, like children’s stories, to allow memorization. The word games and songs of children preserve in our contemporary culture several of the features of such analphabetic verbal art.
Havelock argues that Greek alphabetic writing provided a new and bet-
ter means for the storage and retrieval of cultural memory by providing a highly supple means to record the aural textures of performed language, thus preserving in writing the modes of information storage deployed by the oral culture of the Greeks. According to Havelock, and in this he echoes the ﬁndings of Albert Lord and Milman Parry, the oral (or pneumonic) forms of language storage employed by the Greeks relied on a range of mnemonic techniques that are preserved in a remarkably full-blown way by the Homeric epics. That is, the Homeric epics embody in writing anal-phabetic modes of language storage. The earliest Greek writing, marked by the emergence of a new alphabetic technology within a culture in which oral technology remained dominant for a few hundred years, takes from a/literate verbal performance the form of rhythmic verse, with much of the emerging “literature” written for the holdover medium of performance. Much of the new alphabetic writing, then, was an aid to memory, taking the form of scripts to be memorized for subsequent performance. As result, the prosody was, to some extent, carried over from analphabetic verbal art. In such scripted writing, the page is not the ﬁnal destination but a preliminary stage, prompts for ﬁnal presentation elsewhere.
Such holdover writing practices might be contrasted with more distinc-
tively textual features of writing, ones that are less bound to transcription 
94 THE ART OF IMMEMORABILITY
and scripting—less bound, that is, to “transcriptive” functions of writing. 
If you write something down, then you don’t have to remember it and you don’t have to write it in a way that will help you to memorize it. The writ-ing takes on the work of memory rather than being an aid to memory, and this function is not compromised by writing that is difﬁcult or impossible to memorize. On the one hand, it’s the difference between the Odyssey and 
the Encyclopaedia Britannica; on the other, between a counting game and a 
poem by Jackson Mac Low.
The distinction I am suggesting here is not unlike one that Marshall 
McLuhan makes in Understanding Media between the received and the new 
content of the emerging medium. The initial content of television was the product of the previous moving-image medium, ﬁlm (which, in turn, not only shaped the TV but also changed movies). In contrast, “live” TV (initially broadcasts of sporting events but epitomized by live news broadcasts) is the best example of a distinct genre particular to the medium of television.
If “live” TV suggests a formal essence for the new medium of television, 
we might look at non-oral, non-speech-based forms of writing in order to identify the distinctly textual, rather than holdover or transcriptive, fea-tures of writing.
Greek alphabetic writing, because of both its ingenuity in phonetic repro-
duction (transcription) and its use as scripts for subsequent performance, may obscure the emergence of speciﬁcally textual forms. The almost imme-diate use of the Greek alphabet for inscribing epitaphs (a quintessentially memorial function of writing and one of the earliest uses of any kind of writing) is an important exception, since, like epigrams, epitaphs are nei-ther transcriptions of, nor scripts for, performed verbal art. Greek prose, in the sense of nonrhythmical, non-performance-scored writing, emerged later, with Plato and Herodotus.
In contrast to the phonic agility of Greek writing, earlier nonalphabetic 
writing systems had a more marked separation of speech and writing, since such writing systems were less insistent on (or less effective in) invoking a phonemic reality outside the written characters. In such nonalphabetic writing, there are numerous examples of codes, laws, accounts, and other catalogs and compendia that appear to dispense with the mnemonic for-mula of a/literate verbal art and begin to mine writing’s textuality. These writing systems may have potentiated the textual and immemorial func-tions of writing more fully than alphabetic writing, which bears the trace of its phonetic transcription. The very effectiveness of the Greek alphabet’s apparent ability to “capture” speech may have resulted in the appearance of 
The Art of Immemorability 95
speech “capturing” alphabetic writing. Except that, according to Havelock, 
the Homeric epics are not transcriptions of speech as such, but rather the translation into writing of the performed verbal art of the period. This sug-gests that the “transcriptive” process was twofold: notating the oral perfor-mance and creating scripts for subsequent performance.
The distinction between textual and transcriptive functions of writing 
is by no means clear-cut, since the deﬁnitions of each are recursive. On the one hand, my speculation about the greater textuality of nonalphabetic or early alphabetic writing is undermined by the possibility that what now appears as textual rather than scripted writing was performed or incanted, as is the case with biblical Hebrew texts. On the other hand, the alphabet provided novel, nonprosodic, means of textual organization, from alphabet-ization to the numerology of gematria. While not an opposition, a certain divergence can be noted: Writing as transcriptive retains the mnemonic features of a/literate verbal art either as reproduction or to facilitate memo-rization for subsequent performance. Textualized writing, in contrast, is not an intermediate stage to a performance elsewhere. The immemorial possibilities of textual writing put the memory in the text rather than using the text as an aid to memory.
Writing not only records language, it also changes language—and con-
sciousness. Once some of the memory functions of language are shifted from oral to alphabetic technology, then language may be freed up from these tasks—or in the darker semiotic economy of Walter Ong or David Abram, it loses bodily touch with them. In other words, alphabetic writ-ing makes its own particular marks on language, allowing for greater levels of abstraction and reﬂection, which has often resulted in diminishing the amount of action and “doing. ” For example, descriptions of acts of seeing give way to the idea of sight; or consider, as another example: “Toronto-Hatted  McLuhan exhorts his minions” versus “Language reveals truth. ” Indeed, abstraction and reﬂection are two qualities that typify later classical Greek writing, but, contrary to much received wisdom, these qualities may be less truth-effects than media-effects. The rest, in other words, is history.
The means of language and cultural reproduction always become a 
means of production and variance, as what is “stored” is transformed by the means of its imagined storage—so that it is a matter of morphing more than storing.
Writing read in this way tells us more than what it purports to tell, 
since it embodies the story of its mode of telling alongside any tales it tells. However, it’s not the tail wagging the dog, as much literary criticism has  
96 THE ART OF IMMEMORABILITY
assumed, but a tale of the dog; though if the dog could talk, would we  
understand its bark or only its plight?
My speculative model here is not of one technology replacing another, 
nor am I suggesting that changes in the technology for language reproduc-tion create social or cultural improvement. Alphabetic technology does not replace oral technology any more than cars replace walking. But it does shift the balance, and writing registers the change. After all, poetry pre-cedes prose, but prose does not abolish poetry. Indeed, prose is as agonistic to poetry as it is complementary. Prose has killed poetry many times, but poetry doesn’t seem to get the message. But maybe that’s because poetry is the vampire medium, sucking the blood from other modes of writing and leaving them lifeless, while itself living on into an eternity at the cost of its mortality. This is why poetry often metamorphoses into prose—to regain its historical existence by casting aside its ghoulish triumph.
In any period, some poetry will discover that which can only be done as 
writing using new technical means, while other poetry will bring over into the present of writing the forms and motifs of previous technological and historical moments. Neither approach is invalid, just as neither is sureﬁre, but evaluating one approach by the criteria derived from the other is mis-guided.
Havelock goes on to theorize that Greek lyric poetry is the product of 
the alphabet, which allows for the abstraction of the “I” and for the devel-opment of the individuated lyric self—a claim that modiﬁes Bruno Snell’s earlier Hellenophilic argument for the Greek invention of the lyric and the concomitant emergence of polis (the city-state).
3 No sooner does the Greek 
alphabet appear than the “I” of writing also appears. And with the lyric so the satiric—Sappho and Archilochos—and also (the Greek version of) the civic. While early Greek lyrics were composed to be sung with musi-cal accompaniment, early satiric verse was not. Lyric and satiric were the formally innovative poetry that emerged with the new Greek alphabet and with a new civic society; epic persisted, transformed by the new medium and by the company, if not rivalry, of the new genres.
This is not to say that the self was invented by the alphabet, but rather 
that the Western literary genre of the lyric (and also the satiric) might have been. By making possible a semblance of the speaking voice of the poet, the 
3. Bruno Snell, The Discovery of the Mind: Greek Origins of European Thought , translated by T. G. 
Rosenmeyer (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1953); see especially chap. 3, “The Rise of 
Individuality in the Early Greek Lyric” (1941). 
The Art of Immemorability 97
alphabetic lyric took possession of (or was possessed by) the “other” of that 
vexed double sense of “lyric”—words to be sung and words spoken by an individual. In this way, the alphabet facilitated the creation of a more stable author identity—the signature, a prerequisite for the lyric as literary genre. The lyric utilized the signature-effect of writing in ways not accessible to (or perhaps even desirable for) analphabetic verbal art. Various forms of self-expression, and of signature, certainly existed in the West prior to the Greek alphabet, and there are a number of precursors to lyric poetry in earlier Western writing as well in Greek verbal art prior to the invention of the Greek alphabet. Gregory Nagy has argued that the metrical patterns and possibly the phraseology of Greek lyric poetry predate the metrics of the oral epics associated with the names Hesiod and Homer and have their origins in far more ancient Indic religious hymns and prayers, such those found in the Rigveda, the oldest parts of which go back 3,500 years (though the means for any such possible transmission remain obscure).
4 Such archaic meters 
may themselves be derived from earlier ﬁxed phrases or “charms, ” providing a means for intact preservation over time. Moreover, the Hebrew “Song of Songs” (written about 400 years before Sappho) is often cited as protolyric verse. These examples notwithstanding, the Greek alphabet opened a set of particular possibilities for poetry, including a modulation in the effect of using the “I, ” which were immediately and brilliantly exploited by the secular early Greek poets in a way that had an indelible impact not only on the medium of poetry, as we know it in the West, but also on writing.
In his comparative study of Greek and Indic meter, Nagy notes that Al-
fred Lord deﬁnes “a truly ‘oral’ tradition as one in which every performance generates a new composition” (16). In contrast, writing has often been mis-understood as ﬁxing texts. Transcriptive writing has its end not in a ﬁxed and ﬁnal text but rather in a series of alphabetic and performative version-ings—a dynamic that carries over into textual writing as well. Contrary to the received wisdom of textual and bibliographic theory, based on a bibli-cal model that seeks to recover the immutable scriptural original, textual “transmission” should be understood not only in terms of “corruption” but also as new alphabetic performances.
All early Greek writing bears the stamp of a/literate verbal art, and the 
metrics of both lyric and epic retain features of the mnemonic systems es-sential to that art. The question is what effect Greek alphabetic writing had 
4. Gregory Nagy, Comparative Studies in Greek and Indic Meter  (Cambridge: Harvard Univer-
sity Press, 1974).
98 THE ART OF IMMEMORABILITY
on these archaic modes, both epic and lyric. To what degree did lyric and 
epic poetry take on distinctly new textual attributes after the introduction of the Greek alphabet into an a/literate culture with a long history of both epic and protolyric modes? The Greek alphabet did not create the lyric out of the blue; nor did a particular technology determine a particular litera-ture. Nothing is ever entirely new. But the “same thing” takes on new mean-ings in new technological contexts. Writing technologies affect poetry in ways that are often hard to explicate but nonetheless become part of their meaning. In this particular circumstance, it might be more fruitful to focus not on intrinsic features of lyric verse but rather on the “reading effects” that the alphabet created for the lyric, including those that took place over long periods of time, such as the possibility that a lyric might be read and not sung. That is, the lyric takes on a different quality in the new medium. While the lyric initially may have been a script for performance or song, it led to a newly textualized form of poetry.
After the invention of the alphabet, the next most signiﬁcant Western tech-
nological revolution in the reproduction of language occurred in 1451 with the invention of the printing press (the Chinese were printing books eight hundred years earlier). There were other important technological develop-ments between the Greek alphabet and the printing press, including the invention of the Roman alphabet and other scripts, the fabrication of new and more efﬁcient surfaces to write on, and the development of codices and manuscripts and books. But none of these was quite so far-reaching in its impact as Gutenberg’s press.
The printing press occurs very late in the history of the book; nonethe-
less, it ushered in what well might be called the Age of the Book, a period of unprecedented circulation for writing. If the stage epitomizes the transcrip-tive or memorial functions of writing, the book epitomizes the immemorial storage function of writing. The book is writing’s own stage, not a prompt to some other stage. Insofar as literary works appear in books they make possible a circulation distinct from presentation in theatrical performance. The book is the place where writing as writing comes into its own, has its own “place, ” ﬁnds its own forms.
Many of the effects we associate with literacy were not yet dominant in 
the medieval Europe of Gutenberg, which held fast to many characteristics of analphabetic culture. Writing remained an aid to memory, and oral forms were still part of its infrastructure. Indeed, medieval poetry, scripted to be performed—that is, heard not read—retained many of the rhythmical and 
The Art of Immemorability 99
rhyming qualities of oral poetry. Augustine of Hippo’s 400 CE citing of silent 
reading is a crucial signpost along the road to changing the user interface 
with writing technology, since the emergence of silent reading is gener-ally thought to begin only post-Gutenberg and with the advent of prose. As Wlad Godzich and Jeffrey Kittay note in The Emergence of Prose , prose in 
medieval France emerged from verse and gradually replaced a number of the functions of verse, simultaneous with the rise of a middle class.
5
According to H. J. Chaytor, in From Script to Print: An Introduction to Me-
dieval Vernacular Literature , during the script period of medieval Europe, 
reading was word for word, out loud, and not ﬂuent. Poems were written for recitation.
6 There was no uniformity of grammar or spelling because scripts 
were to be performed and were only rarely read; except for the case of Latin, only with printing did uniformity even become possible. Before Gutenberg, it was assumed that vernaculars were in ﬂux in terms of pronunciation and vocabulary; the rise of uniform national languages as standard bearers for states was, in part, a media effect. Language stabilization and stylistic ideal-ization (manuals, grammars) are the blowback of the printing press.
According to Chaytor, the ﬁrst French prose appeared in the late twelfth 
century; before that, the literature that was produced for public entertain-ment and education was in verse. This ﬁrst prose was for legal documents, Bible translations, and, subsequently, historical accounts. Prose was written for individual readers and it was reserved for “matters of fact, not fancy” (85). As part of an emerging, ultimately massive, deversiﬁcation process, poetry was translated into prose (much as print databases are now being digitalized). The earliest prose by nonpoets or literary artists in France comes from 1202 in an account of the Crusades written in an unembel-lished, factual style. From the twelfth century on, Chaytor notes, all “im-portant” households in England and Europe had at least one person who  could read. By the late 1300s, the ﬁrst “reading public” emerged in En-  
gland, with the production of secular literature licensed by universities for students. By the 1400s, prose was preferred for erudition and instruction, while at the same time there was a gradual rise of literacy; but just being literate didn’t mean you could read books. According to Irving Fang and the Media History Project’s “Timeline, ” the ﬁrst paper was used in England 
5. Wlad Godzich and Jeffrey Kittay, The Emergence of Prose: An Essay in Prosaics  (Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press, 1987).
6. From Script to Print: an Introduction to Medieval Vernacular Literature  (Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1945).
100 THE ART OF IMMEMORABILITY
in 1309 and the ﬁrst paper mill was established in 1495.7 In the fourteenth 
and ﬁfteenth century books were scarce and expensive and were willed to 
heirs. Educated men learned to read (women did not)—possibly one-half of the population of England was literate. Indeed, there were more schools in the 1400s than in 1864, suggesting the intensity of interest in literacy in the ﬁfteenth century (Chaytor, 111). By 1450, the ﬁrst newspapers began to circulate in Europe.
Four hundred years after Gutenberg, the next technological revolution 
for language reproduction began. For the purposes of deﬁning this ongo-ing technological vortex, I would point to the telegraph (ﬁrst invented in the 1830s, with the ﬁrst transcontinental service becoming available in the 1860s), photography (invented in 1827, popular by late 1830s), the telephone (1876), the phonograph (1877), magnetic audio recording (1899), the loud-speaker (1898), wireless telegraphy (1894), the movie camera (1890–1895), radio (ﬁrst regular broadcasting around 1907), television (ﬁrst network TV broadcast 1949), photo-offset printing and “cold type” typesetting (late 1950s), photocopying (ﬁrst plain paper copier 1959), and, ﬁnally, in the last two decades, digital writing and imaging (via computer, the Internet, and the web). Writing in this age of photographic and electronic reproduction is fundamentally postalphabetic in that it no longer relies on scripts to store and transmit information: cultural memory is becoming digital, more im-age than letter. At the same time, just as the Greeks lived through several hundred years of simultaneous alphabetic and oral culture, we are now living in a period of overlaid oral, alphabetic, and photo/phono electronic culture.
One crucial mark of the overlay of alphabetic and electronic technolo-
gies is the emergence of radical modernist art in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century. Just as some of the Greek literary art of the period immediately following the invention of the alphabet formally reﬂected in the new writing the forms of an oral culture soon to be eclipsed, so radical modernism formally reﬂects the alphabetic culture soon to be eclipsed (but not replaced) by photographic, electronic, and digital media.
The other crucial marker of the overlay of the oral, alphabetic, and photo/
phono electronic is the fact that in North America and Europe, the rise of 
7. Media History Project, “Timeline, ” http://www.mediahistory.umn.edu/timeline/, accessed 
July 6, 2010. The media history that follows is largely based on this timeline.
The Art of Immemorability 101
mass literacy in the late nineteenth century occurs just as the new era of 
photographic and electronic communications is beginning, making mass literacy and postliteracy intertwined historical developments. Indeed, the culture of literacy reaches its technical apotheosis in the mid-nineteenth and twentieth century, not only with the rise of a mass readership, but also with invention of nonelectronic and nonphoto/phonographic devices that made language storage and retrieval by writing even more efﬁcient and ac-cessible than ever; for example, carbon paper (1806), the typewriter (ﬁrst manufactured by Remington in 1873), the mimeograph (invented in 1875 and retailed in 1890), linotype (1886), the Waterman fountain pen (1884), and the ballpoint pen (1938). (The pencil was invented in 1565 and the eraser in 1770, while steel pen points began to replace quill pens in 1780.) The nineteenth- and twentieth-century boom in the production of lyric po-etry is coincident with the rise of mass literacy, since many more people were able to become authors. The ability to write and sign something as yours—the signature effect—remains culturally viable until literacy is fully distributed in the society, an event that has yet to occur.
This rise of mass literacy, late in the history of writing, has had the effect 
of putting the printed and bound book front and center, as the cathected ob-ject of the alphabetic unconscious. From the perspective of 1999, the printed book is the best picture we have of alphabetic textuality. As we enter into a postliterate period, we can begin to see the book as the solid middle ground between the stage (performed poetry) and the screen (digital poetry).
In making this broad overview of language reproduction technologies, I 
want to reiterate that one medium does not conquer another. It is not a question of progress but rather of a series of overlays creating the web in which our language is enmeshed. The alphabet did not prescribe the emer-gence of lyric poetry as a medium of art but rather created the possibil-ity. Technology determines neither art nor politics, but politics and art are never free from the effects of technology. Technology informs, but it does not determine.
Havelock speculates that perhaps he and McLuhan were alerted to the 
importance of understanding media by hearing Winston Churchill’s “blitz” speeches on the then relatively new and popular medium of the radio. The sheer oral force of the speeches, he says, helped him to reconsider the ef-fects of centuries of silent reading and of the contrasting possibilities for oral performance in early Greek culture. Indeed, radio, and later TV, 
102 THE ART OF IMMEMORABILITY
marked a turn to a/literate modes for transmission and storage of cultural 
information, and, as we turn to the twenty-ﬁrst century, analphabetic me-dia are the primary source of information for most people: you are more likely to hear or see the news than to read it (even while newscasts continue to rely on alphabetic scripts). Yet, while audio and video reproduction have eclipsed both alphabetic and oral technologies, they have qualities in com-mon with both. Postliteracy brings us back to preliteracy. In particular, the emergence of the World Wide Web in the 1990s has awakened a sharper appreciation for the medium of writing and for the visual and acoustic ele-ments of language. Similarly, hypertext theory has reopened consideration of the achievements of radical modernist writing.
My interest in the technoformalist criticism of Havelock and McLuhan 
as well as Walter Benjamin, Clement Greenberg, and Stanley Cavell is not only that they draw attention to what it means to work within a medium, but also that they acknowledge the value of using a medium to do what can only be done in that medium. While humanist literary criticism naturalizes the medium of the art, just as it neutralizes its ideology, technoformalist criticism recognizes the medium (and by extension ideology) to have quali-ties of its own that some art within this medium will choose to foreground, which is to say, bring to consciousness. In poetry, this approach is at the heart of radical modernism composition, with its focus not only on what is conveyed, but also on the speciﬁc conditions of the conveyance. Perhaps the motto for this project can be taken from Jerome McGann’s “Imagining What You Don’t Know: The Theoretical Goals of the Rossetti Archive”: “To treat all the physical aspects of the documents as expressive features. ”
8
Writing is a storage medium. It stores verbal language. But the various 
technologies (hieroglyphs, scripts, printing, hypertext) literally score the language stored.
In other words: Writing records the memory of language just as it ex-
plores the possibilities for language.
In a formalist emphasis on the medium, we do not escape the question—
a medium of what, for what? Can the medium be emptied out, so that it is just the medium, the pure medium? In that case what does it transport but the contexts (contents) in which it is placed, like a crystal ball reﬂecting the 
hands that (be)hold it.
8. “Imagining What You Don’t Know, ” http://chnm.gmu.edu/digitalhistory/links/pdf/
chapter3/3.24b.pdf, 6, accessed July 6, 2010. Collected in part 2 of McGann’s Radiant Textual-
ity: Literature after the World Wide Web  (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2004).
The Art of Immemorability 103
A medium cannot be in and of itself, autonomous, for only readers or 
listeners or viewers bring a medium into use. In this sense, a medium is a 
mediation, constituted by what it does, for whom, and how.
The “medium” is a metaphor, as Jack Spicer and Hannah Weiner demon-
strate when they insist that their poems are mediums, receiving language from a place outside themselves, north of intention.
A medium is an “in-between” in which you go from one place to an-
other but also the material of that in-betweenness. Metaphors are mediums of transformation, in Greek the bearer ( phor) of change ( meta). Metaphor 
involves transference/transport/transfer. A medium is the means of trans-port, the conveyance, and also the material or technical process of art, like brass or silver. But only use makes something a medium of art. Materials by themselves are inert. Yet sometimes one ﬁnds the use of a medium by rely-ing on the resistance of the materials that constitute it.
If poetry in analphabetic culture maximizes its storage function through 
memorizable language (formulaic, stressed), then poetry in the age of postliteracy (where cultural information is stored orally, alphabetically, and digitally), is perhaps most fully realized through refractory—unmemo-rizable—language (unexpected, nonformulaic, dis-stressed). This is why  apparently nonliterary writing—catalogs, directories, dictionaries, indexes, concordances, and phone books, as well as printing errors, textual varia-tions, holograph manuscripts—have become so important for poetry. And this is also why the textuality of contemporary poetry is so often tested in performance. For the performance of a textual writing, refractory to memo-rization, creates a new-old frisson that is rich with structural meanings and 
acoustic resonances.
But what of the age between the two—the age of ascendant literacy? It 
is commonplace to say that photography freed painting from the burden of pictorial representation, as for centuries paintings and drawings had been the primary means of pictorial and image storing (morphing) and transmission. (The trope of being freed from a burden should not obscure the fact that pictorial representation goes on happily ever after in painting; the point is that the meaning of images change in painting because their use value changes.) Alphabetic writing ultimately freed poetry (though never completely) from the necessity of storage and transmission of the culture’s memories and laws— poetry’s epic function . In the age of literacy, this task 
was ultimately assumed by prose. Poetry, released from this overriding obligation to memory storage, increasingly became deﬁned by the individual voice, poetry’s lyric function  (the persistence of epic notwithstanding, since 
104 THE ART OF IMMEMORABILITY
epic in the age of lyric becomes less infrastructure and more art). In this 
speculative schema, the lyric is contrasted to the impersonal authority of (nonﬁction) prose, constituted by such subjects as law and philosophy.
With the advent of the photo/phono electronic, postliterate age, the 
emerging function for poetry is neither the storage of collective memory nor the projection of individual voice, but rather an exploration of the me-dium through which the storage and expressive functions of language work. That is, the technological developments of the past 150 years have made conceivable, in a way hardly possible before, viewing and reproducing and interacting with language as a material and not just as a means. Poetry’s singular burden in a digital age is to sound the means of transmission: call it poetry’s textual function, making audible/visible the ethos enacted in and by the fabric of writing. Textuality does not erase poetry’s epic and lyric func-tions; rather it supplements and transforms, and in so doing aestheticizes, these increasingly vestigial modalities of the medium.
Another way of saying this is that photography and phonography loos-
ened the grip of representation not only on painting but also on poetry.
Humanist literary criticism cannot and will not recognize the necessity 
of a poetry of textuality in which “memorable language” is just one among many tools of the trade, and not an end in itself. The persistence of the cri-terion of “memorable language” as a primary category for evaluating poetry is a throwback to an actual social function poetry once had, but which has become in our age largely ornamental and nostalgic except when it is used to tap into the deep ﬁssures of poetry’s past, to locate sonic geysers that erupt in the surface of our verses.
A textual poetry does not create language that is committable to memory 
but rather a memory of the analphabetic that is committable to language. This is why so much textual writing seems to return to a/literate features of language, not only in other cultures but also in our own. This is what I mean to suggest, in part, by the term a/orality—the acoustic or aural dimension of 
language within a postalphabetic environment. The signiﬁcance of speech for textual poetry is fundamental because such poetry is able to foreground features of speech that do not contribute to the memory function essential for poetry in cultures where oral art is the primary technology for language storage and retrieval.
In the early part of the twentieth century, Gertrude Stein discovered her 
own version of a/orality through a process of close listening to the vernacu-lar—the African American vernacular in “Melanctha, ” the broken German 
The Art of Immemorability 105
English  in “The Gentle Lena. ”9 In the context of a postliterate writing,  
the transcription of speech looks very different than it did at the dawn of 
the alphabetic age: static, noise, and other microtextures loom large when the art of memory is not at stake. Repetition without memorability uses the features of oral art for textual ends: it is not memory that is being stored but texture that is being exhibited. The result is not a poetry in the service of memory but a poetry, in Stein’s phrase, of “the continuous present. ”
Textuality, sounded, evokes orality. Conversely, orality provokes textual-
ity (polymorphously), albeit the virtual, aliterate materiality of woven se-miosis. This is orality’s anterior horizon, its acoustic and linguistic ground, embodied and gestural. The stuf fness of language, its verbality, is present 
in both writing and speech, but it is particularly marked when language is listened to, or read, without the ﬁlter of its information function. (The material stratum that weaves together speech and writing provides not only the means for language’s information function but also information in its own right.) Textuality is a palimpsest: when you scratch it you ﬁnd speech underneath. And when you sniff the speech, you ﬁnd language under that.
Poetry’s social function in our time is to bring language ear to ear with its 
temporality, physicality, dynamism: its evanescence, not its ﬁxed character; its ﬂuidity, not its authority; its structures, not its storage capacity; its con-creteness and particularity, not its abstract logicality and clarity.
To say we are in an age of postliteracy does not mean that literacy is no 
longer necessary, but rather that it is no longer sufﬁcient; perhaps the bet-ter term would be hyperliteracy. Poetry in a digital age can do more than simply echo the past with memorable phrases. It can also invent the present in language never before heard.
9. Stein, Three Lives (1909), http://www.bartleby.com/74/, accessed July 4, 2010.
MAKING AUDIO VISIBLE: POETRY’S 
COMING DIGITAL PRESENCE
I originally presented this talk as part of a panel on “Textuality and Visual Cul-
tures” at the Society of Textual Scholarship (STS), immediately following presenta-tions more obviously related to the topic by Marjorie Perloff and Johanna Drucker. Perhaps it found a more expectable home in its next incarnation, a collection of essays on “writing environments, ” since sound recordings are a crucial environ-ment for poetry. Monaural recordings of voice coming from a ﬁxed location are as monodimensional as the alphabetic transcription of voice. The next frontier for poetry sound environments may involve new sound installation technologies, such as those pioneered by Janet Cardiff, that permit multidirectional and multifocal acoustic projection. In such environments, the sound not only changes as you walk through the space but also has a 3-D effect: you hear sounds emanating from differ-ent parts of the environment. For example, a voice sounding as if it is coming from right in front of you is overlaid by a whispering voice that seems to come from immediately behind you.
My topic this morning—the digitalization of the recording of poetry read-
ings—would seem, on the face of it, remote, a stretch at best, perhaps even a stubborn refusal to stick to the topic that would not exactly be uncharac-teristic for me. But the more I delve into my subject, the more I see how difﬁcult it would be to extract the topic of digitalized sound ﬁles of poems from either visual culture or textuality.
Let me start with a highly reductive history of language-recording tech-
nologies.
The ﬁrst great technology for recording the sound of spoken language 
was the phonetic scripts of about 2,500 years ago. The phonetic (literally “spoken voice”) alphabet created a simple visual notation system that was 
Presented at the annual meeting of the Society for Textual Scholarship (STS), March 21, 
2003, in New York, and published in STS’s journal, Text 16 (2006). Subsequently published 
in the “Writing Environments” feature, edited by William Watkin, in Textual Practice 23.6 
(2009).
108 THE ART OF IMMEMORABILITY
used, in many instances, as a transcriptive device: that is, as a script for per-
formance, the letters serving as cues to prompt oral recitation. The signiﬁ-cance of a visual technology for the notation of an aural phenomenon is pro-found; its implications for our way of understanding language, and indeed for our perception of both reality and its others, is incalculable, and, as a  result, has been the subject of many learned treatises, very few of which were composed for the tongue. Curiously, the signiﬁcance of visual language on the semantics of literary works has been less widely acknowledged. From the point of view of aesthetics and literary criticism, the works, over the past twenty years, of Drucker and Perloff, are signal exceptions. In contrast, from the point of view of bibliographic scholarship, the signiﬁcance of vi-sual coding has remained central, even as the ﬁeld itself has become more marginal in an age of cultural studies and theorization.
But, back to my abbreviated history—with a two-millennia jump.In 1877, Thomas Edison made the ﬁrst recording of the human voice—a 
short recitation of the ﬁrst verse of Sara Josepha Hale’s 1830 poem “Mary Had a Little Lamb. ” Edison’s recording was made just two years before the poet’s death at the age of ninety-one. The ﬁrst sound recording was of a poem, though not in the author’s own voice. Edison stumbled upon his “speaking machine” while working on a device to speed up telegraphic transmission—the telegraph itself being a device for the audio transmission of visual (alphabetic) code. Edison’s sound-recording device was variously called a talking machine, a speaking machine, and a phonograph. Phono-
graph , the word Edison chose for his company, suggests something of the 
visual/verbal paradox that is my topic today, meaning, as it does, something like sound writing or sound drawing. We don’t, literally, read a sound re-cording but play it. And while the sound recording is able to capture far more acoustic data than phonetic script, “sound writing” shares with alpha-betic writing the ability to retrieve recorded verbal data. This combination of inscription and retrievability marks recorded sound as a new form of textuality, new, that is, for the past century. Indeed, as I note in “The Art of Immemorability, ” sound recording is inextricably linked to modernist poetry and its speciﬁc textual forms.
The most famous image of the phonograph, “His Master’s Voice, ” pic-
tures a dog—Nipper by name—listening to a gramophone. The ﬁrst version of the image was made in 1898 by the British painter Mark Barraud and called “Dog Looking at and Listening to a Phonograph” (see ﬁgure 1). Later the speciﬁc machine depicted was changed and the image became famous as the logo for the Gramophone Company in England and for RCA Victor 
Making Audio Visible 109
in the United States.1 Barraud’s work is iconic of the uncanniness of the hu-
man voice emanating from a machine unattached to a body. Dogs, beloved 
by their owners for their ability to distinguish speciﬁc human voices from other sounds in the environment, are the adequate symbol of transhuman voice recognition. As Gertrude Stein puts it, “I am I because my little dog knows me. ”
2 If the dog hears it, it must be Memorex. For Stein, that is, the 
dog wags its tail when it catches the scent of human nature but not human mind. And since dogs don’t talk, but only listen, the dog represents the ideal audient for a talking machine that, like a text, speaks but cannot hear.
Barraud’s original title, emphasizing the combination of looking and 
listening, is telling because one of the most striking features of the image is Nipper gazing affectionately into the Victrola’s large horn, sometimes imagined to be an ear, but which more pertinently can be imagined as a 
1. Signiﬁcantly, Barraud’s original painting has the dog’s head at a greater distance from the 
horn. For a history of the paintings, along with images of the original (still owned by a Gramo-phone Company’s successor, EMI), go to http://www.designboom.com/history/nipper.html, en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nipper, and http://www.emiclassics.com/aboutusnipper.php, accessed July 8, 2010.2. “Identity a Poem, ” in A Stein Reader, edited by Ulla E. Dydo (Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 1993); see also Stein, The Geographical History of America; or, the Relation of 
Human Nature to the Human Mind (New York: Vintage Books, 1973). I comment on this essay in “Stein’s Identity, ” in My Way: Speeches and Poems (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1999). 
FIG 1  Mark Barraud, His Master’s Voice (1898).
110 THE ART OF IMMEMORABILITY
mechanical throat and mouth. Nipper is looking into the horn as if this 
were the most natural and comforting thing in the world; as if, that is, there were something to see inside the horn, in its dark interior. In other words, the dog (I keep typing this, dyslexically, God) is snifﬁng out the ghost in the machine. Indeed, with his nose almost entering into the cavity, it looks like Nipper’s head would ﬁt snugly into the device, which might be something of a textual womb; or, alternately, as if Nipper might be swallowed up into the voice machine, as Jonah into the whale. Nipper, a dog who is the fantasy of visual culture, is looking straight into the production of a human pres-ence that can call his name but doesn’t know he’s there.
Much has been made of the ghostly presence of the disembodied phono-
graphic voice, the novel possibility, with this new invention, of the voices of the dead speaking to us. But I am interested in a quite different cause for the uncanniness of grammaphony. Talking machines merge two usually separate cognitive phenomena: speech-mode perception and non-speech-mode perception. As Reuven Tsur explains it, we cognitively process speech sounds differently from other sounds.
3 Consider, though, that the talking 
machine produces mechanical sounds that we process, against our typical automatic response, as if they were speech. With early recordings, just as with radio with bad reception, we actively search for the voice in the static, as if it were a ﬁgure to be differentiated from the ground: the mechanical semblance of voice has become the signal in a medium whose material base is sonic, not vocal. In such a phonic economy, noise is sound that can’t be recuperated as voice. Tsur, following Roman Jakobson, deﬁnes the poetic mode of cognitive perception as the perception of speech as if it were sound. The grammaphone reverses the Jakobsonian deﬁnition of poetry: it incites the perception of mechanical sound as if it were speech. The grammaphone 
is a reverse order poetry machine.  This is what fascinated Nipper, our ideal 
audient. The master at whose voice he stares is not his human owner but the machine that produces a voice without body. We are all Nippers now.
The conjuring of voice unattached to body is a kind of disappearing act to 
which we have grown so accustomed that we need a little dog to remind us of what’s not seen. To accept a link between sound reproduction and visual culture, you would have to allow the conceit that invisibility is a part of vi-sual culture. Voice-reproduction technologies undermine intuitive distinc-tions not only between sight and sound, but also between space and time.
3. What Makes Sound Patterns Expressive? The Poetic Mode of Speech Perception (Durham: Duke 
University Press, 1992). 
Making Audio Visible 111
As the story is told, the earliest playable sound recording, from 1878, is 
Frank Lambert’s “Talking Clock. ” Lambert had the idea of marking time in a 
temporal medium: the new “speaking machine” would provide an alterna-tive in real time to the visualization of time in previous clocks. The record-ing has four basic sections: 21 seconds of indistinct speech, 11 seconds of Lambert clearly calling out hours (ﬁve o’clock, six o’clock, seven o’clock, eight o’clock, nine o’clock, ten o’clock, eleven o’clock, twelve o’clock). There follow 36 seconds of silence and then the most extraordinary thing of all: 29 seconds of voiced but illegible sound. Evidently, Lambert cranked the cylinder in reverse, producing, for the ﬁrst time, the human voice played backward. The ﬁrst distributed sound recording was not just of a human voice counting numbers but also the ﬁrst sound poem. Indeed, it is impos-sible to imagine Lambert’s “Talking Clock” as having any practical import at all: it is nothing less than the ﬁrst work of grammaphonic sound poetry.
4
Mechanically reversing the ﬂow of a recorded voice breaks down the per-
ceptual distinction between space and time: it can be both disorienting and mesmerizing. The fact that, with the cranked gramophone, the recorded voice can be played back in two directions is something that puts the earli-est experiments with the plasticity of the reproduced voice in a conceptual tape loop with the rhythmic use of vocables in the sound performances of analphabetic cultures. Voice becomes text, just as with phonetic scripts text becomes voice.
But not so fast. Is sound, is the performative dimension of the poem, 
really textual? We typically associate textuality with the woven texture of written language, and, indeed with visual inscription. Within the context of literary criticism or textual scholarship, the performance of the poem has not been generally recognized as part of the work, a designation that is reserved for the text understood as the scripted incarnation of the poem. Nonetheless, in alphabetic and postalphabetic visual cultures, the a/oral dimension of the poem can’t be split from the text “itself, ” even if it threat-ens to undermine the coherence of the poem by adding possibly new and incommensurable textual layers, to echo a point of Jerome McGann’s about the multiplex nature of the textual condition.
5 The audio text may be one 
more generally discounted destabilizing textual element, an element that undermines our ability to ﬁx and present any single deﬁnitive, or even  
4. “Talking Clock, ” http://writing.upenn.edu/bernstein/syllabi/readings/lambert.html, ac-
cessed July 6, 2010.5. The Textual Condition (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1999).
112 THE ART OF IMMEMORABILITY
stable, text of the poem. Grammaphony is not an alternative to textuality 
but rather throws us deeper into its folds.
To say that we don’t literally read a sound recording, but play it, is itself 
to trip on the distinction between the graphic letter and the interpretive moment. Perhaps we could call this grammaphonic enunciation the sound of one hand clapping, whether that one hand is the stylus or the digital decoder. But the nonliteral sense of reading crosses the sound barrier: for to read a poem out loud is to give a reading of it just as to listen to a poem recited is to have to read it with your ears. The paradox, to say it again, is in the words we have given to these machines: for example, gramophone  (or 
phonogram ), which might be translated as texted voice, suggesting, as it does, 
that the lettered word—gramma—is made invisible so that it can be heard. The process of inscription and retrieval is shared by both the grammaphonic and, if we want to invent a new word for writing, the grammagraphic.
One hundred years ago, a wax cylinder inscribed with the human voice 
stored two minutes of sound. At present (an ever shifting term), a CD in-scribed with compressed sound ﬁles can store ten hours of sound, and a portable MP3 player, at less than six ounces and smaller than a wax cylinder, can store “10,000 songs, ” as the ad tells us. The revolution in our ability to record and store sound has had a huge impact on many areas of the culture; not the least of these, though perhaps the least remarked on, is poetry. In the business press, it is common to hear about the disruptive effect of MP3 music ﬁle exchange on the pop-music recording industry. Dire pronounce-ments are made about theft of intellectual property by the very same com-panies that sell the hardware and software to record and play these ﬁles. Certainly, we are seeing a great change in the mobility of recording, playing, and, crucially, distributing, sound recordings. The change is quite signiﬁ-cant, but I think the greatest signiﬁcance may well be not for pop music and its ﬁnancial base but for poetry and its grammaphonic status. And that’s a prediction you won’t be hearing on CNNMoney.
In the era of print, from which we are slowly emerging, the alphabetic 
version of a poem was supreme, unchallenged. While poems were some-times produced in nonalphabetic contexts, within alphabetic cultures, liter-ary production has been synonymous with writing understood as a visual system of notation. Poetry readings, while signiﬁcant, have been regarded largely as extensions or supplements of the visual text of the poem. Indeed, there has been very little critical work on the poet’s performance of a poem; at least up until very recently, literary criticism has pretty much been con-ﬁned to the printed text.
Making Audio Visible 113
The reason for this is practical as much as conceptual. While archives  
of poetry recordings exist, they are largely inaccessible. Very few editions of 
poets’ sound recordings have been published. As a result, basic principles of textual scholarship have not yet been applied to the sound archive. But the times they are a-changin’.
With the advent of ﬁle compression and broad-band web connections, 
it is now possible for individuals to exchange sound ﬁles of recorded po-etry. The digitalization of the archive of recorded poetry is just now getting started, and it is this digitalization that is my primary focus this morning.
At the University of Pennsylvania, we have started a project we call 
PennSound, which extends the work I have been doing with Loss Pequeño Glazier and Martin Spinelli at the Electronic Poetry Center in Buffalo (http://epc.buffalo.edu) and builds on the foundational work of Kenneth Goldsmith at Ubuweb (http://www.ubu.com).
6 Pennsound is a collabora-
tion between the Center for Programs in Contemporary Writing (Al Filreis) and the Annenberg Rare Book and Manuscript Library (Michael Ryan). For this project, we intend to develop protocols for the indexing and tagging of sound ﬁles of poetry readings. At this time, there are no such standards, and relative chaos exists at every basic level, from ﬁle-naming conventions to formatting to ﬁle-format choices to relevant bibliographic coding to copy-right questions to storage and preservation issues.
I believe that the availability of compressed sound ﬁles of individual 
poems, freely available via the Internet, offers an intriguing and powerful alternative to the book format in collecting a poet’s work and to anthology and magazine formats in organizing constellations of poems. Imagine for a moment that you had on the hard drive of your computer a score of MP3 ﬁles of poems by ﬁfty of your favorite twentieth-century poets. I would bet that no matter how involved or committed any of you may be to twentieth-century poetry, none of you have such a collection readily available. But with poetry’s coming digital presence you will, or anyway, you easily might. What would be the implications of such a collection?
In my focus on the recording of the unaccompanied voice and more spe-
ciﬁcally on poets reading their own work, I am not unaware of the impor-tance of sound recording technology for music; and I have been told that there has been quite a lot of material produced and distributed, over the past hundred years, with either just musical instruments or with musical instruments accompanied by singing. Quite a bit of fuss has been made 
6. PennSound, http://writing.upenn.edu/pennsound, ofﬁcially launched on January 1, 2005. 
114 THE ART OF IMMEMORABILITY
about this and it is evidently today a multibillion-dollar worldwide industry. 
But I wouldn’t want this aspect of sound recording to overshadow what is for me, thinking in terms of the art of poetry, a crucially signiﬁcant feature of sound recording technology: the reproduction of the unaccompanied hu-man voice. In other words, I want to remain archly formalist and even pur-ist on this issue, at the risk of seeming to direct way too much attention to what for most people is at best an epiphenomenon, a footnote to the larger story.
For teachers, one obvious implication of the archive of recorded poetry 
becoming more available is that listening to the poem read by the poet might become a commonplace feature in any course, since such record-ings would be able to be assigned in much the same manner as the visual or alphabetic text of the poem. The sound ﬁle would become, ipso facto, a text for study, much like the visual document. The acoustic experience of listening to the poem would begin to compete with the visual experience of reading the poem. Many of us, of course, ask students to read poems aloud, or we read the poems aloud in class. But the textualization of the sound as an object of study radically changes this dynamic.
How about for readers of poetry? What effect would the collection of 
poetry MP3s have? For one thing, the experience of listening to poetry would be far more mobile and portable than it has been, rivaling, though not exceeding, the portability of the book. Now, however, those interested in poetry performance mostly access it live and in person, where the visual element of the poet reading, the theatricality of the presentation on stage, and the social element of exchange in many ways equal, or surpass, the im-portance of the merely acoustic dimension. Despite the long-time availabil-ity of poetry recordings, very few people have anything more than a passing relation to this archive in comparison to their experience of reading poetry in visualized formats (writing) or going to live readings. Indeed, it is hard for me, and probably hard for any of us, to imagine that possibility—that someone would have their primary relation to poetry via audio recordings.
In poetry’s coming digital presence, the poem, understood as a recorded 
performance of thirty seconds or three to ﬁve minutes or even ten or twenty or thirty minutes or more, may take on an integrity that it presently does not have in the era of book collections of poems. Poems, that is, might ﬁnd themselves liberated from books, free-standing, available to combine with other poems in one’s collection to play in the car or at the health club or on the plane or walking around the city or sitting at the beach or dancing on the head of a needle, a virtual phonograph needle that is. Imagine digital 
Making Audio Visible 115
ﬁles of discrete poems as individual leaves in an anthology of one’s own 
creation. Poems, set adrift from their visual grounding in alphabetic texts, might begin to resemble the songs from which, for so long, they have been divided.
A widely available digital audio poetry archive will have a pronounced 
inﬂuence on the production of new poetry. In the coming digital presence, it becomes possible to imagine poets preparing and releasing poems that exist only as sound ﬁles, with no written text, or for which a written text is secondary. Orally composed, or nonscripted, poems have already been realized by bpNichol and Tracie Morris, among others, but greater access to digital sound editing opens other doors. In the coming digital presence, poets will compose the text of their poems by dictating and editing sound ﬁles much the way we now compose and edit alphabetic writing. In this sense, the production of poetry will come closer to ﬁlm or radio—works that are produced in the cutting room. The result will not necessarily be sound poetry or poetry with accelerated variations of performance affect or number of performers, but possibly an audio-textual poetry akin to the modernist and contemporary work, extending the formal possibilities of language worked as a virtually physical material for making the poem.
Consider also, dear listener, the effect of easily available sound ﬁles on 
critical writing published in digital media. It might become as common to include sound clips in an essay as it is now to include an image; and the clips could themselves be subjected to a microanalysis, via a sound edit-ing program, that we presently do strictly by visual parsing. And I can only here mention the possible transformation of our sense of the poem when we consider the acoustic record along with the visual marking; or when we look at the visual print or sonograph of a performed poem, as becomes possible with any sound editing program. The sound shape would not be merely a metaphor for acoustic or rhythmic analysis, but also an image cre-ated through processing the sound in ways that give it a visual trace.
Moreover, the kind of “deformative” criticism advocated by McGann and 
Lisa Samuels,
7 or my own set of “wreading” experiments at the Electronic 
Poetry Center, which mostly involve visual markup and coloration and era-sure or transposition/translation of visual linguistic elements of the text, 
7. Lisa Samuels and Jerome McGann, “Deformance and Interpretation, ” in New Literary His-
tory 30.1 (1999): 25–56; collected in part 2 of Radiant Textuality: Literature after the World Wide 
Web (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2004).
116 THE ART OF IMMEMORABILITY
could be done via acoustic processing: dropping sound levels, increasing 
speeds, changing timbre, repeating phrases.
For the fact is that the sound ﬁle exists not as a pure acoustic or sound 
event—an oral or performative event outside textuality—but as a textual condition, mediated by its visual marking, its bibliographic codes, and the tagging we give to it to mark what we consider of semantic signiﬁcance.
Another central issue is the effect that sound ﬁles might have on schol-
arly editions. Or should I say the havoc that they might wreak. What, for example, is the relation of the recordings of a poem to the printed text of the poem? How might this relation be articulated in different types of editions, print and digital? Just as there are often multiple alphabetic versions of a poem, there are also multiple performed versions. Indeed it is likely that for a poet for whom we have an extensive archive of recordings, there are likely to be more variations of the poem than produced by print forms. We might have the same poem read at very different points in the poet’s life and there might be lexical variations in each performance (or not).
The types of variations of a poem found in audio recordings are sub-
stantially different from those in visual culture documents. To what extent to “authorize” such variations as credible versions of the poem is itself an issue. But what about different approaches to the performance: timbre, speed, rhythm, temporally marked lineation, emotional valences. Perhaps of greatest signiﬁcance is the paratextual framing of a poem in a reading. For one thing, there are the introductory, peripheral, and explanatory re-marks made before, during, and after the reading of the poem per se. At this year’s annual meeting of the Modern Language Association, Kenneth Sher-wood presented an elaborate transcription of remarks of this kind made by Amiri Baraka in a reading in honor of Robert Creeley in Buffalo.
8 For an-
other, there is the context of the reading itself, which is akin to the context of publication in a magazine or by a speciﬁc publisher. Finally, there is the order of the poems presented in a reading, which will often offer a distinct and signiﬁcant setting of the work.
A poem, to paraphrase Jerome McGann from a talk he will be giving 
this afternoon,
9 is not a converging system of coherent signs but—now 
8. Ken Sherwood, “Elaborate Versionings: Characteristics of Emergent Performance in Three 
Print/Oral/Aural Poets” (Amiri Baraka, Kamau Brathwaite, and Cecilia Vicuña) in Oral Tra-
ditions  21.1 (2006), http://journal.oraltradition.org/issues/21i/sherwood, accessed May 1, 
2009.9. “Texts in N-Dimensions and Interpretation in a New Key, ” presented at the Society for Textual Scholarship, March 21, 2003; published in Text Technology 12:2 (2004).
Making Audio Visible 117
this is me again—a diverging environment of incommensurable sights and 
sounds—“a dimension of mind. You’re moving into a land of both shadow and substance, of things and ideas. You’ve just crossed over into . . . the Twilight Zone. ”
Within the coming digital environment of a poet’s work, the sound ﬁle 
is at this time the orphan, something that if included would disrupt even the most expansive conception of versions, all based on different print ver-sions.
I realize my proposal invites as many questions, and raises as many prob-
lems, as it answers. This is as it should be at this stage. From the point of view of textual scholarship, it still remains to be seen what kind of tagging within the sound ﬁle would be valuable, not to say useful. One obvious is-sue would be search capabilities, how the conception of searching might be translated into recorded sound of poetry, beyond the obvious tagging of line and stanza breaks, titles and subtitles, key words, or even every word. Certainly, there is much to be learned from the far more advanced work in this area with various spoken word archives, from radio to oral histories. But the bibliographic issues for poems would be different. The term “bib-liographic” is yet another reminder of how sound itself will be mediated by visual—graphic—tools. I might call for bibliophonic tagging, but I can’t say what that would mean.
I have emphasized the importance of the recordings of the poets’ own 
performance of their work. I realize that some will object that this valorizes the author function in a way apparently at odds with what many of us have argued for in terms of the active role of the reader. My choice is based on a clear aesthetic preference for poets reading their own work, but of course it is imaginable that performances by others might become signiﬁcant. I address this issue in Close Listening, where I state my preference for audio 
recordings over video or ﬁlm recordings of poets reading their work.
10 On 
a practical level, the visual quality of taped readings is usually very lim-ited in comparison to other moving-image productions; sound recordings do not have the same comparative problem. Then again, like most people, 
10. My remarks at STS, and in the previous essay in this collection, “The Art of Immemoriabil-
ity, ” extend my work editing Close Listening: Poetry and the Performed Word  (New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1998). Close Listening remains the only overview by scholars and poets that 
addresses the signiﬁcance of the contemporary poetry reading for literary studies and poetics. The book came out simultaneously with a related collection of essays, Sound States: Acousti-
cal Technologies and Modern and Postmodern Writing , edited by Adelaide Morris (Chapel Hill: 
University of North Carolina Press, 1998).
118 THE ART OF IMMEMORABILITY
I prefer sound recordings of most music in comparison to straight “head 
shot” or concert video versions (there is at present nothing comparable to music videos for poetry, though this is a form that might well develop). In any case, my claims of value for poetry audio are tied in to the particular formal signiﬁcance that unaccompanied voice recording has for the gram-maphonic imaginary.
“His Master’s Voice, ” the voice on a record, is invested with the aura of 
invisible presence. It speaks to us as through a wrinkle in time. The recorded voice only speaks; the possibility for dialog or response always present at a reading—where the presence of an audience intimately affects what is be-ing presented—is illusory, making our close listening across the electro-static barrier all the more our own private affair. The recorded reading re-enacts the conditions for dialog without its actual presence, unless we want to consider the presence of the imagination. For the imaginative projection solicited by close listening to the grammaphonic poem is the one writing has required all along. Here we go again: it’s déjà vu one more time.
Let me end with a brief manifesto for the PennSound archiving of recorded 
poetry:
1. It must be free. Ideally, all the sound material we put on the web should 
be cleared for copyright to be distributed free. Users of the site will be able to download the MP3s to their own computers or players or play them in a streaming fashion. Teachers could make course CDs or add the MP3s to their online syllabi. Other websites and libraries could recollect the mate-rial. Credits for digitalization and copyright release would also be embed-ded into each ﬁle. One of the advantages of working with poetry sound ﬁles is that we don’t anticipate a problem with rights. At present and in the con-ceivable future, there is no proﬁt to be gained by the sale of recorded poetry. There is, however, considerable expense involved in preserving, cataloging, and distributing such material.
2. It must be MP3 or better. RealAudio is a proprietary format with sound 
quality that will not stand the test of time. We need to use open formats that reproduce reasonably high-quality sound, for a listenership that is used to astoundingly good sound quality from commercial sources.
3. It must be singles. At present, the vast majority of poetry recordings 
are for entire readings, typically thirty or more minutes, with no tracking of individual cuts or poems. While these full readings have great literary and archival value taken as a whole, few but the most devoted listen to full recordings of readings, or if they do, fewer still listen more than once. The 
Making Audio Visible 119
more useful format is to break readings up into individual poems and to 
make MP3s of each poem available. MP3s of song-length poems could be-come a very appealing format for poetry. The implications for audience, listenership, critical thinking, poetics, and poetic production are great.
4. It must be named. Presently, downloaded poetry sound ﬁles tend not to 
have informative names. Looking at a directory of such ﬁles, it is impossible to determine what the ﬁle contains from the visual information available. File sharing for music employs a simple system of the name of the singer and the song, but the P2P system is not compatible with FTP, especially in terms of blank spaces between words, which need to have dashes or underlines. In addition, song MP3 ﬁle names start with the ﬁrst name of the singer, but for the poetry ﬁles I think we need to move to the more conventional last name ﬁrst and give the date and place of the performance as well. For poetry ﬁle names I propose: lastname-ﬁrstname_cut-number_title_place/series_date .mp3.
5. It must embed bibliographic information in the ﬁle. It’s important that 
basic bibliographic information be embedded in the MP3 sound ﬁle itself, so that when someone downloads the ﬁle they get the right ﬁle name and also they get a full range of “ID3”-type information—all in the same ﬁle. This is basically a consumer-oriented MP3 ﬁle exchange approach. The goal  is to make these sound ﬁles available for users to have readily accessible for play and replay. Since downloaded ﬁles will be separated from their home library website or catalog, information on that website or in a catalog will not necessarily be retrievable (although the URL for the catalog can also be embedded).
6. It must be indexed. This will ensure that it is retrievable both from a 
library catalog under the author’s name and via web search engines.
THE BOUND LISTENER
The alphabet is frozen sound. 
In Dialectic of Enlightenment  (1947), Theodor Adorno and Max Hork-
heimer focus on The Odyssey as foundational to what they call the Enlight-
enment thinking of Western Civilization. While they don’t comment on 
the performance history of the text, their reading helps us understand the signiﬁcance of the epic’s historical movement from open and variable in performance to a ﬁxed, authoritative text; the movement, that is, from oral culture to alphabetic inscription. (Revising Pound’s deﬁnition that the epic is a poem including history, we might now say that an epic is a poem fabri-cating history.)
With phonic writing, a strata of spoken language appears to lie under the 
alphabetic script (this is indeed the lie or geist of the spoken). This ghost of 
speech (what Jack Spicer calls “low ghost”) would have been all the more acute during the several hundred years that the oral epic was transcribed through the newly invented Greek alphabet. As Eric Havelock emphasizes, the signiﬁcance of classical Greek literary art is that it provides a record of the transition from an oral to an alphabetic means of cultural reproduction and storage. The new technology of phonetic writing could be said to have rationalized, or dominated, speech, and this form of rationalization is expe-rienced, in retrospect, as a kind of fall, a break from the unity of word and thing that music and poetry may be felt to reverse.
The rupture of word and thing is the repressed trauma of writing-as- 
rationalized-speech. In the act of recording speech, writing cuts its umbilical chord to sonic embodiment. The verse line is the scar of this cut. In every account of the history of sound, one ﬁnds, consciously or not, the projection of a prelapsarian—a prior—state, whether by means of a neoprimitivism or 
a psychoanalytic presymbolic. This is the ontological illusion of the ratio-nalization of language, it is as imaginary (and as palpable) as the mirage of 
Textual Practice 23.6 (2009).
122 THE ART OF IMMEMORABILITY
water in a desert. It is this repressed ontology that literally (and literarily) 
underwrites teleology.
For Adorno and Horkheimer, the story of Odysseus’s triumph over the 
Sirens through cunning is a key to the ontological status of song in Western culture. In this view, interior to any song is the memory of the traumatic breaking of the unity of speech and things, and, indeed, of the sacriﬁce of the Sirens on the altar of rationalization. Odysseus, like a modern day Pro-fessor of Literary-Cultural-Historical-Transnational Studies, stuffs the ears of his charges with wax, so they will not succumb to the irresistible power of the Sirens’ song. They may look but not hear, nor can they communicate with one another. Odysseus, in turn, is bound to the mast so that, while he may be ravished (enraptured) by the call of the Sirens, he will be unable to respond. (This is what has come to be called mastery.) Later, he will report what he hears to his charges, who must take him at his word. But when the ship of Enlightenment sails by those enchanting voices, Odysseus’s men will be oblivious to his pleas to set him free. In the end, Odysseus will be free, the lord of his newly dominated dominion; while the Sirens, spell broken, are forever more bound in those special cages reserved for fallen creatures of the wilderness, in the sideshow of literature.
In hearing the Sirens’ song without abandoning himself to it, Odysseus 
rehearses the conditions of language reproduction, whether alphabetic, magnetic, or digital, in which one hears voices but their sources are neces-sarily out of bounds, unreachable.
Odysseus recognizes the archaic power of the song even when, as a tech-
nically enlightened man, he has himself bound. He listens to the song of pleasure and thwarts it as he seeks to thwart death. The bound listener wants to hear the Sirens as any other man would, but he has hit upon an arrange-ment by which he as subject need not be subjected to them. . . . The Sirens have their own power, but in primitive bourgeois history it is neutralized to become merely the wistful longing of the passer-by.
1
1. Dialectic of Enlightenment , translated by John Cumming (New York: Continuum, 1972), 
59–60.
HEARING VOICES
What’s the difference between the alphabetic text of a poem and its per-
formance? So much depends upon whether one imagines the poet’s per-formance as an extension of an authorized and stable written work or as a discrete work in its own right. While the ﬁrst view might allow the per-formance as a variation of the original, the second implies that textual and vocal instances of the poem offer discrepant versions of the work.
Any reader can perform the written text of a poem and indeed many 
poems need to be read out loud in order to make tangible the rhythm and sound patterning. But a poet’s reading of her or his own work has an en-tirely different authority. The poet’s performance, both live and recorded, poses an arresting issue for poetry, for the differences among the alpha-betic, grammaphonic, and live are not so much ones of textual variance as of ontological condition.
But why this focus on the poet’s performance? Isn’t this just another way 
of fetishizing the author and the author’s voice? The facts on the ground are these: the archive of recordings, as well as the live performance, of con-temporary poems is almost exclusively composed of poets giving voice to their own work; in the ﬁrst instance, the claim for the signiﬁcance of poetry performance is less theoretical than an acknowledgment of actually exist-ing poetic practice. Nonetheless, I would welcome an outpouring of cover versions of contemporary poems, let’s say William Shatner reciting Leslie Scalapino’s Considering how exaggerated music is  or Harold Bloom declaim-
ing John Ashbery’s Girls on the Run.
The closest thing we have to this in contemporary poetry might be Ken-
neth Goldsmith’s highly rhythmical and markedly accented recitations of 
Presented at the Presidential Forum, “The Sound of Poetry/The Poetry of Sound, ” Modern 
Language Association Annual Convention, Philadelphia, December 28, 2007, and published in The Sound of Poetry / The Poetry of Sound, edited by  Marjorie Perloff and Craig Dworkin 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2009).
124 THE ART OF IMMEMORABILITY
signature moments of Western aesthetic thought.1 In a voice that some-
times sounds a bit like Danny Kaye, Goldsmith reads Wittgenstein with 
Stravinsky in the background, performs Adorno over a sonic bed of Satie, and does Barthes layered with the Allman Brothers. He Do the Theorists in 
Voices : Goldsmith’s New York accent gives a local, not to say ethnic, ﬂavor to 
what might otherwise sound like deracinated ideas, reminding us that poet-ry’s all about accent while theory has a tendency to sound the impersonal.
Striking an altogether different note, Caroline Bergvall, in a 2006 perfor-
mance, samples, warps, and not so much rearticulates as reaccents Geoffrey Chaucer, bringing the putative godfather of English poetry into a multilecti-cal and ideolectical sound spectrum that includes Middle and contempo-rary English, French, and Latin. Bergvall’s “Shorter Chaucer Tales” is Jack Spicer’s “low ghost” in the ﬂesh: a glossolalic ghost looking for a medium.
2
For the contemporary poet, though not necessarily for her or his reader, 
performance is the ultimate test of the poem, both stress test, in which the rhythms are worked out in real time, and trial of the poet’s ability to engage listeners. At least this is true for those poets for whom performance is a central part of their practice. For poets so engaged, there are as many modalities of poetry performance as there are styles of poems. While most of the performances archived at PennSound involve poets reading scripts, some poets, as different as David Antin and Tracie Morris, work without prior texts, while other poets, usually associated with “spoken word, ” pre-sent memorized versions of written poems.
Today’s memorized recitations should not be conﬂated with the non-
scripted poetry of analphabetic cultures nor with the use of memory as part of the poetic process. The poetry of analphabetic cultures used prosodic formulas both to aid meaning and to goad composition. Since there were no scripts, literal memorization was inconceivable. Memory, as a poetic practice, involves an active exploration of the unknowable in ways that im-part an evanescent presence. Memorization is a postscript technique that requires precise, literal reproduction of a prescribed source. In contrast, the oral poetry of analphabetic cultures is a technology for the storage and re-trieval of cultural memory that involves variance, repetition, improvisation, elaboration. In this sense, memorization in poetry is a theatricalization of orality rather than an instance of it. So it’s not surprising that, currently, 
1. “Kenneth Goldsmith Sings Theory, ” http://writing.upenn.edu/pennsound/x/Goldsmith 
.html, accessed April 1, 2010.2. “Shorter Chaucer Tales, ” http://writing.upenn.edu/pennsound/x/Bergvall.html, accessed April 1, 2010.
Hearing Voices 125
memorized spoken word is the most marked “performative” style of poetry 
presentation, which often resembles an actor’s performance (motivated character and all). Spoken word’s opposite number—the chamber music performance of the words in more antitheatrical styles of poetry reading—is no less a performance. Moreover, the performance of virtually unmemo-rizable, nonformulaic scripts is one of the signal features of a postalpha-betic poetry in an age of photo/phono/digital reproduction. And when such scripts are performed from memory, and by actors, as in Mac Wellman’s Terminal Hip , Fiona Templeton’s You—The City , or Olivier Cadiot’s Colonel 
Zoo, it is uncanny and exhilarating.
3
If live performance of poetry can be, as Antin once titled a talk, “a pri-
vate occasion in a public space, ” then recorded poetry might be thought of as a public occasion in a private space.
4 Indeed, one of the fundamental 
conditions of the grammaphonic voice of the poet is its ghostly presence. Listening to such recordings, we hear a voice, if not of the dead, then one that sounds present but is absent, a voice that we can hear but that cannot hear us. Perhaps this touches on the reason poets read the work of their contemporaries almost only at memorial gatherings, as a space of mourning in which we keep the poet among the living for one last time.
And so yes, I do fetishize the acoustic inscription of the poet’s voice, or 
at least I ﬁnd it aesthetically signiﬁcant, partly because doing so returns voice from sometimes idealized projections of self in the style of a poem to its social materiality, to voicing and voices. In that sense, though, any  performance of a poem is an exemplary interpretation, that is, one that imagines itself as rehearsal rather than as a ﬁnalization.
The alphabet, with its thirty or so marks, offers a remarkably agile tech-
nology for noting speech sounds, which, in our digital environment, makes it remarkably easy to cut, paste, and transmit. In contrast to alphabetic writ-ing, the grammaphonic inscription offers an immensely thicker description of the voice, making explicit many vocal features that need to be interpo-lated when a poem is read from an alphabetic script.
3. Olivier Cadiot, Colonel Zoo , Ludovic Lagarde’s production presented by Act French, New 
York, in 2005; English version published as Colonel Zoo , translated from French by Cole  
Swenson (Los Angeles: Green Integer, 2005). Fiona Templeton, You—the City , independently 
produced in New York in 1988; script published in 1990 by Roof Books, New York. Mac Wellman, 
Terminal Hip, PS 122, New York, 1990; script published in Performing Arts Journal 40 (1992).
4. “A private occasion in a public space, ” in Talking at the Boundaries (New York: New Direc-
tions, 1976).
126 THE ART OF IMMEMORABILITY
There are four features, or vocal gestures, that are available on tape but 
not page that are of special signiﬁcance for poetry: the cluster of rhythm  and 
tempo (including word  duration), the cluster of pitch and intonation (includ-
ing amplitude ), timbre , and accent . The ﬁrst two of these features can be 
visually plotted with waveforms; the gestalt of these features contributes 
to tone.
The performed rhythm and tempo of a poem are not identical to its me-
ter, and as Reuven Tsur has suggested, dynamic performances of metrical  poetry may work against the implied metric of the text. For Tsur’s perception-  
oriented cognitive poetics, performance comes after and rearticulates  prosody. If performed rhythm trumps idealized meter, tempo can be used to telescope or attenuate articulated rhythmic patterns.
Nonmetrical and polymetrical poems will have rhythms and shifts of 
pitch that are not necessarily apprehendable on the page even while they are foregrounded in performance and visible in waveform graphs. Rhythm and pitch/intonation are not something inherent in the alphabetic script of the poem, but are extended, modiﬁed, improvised, invented, or enacted in performance.
In his far-ranging discussion of the sounds and senses of Coleridge’s 
“Kubla Khan, ” Tsur contrasts two cognitive modes of literary criticism, Negative Capability and Quest for Certainty.
5 For Tsur, critics who tend 
toward a Quest for Certainty display an intolerance of ambiguity, uncer-tainty, and multiple interpretative possibilities; a resistance to symbol-ism in favor of allegory; a perceptual dependence on the concrete and an inability to process multiple abstractions; a tendency to reduce a poem’s meaning to a single level (a form of what I call frame lock); a propensity for “extreme” and “polarized evaluations, namely, good-bad, right-wrong, 
black-white” (18); “a greater insensitivity to subtle and minimal cues and 
hence a greater susceptibility to false but obtrusive clues” (18). Ambiguity intolerance is also associated with a desensitization to the nonthematized emotional dynamics of a poem, the very kinds of dynamics that are intensi-ﬁed in performance. Tsur notes that his categories are related to psychologi-cal studies of dogmatism and the authoritarian personality. I would add that they resonate with Wittgenstein’s analysis of “aspect blindness” and George 
5. “Kubla Khan”—Poetic Structure, Hypnotic Quality, and Cognitive Style  (Amsterdam/Philadel-
phia: John Benjamins, 2006). See especially chap. 1, “ ‘Kubla Khan’ and the Implied Critic’s  
Decision Style. ” Tsur provides waveform analysis of pitch, amplitude, and intonation in chap. 4, 
 “Vox Humana: Performing ‘Kubla Khan.’ ” 
Hearing Voices 127
Lakoff’s distinction between the cognitive framework of the “strict father” 
and that of the “nurturing parent. ”6 What distinguishes Tsur’s study is its 
detailed critique of examples of literary criticism and its stress on the sound of poetry and poetic performance as a prod to interpretive uncertainty and emotional intensiﬁcation.
Performance allows the poet to refocus attention to dynamics hidden 
within the scripted poem, refocusing emphasis and overlaying immanent rhythms. The performance opens up the potential for shifting frames, and the shift of frame is itself perceived as a performative gesture. The experi-enced poetry performer can’t help but loop this experience back onto the compositional process. The implied or possible performance becomes a ghost of the textual composition, even if the transcriptive pull is averted, just as a reader can’t help but hear an overlay of a previously sampled voice of the poet, a ghostly presence steaming up out of the visual script.
No consideration of the poetry reading can leave out the signiﬁcance 
of the timbre of the poet’s voice, yet the subject tends to elicit little more than a blank, if knowing, nod. Like the face of the poet, timbre is both out of the immediate control of an author and the best picture we have of the poet’s aesthetic signature or acoustic mark. Camus is said to have remarked that after a certain age each person is responsible for her or his face. After a certain age, each poet is responsible for his or her voice. If timbre is a given dimension of a poet’s performance, accent is a technical feature that can be used to perform and deform social distinctions and variations. For the mod-ernist poetics of the Americas, the artiﬁce of accent is the New Wilderness of poetry performance, that which marks our poetries with the inﬂection of our particular trajectories within our spoken language.
While script permits the poet to elide (if not disguise) accent, performance 
is an open wound of accentual difference from which no poet escapes. This is not the accent of stress but accents of distressed language, words scarred by their social origins and aspirations. The tension of iambic stress against the accents of the vernacular is one of hallmarks of Claude McKay’s Jamaican dialect poems and a legacy of Paul Laurence Dunbar. In those cases, orthog-raphy was bent in service of the sound of the spoken language; but words spelt according to the standard can still be pronounced slant.
6. Wittgenstein, Philosophical Investigations , translated by G. E. M. Anscombe (New York: 
Macmillan, 1958), part 2. Lakoff, Moral Politics: How Liberals and Conservatives Think (Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press, 2002).
128 THE ART OF IMMEMORABILITY
T. S. Eliot’s “The Waste Land” might, at ﬁrst or even second blush, appear 
to be the epitome of modernist impersonality. Eliot’s own performance of 
his poem, originally called “He Do the Police in Voices, ” can be described as having as its baseline a deaccentuated voice that is haunted by the often sudden intrusion of accented voices:
Marie, Marie, hold on tight.
When Lil’s husband got demobbed, I said—
Speak to me. Why do you never speak?7
One answer is that when poetry does speak, those too enmeshed in the 
literary tradition either refuse to listen or just may be unable to hear, partly because it’s not the speech they are accustomed to hearing; indeed it may not sound like voice or speech at all. Accented voices are easily dismissed as unreﬁned, crude, even ignorant, just as accented or deformed syntax may register as just noise.
Performance always exceeds script, just as text always outperforms au-
dibility. The relation of script to performance, or performance to script, is necessarily discrepant, hovering around an anoriginal center in a com-plex of versions that is inherently unstable. Poetry readings proliferate ver-sions of the poem, each version displacing but not replacing one another. As such, close listening presents an ongoing challenge to readings that, in their intolerance of ambiguity, associative thinking, and abstraction, reduce the poem to a single level of meaning, banishing from signiﬁcance—as stray marks or noises—all but the literal or concrete.
Recognizing that a poem is not one but many, that sound and sense are as 
much at odds as ends, makes the study of poetry’s sound a test case for mid-  
rashic antinomianism, a new approach to critical studies that I am launch-ing here, and one that I am sure will take a prominent place in the general ﬁeld of Bent Studies.
Which is to say, to come to some conclusions
A work of art always exceeds its material constructionsAs well as its idealizations
7. “The Waste Land, ” http://town.hall.org/Archives/radio/IMS/HarperAudio/011894_harp_
ITH.html, accessed April 1, 2010.
Hearing Voices 129
Physical or digital instantiations
Anterior codes or algorithmic permutationsExperiences while reading or viewing are no more than weigh stationsAnd any number of interpretations, contexts of publications, historical 
connections—
All these have a charmed afﬁnityClustering around a center that is empty
That empty center or blank space is the possibility of freedom.
OBJECTIVIST BLUES: SCORING SPEECH 
IN SECOND WAVE MODERNIST  
POETRY AND LYRICS
1. How Strange the Change from Major to Minor
Since I am interested in the conﬂict, as well as the interconnectivity, among 
poetic forms, the modernist period has drawn me again and again. I ﬁnd the proliferation of new styles in the ﬁrst decades of the twentieth century particularly interesting in the context of the more traditional styles that also ﬂourished. I like to think of the period as having produced an epic collage poem of innovative and traditional poetry, popular verse, newly emerging styles of song lyrics, from blues to Tin Pan Alley, and also the linguistically accented talk forms emerging from vaudeville.
Perhaps the best representation of this collage is American Poetry: The 
Twentieth Century , the Library of America’s two-volume anthology, which 
covers poets born from 1838 to 1913.
1 In a dialog published in boundary 2 
with Geoffrey O’Brien, the anthology’s lead editor, I noted that one of the remarkable facets of this period is the reversal of fortune for many poetic forms and styles.
2 Some considered marginal and eccentric not only in their 
1. American Poetry: The Twentieth Century , 2 vols. (New York: Library of America, 2000). The 
advisory board for the anthology consisted of Robert Hass, John Hollander, Carolyn Kizer, 
Nathaniel Mackey, and Marjorie Perloff. Geoffrey O’Brien, the editor in chief of Library of America, coordinated the editorial team. The ﬁrst volume goes from Henry Adams (born 1838) to Ezra Pound (born 1885) to T. S. Eliot (born 1889) to Dorothy Parker (born 1893); the second volume goes from e.e. cummings (born 1894) to May Swenson (born 1913). 
2. This section is adapted from Geoffrey O’Brien and Charles Bernstein, “A Conversation, ” in boundary 2 28.2 (2001).Ward Phillips Lecture, Notre Dame, November 28, 2006. American Literary History , 20th An-
niversary Issue, 20.1–2 (2008). Thanks to Gordon Hutner.
132 THE ART OF IMMEMORABILITY
time but until relatively recently now seem the most inﬂuential, while lots 
of the presumed majors now look more like held-over corporals from the previous epoch. But perhaps even more intriguing is how the players with the smaller parts now look so indispensable.
The whole period, as presented by the Library of America anthologies, 
has an ensemble feeling, rather than a set of star turns or continuous high-lights. It insists that poetry is for reading, and if all you want to do is skip to the so-called good parts, you are missing the story. This, in turn, strikes a blow against a still prevalent reading value for poetry—that the only thing that really matters is masterpieces, those precious few. To read poetry ﬁl-tered in that way is to take it out of the social ﬁeld, to deanimate not only poetry but also individual poems.
The spirit of poetry, not to say what matters about poetry, can only be 
experienced if one reads around in it, checking out not only the different types of work but also the different orders and measures of success. And this is because many readers will disagree about what is the best, accusing each other of perpetrating minors as majors, so that one never will really be able to come out with consensus on just exactly who those elect might be. The problem is with the idea of the “few” itself: poetry is a social ﬁeld whose meaning comes, in part, from the relationship among poems. To remove that social ﬁeld is to strip poems of the cultural context that lends them  meaning. Yet you can only acknowledge this social ﬁeld by very precise selections; indeed, judgments of quality not only are a required part of this activity but also are given a more active role. More, rather than less, judg-ment, articulation of preference, is required. If anthologies are something of a shell game, the point is not just to uncover the peas but to present the shells as well; otherwise you may ﬁnd the dish ran away with the spoon.
 Maybe you remember this story? A couple of critics were speaking of 
their ideal anthology. The ﬁrst critic compared two anthologies. The ﬁrst anthology was described as containing only the most perfect works, sub-lime content married to consummate craft. The other anthology was de-scribed as a ragtag and noisy affair of the good, the bad, and the promising, the overstated or too ambitious, the utterly discountable, and the at-best-OK. Finally, the second critic got up to speak and said she agreed completely with the ﬁrst critic, that the two anthologies were accurately described. The one anthology was indeed very crowded and boisterous and, no question, the other was pristine and solitary, unmarred by imperfection. The only problem was that it was blank: there wasn’t a single poem in it.
Objectivist Blues 133
I read modernist American poetry in a comparatist frame that empha-
sizes technical invention. One of my persistent interests is the interplay be-
tween the vernacular, the colloquial, the ordinary, and the self-constructed syntax and vocabulary of the ideolectical; that is, the ideological play of dialects—real and imaginary—in American poetry. One way to trace this is to take the representation of speech in Paul Laurence Dunbar’s African American and Claude McKay’s early Jamaican dialect poems and run that against Oscar Hammerstein II’s lyrics for Show Boat  (“Ol’ Man River”) or 
DuBose and Dorothy Heyward and Ira Gershwin’s more supple lyrics for Porgy and Bess  (“Summertime” and “I Loves You Porgy”), James Weldon 
Johnson’s early song lyric “Under the Bamboo Tree” and his later sermonic textualizations in God’s Trombone , Fanny Brice’s Yiddish schtick monologues 
(or Groucho Marx’s Euro-ethnic ones), the virtually “Objectivist” blues of Robert Johnson or Charlie Patton, and the transcriptive works of Sterling Brown; or contrast these with the more ﬂuid poetic vernacular of William Carlos Williams, Jean Toomer, and Langston Hughes, and the rebarbative anti-assimilationism of Louis Zukofsky’s “Poem Beginning ‘The,’ ” or Mel -
vin Tolson’s Harlem Gallery: Book 1, The Curator . Or then again jump to the 
other side of the Atlantic and look to Tolson’s and Zukofsky’s immediate contemporaries Basil Bunting and Hugh MacDiarmid, both of whom wrote major works in reinvented (or synthetic) local dialects, Northumbrian and Scots, respectively. From there, we might be able to consider, under the sign of sound poetry—that is, not as a matter of inﬂuence but of Second Wave Modernist reﬁnement/revision—Cab Calloway’s scat “Hi-De-Ho” as an ideo-  
lectical descendent of Velimir Khlebnikov’s zaum, Kurt Schwitters’s “Ur 
Sonata, ” and Hugo Ball’s Dadaist “Karawane. ” My mix is certainly odd by most accounts. But there is something at the least fascinating in consider-ing McKay and MacDiarmid and Groucho Marx, or Cole Porter and Patton and Brice, not to say Walter Benjamin and Ludwig Wittgenstein, all born in the ﬁrst four years of my putative period.
I give this list not to be exhaustive—it’s only the tip of the tongue—but 
to suggest the tensions between the oral, transcriptive, and textual, not to say popular and rebarbative, that gives so much resonance to the poetry of this period. Underlying the range of approaches is the formidable technical achievement of these literary artists, a technical achievement that needs to be read within the context of the emergence of mass literacy, the preva-lence of second-language speakers of English, the new presence of sound reproduction technologies, and a generation of poets for whom poetry was 
134 THE ART OF IMMEMORABILITY
as much an arena to resist cultural and linguistic assimilation as a place that 
marked such assimilation. In a sense, this period represents a reaccenting of English, but not by the English. Indeed, one of the primary sites of poetic invention in this period involved novel ways of alphabetically representing, or refusing, accentuated speech. In other words, identity is not so much constructed as performed.
2. Objectivist Blues
238 If horses could but sing Bach, mother,—
239 Remember how I wished it once—240 Now I kiss you who could never sing Bach, never read Shakespeare.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .251 Assimilation is not hard,252 And once the Faith’s askew253 I might as well look Shagetz just as much as Jew.254 I’ll read their Donne as mine,255 And leopard in their spots256 I’ll do what says their Coleridge,257 Twist red hot pokers into knots.
 —Louis Zukofsky, “Poem beginning ‘The’ ” (1926)
3
In “Poem Beginning ‘The,’ ” a very young Louis Zukofsky (born in 1904) 
writes of the temptation to assimilate into the “historically valued”4 English 
literary tradition. “Assimilation is not hard, ” he tells his mother; but the burden of the poem is to register both the difﬁculty of resisting assimila-tion and the unexpected and irreparable costs of not resisting. The “The” of Zukofsky’s poem is Eliot’s “The Waste Land. ” Zukofsky’s critique provides a very early and profound recognition of that poem as establishing a fault line for high culture that is self-defeating in its exclusion of the minor keys that Zukofsky’s poem ludicly enumerates, from Bolsheviks and Broadway to Bach’s horse play,  from accented speech to unaccented meter. Zukofsky rec-
ognized that Eliot’s poem, great as he undoubtedly thought it was, created an impasse for poetry in its wake, at least for those, talented or not, who found themselves on the outside of Eliot’s brand of literary tradition.
3. “Poem beginning ‘The’ ” in Selected Poems, edited by Charles Bernstein (New York: Library 
of America American Poets Project, 2006), 7–8.
4. To echo business theorist Clayton Christensen, quoted above in “Invention Follies. ”
Objectivist Blues 135
Zukofsky grasped that radical modernism was, like racial modernism, 
inevitably connected to the multiplicities of spoken sounds. The burden 
of modernist composition was to articulate the range of sounds into fugal patterns, not purify the language. In his 1940 study for “A”-9, Zukofsky cre-
ates one of the wittiest and most trenchant dialect poems of Second Wave  Modernism. “A foin lass bodders, ” his translation of Guido Cavalcanti’s  thirteenth-century poem “Donna mi prega” into Brooklynese (itself a foil for Yiddish dialect). The poem begs performance:
5
A foin lass bodders me I gotta tell her
Of a fact surely, so unrurly, often’’r ’t comes ’tcan’t soften its proud neck’s called love mm . . .Even me brudders dead drunk in dare cellarFeel it dough poorly ’n yrs. trurly rough ’nHis way ain’t so tough ’n he can’t speak from above mm . . .’n’ wid proper rational understandin’ . . . (Selected, 152)
Zukofsky’s dialect, one might even say schtick, translation of Cavalcanti is 
noisy, disruptive, brilliant, and unacceptable all rolled into one. Zukofsky is here responding to First Wave Modernist Ezra Pound’s 1928 “traduction” (as he called it) of “Donna mi prega”:
Because a lady asks me, I would tell
Of an affect that comes often and is fellAnd is so overweening: Love by name.E’en its deniers can now hear the truth,I for the nonce to them that know it call,Having no hope at allthat man who is base in heartCan bear his part of wit . . .
6
Pound’s commentary on Cavalcanti, and in particular on “Donna mi prega, ” 
together with his translation of the poem, appeared ﬁrst in The Dial (with 
the subtitle “Medievalism”) in 1928; in 1934 it was collected in Make It New . 
5. You can hear my performance of the poem at http://writing.upenn.edu/ezurl/5/ and Zukof-
sky’s performance at http://writing.upenn.edu/ezurl/6/.6. Pound’s Cavalcanti: An Edition of the Translations, Notes, and Essays , edited by David Ander-
son (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1983), 171.
136 THE ART OF IMMEMORABILITY
Pound praises Cavalcanti as being more modern than Dante and also char-
acterizes him as a radical and indeed “dangerous” ﬁgure, a “natural philoso-pher” in the sense of an atheist (he connects Cavalcanti to Averroes as well): proof by experience (“natural demonstration”) not preordained authority.
7 
This perhaps explains Cavalcanti’s place in Zukofsky’s “A”-9, in which his 
words and his canzone form are put in fugue-like arrangement with Marx and Spinoza, twin ﬁgures of radical Jewish secular thought. While Pound’s transduction makes Cavalcanti come alive in quasi-idiomatic English rhythms that play to, while transforming, historically mediated standards of high lyric sonorousness, “A foin lass bodders” is obtrusively antiassimi-lationist, not to say dissident or antiabsorptive, both culturally and poeti-cally. It is this twining of ethnic and aesthetic resistance, in both “A Poem beginning ‘The’ ” and “A foin lass” that makes Zukofsky’s work of such signal 
importance for the politics of poetic form in Second Wave Modernism.
Nowhere are the innovations of both assimilation and disruption more 
compelling than among the Second Wave Modernists, poets and comics, 
lyricists and blues artists born between 1889 and 1909. The dates are some-what less arbitrary than they might at ﬁrst appear, since they cover the ﬁrst wave of response to many of the radical and disruptive innovations of the modernist poets and artists of the previous generation. You could call this postmodernism avant la lettre . Indeed, Second Wave Modernism may be 
the most profound critique we have of modernist art—not in theory but in practice. One element of this critique is certainly related to ideology and politics, and this is in a sense how we often receive these writers of the “ ’30s 
generation, ” as they may sometimes be called. In contrast, I want to point to 
how modernist art practices were both reﬁned and deepened, questioned and extended. The work may sometimes seem less bold than its immediate forebears, and it is often less celebrated, but I would propose that the subtle and intensely technical innovations of the period remain foundational for present work.
One of my interests in focusing on Second Wave Modernism is to trouble 
the distinctions made both within and between high and low culture and to focus on a key category, the in between . The literary artists of this period 
were witness to, even participants in, the movement from folk and popular culture to mass culture and the culture industry. Distinguishing between popular and mass culture encourages a scrutiny of how mass culture was forged out of—both extending and betraying—popular and folk culture, 
7. See Pound’s 1928 essay “Cavalcanti” from Make It New in Pound’s Cavalcanti (203–51).
Objectivist Blues 137
though it also needs to be acknowledged that common concerns for the 
vernacular, as well as immediacy of experience, cut across these lines. By considering transitional works of popular and folk culture in the unfamil-iar context of the radical technical innovations of Second Wave Modernist poetry, it’s possible to recognize how the diction and form of these works resist or embrace, invent or reconceptualize, assimilation, that always vex-ing virtual horizon of American culture.
Let me start with a few comments on Second Wave Modernist Cole 
Porter’s “You’re the Top” from the 1934 show Anything Goes  (Porter was 
born in 1891).
8 In his forging of the prewar American popular song, a 
precursor to, but not identical with, the American mass culture song of the postwar period, Porter’s innovations included an exquisitely effervescent use of colloquial language that never marks itself as vernacular in the literary sense but passes by means of its urban wit. At the same time, Porter  engages in a range of juxtapositions that take something from the Pound-Eliot paratactic playbook but with a distinctly anti- (or a-) canonical twist. Porter’s heteronomous juxtapositions are renowned of course, but their charm should not detract from the marvelous, even devilish, cultural aggressiveness of their high/low conﬂations: an old Dutch Master with Mrs. Astor with Pepsodent, Dante with Durante, a Bendel bonnet and a Shakespeare sonnet or, outdoing himself one more time, the National Gallery—and what could be a more explicit symbol of the canon?—with Garbo’s salary and then, in perhaps Porter’s most memorable example of the nonpareil par excellence, cellophane, which he identiﬁes, barely a beat away, as the sublime. Then again, consider the Red 1930s conﬂations of the political and its others in the rhyme of Mother Russia with a Roxy usher or Mahatma Gandhi with Napoleon Brandy.
If Frank O’Hara and John Ashbery can be credited with the “postmod-
ern” inclusion of popular culture in their poems, it’s hard to take in the his-tory of such poetic peregrinations without a nod to Porter, even if it turns the distinction on its head given that Porter incorporates not the low in the high but the high in the low, or really leveling or parodying the distinc-tion.
9 Indeed, Porter’s collages of discrepant materials represent a shifting, 
8. The Library of America anthology, vol. 1, includes three Porter lyrics—“I Get a Kick Out of 
You, ” “Anything Goes, ” and “Just One of Those Things. ” “You’re the Top” is collected in Read-ing Lyrics, edited by Robert Gottlieb and Roger Kimball (New York: Pantheon, 2000).9. This also makes Porter a precursor for Pop art. And with Porter’s double entendres, the “homotextual” dimensions of his work are as startling and revelatory as those of his fellow Second Waver, Hart Crane (1899–1932), both Porter and Crane leading, after a fashion, to 
138 THE ART OF IMMEMORABILITY
an opening, of American social space as much as any poetry of the period, 
and his cosmopolitan élan might just be the medium or tone that allows this to be not polemical but intoxicating, even as it risks apolitical depolariza-tion. On the one hand, “You’re the Top” can be read as a reﬁnement of the modernist innovators (and not only in terms of collage but also in the use of vernacular, or perhaps to say in a more Porteresque lingo, slang). On the other hand, the work is a form of disruptive innovation, since it brings into being a new, and ultimately dominant,
10 model for popular music, affect-
ing production, style, and distribution at the same time, exploiting the new technologies for sound reproduction, including the phonograph record, the radio and voice ampliﬁcation through the microphone. Invented just nine years before Anything Goes opened on Broadway, the microphone was 
used to magniﬁcent advantage to create a new intimate sound—often with 
Ashbery and O’Hara. “Love for Sale” is only the most emblematic of Porter’s charting of “Love 
that’s only slightly soiled”—“the wayward ways of this wayward town”:
Let the poets pipe of lovein their childish way,I know ev’ry type of loveBetter far than they. (Reading Lyrics, 117)
The song is from the 1930 show The New Yorkers . According to Roger Kimball’s The Com-
plete Lyrics of Cole Porter (Cambridge: Da Capo Press, 1992), Porter at one point said “Love for Sale” was “his favorite Porter song. ” Kimball also reports that to get around objections to the song’s propriety, the setting was changed from outside a white nightclub to Harlem’s Cotton Club, and a black singer was substituted for a white singer (145). That singer, Second Waver Elisabeth Welch (born in 1904), was the child of a Scots mother and a father of “African and Native American” descent, according to the African American Registry, http://www.aaregis-try.com/african_american_history/2268/She_could_Do_It_All_Elisabeth_Welch, accessed August 8, 2007. One of the most recent covers of the song intensiﬁes, more than any other I know, the foreignness at its heart; perhaps it is not that surprising that the Brazilian musician and vocalist Caetano Veloso would—like Billie Holiday—bring out just how haunting and des-olate “Love for Sale” is. Veloso includes the song on his album of American standards, A Foreign 
Sound, a 2004 Nonesuch release. Veloso knows just how to make the familiar strange. 10. The sexual image of a top and a bottom might also be thought of in terms of the newly emergent dominance of mass culture (one of Porter’s tops is the Tower of Babel). At the same time, Porter’s works suggest that the major and minor, the dominant and the submissive, mas-ter and slave are as much a psychosocial erotic continuum as terms of positive valuation. In Irving Berlin’s “parody” version, written for his friend Porter, Berlin is nothing if not explicit in his rhymes for top: King Kong’s penis, self-abuse, the starch in a groom’s erection; in con-trast to the bottom as “a eunuch / who has just been through an op. ” The parody is attributed to Porter in Complete Lyrics (171); Roger Kimball makes the correction in Porter’s Selected 
Lyrics, edited by Kimball (New York: Library of American, 2006), 56.
Objectivist Blues 139
songs by Porter—by such Second Wavers as Fred Astaire (born in 1899), 
and such younger singers as Frank Sinatra (born in 1915), and Billie Holiday (also born in 1915), among many others. All were “swooners” who swerved from the style of such “crooners” as Rudy Vallee (born just two years after Astaire).
American mass culture is founded (and founders) on a streamlining, not 
to say mainstreaming, of vernaculars, in order to forge a synthetic mass slang that is the antithesis of dialect, which remains marked by the local and unassimilated. Mass culture entails the absorption of dialect by reﬁne-ment, assimilation, and ultimately standardization. The precarious distinc-tion between popular (or folk) culture and mass culture retains force within the cultural ﬁeld of mass-mediated culture even today, when bluegrass mu-sic can interpose itself as exemplary of folk or popular culture, in contrast to mass culture, as, for example, in the 2002 Grammy Awards with Ralph Stanley walk-on to Britney Spears’s party. The backstory of that cultural hiccup, or momentary malabsorption, would require that I introduce into evidence Harry Smith’s epic Anthology of American Folk Music (1952)¸ a Ho-
meric project, collecting and conceptualizing recordings made primarily in the late 1920s, the works of a set of singer/lyricists of a then-thriving American oral culture, almost all of whom are part of the Second Wave Modernist generation.
Before taking up Smith’s anthology, I want to turn to a song I mentioned 
brieﬂy, “Under the Bamboo Tree” (1902), composed by the First Wave Mod-ernist team of Bob Cole, J. Rosamond Johnson, and James Weldon Johnson (born in 1871). “Under the Bamboo Tree” was a megahit of the day.
11 The 
song is notable for its setting “down in the jungles, ” featuring, “a Zulu from Matabooloo, ” who every morning sings to his beloved from under a bamboo tree. For those of you who may not be familiar with the location of Mata-
booloo—it’s just a few miles from Passaic, right by the Orientalist Mall’s 
Bamboo Court, which has only recently been renamed Bantu Court; the Voodoo Lounge is no longer open. What drove this song up the charts be-fore the hit parade was even a glimmer in Dick Clark’s mother’s eyes is the catchy, just about unshakable refrain, reprised most famously by Judy Garland and Margaret O’Brien in Meet Me in St. Louis . Listen to Harry  
11. See Thomas L. Morgan, “Bob Cole, J. Rosamond Johnson, and James Weldon Johnson” at 
http://www.jass.com/c&j.html, accessed November 26, 2006. The 1902 recording was made by Arthur Collins.
140 THE ART OF IMMEMORABILITY
MacDonough and John Bieling’s version of the song, recorded on February 
27, 1903, by Victor Talking Machine (for a sound clip of “Under the Bamboo Tree” go to http://writing.upenn.edu/ezurl/1):
Down in the jungles lived a maid,
Of royal blood though dusky shade,A marked impression once she madeUpon a Zulu from Matabooloo;And ev’ry morning he would beDown underneath the bamboo tree,Awaiting there his love to see,And then to her he’d sing:
If you lak-a-me, lak I lak-a-you
And we lak-a-both the same,I lak-a say, this very day,I lak-a-change your name;’Cause I love-a-you and love-a-you trueAnd if you-a love-a-me.One live as two, two live as oneUnder the bamboo tree.. . . . . . . .
12
In this song, so much the prototype of the American popular song, we get 
a sort of undifferentiated pan-culturalism, which nonetheless is unmistak-ably African and whose refrain is a bepidginonated or perhaps nonsensical-ized version of black dialect, invented, at least in part, by the author of God’s 
Trombone  (1927), perhaps the greatest translation, or transposition, of the 
African American oral sermon into modernist American poetry. “Under the Bamboo Tree” is a quasi-sound/scat poem accompanied by teasing eroti-
12. The lyric is included in the 2004 Library of America edition of James Weldon Johnson’s 
Writings , 811–12; note that there is a typographical error in this printing: “One [not once ] 
day he seized her” is correct. A website, John Kendrick’s Musicals 101 , provides an image of 
the cover page of the sheet music (as published by Jos. W. Stern & Co in New York in 1902) as well as a transcription of the lyrics, http://www.musicals101.com/lybambootree.htm, ac-cessed Aug. 17, 2007; however, Kendrick misreads the attribution “By Cole and Johnson Bros” to mean Bob Cole and J. Rosamund Johnson rather than the Johnson brothers J. Rosamund and James Weldon. 
Objectivist Blues 141
cism, not to say exoticized racial fantasy (though this verse does not make 
it to the 1903 recording):
And in this simple jungle way,
He wooed the maiden ev’ry day,By singing what he had to say;One day he seized her and gently squeezed her . . .
Seized and squeezed  is exactly the linguistic action of the poem: seizing the 
vernacular into Victorian song form so that it can be titillatingly squeezed—
a formula that mass culture hasn’t so much overcome as capitalized.
None other than the Ol’ Possum heself, Mr. Thomas Stearns Eliot, seizes 
and squeezes this song in his 1932 unﬁnished poem “Sweeney Agonistes”:
song by wauchope and horsfall 
swarts as tambo, snow as bones
Under the bamboo
Bamboo bambooUnder the bamboo treeTwo live as oneOne live as twoTwo live as threeUnder the bamUnder the booUnder the bamboo tree
13
Rachel Blau DuPlessis discusses “Sweeney Agonistes” in terms of black 
and Jewish minstrelsy and vaudeville, with particular reference to Vachel Lindsay’s “The Congo” in “ ‘HOO, HOO, HOO’: Some Episodes in the Con -
struction of Male Whiteness. ”
14 Her essay charts the First Wave Modernist 
13. T. S. Eliot, The Complete Poems and Plays 1909–1950  (New York: Harcourt, Brace & World, 
1971), 81.
14. Genders, Races, and Religious Cultures in Modern American Poetry  (New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 2001). In a subsequent chapter, “Wandering Jews: Melting Pots and Mongrel Thoughts, ” DuPlessis discusses the passage of Zukofsky’s “Poem Beginning ‘The’ ” cited here. Cultural mongrelization and miscegenation is a keynote of Second Wave Modernism; DuPles-sis adeptly sets the stage in a discussion of First Wave Modernist Mina Loy’s antiseminal poem “Anglo-Mongrels and the Rose” (1923–1925). 
142 THE ART OF IMMEMORABILITY
use of “hoodoo” and “voodoo” to mark racialized projections of the primi-
tive, let’s call it jungleiﬁcation . Responding to Michael North’s discussion, 
in The Dialect of Modernism , of Eliot’s pastiche of “Under the Bamboo Tree, ” 
DuPlessis notes that the poet from St. Louis “acknowledges the power of Af-rican American popular culture in relation to other powerful theatrical tra-ditions” (193). Hoodoo and voodoo would melt into pop in the Second Wave 
lyrics of Johnny Mercer and Cole Porter, where the spondaic beat is not of the jungle but of the human heart. Consider Mercer’s 1939 “Day In—Day Out”—“The same old hoodoo follows me about / The same old pounding in my heart / Whenever I think of you” ( Reading Lyrics, 437); and Porter’s ver-
bally acrobatic charm-melos in his 1929 “You Do Something to Me”—“Let 
me live ’neath your spell, / Do do that voodoo that you do so well” ( Complete 
Lyrics , 117). “Do do” secularizes and pragmatizes “voodoo. ” The charm of 
slang absorbs (sublimates?) the sting of dialect; the spell works. Or is it sub-lates, as the sharp demarcation of the discourse of master and slave seems to vanish before our ears? Porter shows perfect cultural pitch for the process: “You do something to me, / Something that simply mystiﬁes me. / Tell me, why should it be / You have the pow’r to hypnotize me?”
It’s not, then, such a huge jump from this First Wave Modernist era song to 
the modernist classics, Oscar Hammerstein II and Jerome Kern’s Show Boat 
(1927), and Dubose and Dorothy Heyward’s and George and Ira Gershwin’s Porgy and Bess  (1935).
15 (While Kern was born in 1885, Hammerstein was 
born in 1895, Ira Gershwin in 1896, and George two years later.) In “Ol’ Man River, ” Hammerstein essentially took on the task of setting dialect vo-cabulary into the rhyming, metrically and tonally uniﬁed song form of a new musical genre emerging from the operettas of Victor Herbert and the 
15. A smaller jump from “Under the Bamboo Tree” would be to a contemporary song, “Under 
the Matzos Tree: A Ghetto Love Song” (1907) by Alexander Carr and Fred Fisher, which was reissued on Jewface, a CD of comic, sometimes self-deprecating songs and schtick by Jewish performers, recorded from 1905 to 1924. Perhaps the most famous song on the album is Irving Berlin’s 1916 “Cohen Owes Me 97 Dollars. ” Many of these songs used Yiddish dialect, or, if this is a difference that makes a difference in the context of dialect comedy, travesties of it. The 1906 “When Mose with His Nose Leads the Band” includes its own scat/vocable refrain: “Oy, oy, oy, oy / Mazel tov!”; Jewface, curated by Jody Rosen (N.p.: Reboot Stereophonic [RSR 006], 2006). The contemporary poet Thomas Fink takes up this tradition, with an idiolecti-cal twist, using Yiddish syntax and, in performance, intonation and accent, in his “Yinglish” poems—“We’ll have snow April. Did / you ever have here April snow?”: “Yinglish Strophes” 8, in Clarity and Other Poems  (East Rockaway, NY: Marsh Hawk Press, 2008), 24; see also his 
Yinglish Strophes 1–19 (New York: Truck, 2009).
Objectivist Blues 143
American parlor songs of Paul Dresser (“On the Banks of the Wabash”) and 
Stephen Foster before him. The setting of African American dialect into a  familiar-sounding English verse prosody—into the stadium of a metrical, not to say Euclidian, acoustic space—bears a relation to the iambic pentameter (and hexameter) dialect poems of Dunbar and McKay. Hammerstein and Kern perform both a translation and transposition of this material. “Ol’ Man River” is an explicitly heterogeneous, not to say dysraphic, work; indeed its hybridity, uncomfortable for and even offensive to some contemporary audiences, is prominently ﬁgured in the plot. Show Boat is, after all, about 
racial passing, about the status of miscegenation, about a person, who, like the show itself, is one-eighth black and seven-eighths white. But it is only in the soaring, projective operatic performance by Second Wave Modernist and noted African American political activist Paul Robeson (born in 1898) that the social formalism of the song is fully articulated.
Take a look at the reproduction of the facing pages on which this lyric 
appears in the Library of America anthology (see ﬁgure 2). (The anthol-ogy is sequenced by author’s date of birth.) The verso page, from Abraham Lincoln Gillespie’s marvelous post-Joycean collection of constructed words, could not be more fortunate from my point of view, especially since I dis-cuss Gillespie in the context of McKay’s dialect poetry in “The Poetics of the Americas” (this essay is the sequel). The lexicon on both pages is im-mediately odd, unfamiliar, estranged. In the case of the Gillespie’s ideolec-tical, nonidentitarian language, this is the intended effect. Taken by itself, Hammerstein’s lyric, written as a part of a score to be sung, not as a poem to be read on its own, suffers from a fundamental paradox: the closer we get to transcribing the actual sound of speech, the odder the transcription may appear. The dialect spelling looks strained if not condescending: if it gestures at a spoken language that is unselfconscious and ﬂuid, it presents at the same time an ethnographic distortion or slur in the very method of its means of reproduction. In performance, however, much of this strangeness, though by no means all, disappears. And it is signiﬁcant that the musical appears at a time when writing has been suddenly and radically replaced as a medium for reproducing and storing local speech and local song by the invention of a means of mechanical reproduction of sound—the tape recorder and the phonograph.
Listen to Robeson singing “Ol’ Man River” in 1932, the exact same time 
as the recordings that Harry Smith collected were being made (for a sound clip of an excerpt from “Ol’ Man River”  go to http://writing.upenn.edu/
ezurl/2):
144 THE ART OF IMMEMORABILITY
Dere’s an ol’ man called de Mississippi’
Dat’s de ol’ man dat I’d like to be!What does he care if de world’s got troubles?What does he care if de land ain’t free?
Ol’ Man River,
Dat Ol’ Man River,He mus’ know sumpin’But don’ say nuthin,’He jes’ keeps rollin,’He keeps on rollin’ along.. . . . .You an’ me, we sweat an’ strain,Body all achin’ an’ racked wid pain—Tote dat barge!Lif’ dat bale!Git a little drunk,An’ you land in jail. . . .
FIG 2  Gillespie and Hammerstein from Library of America’s American Poetry: The Twentieth 
Century (New York: Library of America, 1993), 2:87–88.
Objectivist Blues 145
Ah gits weary
An’ sick of tryin’;Ah’m tired of livin’,An’ skeered of dyin’ . . .. . . . . . .
—Library of America anthology (88–89)
Nowhere in Show Boat is the contrast stronger between the lexical mark-
ings of dialect and the very nonvernacular, highly enunciated singing style 
demanded by Kern and Hammerstein’s score. The dialect is strictly in the words, not in their pronunciation, an odd but highly signiﬁcant reversal, given that in speech the main mark of dialect is accent, not lexicon. In the 1932 studio recording, Robeson modiﬁes Hammerstein’s dialect lyrics, changing “git” to you gets, “land in jail” to lands in jail, “ah get” to I gets, and 
“jes” to just .
16 This oscillation among dialect, standard, and new standard 
dialect underscores both the ﬂuidity and the incommensurability of the so-cial layers that are dysraphicly fused together in the birth of popular song.
Robeson went on to use “Ol’ Man River, ” over the following decades, as 
a theme for his radical racial and social politics, but not without turning the lyric on its head, in a collaboration involuntaire  with Hammerstein. In a 
1952 performance at a civil rights meeting in Chicago (and also at other con-certs), Robeson sings just the initial four-line stanza and the twenty-four-line  refrain, expeditiously eliding the reference to “Colored folks” that starts the next stanza. In the quatrain, he blows away Hammerstein’s spirituals- inflected, let’s-forget-our-troubles-and-watch-the-river-flow-there’s-a- better-world-on-the-other-side-of-the-River-Jordan fatalism by negating the identiﬁcation with the river in the second line—“Dat’s de ol’ man dat I’d like to be!”—singing, in its place, “That’s the ol’ man I don’t like to be!, ” while 
16. There are similar differences between the “ofﬁcial” Hammerstein lyric published by Li-
brary of America and Reading Lyrics and the 1928 vocal score of the London production that 
ﬁrst featured Robeson: “Don’ ” is don’t , “git” is gits, and “skeered” is scared ; see Jerome Kern and 
Oscar Hammerstein 2nd, The Theater Royal Drury Lane Production of Show Boat, vocal score 
(London: Chappell; New York: T. B. Harms, 1928), 53–64. There are a number of recordings of Robeson singing “Ol’ Man River, ” and innumerable versions by a vast array of singers, from Ray Charles to Rosemary Clooney to Frank Sinatra, most of whom modify the dialect. The ﬁrst recording of the song was by Bing Crosby, with the Paul Whiteman orchestra, in 1928; Crosby, in his thin and jaunty version, averts Hammerstein’s dialect. Judy Garland, perform-ing the song on her early 1960s TV show, had mainstreamed (not to say whitewashed) the song to such an extent that it retained almost no hint of Hammerstein’s dialect. 
146 THE ART OF IMMEMORABILITY
at the same time standardizing the pronunciation of the deﬁnite article in 
the ﬁnal two lines of the stanza, singing the not “de. ”17 In place of one of the 
troubling stereotypes in the lyric, “Git a little drunk / An’ you land in jail, ” Robeson sings, “You show a little grit / An’ you lands in jail. ” He completes his call to action by replacing “Ah git weary / An’ sick of trying” with—
But I keeps laughin’
Instead of cryin’I must keep ﬁghtin’Until I’m dyin’ . . .
18
. . . and that old person river . . . well, it just keeps roiling along . . .
In his concert programs, as they evolve over his career, Robeson lifts 
his material up and out of its initial context, creating a panethnic and mul-
tinational—in short internationalist—frame for the many folk and popu-lar songs he performs. For Robeson, the operatic voice, with its deep bass resonances, is the vehicle of internationalism, while the local accents of individual songs are—in Ezra Pound’s sense—luminous details. Enormous respect—not to say affection—is given to the particulars, and yet the tran-scending grandeur of Robeson’s voice marks something beyond the particu-lars, something utopic. Robeson performs spirituals not as a re-creation of the direct, heart-rending, expression of an enslaved group but as art songs, as a classically trained singer might perform Schubert lieder. This is why his singing is so inspirational but at the same time unsentimental. In a late concert, Robeson can segue directly from a Russian folk song (“The Song of Volga Boatman”) to a spiritual (“Deep River”) to “St. Louis Blues” to “Kad-dish” to Beethoven’s “Ode to Joy” to a Chinese children’s song to an Ameri-can folk song (“John Henry”) to a militant labor anthem (“Joe Hill”) to a 
17. According to Robeson’s son, Paul Robeson, Jr., Robeson began altering the lyrics “during 
the civil rights struggle of the 1940s. ” See Robeson, Jr.’s liner notes to The Odyssey of Paul Robe-
son, a CD compilation produced by Seymour Soloman and Robeson, Jr. (New York: Omega 
Classics [OCD 3007], 1992). Martin Duberman, in his biography Paul Robeson  (New York: 
Alfred A. Knopf, 1988), dates the ﬁrst changes to 1935, at the time of the ﬁlm version of Show 
Boat, and, in part, at the suggestion of his lifelong friend, leftist Freda Diamond (604–5).18. Duberman documents Robeson’s introduction of this change at a concert in support of the anti-Fascist Spanish Republicans at Albert Hall (in London) in December 1936 (213–14). He quotes Hammerstein’s 1949 response: “As the author of these words, I have no intention of changing them or permitting anyone else to change them. I further suggest that Paul write his own songs and leave mine alone” (604).
Objectivist Blues 147
Broadway standard to a recitation from Shakespeare’s Othello.19 The result 
is a virtually Poundian montage, but with a Popular Front ideology: discrep-
ant particulars—radically mixing high, folk, and popular culture—are con-nected both through the medium of Robeson’s elegiac voice and through his strongly articulated aesthetics of musical relationships through contrast and conﬂict. Robeson’s concerts construct a utopian space in which solidar-ity and struggle move us closer to imagining a just world. And such struggle begins with an abiding, unbreachable, commitment to “historical and con-temporary particulars, ” to use a phrase of Zukofsky’s.
20
The act of rearticulating—translation through performance and trans-
mission through resounding and replaying—is fundamental to the process initiated in Robeson’s performance as well as in the work of a number of jazz musicians and vocalists in their performances of versions of “standards” (as they are still called) with lyrics by Hammerstein, Gershwin, Porter, and other Tin Pan Alley writers. Consider, for example, Nina Simone’s signature performance of “I Loves You Porgy, ” in which she restandardizes the lyric to “I Love You, Porgy, ” as indeed Billie Holiday does in her own performance of the song. Consider too that the Gershwins reﬁned themselves by Angliciz-ing their names, which in their school days were Jacob and Israel Gershvin, an assimilationist practice that was common at the time. The translation of Jake and Izzy to George and Ira certainly makes for a fascinating rhythm. But youse certoinly cain’t get vehry far on duh greht vite vay with ah noime like dat. Indeed, many of the songs we call jazz standards are just such rein-
scriptions, though translation and improvisation, of songs by Hammerstein and Gershwin and Porter, not the least of which are the re-versionings of 
19. Speaking of the segues in one of his concerts of the late 1950s, Robeson notes “the likeness 
of the music of various peoples”: The Odyssey of Paul Robeson , track 23. This echoes similar 
comments Robeson made starting as early as 1929 (Duberman, 121). The next Odyssey track 
(24) introduces Robeson’s lamentation of Jewish oppression, Levi Yitzhak of Berditchev’s “Hassidic Chant, ” an eighteenth-century rearticulation of “Kaddish” that is also known as “Din Toyre mit Got” (“The Lawsuit with God”). Robeson says that it is “very much like the sermons in the Negro church. ” Robeson’s pancultural commitment to folk songs was in full evidence by 1934 (Duberman, 176–78). Robeson’s 1958 Carnegie Hall concerts are the best-known example of his late-style concert organization, which can usefully be contrasted to Harry Smith’s folk anthology of the same period. For a discussion of “Hassidic Chant, ” as well of Robeson’s concert programs, see Jonathan D. Karp, “Performing Black-Jewish Symbiosis: The ‘Hassidic Chant’ of Paul Robeson, ” in American Jewish History 91.1 (2003): 53–81.20. Zukofsky uses this phrase in “An Objective, ” collected in Prepositions  (Middleton, CT: 
Wesleyan University Press, 2001), 12.
148 THE ART OF IMMEMORABILITY
Porter’s “Night and Day” (1934), with its opening spondaic verse, simply 
dropped by Billie Holiday in one recording:21
Like the beat beat beat of the tom-tom
When the jungle shadows fall (Reading Lyrics, 118)
Just how far this Second Wave lyric is from the crude but mold-breaking 
First Wave jungleiﬁcation of Vachel Lindsay’s 1914 “The Congo: A Study of the Negro Race” is the measure of Porter’s exquisite assimilationist aes-thetic of cultural absorption.
22
The American songbook “standards” of Second Wave Modernism have 
the peculiar history of rearticulations (aka covers) across the political and aesthetic spectrum, from bebop to Mantovani. (The British conductor An-nunzio Mantovani, whose rigorous practice of taking out the highs and lows of lowbrow and highbrow music alike to create a smooth and sedating sonic wash that is the ultimate symbol of Cold War middlebrow culture, was him-self a Second Waver, born in Italy in 1905.) Unlike language standards that are models of correct articulation, the American standard songs are open invitations to radical stylistic otherings. They are virtual tokens of Emerso-nian moral perfectionism, a constellation of interchanging variations that together suggest the unﬁnishable possibilities of community.
But now it’s time to return to St. Louis, or at least to the “St. Louis Blues” 
by W. C. Handy (born 1873), which is often considered to be the ﬁrst blues song. The song was published in 1914, the same year as Lindsay’s “Congo. ” I want to contrast Handy’s foundational First Wave Modernist song, and especially his performance of it, with Charlie Patton’s paradigmatic Second Wave Modernist work, “High Water Everywhere, ” which, like Robeson’s performance and Smith’s recordings, were recorded in the late 1920s. In Handy’s performance of his “St. Louis Blues, ” he incorporates many of the harmonizing elements of the Victorian parlor song: voice is projected over the melody; melody exists as separate from the lyric rather than as an ex-tension of the lyric; tone, melody, and lyric are harmonized, subordinated 
21. According to Michael Steinman, John Hammond produced the 78 rpm recording on De-
cember 13, 1939; Steinman notes that the opening lines might have been cut, at Hammond’s suggestion, due to the time limitations of the disc (personal communication, September 23, 2008). 22. PennSound has made available a recording of Lindsay reading “Congo, ” http://writing .upenn.edu/pennsound/x/Lindsay.html, accessed May 1, 2007.
Objectivist Blues 149
to one another. The ﬁgure of the words is set off against the ground of the 
music. In the Library of America anthology, the lyrics look like this (for a sound clip of “St. Louis Blues, ” go to http://writing.upenn.edu/ezurl/3):
I hate to see de ev’nin’ sun go down,
Hate to see de ev’nin’ sun go down,’Cause ma baby, he done lef dis town,
Feelin’ tomorrow lak ah feel today,
Feel tomorrow lak ah feel today,I’ll pack my trunk make ma gitaway. (vol. 2, p. 89)
“St. Louis Blues” creates a song form that is uniﬁed, prosodically con-
sistent, and sonorous. It creates a Euclidian or proscenium space that is 
projective in its centripetal force. The setting is formal and reproducible. Handy sings in a melodic falsetto that is projective in the way of trained singers. (Robeson’s performance of “St. Louis Blues” is structurally similar to Handy’s, but Robeson is even more operatic than Handy.) The metrical structure exists independently of the performance, suggesting a continuum with the setting of dialect or vernacular within a received metrical structure in Dunbar, McKay, Johnson, and Hammerstein.
In contrast, the work of Second Wave Modernist Charlie Patton (1891[?]–
1934) breaks drastically from almost all of these features, in ways that make his songs resonant with radical developments among other Second Wave Modernists. His sound is not separable from his words but emerges from them and returns to them. The timbre or grain of voice is foregrounded over both the tune and enunciation of the words. Patton actively works to col-lapse the separation between ﬁgure and ground, between lyric and melody, between song and singer, and between voice and projection. The acoustic equivalent of perspective is thwarted. The effect is of a radical acoustic ﬂat-tening—a feature sometimes noted as “muddiness. ” Listen to Patton singing “High Water Everywhere” (sound clip at http://writing.upenn.edu/ezurl/4). During his second recording session in October 1929, Patton literally in-scribed his song by means of a needle writing directly onto a wax master, singing into a sixty-centimeter wide, eight-foot-long plywood horn that was attached to the needle.
23
23. Keith Briggs and Alex Van Der Tuuk describe the session in the booklet that accompa-
nies The Deﬁnitive Charley Patton (UK: Catﬁsh Records, 2001). (Patton’s name is frequently 
150 THE ART OF IMMEMORABILITY
The song is not projected by convex force into the Euclidian or three- 
dimensional space of the proscenium theater but resonates within the body; 
it is almost as if the sound-shape is two-dimensional or concave. Body and voice are one; or, to put it in more formal terms, Patton plays the body as an instrument—typically against the grain, emphasizing the artiﬁce of noise over the ﬂuidity of voice. The song has no inner or outer; it starts in the middle and stays there. The singing is inwardly directed in constructing the song out of its vocal materials; as such it is nonprojective or introjec-tive. The melody is not detachable from the words, does not accompany the words, but rather comes out of the words. Its musical shape is created pri-marily by rhythm, making the work, formally, as close to sound poetry as to the emerging styles of popular and folk song. At the same time, its rhythmic base also marks the origins of this style in African American ﬁeld shouts, work songs, and chants of the nineteenth century, with their rhythmically intoned vocables serving as acute temporal markings. Patton’s words also oscillate into vocables, which is to say become indecipherable, as he plays the signal-to-noise ratio almost as one would play an instrument. Indeed, there is a kind of sonic Fauvism or brutism emerging here.
Patton’s nonprojective singing is not a matter of reduced volume, as it 
is, for example, in the emergent informal and intimate singing made pos-sible by the introduction of microphone ampliﬁcation in 1925. Patton’s vol-ume can be substantial, but the vocalization emanates from the body and is not separated out into a vocal stream; the sound is contained and suffused. Patton’s guttural soundings are by now highly inﬂuential. He sings in and through his throat not, as with a conventionally trained voice, up from his diaphragm and out from his mouth. Like Robert Johnson, he overlays his singing with various noise effects that interrupt any continuous melodic production: talking, grunts, inhalations, interjections, improvisatory rather than formulaic repetitions, variations, extensions, and rephrasings, incom-mensurable switches of tempo, pitch, volume, and tone.
In his foundational study of Patton’s work, John Fahey notes a stunningly 
innovative use of disjunctive, recombinant lyric patterning in which Pat-ton improvisationally samples and recombines phrases and lines without apparent reference to conventional narrative or grammatic continuity or 
given as “Charley. ”) A transcript of the improvised lyric is included in vol. 1 of the Library of 
America anthology. The visceral subject of “High Water Everywhere” is the catastrophic Great Mississippi Flood of 1927. 
Objectivist Blues 151
coherence.24 Such nonlinear, or serial, lyric composition bears a close re-
semblance to the collage technique of radical modernist poetry, creating a 
body of work as inventive in its ludicly inchoate, disruptive force as any of its poetic counterparts.
No metrical structure exists external to the song’s unfolding. The rhythm 
and acoustic patterning is dominant but also irregular from the point of view of conventional prosody, emerging from the poiesis, from the materializa-tion of the song, out of the active, inventive, wording process in a practice of errant wandering and acoustic probes. The music doesn’t take the words on a ﬂight of sound but rather brings the words home, back to themselves, to ourselves. Here, I see an afﬁnity between this work and Zukofsky’s poetics, particularly his conception of sincerity and objectiﬁcation, articulated for the ﬁrst time in an essay published within a couple of years of the recording of “High Water Everywhere”: sincerity—song as an extension of its poiesis of self-making; and objectiﬁcation—structural solidity of the singer/song intertwined into a single ﬁgure.
To transpose my account of Zukofsky’s poetics, “objectiﬁcation” marks an 
insistence on “the detail, not mirage” of hearing ; the desire is to represent not the appearance of nature but its conditions—autonomy, completeness, self-sufﬁciency, particularity. “Sincerity” is not an affect but the truth in the materials: “thinking”—and here say “singing”—“with things as they exist, ” where things are not only objects but also persons. Sincerity and objectiﬁ-cation are means of grappling with the structures and conditions through which things come into perception and by means of which we come into contact with them and live alongside them.
25
“High Water Everywhere, ” then, is a form of sprung or informalist, if 
not to say Objectivist, verse. Patton’s vernacular is not something set to music but is infused with it, far from what James Merrill has praised as the felicitous iambic pentameter of Handy’s “St. Louis Blues. ”
26 I use the 
term “informalism” advisedly, thinking of Bruce Andrews’s extension, in his  
24. Charley Patton (London: Studio Vista, 1970).
25. This passage is adapted from my foreword to Zukofsky’s collection of essays, Prepositions, 
cited above. See “An Objective” and its 1932 source, “Sincerity and Objectiﬁcation: With Spe-
cial Reference to the Work of Charles Reznikoff. ”26. Merrill’s “The Education of the Poet” is cited in Raymond R. Patterson, “The Blues, ” in An Exaltation of Forms: Contemporary Poets Celebrate the Diversity of Their Art , edited by Annie 
Finch and Kathrine Varnes (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2002). The quotations in the next paragraph are from this essay, 191.
152 THE ART OF IMMEMORABILITY
essay in Close Listening , of Adorno’s idea of “constructivist noise or athe-
matic ‘informal music.’ ”27
In “The Education of the Poet, ” Merrill takes on the ideolectical/free verse 
issue directly, by contrasting Handy’s pentameter to the “new measure” of 
Pound, Williams, Ashbery, and Allen Ginsberg. “The pentameter—so went the argument—wasn’t a truly American line. I had to wonder if these patri-ots had ever heard the blues. ‘I hate to see the evening sun go down’—wasn’t that an effortless and purely native music?” Handy, in his own account of the origin of this song in the recording, is at great pains to show the effort and resistance embedded in the song, and speciﬁcally those lines, which evoke the pain of a homeless man facing another cold night on the streets. But Merrill is certainly right to associate Handy with that aspect of African American poetry that wedded itself to the pentameter, from Paul Laurence Dunbar to Claude McKay’s early Jamaican poems to Countee Cullen.
28 This, 
though, is only one part of the blues, and surely one of the bluest parts. It’s as if one associated jazz with swing rather than “free” jazz or Dadaist noise music. In poetry, in the broadest terms, the contrast is Dunbar and Cul-len versus Sterling Brown, on the one hand, and Jean Toomer or Langston Hughes, on the other. In political terms, Booker T. Washington versus W. E. B.  DuBois. In any case, what is native to America is always synthetic, not to say syncretic. The pentameter is always a device, and its meaning has to be not read, but heard, socially, in terms of its aesthetic motivation.
In looking at the Patton lyrics in the Library of America anthology, it is 
important to note that the text is not Patton’s creation; his inscription was with a needle on a wax master, not a pen on a blank page. Patton is a pioneer of the new age of phonographic reproduction. The Library of America cre-ates a place marker in its collection; its transcription uses the alphabet, an earlier form of language reproduction technology that is clearly not up to the task at hand. The signiﬁcance of its inclusion in the anthology is in part to mark that writing has been superseded in its function of scoring speech. Indeed, this is not a script to be performed, but a transcription after the fact of performance. It is documentation that supports the primary work, which is not the lost “live” performance but the fabricated acoustic recording.
27. “Informalism, ” in Close Listening: Poetry and the Performed Word , edited by Charles Bern-
stein (New York: Oxford University Press, 1998), 73.
28. I outline this in “The Poetics of the Americas, ” in My Way: Speeches and Poems (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1999); this essay is a sequel to “The Poetics of the Americas. ”
Objectivist Blues 153
3. Get Ready for Saints
Cole Porter’s “How strange the change from major to minor” could be the 
theme song of Second Wave Modernism, where minor keys struck major chords.
29 If Porter, in his songs, included the high in the low, then Danny 
Kaye’s and Second Waver Louis Armstrong’s rollicking (and deliriously scripted) version of the African American spiritual “When the Saints Go Marching In” in the 1959 movie The Five Pennies  is the ultimate anthem 
of such cultural miscegenation, here brought to a crescendo by the Jewish Kaye singing side-by-side with Armstrong, the icon of African American classical music.
30 (Kaye, born David Daniel Kaminsky in 1913, is four years 
too young to be a full-ﬂedged Second Waver.) At one point, the younger Tin Pan Alley crooner impersonates the classic jazz singer (including the famous handkerchief-on-mouth), to which Armstrong remarks, in an aside, “Is this cat digging me, face and all?” (See ﬁgure 3.) In this (Levinasian?) moment, Kaye dialogically redeﬁnes by reﬁning— yet without redeeming—Al 
Jolson’s blackface “Jazz Singer. ”
31 Armstrong and Kaye riff on popular ﬁg-
ures of European classical music—“Chopin—solid man  . . . Mozart—with 
the symphonies and operas and all that jazz  . . . Rimsky— of coursikov . . . Ravel 
and Gustav Mahler— but don’t forget Fats Waller  . . . put Liszt on that list  . . . 
Haydn [pronounced Hidin’ ]—well let him come out!  . . . Khachaturian—ge-
sundheit . . . , ” ending the performance with an ecstatic dose of ideolectical, aka scat, mayhem.
“Who’s gonna play on the day when the saints go marching in?” Arm-
strong sings, envisioning a messianic, not to say apocalyptic, moment of judgment and redemption in which Western high culture marches into paradise side by side with jazz and Broadway. “I want to be in that number”: elect but more profoundly, company. Being in the number does not elevate 
the “other” but rather democratizes the “high, ” brings the “high” and “low” 
29. “Ev’ry Time We Say Goodbye, ” Complete Lyrics, 362.
30. The Five Pennies, directed by Melville Shavelson (Paramount, 1959).
31. In Mandy Patinkin, his 1989 debut CD (Sony), Patinkin puts Jolson front and center of his pastiche of bathos in American popular song, doing covers of a number of Jolson’s signature songs, recontextualizing them within an eclectic range of his characteristic over-the-top per-formances of classics and novelty numbers. Somewhere over the rainbow, emotional artiﬁce is a covering angel for American bifacial aspiration, tainted by racialist masks but opening toward what Melvin Tolson called “the racial ballad in the public domain. ” Or isn’t it pretty to  think so. (Tolson citations from the epigraph to sec. 4 [note 32], pp. 154–55, below.)
154 THE ART OF IMMEMORABILITY
(sacred and profane, standard and aberrant) into the space of the people 
(demos ), the commons. Amidst the ﬁnal scat, the singers exclaim to each 
other, “Oh too high! Oh too low!, ” meaning the notes but also the cultural referents. It is an exuberant moment not so much for popular culture (in terms of which this is nothing special), but for high culture.
Cultural miscegenation (the mixing of types) is in dialectical relation to 
assimilation. Miscegenation, insofar as it is marked by difference, resists as-similation. But miscegenation is also assimilation by means of absorption;  call it, the syncretic. Conceptualized as a function, assimilation has as its utopian upper limit Emersonian moral perfectionism, whose horizon is the new or invented, in the sense of emergent or not yet realized (possibly not realizable). The dystopian lower limit is absorption into the dominant cul-ture without a trace of the constituent parts, the fantasy of the total dissolu-tion of otherness into the mirage of the preexisting; call it the ﬁnal solution 
by other means.
4. Incognegro
I knew
About the split identityOf the People’s Poet—The bifacial nature of his poetry:
FIG 3  Louis Armstrong and Danny Kaye. Still from The Five Pennies (1959).
Objectivist Blues 155
The racial ballad in the public domain
And the private poem in the modern vein.
 —Melvin Tolson, Harlem Gallery32
The social trauma inscribed by accent and assimilation is resolved, in Amer-
ican poetry, only at the cost of repression, a repression that manifests itself in both a celebration of identity and a despair at identity’s loss. This remains a fundamental condition for American poetry, one which ﬁnds its signature moment in Langston Hughes’s identiﬁcation and distance from the singer of “The Weary Blues. ” Code switching, from vernacular to standard, from slang to formal, is a part of American life as common as having clothes from the Gap and Brooks Brothers in the same closet. But poetry takes nothing for granted when it sacriﬁces the ease of the given on the hooks of the dif-ﬁcult. The title poem of D. S. Marriott’s Incognegro offers both demonstra-
tion and instruction in such difﬁculties.
33 In and around 1990, Marriott 
published a few startling chapbooks that while identiﬁable with a kind of Cambridge (UK) style, seemed to eviscerate the very grounds of their own expression. As some of these works resurface in Incognegro , their lyric ab-
jection and loneliness swell into unsung song. These poems, revised and collected, become palimpsests, overlaying personal anguish with the social terror of racism, and the historical trauma of slavery. Marriott teaches in Santa Cruz, grew up in England, and has parents from Jamaica. “Incog-negro”  offers a startling alternation, line by line, of marked black dialect 
against its lexically standard lyric twin, each line reciprocally mirroring the pain of the other’s deformance. The poem internalizes the alternation of 
32. “Harlem Gallery” and Other Poems , edited by Raymond Nelson  (Charlottesville: University 
Press of Virginia, 1999), 335. The Curator, a central character of Tolson’s poem, is speaking 
of the poem’s poet, the Cab Calloway namesake Hideho Heights. In a 1965 radio interview, Tolson comments: “The Curator is of Afroirishjewish ancestry. He is an octoroon, who is a Negro in New York and a white man in Mississippi. Like Walter White, the late executive of the NAACP, and the author of A Man Called White , the Curator is a ‘voluntary’ Negro. Hun-
dreds of thousands of Octoroons like him have vanished into the Caucasian race—never to return. This is a great joke among Negroes. So Negroes ask the rhetorical question, ‘What man is white?’ ” Quoted in Joy Flasch, Melvin B. Tolson (New York: Twayne Publishers, 1972), 
100; cited in Kathy Lou Schultz, “In The Modern Vein”: Afro-Modernist Poetry and Literary 
History  (Doctoral dissertation, Department of English, University of Pennsylvania, 2006).  
Harlem Gallery  was ﬁrst published in 1965, but was probably started in the 1930s and then  
put aside for a couple of decades.33. Incognegro (Cambridge: Salt Publishing, 2006).
156 THE ART OF IMMEMORABILITY
dialect and standard in Dunbar, making a Möbius strip of the either/or dy-
namic of mastering form/deforming mastery that is at the heart of Houston Baker’s Modernism and the Harlem Renaissance.
Back-a-yard is wey de fuss is,
and the moon bright in the scuffed mirror.Me nuh see wha a gwan,but the glass reﬂects what is real and what is not.
Dem sey dem feel involve
even though pity is missing from the gaze,a lapse, a density, as the bizzies armlock him,so him put up nuh fuss, an dem candemn im to damnashan, —
the thought of calling her mobilefor our own peace of mind, only.Wi look like wi headin back to de grave,but the soul is so unlikely a captive,
dem nieda see nor do dem feel
the smoke above the ash trees, the banks of fog,de time incognegro an nat a dyam tingbut silence at the other end of the line.
Im sit wid us in the dark, de man nuh respec us,
the fault is in the cold night air,in the grim, deep and unsettling form of the mirror.Di pathos an disenchantment, undastan, lass beyan rekonin.
“Incognegro” is a ﬁercely formal study of the poetics of subjection, assimi-
lation, lyric authority, and historical double-consciousness. The particular closed poetic economies of Derek Walcott and J. H. Prynne just part of the background against which Marriott weaves his cries—not just of the heart but of history. “Incognegro” does not permit any settling into a single mode in its unforgiving demonstration of the disguises of voiced voicelessness. The result is both incendiary ﬁre and cold logic.
Radical formal innovation in modernist and contemporary art has, at times, 
been seen as undermining the aesthetic, but it is more accurate to say that  
Objectivist Blues 157
such work reinvents the aesthetic for new readers and new contexts. It’s 
the refrain. We have constantly to reinvent our forms and vocabularies so that we don’t lose touch with ourselves and the world we live in. The need for change in art is prompted by changes in the social and economic envi-ronment. The responses of the past are not always able to grapple with the present. Second Wave Modernism may be understood in this context as part of a continuing struggle to reinvent modernism for present times and present conditions, often in speciﬁc response to challenges posed by First Wave Modernists. Its technical innovations are an ongoing witness and ad-justment to the social dislocation and relocations of the contemporaneity, the pressure of reality.
34
34. Williams Carlos Williams (born 1883), ends “To Elsie, ” from Spring and All , “No one / to 
witness / and adjust, no one to drive the car”: The Collected Poems , vol. 2,  1939–1962 , edited 
by Christopher MacGowan (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2001), 217–18. In “The 
Noble Rider and the Sound of Words, ” Wallace Stevens (born 1879) writes of “the pressure of reality”: Collected Poetry and Prose (New York: Library of America, 1997), 643–45. 
III
The Fate of  
the Aesthetic
It is likewise probable that the pre-ecstatic euphoria constituted one 
of the universal sources of lyric poetry. In preparing his trance, the shaman drums, summons his spirit helpers, speaks a “secret language” or the “animal language, ” imitating the cries of beasts and especially the songs of birds. He ends by obtaining a “second state” that provides the impetus for linguistic creation and the rhythms of lyric poetry. Poetic creation still remains an act of perfect spiritual freedom. Poetry remakes and prolongs language; every poetic language begins by be-ing a secret language, that is, the creation of a personal universe, of a completely closed world. The purest poetic act seems to re-create language from an inner experience that, like the ecstasy or the religious inspiration of “primitives, ” reveals the essence of things. It is from such linguistic creations, made possible by pre-ecstatic “inspiration, ” that the “secret languages” of all the mystics and the traditional allegorical languages later crystallize.
MIRCEA ELIADE, SHAMANISM: ARCHAIC TECHNIQUES OF ECSTASY, TRANS.   
WILLARD R. TRASK
You’d never know it
But buddy, I’m a kind of poetAnd I’ve gotta lotta things to say.
JOHNNY MERCER, “ONE FOR MY BABY AND ONE MORE FOR THE ROAD”
Poets are fakersWhose faking is so realThey even fake the painThey truly feel
AFTER FERNANDO PESSOA
McGANN AGONIST
At the heart of a crisis in contemporary literary criticism is the systematic 
use of “text” for “poem. ” According to Jerome McGann, a poem  is a social 
event—a work of literature—embedded in a dynamic, multilayered histori-
cal and ideological context. In contrast, a text is a deanimated linguistic 
structure—a document —removed from sociohistorical context. “What we 
ought to see, ” says McGann in The Beauty of Inﬂections, “is that ‘text’ is the 
linguistic state of the ‘poem’s’ existence. No poem can exist outside of a textual state any more than a human being can exist outside of a human biological organism. But just as a person is not identical to a particular body, so neither is a poem equal to its text” (22).
This metaphor suggests a parallel between New Criticism and behavior-
ism; both collapse the operant distinction between a mechanism ( behav-
ior) and a function ( action ). McGann’s polemic takes up the philosophical 
and political imperatives of Bakhtin, asserting that language is a social act and meaning is interdependent on social context; it offers an alternative to imagining language as a formal system in which meaning is derived by a variety of internal differentiations.
McGann’s “historically based critical procedure” represents one of the 
most comprehensive and sophisticated efforts in academic literary criti-cism to reverse the dehistoricizing and depoliticizing tendencies not only in New Critical “close reading” but also in structuralist and poststructuralist “textualizations. ” The goal is not to reject, wholesale, these heterogeneous developments but rather to incorporate them, where possible, into a his-torical program that would radically alter the practice of literary criticism 
Three books by Jerome McGann are discussed in this essay: The Romantic Ideology: A Criti-
cal Investigation  (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1983); A Critique of Modern Textual 
Criticism (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1983); and The Beauty of Inﬂections: Literary 
Investigations in Historical Method and Theory  (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1985). Sulfur 15  (Janu-
ary 1986).
162 THE FATE OF THE AESTHETIC
by redressing the current schism between textual and bibliographic scholar-
ship (investigations of the history of the text and reception of the work) and literary criticism (that is, interpretation). For McGann, textual and biblio-graphic research is not preliminary and incidental to the interpretation of literary works; it is a basic part of the interpretative act. That is, its function is not simply textual emendation but, more importantly, establishing the signiﬁcance of the context of publication. As McGann repeatedly shows, the same text has different meanings— is a dif ferent poem —depending on 
where and when it appears.
In 1983, McGann published two short books, A Critique of Modern Tex-
tual Criticism and The Romantic Ideology , aimed at making a decisive inter-
vention within the practices of textual scholarship and literary criticism, respectively. Because these books are akin to legal briefs—summarizing major positions and formulating an alternative, ideologically self-conscious program—they emphasize how seriously McGann takes the precedence of historical engagement over “pure theory”; that is, they demonstrate his commitment to sociohistorical reﬂection  as an essential part of any mean-
ingful historical engagement. When McGann criticizes his profession for repressing the ideological character of its subjects, his point is that neither poetry nor criticism transcends ideology. (An interesting, and provocatively truncated, appendix to The Romantic Ideology  argues that Louis Althusser 
and Pierre Macherey are wrong to suggest that art is not to be counted among the ideologies; however, this crucial point is best understood as a corrective to Althusser’s more general formulation of the concept of ideol-ogy in his germinal essay “Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses, ”
1 a 
formulation on which McGann’s relies.)
For McGann, it is not just the historical subjects of literary criticism 
that need to be recognized; rather, and rather more crucially, contempo-rary criticism’s own institutionally based ideological formations must also be explicated. Literary criticism can never be the ﬁnal arbiter of the ﬁxed meaning of a “text, ” just as literary or linguistic theory cannot be the ulti-mate explicator of ﬁxed systems of meaning. In contrast, McGann’s two tracts insist that literary criticism is an active participant in the continuing reception— reproduction —of works . I say “tracts” to emphasize McGann’s 
stylistic extension of his ideological interventions; these pamphlets are in every sense didactic; their virtue is to be repetitive and blunt more often   
1. Lenin and Philosophy (New York: Monthly Review Press, 1971).
McGann Agonist 163
than elusive and elegant. If there can be any doubt that this is deliberate, 
the contrast with The Beauty of Inﬂections  will settle the matter. McGann’s 
expansive, thoughtful readings of works by Keats, Byron, Crabbe, Coleridge, Christina Rossetti, Tennyson, and others are exemplary of the possible fruits of his program. Swimming against the tide of literary theory without literature, McGann anchors his methodological and interpretive craft in close, and contextual, readings of speciﬁc poems.
In The Romantic Ideology, McGann argues that the criticism of Romanti-
cism, to our own day, has uncritically absorbed the key self-representations of the Romantic movement. Terms like “spirituality, ” “creativity, ” “process, ” “uniqueness, ” “diversity, ” “synthesis, ” “reconciliation, ” “imagination, ” “po-etic truth” are accepted as fundamental human concepts that need not, and cannot, be analyzed. McGann contends that the belief that Poetry tran-scends history and ideology (in the sense of false consciousness) is an essen-tial element in Romantic displacement, the “grand illusion” that one may escape the disappointments of history through imagination and poetry: “a sense sublime, ” as Wordsworth had it in “Tintern Abbey, ” “Of something far more deeply interfused, / Whose dwelling is the light of setting suns . . . /  A motion and a spirit, that impels / All thinking things, all objects of all thought, / And rolls through all things. ” While the wrecks of history “fade and fall to ruin, ” McGann comments, “the abbey of the mind suffers no decay. . . . The poem generalizes—we now like to say mythologizes—all its conﬂicts, or rather resituates those conﬂicts out of a sociohistorical context and into an ideological one” (87–89). “The polemic of Romantic poetry, therefore, is that it will not be polemical; its doctrine, that it is nondoc-  
trinal; and its ideology, that it transcends ideology” (70).
Romantic ideology has descended to us, says McGann, largely through 
the lines of thought that have developed from Coleridge and Hegel (the German ideology). But while the Romantic ideology of 1789 to 1824 was articulated, to a large extent, by poets skeptical of many of its features, this ambivalence and self-consciousness largely disappears in the debased forms of Romantic ideology we encounter today. McGann censures his own 1968 study, Fiery Dust: Byron’s Poetic Development , because of its absorption in 
Romanticism’s self-representations and its presumption of the poet’s linear development (a biographic teleology that cripples much critical thinking about art).
The uncritical acceptance of Romantic ideology, however, poses prob-
lems for more than the study of Romanticism. The effect is all the more di-sastrous when, institutionally reiﬁed, this ideology continues to be the basis 
164 THE FATE OF THE AESTHETIC
for the reception of post-Romantic poetry by an inﬂuential segment of what 
McGann calls the clerisy, that is, literary academia. In this light, the gro-tesque, yet systematic, misjudgments about twentieth-century poetry by a critic of Romanticism such as Harold Bloom become more understandable, if no less excusable. McGann’s sometimes humorous self-consciousness, true to his own didactic intentions, speciﬁcally keeps the focus on “that nar-rowest and most cloistered of spheres . . . the critical work produced by the literary academy” (59). It would be a mistake to ignore the pervasiveness of the same debased Romantic ideology as it informs much contemporary American poetry. Indeed, a broad range of seemingly antagonistic tenden-cies in current writing share a conception of poetry as giving a “voice” to unmediated “basic truths” of “imagination” and “feeling” through “direct expression” of human “creativity”; they also share an allergic reaction to any intimation, in a poem, of intellectual or ideological self-consciousness. Absorption in Romanticism’s self-representations, then, is not only a prob-lem for critics; it is also a problem for poetry. This is the kind of reciprocal interaction in our own time that McGann sees as central to understanding the ideological context and reception of past and present literature.
I take McGann’s various explications of Romantic ideology to be provi-
sional, that is, a stage in the development of a historical criticism informed as much by the contemporary ideological climate as by Romantic “texts. ” While McGann rejects René Wellek’s view that there is a basic unity under-lying the various manifestations of Romanticism, he does not quite adopt A. O. Lovejoy’s skepticism—Romanticisms, not Romanticism (17). The ﬁrst step in breaking from the spell of a uniﬁed Romanticism is to recognize its particular and parochial ideological formations. McGann notes the funda-mentally Christian character of the Romanticism formulated by Coleridge and formalized by Hegel. It is not surprising, then, that Heine—a poet in-clined to consciously resist absorption in Christian Romanticism—would write a work McGann ﬁnds paradigmatic for historical criticism, The Ro-
mantic School . Heine “writes between 1833 and 1835 as an expatriate Ger-
man Jew to a French intellectual audience about a cultural phenomenon, German Romanticism, which is now historically concluded. . . . At every point Heine is concerned with the problem of the immediate relevance of removed cultural resources—in this case, German Romantic literary works. He is qualiﬁed to take up this problematic matter because he contains in himself, as it were, a crucial division of sympathies and knowledge” (33). Heine’s otherness can serve as a reminder that Romantic ideology was one 
McGann Agonist 165
among many ideological formations present in the early nineteenth cen-
tury. Which is to say, the history of literary criticism is as much a history of unheard or disregarded voices as it is of the privileged voices able to “domi-nate” a period (originally or in retrospect). The increased prominence that historical method gives to the history of a work’s reception makes impera-tive that lacunas—failures or refusals of reception or publication—be en-abled to speak as loudly as the ideas that ﬂowed unimpeded through ofﬁcial cultural channels. Otherwise we will see, as we have seen over and again, the initially tragic story of marginalized lives told in farcically amnesiac of-ﬁcial histories of English and American writing.
In this respect, McGann makes a useful distinction between Romantic 
works and the Romantic period, citing Austen and Crabbe as non-Romantic writers of the Romantic period. He is particularly irritated at attempts, for example, to reverse the critical “neglect” of Austen by trying to make her out as a closet Romantic. Nonetheless, the kind of critical thinking that McGann encourages will hopefully move more in the direction of Roman-tic ideologies  than he presently allows for, without vitiating the polemical 
edge of his term; perhaps, that is, the non-Romantic ideologies of the “Ro-mantic period” may even erode the legitimacy of that moniker. McGann’s position on such problems is basically pragmatic; he wants to develop a historical methodology that will be as teachable as New Critical reading. 
Radical skepticism about periodization and ideological characterizations may be difﬁcult to teach, but it is just this type of institutionally motivated thinking that led to many of the problems with New Criticism. Critical thinking has not fared any better under historical narratives than it has un-der structural verities. While a historical and ideological dimension needs to be restored to discussions of literature, positivism and reductionism are perennial dangers. McGann is acutely aware of these problems, despite his troubling espousal of the hegemony of the sociohistorical method as “the general science governing [the] human context” [ Inﬂections, 63; my italics]. 
(The troubling positivism within the natural sciences is exactly the suppres-sion of this sociohistorical context.) But his intensely reﬂective example, his consistent reiteration of the tendentiousness and ideological character of his own (or any) historical account, will not necessarily be heeded by those adopting his program.
McGann’s method would remove poetry from the pedestal of the purely 
beautiful and sublime, beyond or above ideology, where it is constantly at risk of dissolving into the “spirit of the age, ” or worse, “the spirit of the 
166 THE FATE OF THE AESTHETIC
ages”—authorless, contentless. To tar poetry with the name of “false”—that 
is, historical, partisan—consciousness is to return it to the ﬁeld of conten-tion and use. It is as valuable to take issue with Shelley’s “doctrines, ” as one would take issue with Napoleon or Rousseau, as to savor his “exquisite sen-sibility. ” This requires a recovery of the historically speciﬁc situations in which poems of the past were written, published, republished, reviewed, and read (all different dynamics). It means we stop reading past works as if they were contemporary or temporally transcendent and start to appreciate their value as culturally alienated and socially estranged.
“We have to recover those traditional philological procedures for put-
ting us in touch with worlds, people, and experiences from the past, and with the media in which these things embodied themselves; for putting us in touch with them in the full range of their pastness and differentials. The ultimate purpose of establishing a structure of such differentials is not to lose one’s self in a displaced world, which is certainly a danger in pursuing such methods, but to gain a measure by which our present interests and ideologies may be critically observed. Past worlds, in a historical conscious-ness, make up points of ﬁxity and ﬁnishedness, but not in some permanent and absolute sense. The ﬁnished past is constantly being reformulated into new forms of ﬁnishedness, forms which answer to the changing needs of the immediate world. Nevertheless, whatever form of ﬁnishedness the past may take, it can be—must be—made into an (arbitrary) measure in terms of which the present may be understood and judged” (Inﬂections, 12–13).
In A Critique of Modern Textual Criticism, McGann notes that “a hypnotic 
fascination with the isolated author has served to foster an overdetermined concept of authorship, but (reciprocally) an underdetermined concept of literary work” (122). He argues that the best text of a poem is not neces-sarily produced by trying to reconstruct the “author’s ﬁnal intentions. ” He criticizes, for example, the preference for using as “copy-text” an author’s manuscript even when an early edition, together with author-corrected proofs, is available. Traditionally, textual scholars have tried to construct a hypothesized “lost original” for classical or medieval works whose earliest extant texts date from long periods after the work’s composition. Biblical scholars face the most extreme, and metaphorically interesting, case of lost “originals. ” As a result, the work of textual scholarship has been deﬁned as purifying the corruption and contamination of the “lost original” that has occurred in the process of transmission through publication, expurgation, augmentation, modernization, and previous scholarly editions.
McGann Agonist 167
In modern textual criticism the “ideal text” has become a substitute for 
the “lost original, ” and the author’s holograph documents are taken to be the 
source for the author’s ﬁnal intentions, even if the writer never imagined that these documents would be reproduced. McGann disputes the notion that publication necessarily contaminates the text. Poetry, insofar as it is published, is a social form, and the intersection of the text with social insti-tutions is part of the work, not a corruption of it. “Having learned the lesson that authors who wish to make contact with an audience are fated, by laws of information theory, to have their messages more or less seriously garbled in the process, textual critics proposed to place the reader in an unmediated contact with the author. This project is of course manifestly impossible, a Heisenbergian dilemma, since some form of mediation is always occurring, not the least in the editions produced by critical editors of various persua-sions. Nevertheless, though everyone today recognizes this inherent limita-tion on all acts of communication, the idea persists in textual studies that a regression to authorial manuscripts will by itself serve to reduce textual contamination” (41).
McGann argues that the overall effect of much textual criticism is to 
discount the social and historical dimensions of textual production. Certain writers serve as outer limits to his consideration: Blake’s self-published edi-tions and Dickinson’s manuscripts were speciﬁcally produced outside the customary social nexus of publication; however, their work is now known only insofar as, at some later point, it entered into this nexus. Moreover, the collaborative interaction of writers, friends and colleagues, assistants, proofreaders, editors, publishers, and readers is not inevitably pernicious. Almost all writers choose to make some sort of collaborative arrangements, as much because of, as in spite of, potential disagreements. “Sometimes these relationships operate smoothly, sometimes the author will struggle against every sort of intervention, and between these two extremes falls every sort of variation. . . . ‘Final authority’ for literary works rests neither with the author nor with his [or her] afﬁliated institution; it resides in the actual structure of the agreements which these two cooperating authorities reach in speciﬁc cases” (53–54). The history of publishing is ﬁlled with un-warranted and meretricious alterations of a writer’s punctuation, spelling, and grammar; such abuses need to be adjudicated on a case-by-case basis. At the same time, the dispute becomes part of the work’s meaning, which is suppressed when such problems are resolved, as McGann puts it, in terms of right and wrong rather than “what does this mean?” Ironically, recourse 
168 THE FATE OF THE AESTHETIC
to the ideology of ﬁnal intentions has often resulted in the circumvention of 
the writer’s actual intentions as expressed by active consent.
The social process of literary production is a constituent component of 
a work’s meaning, not a barrier preventing access to it. In this regard, the visual representation of language—typography and book design—is among the least recognized, and most important, actors in constituting a work’s meaning. Furthermore, theories about “ideal texts” do not offer viable methods of resolving problems arising from variant versions of the “same” poem. Variants, McGann points out, arise from different social contexts of publication, changing assumptions about readership, or a poetics that incorporates variants as part of its processes. The contextual nature of vari-ants helps to dispel the illusion that each poem has a perfect and inviolable autonomy that is defamed not only by publisher’s changes and printer’s me-diations but even by author’s errors and irresolutions. McGann notes that many writers have been more than willing to dismember and revise their poems, leaving open the issue of ﬁnalization. In contrast, the reiﬁcation of the Poem erases the historicity of its composition, that is, its appearance in the world and the forms its past readers have responded to. Reiﬁed time-lessness is an effect that some poets may wish to create, but, as McGann says, “an author’s work possesses autonomy only when it remains an un-heard melody” (51). The theory of ﬁnal intentions turns out to be thick with Romantic ideology.
Most importantly, McGann argues that just as there is no ideal text of 
a poem, so there is no ideal—deﬁnitive—scholarly edition. Scholarly edi-tions are historical, institutionally motivated documents; yet the scientism inherent in much textual methodology denies this ideological dimension. The implication of this appeal is not to legitimize unwarranted altera-tions by publishers and scholars but to bring into the open the dynamics of these virtually inevitable interactions. McGann’s writing acknowledges the effects that current developments in poetry have on the editing of past poetry. A Critique of Modern Textual Criticism  will seem relevant to readers 
familiar with Charles Olson’s notoriously indeterminate manuscripts; Rob-ert Duncan’s and Robert Grenier’s insistence on retaining the typewriter grid in their books; any of a number of recent collaborative poems; and the scrupulous or funky self-publications of many writers, ranging from pho-tocopies of manuscripts with holograph changes to “book art” productions in which the graphic element is foregrounded. McGann’s currency will not surprise those familiar with a book he published a baker’s dozen years ago, Swinburne: An Experiment in Criticism . Cast in the form of a dialogue among 
McGann Agonist 169
a variety of personages who knew Swinburne, the book provides a beauti-
fully realized alternative to the monological voice of critical authority; it also engages many of the questions that have focused discussions of poetics in the ensuing years.
In advocating a sociohistorical approach to the poem, McGann is as wary 
of biographic reduction (conceiving of the poem as existing primarily in terms of the poet’s life history) as of formalist aestheticization (poems are primarily about other poems or the poetic process). Yet it is important to keep in mind that a well-grounded, scholarly reading of a poem is not the only kind of desirable reading. Many poems thrive on wildly ill-informed readings, as anyone knows who has ﬂipped open a book of older texts and read them without reference to author or date. That a poem may have this kind of resilience is a central fact in any reading of it. Thinking of poems as 
texts is liberating because it locates their object status within the generic de-mocracy of the written— a piece of writing ; it undercuts the Romantic aura 
of the Poem while allowing for an exhilaration in the wordness of all writ-ing. Poems are not necessarily diminished ( or illuminated ) by specialized 
(partisan, tendentious) readings—Marxist, psychoanalytic, biographic, structural, formal, bibliographic. The problem arises when such readings claim for themselves priority or exclusivity, that is, deny their sociohistori-cal and ideological character; which, of course, they so often do. Indeed, it was the hegemony of proprietary readings of literature—ﬁxed meanings executed  by authors and embalmed by textual science—that led Roland 
Barthes to renounce the notion of the work (that which can be “held in the 
hand”) in favor of that polymorphous, heterogeneous, decentered, unau-thorized, plural “methodological ﬁeld” that is the text.
2 McGann’s work is 
polemical because he does not ameliorate the dispute between “Dryasdust” philologists and “Skimpole” deconstructionists, as he labels them. On the contrary, he wishes to bring into the open a conﬂict both sides have chosen to ignore by proceeding, uncontested, on their own falsely  separate paths. 
McGann’s historical program, paradoxically, supplements, rather than sup-plants, Barthes’s critique (as is apparent in his considerations of “ﬁnal au-thority”). Like Marx critiquing Hegel, he wishes to turn Barthes’s dialectic on its head, not revert to the state of affairs that led Barthes to write his essay.
2. See Barthes’s 1971 essay, “From Work to Text, ” in Textual Strategies, edited by Josue V.  
Harari (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1979); and “Shall These Bones Live, ” in The Beauty 
of Inﬂections.
170 THE FATE OF THE AESTHETIC
There is no key that unlocks the mystery of how or what or why a poem 
means or becomes. All readings are partial and distorting, though some 
more than others; there are many virtues in excess, even if this excess effec-tively annihilates the object of reference. McGann’s view is more sobering, less ludic. He insists that we pay a high price for such transgressions, that they threaten our ability to learn what history teaches. The implicit analogy is to our relations with one another, where a moral distinction can be made between projection and understanding; response based on projection is a form of denial, on understanding, a sign of acknowledgment.
McGann’s project is not to curtail the proliferation of approaches to read-
ing, or writing, but rather to ground them. I think he means something like that by choosing as the epigraph to his most textual  work some lines from 
Wallace Stevens’s “Thirteen Ways of Looking at a Blackbird”:
I do not know which to prefer,
The beauty of inﬂectionsOr the beauty of innuendoes,The blackbird whistlingOr just after.
3
3. Collected Poems (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1954), 93.
POETRY AND/OR THE SACRED
Every time I hear the word “sacred” I reach for my checkbook. Every time I 
reach for my checkbook I get a warm glow that haunts me with the ﬂow of international capital. In God we trust—all others need a major credit card. I’ll give you credit for that—just don’t bank on it. Is nothing sacred anymore? Of course nothing is sacred: some things never change. But I’d put it is this way: at least nothing is sacred. That’s a start. Either nothing is sacred or ev-erything is. If the sacred is the hot air inﬂating a poem, it doesn’t mean the poem won’t ﬂy, though just as likely it may snore. Now is the allusion there to a blimp or to Blimpie’s. No more priests—in every sigh of every woman, child, and man. Not something to rise up to but something in which to de-scend, the gravity Simone Weil talks about that is a condition for grace.
The sacred as opposed to what? Against the priestly function of the poet 
or of poetry I propose the comic and bathetic, the awkward and railing: to be grounded horizontally in the social and not vertically in the ethers. My motto would be a revision of Cavalcanti: “for the sacred is such a thing that if it is portrayed it dies. ”
Lately I’ve been thinking about the distinction between moral discourse 
and ethical reciprocity. Morality as a ﬁxed system telling you what is good or good for you: the sacred can sound a lot like that, even if it’s supposed to be something deeper or more experiential or exceptional. I think of ethics as intertwined with aesthetics, as dependent on context, judgment, shifting situations. Ethical reciprocity involves recognition and acknowledgment—a process of registration—rather than states such as feeling spiritual (as if it were a goal). I’m for conversation not conversion. I would worry—for me worry is the only sacred giraffe—about all the things not sacred . . . Well, that old song—and dance.
“Poetry and the Sacred, ” keynote panel at the 17th Annual Tucson Poetry Festival, March 27, 
1999. Other panel members were Robert Bly, Jane Hirshﬁeld, Ramson Lomatewama, Pat Mora, and David Shapiro. & with thanks to Adrienne Rich. Salt 13 / Jacket 14 (2002).
172 THE FATE OF THE AESTHETIC
In the Jewish mystical tradition, there is the idea that everything is holy—
an idea given a particularly forceful spin in the coda to Allen Ginsberg’s 
Howl  (the spatula is holy, the tuxedo is holy, the mud is holy, the tumescence 
is holy, the misquotation is holy, the parody is holy, my jacket is holy—but I just bought a patch to ﬁx that). Ginsberg’s famous Whitmanian lines ex-tend a crucial tradition in American poetry away from the allegorical and high-literary and religious and toward the ordinary and the detail. William Carlos Williams and Gertrude Stein are the paradigmatic modernist poets of the ordinary. Just as Williams found the poetic, and possibly the sacred, in the back-lot “cinders // in which shine / the broken // pieces of a green / bottle, ”
1 so Stein found the poetic in the materials of the poem, “actual word 
stuff, not thoughts for thoughts, ” to use Williams’s formulation.2
This brings to mind again that the crucial focus for Jewish mysticism is 
on language, in its material form: not what language represents or means or signiﬁes, but what it is in itself.
Poems are no more sacred than the use to which they are made, any 
more than you or I or Uncle Hodgepodge is. They are scared and looking for cover, scarred by the journey. They may be good company but more likely resemble the man in the train compartment who never stops talking. What time is it now? Are we there  yet? What do they call this town?
1. “Between Walls, ” in The Collected Poems of William Carlos Williams , vol. 1, 1909 –1939, ed-
ited by A. Walton Litz and Christopher MacGowan (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 
1986), 453.2. Williams is commenting, in a letter to Zukofsky on April 2, 1928, on Zukofsky’s “Poem Beginning ‘The’ ”: “It is thoughtful poetry, but actual word stuff, not thoughts for thoughts. ” The Correspondence of Williams Carlos Williams and Louis Zukofsky , edited by Barry Ahearn 
(Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press, 2003), 544.
THE ART AND PRACTICE  
OF THE ORDINARY
—and, by words
Which speak of nothing more than what we are . . .
WORDSWORTH, “THE RECLUSE”
The ordinary is always elusive—“near is / and difﬁcult to grasp”—even as 
it is the most present actuality. And my sense, when talking about the ordi-nary, is always how extraordinary it is. Paradoxically, any attempt to ﬁx the ordinary pulls it out of the everydayness in which it is situated, from which it seems to derive its power.
The problem with transparent language is that it aims to create a semblance 
of the ordinary, a spectacle of the ordinary. But that is the opposite of what you may want to achieve. Instead of creating an experience of, or in, the ordinary, you have created a representation of it. Transparency, in trying to picture the ordinary, at the same time removes the reader from it.
In a society of the spectacle, such as American society, much of ordinary 
life is constructed by consumer culture. In this sense, the mall is the most ordinary environment and shopping the most ordinary activity. Yet, this kind of ordinary may be quite opposite to the everydayness a poet might want to evoke.
Adapted from “Pour une critique de l’ordinaire: Entretien avec Charles Bernstein” [Toward 
a critique of the ordinary: an interview with Charles Bernstein], by Barbara Abad, Thérèse Tseng, and François Paré, published in Études françaises (University of Guelph, Quebec), 33.2 
(1997). Presented at the Séance symposium at the California College of the Arts, Red Cat The-ater, Los Angeles, October 30, 2004; published in Séance, edited by Christine Wertheim and 
Matias Viegener (Los Angeles: Make Now Press, 2005). My translation of the opening lines of Hölderlin’s “Patmos” is quoted in the ﬁrst sentence: “Nah ist / Und schwer zu fassen [der Gott]”; see Friedrich Hölderlin, Hymns and Fragments , trans. Richard Sieburth (Princeton: 
Princeton University Press, 1984), 88.
174 THE FATE OF THE AESTHETIC
For me the question of the ordinary breaks down practically and philo-
sophically into three separate, interrelated, but not entirely commensurate 
elements. One is the representation and objectiﬁcation of everyday life, which I have just barely touched on now. Another is ordinary language philosophy (not only Ludwig Wittgenstein but also Michel de Certeau and Stanley Cavell). But there is a third issue, which is crucial in terms of poetry: the transcription of spoken, everyday language, which can be considered as a problem of poetic diction, or of the vernacular, or indeed of dialect.
In the American poetic tradition the question of diction takes several forms. 
First, there is the insistence that a poetry of the everyday be written in American, rather than British, English—a development most often linked to William Carlos Williams. Vernacular diction is not, however, the same as the transcription of spoken English. In fact, spoken American English has a very complex structure, and there is no simple or single method of presenting it in writing. If you transcribe everything I say, including the pauses and hesitations, you’d get a very dense, Joyceian text. Any attempt to reduce speech to a particular literary style of representing speech, in order to claim that style as “ordinary, ” is always a move away from the ordinary. Indeed, such an “ordinary” poetic diction has fetishized as ordinary what is in fact a literary style. The tension between the spoken—the vernacular or dialect—and the literary representations of it, going back to Dante and ear-lier, produces new poetic dictions but never the erasure of poetic diction, never an absolutely “ordinary” diction. This dialectical movement is one of the most important features of English poetry, not just since Wordsworth’s “Preface” to Lyrical Ballads, but going back to Old English.
But the relation of the ordinary to speech is not necessarily one of transcrip-
tion, idealized or empiricized. Take Gertrude Stein’s poetry as an example. Stein is not interested in the transcription of the spoken language, but she is committed to using everyday words. Stein makes a syntax for them; that is, she invents new word orders rather than following the conventions of received grammar. She works with ordinary American words and with ev-eryday objects. She repeatedly uses words like “this, ” “a, ” “one, ” and “the” or “belly” or “button” or “tender” or “shutters, ” and rarely uses anything but such everyday words—but not as a way of representing anything. Stein is emphasizing the everydayness of the vocabulary rather than emphasiz-ing what the words are used to represent, the everydayness of their refer-ent. If you compare Stein’s poetry from the ﬁrst two decades of the twen-
The Art and Practice of the Ordinary 175
tieth century with the carefully wrought, eloquent diction of one of Robert 
Browning’s monologues from the middle of the nineteenth century, or more generally, with Victorian poetry, Stein’s poetry is stripped of all its literari-ness, as marked by high poetic diction, a certain set of themes, metrical con-ventions, even the look of the poem on the page. Indeed, the prose format of Tender Buttons is more ordinary than the verse format of a sonnet. So the 
work is certainly a move toward the ordinary and away from the literary. But because it is not representational in a conventional way, it seems odd or opaque. It does not appear to be ordinary, yet its aim is to present the ordinary. William Carlos Williams is more representational, but often the thinness of his subject matter has a similar effect of grounding the poem in vernacular experience and in stripped down vernacular language (what emerges in Robert Creeley’s work as the common fact of each word).
Indeed, we can move toward the use of slang or dialect, especially associ-
ated with African American writing and Caribbean poetry in English. The attempt to capture the sounds of dialect by deforming the words has a very political and charged quality. It is ordinary in the sense that this work beck-ons to the way people speak. But because of the spelling, the poetic text often looks strange, even when a new orthography for the dialect words is established (which itself is a move away from the ordinariness of the sound of the words). That is, there is a tension between the dialect orthography, which may look odd, even to the people who speak the dialect, and the  putatively naturalizing effect of the “spoken. ” For instance, some of the post-war Caribbean dialect poems, say of Michael Smith or Louise Bennett, are highly performative. When they are performed, the sounds produced do not raise the question of the nonstandard orthography, because the audiences do not see them written down. But such works may appear to be incompre-hensible for people who are not part of that particular speech community. So my point is that even for the speakers of the dialect, dialect poetry seems odd, because they are not used to seeing dialect in a literary context; and for nondialect speakers, the very ordinariness of dialect is what makes it appar-ently exotic. Consider for a minute the African American dialect poetry that Paul Laurence Dunbar wrote at the very beginning of the last century. This dialect poetry is written in iambic pentameter. Dunbar creates this strange mélange between nonstandard, “ordinary” uses of the language and high literary form, a kind of stylistic oxymoron. This is also true of much current rap music. I don’t think there is any way of getting outside of these ten-sions. The interest of works like Dunbar’s is precisely the tension between 
176 THE FATE OF THE AESTHETIC
the literary form and the live performance (not only of the poem but of the 
language itself).
The issue of ordinary language—dialect, or the nonstandard, second—re-
mains one of the most politically charged issues of the time. Black English is reviled by the conservative mainstream as deformed English and celebrated by Afrocentrics as the mother tongue. What’s sanctiﬁed as ordinary for one group is derided as spurious by the other. The very ordinariness of black En-glish is what makes it seem of self-evident value to its speakers (and rightly 
so), but this ordinariness is a red herring to conservatives because it is not 
ordinary to them. The problem is that there is no one ordinary language,  but many ordinary languages. And all languages are social constructions—black English as much as standard English.
The politics of the ordinary plays a crucial role because of the paradoxi-
cal conﬂict between the ordinary and the conventional, between the dialect and the standard, between the normal and the spoken, between the intel-ligible and the vernacular. It’s the ordinary versus the really ordinary. Con-ventional, standard English derives its authority from being perceived as the normal, the intelligible, and also the transparent. “It must be ordinary ’cause it’s what I understand. ” Dialect, however, casts the conventional or standard as artiﬁcial or other or learned or imposed—“it’s not my ordinary”—while sometimes claiming to be authentic or natural or spoken.
What the poetics of the ordinary can hope to show is that authenticity 
and normalcy both misconceive the dynamic and essentially rhetorical or trop(e)ical social fact of language. Black English is just as rich a language as standard English, just as valid (all languages are equally valid). The point is not to go from fetishizing (or naturalizing) the standard to fetishizing (or naturalizing) the authentic, but to acknowledge the multiple possibilities, and different social valances, of language. And to recognize that the ordinary lies not in any one type of language but in the between.
Charles Baudelaire is a crucial poet in terms of what we could call the mod-
ern history of the representation of the everyday. Baudelaire wants to take French poetry down from the lofty subject matter traditionally thought of as appropriate for poetry: the beautiful, the expensive, the royal, the mythologi-cal, the important, and, crucially, the uplifting. But the problem is that, in “À une mendiante rousse” (“To a Begging Redhead”), for instance, Baudelaire  casts himself as a bohemian—a poet freed from the chains of daily life. He can sit in a café and gaze out at the ordinary folk, as Peter Nicholls notes in 
The Art and Practice of the Ordinary 177
Modernisms: A Literary Guide . In short, Baudelaire objectiﬁes his ordinary 
subject. He gazes upon her from his own point of detached privilege. The 
problem of objectiﬁcation is intimately connected to the problem of repre-sentation. Baudelaire is important because he identiﬁes with the ordinari-ness around him. But he cannot get away from this objectiﬁcation. This issue of representation as objectiﬁcation is crucial for any consideration of the poetics of the ordinary: it is the ﬂy in the ointment of transparency. For objectiﬁcation is antipathetic to the poetics of the ordinary because it removes that which is objectiﬁed from the ﬂow of the ordinary, from its location in the everyday. I am interested in a poetics of the everyday that attempts to break down this objectiﬁcation of the ordinary. That requires a kind of writing that tries to break down the relationship between seer and seen, the observer and the observed. And this is where we can see the great importance of some of the poets with us this weekend.
Like Wittgenstein, we must understand that the everyday is in fact a prac-
tice, not a style. It is something in which we are engaged. Take, for instance Michel de Certeau’s example, in Arts de faire , of a worker putting his or her 
timecard in backward as a way of creating a small space of her or his own: this is a practice that interferes with the everyday; it is not a literary style, it is not a form of representation, it is a way of proceeding. And this proce-dure, this practice of the everyday, is where the issues can be most richly and dialectically confronted. As it is by Guy Debord and the other Situationists, such as Asger Jorn, who were interested in creating a method of breaking down the barrier of art and the everyday, where art, in its stylistic ﬁxations, was understood as adding to the spectacle of commodity culture. I want a critique of the ordinary (to echo Henri Lefevre’s title) that also is a critique of market value. One wants a practice that counters the alienation from the ordinary rather than that domesticates or naturalizes this alienation.
The relation of Marxism to the poetics of the ordinary is fundamental, but 
I would suggest that poets such as Louis Zukofsky, George Oppen, Charles Reznikoff, Lorine Niedecker, who are often together called, for all their dif-ferences, “Objectivists, ” offer a path radically different from socialist real-ism, even while sharing some of its political premises. Oppen and Zukofsky were both committed to socialism. Oppen was working with the Commu-nist Party in the thirties and after, during which time he stopped writing, possibly because he could not reconcile his politics with his poetics. His ﬁrst book, Discrete Series  (1934) is very difﬁcult, very abstract at one level. 
178 THE FATE OF THE AESTHETIC
At the same time, its absolutely ordinary words, its series of concrete obser-
vations, are permuted one after the other without any literary ﬂourish at all. In fact, Oppen and Zukofsky are the most radical in their disafﬁliation from any sort of literariness and aestheticization, also from a kind of bombastic and hyperpoetic work that might be associated with the European futurists and surrealists. Their writing is extremely low-key. They are both coming 
out of Jewish immigrant families where English was not the ﬁrst language 
spoken, but they are choosing to write in English, to be a part of an interna-tional modernism. So there is a strain of secular internationalism in them. But, at the same time, they are committed to the particular, to the detail, rather than to the general or metaphysical. In this way, they are very much against the symbolic or allegorical use of the particular, which is contrary to social realism, or more conventional kinds of poetry of the everyday, where the individual is meant to represent something larger. They want things to be what they are.
Much of Reznikoff’s work consists of quite short poems in serial forms about 
topics that do not even seem to be topics. They approach the ephemeral: like gum stuck to the pavement. These are also intensely urban poems, very much outside a literary ethos that is nostalgic for some other kind of life.
More recently, some of these approaches to the ordinary have been pur-
sued by such writers as Creeley, Larry Eigner, Ted Berrigan, Lyn Hejinian, Leslie Scalapino, Ron Silliman, Robert Grenier, Bernadette Mayer, Hannah Weiner, and Kenneth Goldsmith. In my own practice, which, like my con-temporaries, is of course quite different from these older poets I so much admire, there is a very strong critique of the institution of literature and a relentless look at how poetry operates at a social level, so that the everyday becomes an understanding of the social uses of language and the different registers of vernacular language.
I am less interested in talking about the aesthetics of the ordinary than par-
ticipating in the ﬁght for the ordinary. For the ordinary is always contested ground. For this reason, I have been very interested in understanding the problem of the politics of poetic form, rather than the politics of poetic subject matter. The politics of poetry has partly to do with its character of resistance, its recalcitrance, its awkwardness, understood as a crucial space for reﬂection and thought on the political realm, on values. Imagine the poem as an ordinary space not in content so much as form: I mean imagine the space of the poem itself, with its stubbornness or its erraticness—which 
The Art and Practice of the Ordinary 179
would be odd as a literary style—as actually existing in and as the ordinary. 
What’s ordinary is an enacted process, not the product.
Obviously, with the postwar period, poetry no longer is a medium of 
mass communication. If, as an artist, you are interested in galvanizing the broad masses, poetry would not be the best choice to achieve that.
By the very process of the ideological critique, the poetic work is ﬂipped out 
of the context of the ordinary. It may not be standardized; it does not speak with an individual voice; it is abnormal. In fact, normalcy of language (that is to say, standardization) is not a natural fact of human being but a highly controlled social institution to which people are forced to conform. If you wish to unlearn normalcy, you will seek a level of inarticulateness which is very ordinary. Inarticulateness, stuttering, oddness are parts of the most or-dinary experience, and in poetic language they may refuse coherence. The right will say that such an abnormal language is decadent, un-Christian, an -
archic, or nihilistic; in other words, that it is an attack on logos (or anyway logos according to the ideological state apparatus). If you do not examine the values reproduced through grammatical structures, by diction, and via the norms of exposition, then you will ﬁnd yourself constantly trapped in a controlled simulation of reality that limits any kind of political transforma-tion. Of course, critique does not change the distribution of wealth, or end racial discrimination or gender oppression. Politics never dissolves at any one level, certainly not simply as a result of artistic work. But art does have a crucial social role to play.
What I am trying to do in my own writing is to produce an experience of 
language as a social material, evoking, in the process, material facts about language and rhythms within language that each of us knows as well as our own breath or the thud of our heart or the viscosity of our saliva. Such writ-ing is often accused of being obscure, difﬁcult, inaccessible, but this may be because preconceptions about what poetry should be like block out the very real experiences possible with language not tethered to stylistic conventions. In contrast, for poetry that advertises itself as directly or emotionally expres-sive, the very terms emotion and directness are caught within an ideological web of literary manners, forms, and structures that end up preventing direct expression. If a poet does not confront how these concepts of directness and emotionality are the objects of literary manipulations, then she or he is never able to achieve directness in poetry. Such a confrontation and resistance may be difﬁcult at ﬁrst because it requires questioning, even breaking with, 
180 THE FATE OF THE AESTHETIC
the norms. In attempting to engage the ordinary it is necessary to explore, 
from a conceptual point of view, the effect of the structures through which the directness of the ordinary is to be expressed. Unfortunately, the politics of the everyday does not allow simple solutions. Social reality is too complex to be conquered or fully understood, but that does not mean we cannot alter or transform it. Our work is to engage with the complexity without losing contact with an ordinary that is our constant companion, our most trusted guide.
ELECTRONIC PIES IN THE POETRY SKIES
Language reproduction technology—from the alphabet to the printing 
press to our current systems of photoelectronic reproduction—has a history of democratizing social space while at the same time not democratizing it enough.
Freedom is a relative value, not an absolute. The question is always freedom 
for what or from what, freedom for whom or from whom.
The utopian vision of the open spaces of the Web may also hold out the false 
promise that everything, at last, can be heard.
Nonetheless, our ideals for technology may incite greater freedom even if 
these ideals are not, perhaps cannot be, reached.
Authority is never abolished but constantly reinscribes itself in new places.There is a virus out there, but it is not trying to get to your hard drive but 
your outsides and insides.
I founded the Buffalo Poetics list (http://epc.buffalo.edu/poetics/welcome.html) in late 1993, 
with this poem: “Above the world-weary horizons / New obstacles for exchange arise / Or unfold, / O ye postmasters!” The list faced its share of obstacles, changing in late 1998 from an open (but private and subscription-based) to a moderated list. Portions of this work were published online in 2001. In 2002, Damian Lopes did a three-card shufﬂe realization, now ar-chived by Coach House Books (http://archives.chbooks.com/online_books/electronic_pies).  
This version was collected in The Politics of Information: The Electronic Mediation of Social 
Change, edited by Marc Bousquet and Katherine Wills (Alt-X Press / Electronic Book Review, 2003). URLs accessed July 7, 2010.
182 THE FATE OF THE AESTHETIC
The greatest contribution of small presses and magazines of the past ﬁfty 
years has not been that they have been more “open” than the trade or com-mercial presses but that in many cases they have been more selective.
Every new path to freedom creates new, sometimes even more intractable, 
obstacles to freedom.
The goal of democratizing the Web, understood as an end in itself, may 
sometimes conﬂict with the creation of sites that allow for the articulation of alternative perspectives.
Populism is not the same as market share.Access is a method, not a goal.The absence of physical or temporal bars to exchange in various interactive 
spaces does not necessarily allow for a greater range of exchange.
The group dynamics that hamper exchange in “live” settings have colonized 
our electronic interactions.
& you can never completely rid yourself of this virus, but you can be a more 
or less hospitable host.
Decentralization allows for multiple, conﬂicting authorities, not the ab-
sence of authority.
Authority is dead; editing begins.Mass culture is not the same as popular culture.Fostering dissent on the Web requires the invention of new formats.Authority in the defense of liberty is not linear.The destruction, in the United States, of TV and radio as a space for the 
articulation of alternative political, ethical, and aesthetic points of view haunts all who imagine that new technologies might serve ends other than those of the market or its ideological underwriters.
Electronic Pies in the Poetry Skies 183
For interactive sites such as discussion groups, it is always useful to consider 
whether the structure precipitates resentment over exchange, the average over the particular, mediocrity over difference, voice over thought, imme-diacy over reﬂection, recirculation over invention.
The purpose of supporting unpopular culture is not necessarily to make 
it popular, but this does not mean that preserving unpopularity is itself a virtue.
In some ways, the intimate space of e-mail discussion lists can leave one 
feeling more vulnerable to animosity than in “live” settings, where the pres-ence of others serves as a buffer.
Freedom is never free.The structural problem is how to foster counterhegemonic perspectives, 
including aesthetic ones, within an environment where accessibility and democratization are often used to erode such perspectives.
The Internet provides new opportunities for rumor, gossip, exploitation, 
and innuendo.
The lobotomizing of radio and TV has been done under the banner of 
democratization: Let the Majority Decide! Down with the Authority of  Elites!
“This time it will be different” but it never (quite) is and never is not 
(quite).
Majority rule via market and ratings systems, like our winner-take-all po-
litical system, has been far more effective than any state-run censorship in ensuring the minority rule of those with the greatest capital accumulation.
Electronic space is neither free nor unlimited because our lives are neither 
free nor unlimited.
Corporate America is now constructing elaborate Web on-ramp systems to 
control the ﬂow of hits; that’s why AOL bought Time/Warner and not the other way around.
184 THE FATE OF THE AESTHETIC
In some of the new Internet environments, there is a fairly high tolerance 
for ﬂaming, ad hominem attack, libel, and diatribe, as if resentment is a measure of honesty.
The megacorporate control of the ﬂow of hits, of consumer—not citizen—
attention is far more important than short-term proﬁts because the system of preserving proﬁts depends upon it.
& sometimes there is nothing you can do about the virus, and those may 
be just the times when it seems most urgent to imagine that you can do something.
Not all unpopular culture is equal or equally worth supporting.What’s the alternative?The very ease of posting to a list may sacriﬁce necessity (not the same as 
substance) even while allowing for immediacy (not the same as urgency).
Infrastructure, infr astructure, infrastructure.
The Web necessitates ever more editing, more intensive intervention, lest 
our alternative spaces be rendered vacuous, or desperate, by default launch-ing people into the ofﬁcial ﬂows of information.
Yet righteous outrage is as likely to shut down exchange as provoke it.Web space is not so much disembodied as differently bodied. And those 
different bodies can be as scary as the demons that haunt our dreams for human freedom.
While the proliferation of unmoderated spaces does of course allow for 
some of the otherwise unheard to speak, in the resultant din it may impos-sible to hear them.
We remain vulnerable to destabilization  by agent provocateurs but also by 
provocative agencies within ourselves, our desire for puriﬁcation through 
self-immolation.
Electronic Pies in the Poetry Skies 185
Knowledge is constituted by the available information in a particular  
time.
It’s not technology that will change the possibilities for dialogue but  
politics.
In my own experience as the editor/moderator of a listserv, I found it hard 
to be as grumpy as I needed to be and hard not to be too grumpy about the results.
The automation of language reproduction and exchange possible with the 
Internet is very alluring as it seems to save so much labor-intensive work in comparison to print publications or letters; ultimately, this is illusory, since the labor of selection, editing, and involving participants/readers is still the essential ingredient, while the technical work of site and list formation and maintenance are themselves relatively complex and time- consuming tasks.
For alternative voices to make a difference, space must be created and main-
tained so that they can not only speak but also be heard; and this means creating spaces that earn the trust of their participants.
As much as we may be troubled by the growing concentration of “web-
fotainment, ” we also need to be wary that as many of the most “ungoverned” sites purvey disinformation as offer critique.
Automation of language reproduction doesn’t make things simpler but 
more complex.
If the discussion is always starting from scratch, the participants with 
greater experience may drop away.
Public space requires protecting rights as much as allowing access.The contribution of small press publications is that they articulate speciﬁc, 
not general, aesthetic values; that they do not allow market forces to be the primary arbiter of value; and that they provide sharp contrasts with the otherwise available literature of the time.
186 THE FATE OF THE AESTHETIC
Some disagreements are too extreme to be articulated politely.
The hardest thing is to create spaces that not only provide information but 
also allow for exchange.
My own reluctance to impose sufﬁcient restrictions almost allowed those 
antagonistic to the list to destroy it.
It may be as useful to participate in a conversation “over your head” as “at 
your level. ”
The virus is in our systems of social reproduction.The ideal of civility is as often a ploy to suppress dissent as a means of facili-
tating dialogue.
But because some things are beyond redress it does not follow that every 
circumstance is without recourse, nor every case without prospect.
There is a pleasure, also, in delusions: not of grandeur but of agency.There’ll be a pie in the sky when you die.But not likely.
POETRY PLASTIQUE: A VERBAL 
EXPLOSION IN THE ART FACTORY
Coauthor: Jay Sanders
In June 2000, Jay Sanders wrote me a note suggesting we work together on a 
poetry show at the Marianne Boesky Gallery, where he was on the staff. In our ﬁrst few conversations we discovered that we shared a very speciﬁc conception for the show. As our planning grew more intense, we began to see that a distinct character-istic of “Poetry Plastique” was that it would focus on poetry off the page or outside normal typographic constraints. Letters of the alphabet are tenaciously referential (standing for a sound or for the idea of the letter), often at the expense of denying the physical and visual existence of written language, even the possible origin of letters as icons and pictographs. Our exhibition would seek to both open up and explore letter shapes, with the idea that as works move off the page and out of the book, letters are able to repossess their thickness as objects and their presence as sounds. The exhibition opened at the Marianne Boesky Gallery on February 9, 2001. On February 10, we presented an all-day symposium featuring most of the poets and artists in the show. Our two panels were chaired by Marjorie Perloff. In the evening, we screened the ﬁlms that we selected to be part of the show. Anthol-ogy Film Archives subsequently presented a separate “Poetry Plastique” program of ﬁlms chosen by Jay and the Anthology staff. In addition, Granary Books published a catalog for the exhibition, with extensive reproductions and a statement by each participant (available at http://epc.buffalo .edu/features/poetryplastique). For this 
essay, we have pulled together various statements we wrote to introduce the show.
CH. B.
Not words and pictures but poems as visual objects (read: subjects). Not po-
ems about pictures but pictures that are poems. Not words afﬁxed to a blank page but letters in time. Not works closed in a book but poems hanging on a wall or suspended from the ceiling or rising from the ﬂoor or sounding from inside a ﬁgure or embedded with paint on a canvas or written in the sky or ﬂickering on a screen.
“Poetry Plastique” presents the work of thirty-four poets and artists work -
ing to move poetry off the page and into sculpture, ﬁlm, painting, assem-blage, photography—even skywriting. Pushing the boundaries of textuality, 
188 THE FATE OF THE AESTHETIC
these literary and visual artists move poetry into a new dimension that em-
phasizes the concreteness and materiality of the written word. Featuring both collaborations between poets and artists and well as visual work by poets and textual work by visual artists, the exhibition presents some of the most signiﬁcant poets and artists of the time in a context that promises to change our understanding of poetry and its relation to visual art.
The exhibition includes new work as well as a historical section of works 
from the 1960s to 1980s that provides a context for understanding the de-velopments charted by the show. Extending from the work of visual poetry and book art, the poem-objects in the show suggest a markedly different ap -
proach to language than is often seen. Indeed, while language is a common element in much contemporary visual art, the works in “Poetry Plastique” use language not as a conceptual screen or a set of received ideas but as an active principle for articulation and meaning.
“Poetry Plastique” takes a distinct place in a spectrum that includes vi-
sual and concrete poetry as well as book and language art. The precedents hang in the air—from William Blake’s fusion of poem-engraving-image to 
the exquisitely expressive features of Emily Dickinson’s hand-inscribed fas -
cicles, from Marcel Duchamp’s verbal objects and Kurt Schwitters’s collages and Merzbau to the collaborations of the Russian Futurist painters and po-ets and Len Lye’s inscribed ﬁlm stock. A secret history, but one known to an international array of participants, links the works shown here to a range of poems, sculptures, paintings, and books that have formed the matrix of a previous series of exemplary shows that have mapped out the ground for this exhibition. We hope that the inclusion of a small grouping of classic works from the 1960s and 1970s will help to contextualize the new work presented here. At the same time, we realize that even our “classics” will ﬁnd a new audience with this presentation, since many of them have rarely if ever been shown in a New York art world context. We are also pleased that “Poetry Plastique” brings to the fore a range of new collaborations between poets and visual artists—a traditional pairing here made new again.
Why aren’t poets more central to contemporary visual art? This exhibi-
tion makes this question impossible to ignore. For many contemporary po-ets, the connections and afﬁnities with the visual arts are readily acknowl-edged. Indeed, today’s most innovative poets have challenged traditional ideas of the literary, moving their work into close proximity to the most radical questionings of current visual artists. And, indeed, the proximity of avant-garde poets and artists has a vibrant history that our show hopes to 
bring up to date.
Poetry Plastique 189
Take, for example, the crucial recent anthology Poems for the Millennium , 
edited by Jerome Rothenberg and Pierre Joris, which is emblematic of the 
wide-reaching and multifaceted history that contemporary poetry increas -
ingly considers its own. For Rothenberg & Joris, poetry exists in an active context that includes such poet-artists as Marcel Duchamp, Kurt Schwit -
ters, and John Cage (not to mention Picasso, Cendrars and Delaunay, Mari-netti, Stepanova, Kandinsky, Grosz, Klee, Michaux, Tzara, Ball, Arp, Picabia, Breton, Ernst, Artaud, Brecht). In their respective practices, these individu-als—most of whom are primarily known as visual artists—and many more, are of real interest as poets, informing the survey, connecting the dots, and giving key insights into contemporary poetic practice.
Poems for the Millennium  reminds us that poetry has historically played 
a central role in most of the key art movements of the twentieth century. Futurism, Dada, and Surrealism were all, ﬁrst and foremost, literary move-ments. And while the story is perhaps less known today, contemporary poets continue to produce works that rival any other medium in terms of innovation, variety, and accomplishment. With regard to the relationship between poetry and the plastic arts, we’ve tried to take poetry out of its expected—but not necessary—contexts, pulling poetry out of the book and throwing it up on the wall or down on the ﬂoor. “Poetry Plastique” is a ver-bal explosion in the art factory. It returns cutting-edge poetry to the center 
of art culture, a position poetry occupied for much of the last century. It is a 
celebration of the physical dimensions of the written word and the textual dimensions of art objects.
The exhibition presents an important aspect of the often underrepre-
sented visual works of contemporary poets. We offer a constellation of in-tellectually compelling, poetically dense, visually dazzling works that rep-resent some of the most exciting efforts in current practice. Additionally, we shed light on an essential gathering of historical progenitors. Known primarily as visual artists (Robert Smithson, Arakawa, Tom Phillips, Carl Andre, Wallace Berman), poets (Clark Coolidge, Steve McCaffery, Jackson Mac Low), ﬁlmmakers (Hollis Frampton, Michael Snow), and composers (John Cage), the artists in our historical component each exhibit an under-standing of the possibilities of enacting the verbal and visual—centering their concerns on a real exploration of poetry and language—rather than simply “text. ” Such a grouping, shown concurrently with critical contem-porary examples, updates the recent historical crosscurrents of poetry and visual art, and contextualizes the contemporary works in a broad manner that extends beyond the speciﬁcities of a single medium.
190 THE FATE OF THE AESTHETIC
We have taken a wide, interdisciplinary view of “Poetry Plastique” which 
looks favorably on convergences, collisions, and corruptions between cat-
egories in the arts. For many of the participating artists, this means high-lighting lesser-known (but more pertinent for us) aspects of their creative 
endeavors. One of the common hallmarks of the “historical” artists is an 
unabashed irreverence for the divisions between artistic mediums. Each artist has allowed her or his practice to transcend disciplinary categories, making vital innovations in more than one milieu. And, as we illustrate here, each has critically explored the limits of language and poetic text in a visual context.
For many of the contemporary poets and language artists (David Antin, 
Christian Bök, Johanna Drucker, Kenneth Goldsmith, Robert Grenier, Lyn Hejinian, Tan Lin, Emily McVarish, Nick Piombino, Leslie Scalapino, Dar-ren Wershler-Henry), we are highlighting both special projects and ongoing 
corollaries to their practice as writers. For the most part, these poets also 
publish less visually intensive poetry, but it is their works that combine visual and verbal sensibilities that are central to our concerns. Addition-ally, we include key painters (Susan Bee, Mira Schor) whose canvases—in a complementary manner—provide grounds for intensive explorations of poetics and language.
We have also chosen to exhibit important collaborations between poets 
and visual artists. While some of these pieces were made speciﬁcally for this exhibition, we did not organize any of the collaborative pairings. Instead, it was our intent to seek out existing relationships that demonstrate a dy-namic synthesis of the physical/visual/material with the poetic/textually-
dense. While there are many poet/artist collaborations, each of these (Clark 
Coolidge/Philip Guston, Madeline Gins/Arakawa, Robert Creeley/Cletus Johnson, Mei-Mei Berssenbrugge/Kiki Smith, Charles Bernstein/Richard 
Tuttle, Lyn Hejinian/Emilie Clark) has intricately intermeshed the visual 
and the poetic to the utmost degree.
For our show, we have chosen to include neither artist’s books nor poetry 
that is primarily “concrete” or typographical, in part because these forms have been more commonly exhibited, but also because we are especially interested in works whose visual materiality is not fully reproducible in books, anthologies, or on the Internet. For this reason, we have made every effort to display “originals, ” even of works designed to be read in repro-duction. And we have included a number of works—sculptures, paintings, ﬁlms, and video—where paper is not the medium upon which the words are inscribed. Not simply poems on the wall, the works in our exhibition share 
Poetry Plastique 191
an interest in materials and visuality, and exist as “unique” objects ideally 
viewed in a gallery setting and best appreciated in person.
To the curators of this exhibition, mounting such a show in a commer-
cial New York gallery is an important component. It annexes these poets and their works into the context of contemporary art, and generally restates the importance of poetry in the realm of the visual arts. In organizing and presenting these works, we have taken every measure to acknowledge them to be as compelling as any grouping of artworks.
Organizing a gallery exhibition full of poetry actively pushes against 
categorical deﬁnitions separating artistic mediums. In their endeavors, the poets involved in “Poetry Plastique” are all consciously concerned with boundaries. The boundaries between poetry and criticism, verse and prose, reading and looking, meaning and material are incessantly pushed to the breaking point. We have endeavored to exhibit an element of that spillage, where creative works extend limits so far, they can potentially turn into something else.
SPEED THE MOVIE OR SPEED THE BRAND 
NAME OR AREN’T YOU THE KIND THAT TELLS: MY SENTIMENTAL JOURNAL 
THROUGH FUTURE SHOCK AND PRESENT 
STATIC ELECTRICITY. VERSION 19.84.
[Note this document is best heard with Quixotic’s Tympanic Membrane Firmware  bundled to the CNS 98 operating system. Upgrade now.]
A lion, a ﬂinch, and an extraterrestrial were in a lifeboat together and sup-
plies  were dwindling. Finally, the lion asked the extraterrestrial, “So what’s the  
big deal about the Internet?” “Speed” said the ﬂinch in a blink of a wince.
No matter how you look at it, speed is a morally coded concept. With its 
etymological roots tied at the groin to success, to think speed is to invoke a java applet alternating ﬂashing SPEED / All Others Pay Cash.
Is it possible to imagine an ethics of speed to contrast with the moral insis-
tence on speed as success, efﬁciency, progress? That is, to interrogate speed not in terms of whether it is good or bad but by means of reciprocal values in which rate is one among many factors, gauged for its aesthetic articulation more than as an absolute measure of anything? In other words, to break the moral coding of speed in order to release its many valences for aesthetic experience and ethical consideration?
Speed is always, anyway, relative to background, context, observer, ob-
served, expectation, desire, loss, habit; what Einstein called the Special 
Written for “Key Words” seminar (speed, betrayal, healing) at the Rockefeller Foundation, 
organized by Michael Brenson, June 12, 1998. Shark 2 (1999).
194 THE FATE OF THE AESTHETIC
Theory of Relativity, as in: the station moves along the tracks looking for 
the train.
An ethics of speed might begin by noting that human sexual response is 
often enhanced by prolongation, actively slowing down, what’s the rush, it’s not a race, it’s not the goal but the getting there, getting by, the doing not the done, energia not kinesis, distraction not attention, digression not forward movement.
What Muriel Rukeyser calls “the speed of darkness” (70 beats per minute at 
rest, doubled in motion).
“Faster than a speeding bullet, more powerful than a locomotive, ” it’s John 
Henry versus the steam shovel in three rounds at the Garden, with running commentary by Bob, or is it Ray?, Slow Talkers of America, or then again the tortoise beating the hare, Charlie Chaplin deranged by Taylorization, Marinetti writing odes to acceleration, Ozu head to head with Jackie Chan in Swift Justice: The Bonneville 500 Story , XT, AT, 286, 386, 486, Pentium 1, 2,  
you’re out.
As if the choice were between the assembly line and the verse line.When I was twelve years old I enrolled in a summer Evelyn Wood speed 
reading course, lured by the image of the man who read a dozen books a day, itself echoing that mad desire Thomas Wolfe writes about in Of Time 
and the River  when as a student at Harvard he wanted to read all the books 
in Widener library. After getting a hang for the Evelyn Wood system, I was able to read Albert Camus’s The Stranger  in twenty-ﬁve minutes. “Mother 
died today. Or, maybe, yesterday; I can’t be sure. ” I still remember the start-ing line, and it is the sort of blur Camus evokes here that is the sensation of this kind of speed reading. You might call it virtual reading. But the Wood people made a disclaimer that would be welcome in today’s cultural speed-
up: You can only read as fast as you think.
When I was in college we made the distinction between books we would 
like to read and books we would like to have read. Or then again there was the legendary story of the student who writes the best exam of his life on speed, the only problem being that he writes over and over on the same line 
Speed the Movie or Speed the Brand Name 195
of the page. SPEED KILLS, the poster said, but it also chills and chills out. 
Up to speed but off the wall.
Looking at something fast you get the advantage of an overview, you see 
patterns not discernible up close, but you may lose the detail. Can’t see the thread only the weave. Is that a technical problem to be solved, an aesthetic problem to be explored, or an ethical problem to be acknowledged?
Efﬁciency without reason is desperation.One wants—I want—to slow reading down and speed it up at the same 
time. That is, I want to have thick meaning and then accelerate it, as if the reader might download a zipped poem that proceeds to unpack itself in the mind, over time. By this method, one combines quick delivery— conden-
sare—with “heavy reason. ” (Laura Riding, in “By a Crude Rotation”: “To my 
lot fell / . . . A slow speed and a heavy reason, / . . . And then content, the language of the mind / That knows no way to stop. ”)
Art is the ketchup that loses the race.The political unconscious of postmodern speed is the transcendence of the 
body and of history, of the resistance in the materials, of the space between here and there, of the time it takes (that time takes as much as it gives); that is, of our animalady, the limits that we live inside of (as Charles Olson put 
it), our grounding in and as ﬂesh.
(As if you could accelerate the pace of recovery without wounding  
healing.)
Which is to say that there is in our culture, an intense dissatisfaction with 
the pace of things, the planned obsolescence now known as obsessive-  
compulsive upgrade disorder (OCUD), with a culture driven by the val-ues of efﬁciency, celebrity, market penetration, and disposability. In equal proportion to being beneﬁciaries of this culture, we feel betrayed by it and beholden to it (as the drug is the master of the addict). We have alternatives, but it is our habit to deride these because they offer resistance instead of as-similation, purposelessness instead of proﬁt, blank spaces in place of demo-graphic rationalization, reﬂection rather than production, inquiry in place 
196 THE FATE OF THE AESTHETIC
of accumulated knowledge. The alternative is to acknowledge the value of 
stopping, of derailing, of getting off the machine, in which case we may ﬁnd that we were not speeding at all, just spinning our wheels without traction. I know I am—and I want to do that some more.
If technology is the answer, what is the question?Our halls of culture boast newly efﬁcient systems designed to maximize the 
ﬂow of people through spaces that tokenize the aesthetic experience into voiceover tours with take-home souvenirs, making a trip to some museums 
more like a walk in a mall than contemplating a bust of Homer. Instead of 
making ourselves tourists to our own culture, we might create ever more dwelling spaces in which to reﬂect on art, salons that stop the ﬂow of trafﬁc, that encourage the viewer to rest, to ﬂounder, even to be confused—indeed to be consumed by the art rather than to consume its representations.
Much of the prized and popular writing of our time is written to increase 
the speed with which it can be read. Our colleges are charged with teaching students a kind of expository writing that emphasizes efﬁcient expression and plainness and that demonizes complexity, ambiguity, contradiction, or anything else that might bog readers down in the writing. Such ideologically blindered writing is governed by the three Cs of Strunk and White Elements 
of Style fundamentalism: Clarity, Concision, Coherence. In this context, it is 
useful to note how close this ideology of writing is to the moral discourse of speed. Yet there is another kind of writing, a writing that slows you down, that makes space for the reader to think, to respond, to wander, to savor. That takes pleasure in complexity and ﬁnds complexity in pleasure, that isn’t interested in producing a meaning for the reader to skim off the top but to provide a pool of thought—a sound—in which to swim.
How can we ﬁnd ways to support that, to support a writing—and more 
generally noncommercial contemporary art—that does nothing concrete, that is noninstrumental, that raises questions more than providing answers. One way is as simple as could be: direct support for the production of works through those independent presses or writing centers or websites, as well as noncommercial art spaces, that publish and present and distribute art. Without direct support for literary publishing, the small presses will not be able to survive in their present form—and the same could be said for the nonproﬁt sector of the other contemporary arts. And I am not talking 
Speed the Movie or Speed the Brand Name 197
about seed money, or money to build better bureaucratic and promotional 
structures, which are two favored ways to mime, while actually undermin-ing, direct support for the production of literary works and works in other art media.
When the hare always wins, that’s morality—speed as success—not ethics. 
And it sure isn’t aesthetics either.
God speeds but she also brakes for humans.
BREAKING THE TRANSLATION CURTAIN: 
THE HOMOPHONIC SUBLIME
Translation is always a form of collaboration: between two (or more) poets 
and also between two (or more) languages. For me, the most important value is that the poem newly being written is engaging as a poem in its “own” “new” language, not a secondary representation of that which lives primarily elsewhere. Accuracy is the bogeyman of translation; for what can be accurately paraphrased is not the “poetic” content of the work.
Translation can be a goad to invent new forms, structures, expressions, 
textures, and sounds in the (new) poem being written. This is to acknowl-edge, but also go beyond, Walter Benjamin’s famous comment that the mark of the translator should not be made invisible, or inaudible, in the transla-tion.
1 A certain strangeness from the original must necessarily be embodied 
in the new poem. When I translate, I want to keep as much of the syntax of the original as possible, especially if it goes against colloquial English: this might mean, for example, translating all the articles and genders that you have in French but not English. I realize this is a kind of mania: it is delirium, in Jean-Jacques Lecercle’s sense, induced by the ontological in-scrutabilities of translation.
2
The poet/translator should be free to intervene in the process, assert her 
or his poetic presence, to let the poem mutate into fruition. I always start 
1. “The Task of the Translator, ” in Illuminations , translated by Harry Zohn (New York: 
Schocken, 1969). See also Lawrence Venuti, The Translator’s Invisibility: A History of Transla-
tion (New York: Routledge, 1995); and Steve McCaffery & bpNichol, Rational Geomancy: The 
Kids of the Book-Machine: The Collected Research Reports of the Toronto Research Group, 1973–82  
(Vancouver: Talonbooks, 1992).
2. Jean-Jacques Lecercle, Philosophy Through the Looking Glass  (LaSalle, IL: Open Court, 1985). 
See, for example, Yunte Huang, SHI: A Radical Reading of Chinese Poetry  (New York: Roof, 
1997), which provides, for the ﬁrst time in English, a character-for-character translation of several classic Chinese poems.L ’Esprit créateur 38.4 (1998).
200 THE FATE OF THE AESTHETIC
with the idea of homophonic translations, which I take from Louis and Celia 
Zukofsky’s translation of Catullus into English, translating the sound of the Latin over and above the lexical meaning. Letting the sound lead is crucial, or often crucial, for the sound may lead to the sense. Every translator knows that a translation requires doing an interpretation of the poem, for words or expressions ambiguous in the original need to be translated one way or another, while a reader need not make any such decisions. We must be wary of a translation that is less ambiguous than its original: the task of the trans-lator is to maintain an economy of ambiguity or inscrutability, as well as of sonic dynamics, not devalue these features in the process. We have many examples of poems that are translated into a ﬂuent or colloquial English that stand in sharp contrast to the marvelous inﬂuidities and resistances to assimilation of the original poem: a boring and reductive way to translate, though I would have to say it is the “ofﬁcial” way, the authorized method.
Yes of course these remarks suggest just one way to translate. Nor do I in-
tend them to apply only to poetry: philosophy in translation suffers perhaps more greatly than poetry if only because its readers are often less conscious of the semiotic cost of translation (roughly 3.1459) and even less willing to 
cede signiﬁcance to what is unrecoverable.
And perhaps, too, my remarks reﬂect an American perspective. Because 
American English is such a capacious language, incorporating the accents, 
syntaxes, and manners of speech of both many other languages and many varieties of our own, many translations are unable to bring across the inno-vative force the originals have for their own language. The originals, often set against a very ﬁxed pattern of poetic practice, have decisive meaning for readers or listeners precisely in the departures from this ﬁxed, or relatively ﬁxed, background. In American English, we have no comparable grid upon which these innovations can play, and as a result many of the poems her-alded in the introductions, when translated in the conventional manner, seem like weak versions of any of a number of American poetry styles: one can only imagine what might be interesting about them.
Within this context, one might add a formal criterion to the evaluation 
of translation, taking translation as its own medium, not merely a genre of poetry: what is the translation doing that can’t be done in any other me-dium?
Perhaps this also suggests the need for new formats for translation, using 
digital formats to allow, for example, for listening to the work read in the original language while looking at a translation—and for the possibility of extensive supplemental material, including multiple alternate ﬁgurative, 
Fraud’s Phantoms 201
conceptual, and literal translations, as well as a full range of notes. Indeed, 
the embedding of a translation with such a dense textual ﬁeld intensiﬁes the possibilities for cultural exchange that might motivate the art of transla-tion, while refusing a reductive idea of poems as lyric utterances, unfettered to speciﬁcs of location, language, style, and historical moment.
Disputes about translation are always a pretext for disputes about poetry. 
Translation theory is poetics by another name. If I am interested in a cer-tain kind of translation, it is because I am invested in a certain kind of po-etry. And if I object to a certain style of translation , it is likely that I would 
also object to this style if it were written “originally” in the American. Yet under cover of “translation, ” many things—ideas, forms, contents—can be smuggled into the “target” language that might not be allowed, or validated, if composed without justiﬁcation in some authoritative original other. Of course, this makes translation a rich and valuable ﬁeld for literary frauds (from Ossian to Araki Yasusada). At the same time, attacks on translation for “unfaithfulness” are typically pretexts for a rejection of a style of poetry in the translator’s own language that the attacker ﬁnd unacceptable, un-faithful to his or her sense of the proprieties of that language.
One of the most interesting post-Zukofsky homophonic translations is Da-
vid Melnick’s Men in Aida .
3 While anything more than the most cursory 
reading of Men in Aida  would move to its relation to Homer, the fact that 
this work is a homophonic translation of The Iliad has not been mentioned in the publications of the work. This raises the question of whether such works are meant to stand “on their own” or only in relation to their source. What happens when someone reads Men in Aida  and doesn’t recognize the 
Homer connection? Is the reading invalid? Doesn’t Melnick want to allow for this? Once again, it is the question of the original versus the secondary, for which Andrew Benjamin’s idea of “anoriginal” is such a useful alter-native.
4 Is this like someone seeing Clueless  but being clueless about Jane 
Austen? Us parents like to hope it sends the kids back to the book, but this is also preposterous. What really happens is that we Austenites are sent out to the movie. What is valuable, the original or the reproduction (Lori 
3. David Melnick, Men in Aida  (Berkeley: Tuumba, 1983); online at Eclipse, http://english 
.utah.edu/eclipse/projects/AIDA/aida.html, accessed June 28, 2009.
4. “Translating Origins: Psychoanalysis and Philosophy, ” in Rethinking Translation: Discourse, 
Subjectivity, Ideology, edited by Lawrence Venuti (London: Routledge, 1992).
202 THE FATE OF THE AESTHETIC
Chamberlain’s engendering reading of that question intended):5 the source 
or the transﬁguration of it, the product or the activity, the accuracy or the 
exchange? Or is what is valuable the relation of the original to the repro-duction? Or the ﬁrst on its own, but not the second on its own (the father and the relation of the father to the child, but not the mother/reproducer)? Homophonic translation is signiﬁcant because it can symbolize the revenge of the translator: no longer invisible, but through the text’s opacity mak-ing the “original” invisible (or occluded). (Though as Ben Friedlander has pointed out to me, this symbolic or categorical function can empty out what is actually interesting about any given homophonic or otherwise radically nonstandard translation.)
In reprinting Zukofsky’s short poems, Paul Zukofsky, product of the re-
productive act of the authors/sources LZ/CZ, prints only the LZ/CZ Catul-lus poems, dropping the Latin originals altogether, saying they get in the way of reading the work in itself as original (as PZ told me in phone con-versation, ﬁltered through / translated by my memory and desire to make this point).
6
Stand on its own, eh? Just like you and . . .But I could never do that . . .Can there be a translation without an original? Interpretation without 
its object or subject? A beloved without a lover? Child without parent?
What is poetry?
5. “Gender and the Metaphorics of Translation, ” in Rethinking Translation.
6. Louis Zukofsky, Complete Short Poetry (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1991).
In November 1999, I got an e-mail from Nick Gallansky, saying he had heard 
that I was giving a talk on literary frauds at the MLA in Chicago and wanted to share some of his thinking with me on the topic. His return address was “NickGa1133@Gotchya.IOU, ” one of those e-mail services which anyone 
can use to style their identity. Normally I would have been wary in a case 
like this, but, from a few remarks he dropped in his e-mail, I had the un-canny sense that Gallansky was reading my mind (or at least the part of it that wasn’t password protected), since he mentioned “a certain Czernin” and that he had written extensively on Wayne Pratt, two subjects I thought I would be the ﬁrst to introduce into the discussion of literary fraud. Gal-lansky said he was coming to Chicago for the MLA and wanted to meet; he was on the job market for a creative writing job, and while he was a habitué of the Associated Writing Programs’ annual conventions, he had never been to an MLA. I couldn’t resist continuing a conversation that promised to help me think through what I was ﬁnding an increasingly vexing issue. We agreed to have a few drinks before the night session of the MLA on which I was scheduled to speak. I didn’t know Chicago well, but Gallansky recom-mended a bar in the Loop, saying we could grab a cab back to the big hotels and still make it to the last few minutes of the Pataphysics cash bar, which I never miss, and then go together to the session on fraud.
Gallansky turned out to be an affable, red-faced man of around thirty-
ﬁve, quite a bit older than I had expected. He has the garrulousness of a Sili-con Valley CEO giving the specs on a new operating system, but the gleam just beyond his left iris put me on edge. “Have you read this?” were his ﬁrst words to me, pointing to an article entitled “The Blood Runs Like a River through My Dreams” from the June Esquire  by a guy going under the name of  
Textual Practice 22.2 (2008).
204 THE FATE OF THE AESTHETIC
Nasdijj and billed as the son of an alcoholic Navajo mother and an abusive 
white cowboy. “This is the real thing, ” Gallansky said. While I had heard the buzz that it was the best memoir of 1999, I explained to Gallansky that my 
beat was poetry and the last memoir I had read was Hanta Yo by Ruth Beebe 
Hill (though as far as ﬁrst-hand accounts of native American life I still pre-
fer Carlos Castaneda). But Gallansky quickly jumped to what seemed to be his main point, that I should read a book by Nancy Ruttenburg on the use of specter evidence by Puritan ministers, which reminded me a bit of the Salem witch trials, but seemed very remote from the issue of contemporary literary frauds.
1 In any case, I found it hard to focus and my thoughts kept 
getting interrupted by ﬂashbacks from our high school production of The 
Crucible (“I saw Giddy Yid in the chicken coop with the skinheads”). The next thing I remember was a singsong, nasal voice saying over and over “Hurry up, please, it’s time. ” As I came to, I realized that Bronx Science had never staged a production of The Crucible , at least not while I was there. 
I looked at my watch: it was after two. Gallansky must have slipped me a mickey. There were no cabs on the near-deserted street so I staggered back to the Marriott on foot. The lobby was almost empty, though in the bar there was a spirited discussion about the under-representation of panels on Canadian poetry at recent MLA conventions, one of the hot-button topics in the literary academy in the late ’90s.
I was too embarrassed to ask anyone on the panel how it had gone. In any 
case, I abandoned my plan to write an essay based on my notes since, when I woke up the next morning, I realized they were missing. Gallansky must have taken them from me, or, then again, perhaps I had forgotten them at the bar.
I was reminded of the story recently when reading about James Frey. 
Was this another case of a white guy getting ahead by casting himself as victim? The mainstream reviewers and editors and book enthusiasts who had become addicted to memoir and uplift were shocked—shocked—that Frey’s story was largely fabricated. But the more intriguing response was not the ofﬁcial condemnations of what was all along condoned, but the idea, ﬂoated by a few whose claims to aesthetic seriousness come off as particularly ludicrous, that the deep truth isn’t who writes something but what it says about human experience. I have been around long enough to 
1. Nancy Ruttenburg, Democratic Personality: Popular Voice and the Trial of American Authorship  
(Palo Alto: Stanford University Press, 1998).
Fraud’s Phantoms 205
know how to duck when I hear the “human experience” used in this way. As 
I wrote in a poem not too many years ago: “nobody seems to want to hear / About the pain we men feel / Having our prerogatives questioned. ”
2
Then, about two months ago, in early 2006, I received a manila envelope 
with no return address, sent to my home. I asked my thirteen-year-old son Felix to open it for me, out of fear it might contain poison or an explosive (a process I follow with all suspect packages). Felix extracted a garden-variety manuscript from the envelope and assured me there was nothing to worry about. The text purported to be my December 1999 MLA lecture. While I 
disagreed with many of the key points, and found the rhetorical excesses of 
the piece objectionable, I nonetheless found the essay of some interest, if only for putting forward a point of view that few respectable scholars would care to articulate. However, I was alarmed to ﬁnd some inconsistencies in the thinking and also some references to events that occurred after Decem-ber 1999. That led me to question the authenticity of the work. Despite 
(or possibly because of) these features, and Gallansky’s uncanny ability to 
mimic my essay style and point of view, few would have guessed, or even now will believe, that this essay was in fact not written by me. I present it here as a way to put this incident behind me so I can continue with my on-going work on poetry and truth.
CHARLES BERNSTEIN
UPPER WEST SIDE, MARCH 21, 2006
PRESENTED AT THE ANNUAL CONVENTION OF  
THE MODERN LANGUAGE ASSOCIATION IN CHICAGO  
ON DECEMBER 29, 1999
I am sorry to say that Charles Bernstein is not feeling well and has chosen 
to stay in his room in the hotel. He sends his regrets. In any case, he has de-cided to withdraw from the panel, feeling unable to discuss inauthenticity with the rigor and intellectual seriousness the topic demands. A few days ago he asked me to substitute for him, expressing his great admiration for my recent work. While I regret Bernstein’s inability to appear here, I am 
2. “The Inﬂuence of Kinship Patterns on Perception of an Ambiguous Stimuli, ” in Dark City  
(Los Angeles: Sun and Moon Press, 1994), 133.
206 THE FATE OF THE AESTHETIC
delighted to take his place. My name is Nick Gallansky and I hope you will 
remember it, even if you don’t remember anything I say. By the way, due to the oppressive time constraints that Bernstein insisted I observe, no doubt a concession to his obsequious relationship to these kinds of social niceties, I have had to cut a far longer, indeed book-length, piece, to just a few pages. Rest assured, that any objections you may have to what I am about to read are fully answered in the longer version.
FRAUD’S PHANTOMS: A BRIEF YET 
UNRELIABLE ACCOUNT OF FIGHTING 
FRAUD WITH FRAUD (NO PUN ON FREUD 
INTENDED), WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE 
TO THE POETICS OF RESSENTIMENT
On certain days
heart is full of hypocrisyﬂowers of gobo are purple
SHIZUKU UYEMARUKO, FROM MAY SKY
The representation of an idea can under no circumstances be considered suc-cessful unless the whole range of possible extremes it contains has been virtually explored.
WALTER BENJAMIN, “EPISTEMO-CRITICAL PROLOGUE”
It is simply a lie to say that a story that is applicable to a culture or even a  
subculture or a subsubsubsubculture or a molecularly distant, tiny, miniscule, 
subatomic, barely related neighborhood of circling electrons, is owned lock, stock, 
and barrel by someone so self-important they OWN  events common to us all. They 
simply don’t. . . .
I don’t give a damn where you are from.
I am from EVERYWHERE .
NASDIJJ
Every act of writing is a forgery in “telling but not showing” or showing 
principally in its telling. In this sense, the only authentic act of writing is the fraud that articulates its own dissembling—but a fraud, after all, can hardly ever be called genuine goods. In this way, the real poem is constantly hitting its head against the promise of a poem about the real, as in Robert Creeley’s 
“Was That a Real Poem or Did You Just Make it Up?”—real, that is, by being 
made, like a bed, to lie in.3
If one invokes the artiﬁce of a poem, it may well be to avoid deception, as 
if publicity is a shield against disappointment. Deception is another matter altogether, a conﬁdence game in which we are lead to believe that one state of affairs exists while our deceiver knows, or thinks she knows, that it does not.
Literary frauds that are not deceptive fall into the category of satires or 
ﬁctions, and we speak of spoofs and personae. The frame of the poem will typically sufﬁce to tip off, broadly or subtly as the case allows.
A marvelous recent example of this is Wayne Pratt’s short collection of 
poems entitled Watering the Cactus  (originally published in London by Ship of 
Fools press in 1999).
4 As Pratt himself writes in his illuminating introduction 
to his own work—I share with Pratt’s widow Wendy Pratt-Sidebottom the belief that Pratt is the author despite clear evidence of the hand of Dr. Rob-ert Sheppard—“A simple trip to the dentist is imagined so vividly that we feel we are under the ‘interrogation bullseyes’ of the dentist who ‘garottes / My gaping tooth with a clamp.’ ” Pratt illustrates how this same poem situ -
ates him both as postmodern in content (“He scribbles master hieroglyphs / in the tomb of my mouth”) as well a consummate craftsman in the manner of post-Movement orthodoxicalities.
Here is Platt’s poem “Fornication”:
Limp now, I turn away.
No longer can I faceThe heaving spaghetti
Of your steaming sex, or
My elephant’s fumblingsIn the bamboo pit of our bed.
Hunching over your foetal back
On the infertileGulf of our marriage, I hug
3. Robert Creeley, Was That a Real Poem or Did You Just Make It Up Yourself , issued as Sparrow 
40 (Santa Barbara, CA: Black Sparrow Press, 1976); collected in Was That a Real Poem and 
Other Essays , edited by Donald Allen with a chronology by Mary Novik (Bolinas, CA: Four 
Seasons Foundation, 1979).
4. Collected as “Blues 62” in Robert Sheppard, Complete Twentieth Century Blues  (Cambridge, 
UK: Salt, 2008), 324.Fraud’s Phantoms 207
208 THE FATE OF THE AESTHETIC
My hottie-wottie-boggie
And say goodnight.This childhood name
Brings back the muscular arms
Of my mother, haulingThe black-bottomed kettles
Onto our northern griddle
Spanning the rubber ﬂanksOf the spouting hotties.
My only consolations now
Are these virile imagesTossed up in a spray of old words.
If you notice a close resemblance to Paul Muldoon’s “Quoof, ” the resem-
blance is intended. For in this publication, the literary fraud is amusingly 
announced from the opening pages and the whole work is clearly by Shep-pard. Here a mock fraud is used as a literary conceit to send up a range of earnest and sincere poems. Watering the Cactus  achieves this aim by being 
disarmingly straightforward about the terms of the fraud, so that it probably doesn’t qualify as fraud at all, but parody.
Pratt may be a persona for Sheppard, but not a persona used to mine 
deeper poetic or emotional truths than would be possible for Sheppard writing in his own name. In contrast, many poets have used personae as a probe to produce poems that are not primarily satiric. Fernando Pessoa is perhaps the most famous twentieth-century example, though Jack Spicer’s After Lorca  is a crucial example for postwar American poetry. Let me here 
brieﬂy note Clayton Eshleman’s “Hoorah Pornoff” poems, inspired in part by a negative reaction to a review by Marjorie Perloff that Eshleman felt had challenged him to create works, with a female persona, of “horror and pornography” (thus horror/Hoorah and Perloff-Pornography/Pornoff).
5 For 
Eshleman, the persona allowed him to create poems “free to be and not to 
be me . . . [poems that were] an expression of the extent to which the femi-nine aspects of my personality had fought over the years for their rightful place in my work” (190–91). After ﬁnishing the series of poems, Eshleman 
5. Clayton Eshleman, Under World Arrest (Santa Rosa, CA: Black Sparrow Press, 1994).
took out a post ofﬁce box and sent poems out in Pornoff’s name, with the 
poems soon appearing in Fag Rag , Momentum,  and as the featured poems 
in the fourth series of Cid Corman’s Origin . Eshleman notes that he kept 
up a few correspondences for his made-up poet, even fending off people who wanted to date her. An edited set of the poems appears in Eshleman’s collection Under World Arrest , and it is apparent, from this selection, that 
Eshleman is exploring his own relation to the persona created in almost every poem, in many cases directly addressing his “homuncula. ” Here is the fourth poem in the series:
to be an udder dripping in the lie
To feel acutely the size of trees,
the cutaneous test of wind,to return on the bodyspoken, as if in rim.
And to be in touch, womanic,
to lean back into noun.But to be sufﬁx, mother, to have otherburied behind an m,I lie
inher lie,
a supporting beam in the Tomb of M. (78)
The personae of Eleanor Antin are illustrative of a radically different ap-
proach to personae. In playing the role of Eleanora Antinova, a black Russian 
dancer, possibly the last to dance with Diaghilev in Paris in the 1920s, Antin 
does nothing to disguise her complexion or change her accent. She appears 
live, as at the MLA some years ago, or on tape, as in apparently archival ﬁlm footage, as Antinova, one in a series of roles Antin has assumed over her ca-reer. Yet, strikingly, Antin, whose personae have never involved deceit about her identity, tells a story of a curator dismissing the signiﬁcance of her work with this telling remark—“Oh Eleanor Antin—she’s a fraud!”
I have been called a fraud myself and more than once, perhaps in part 
for speaking in forked tongues . . . or maybe just because my tongue was Fraud’s Phantoms 209
210 THE FATE OF THE AESTHETIC
not forked enough, not forked in the way designed to pass muster, or that 
is, was tongued in a way that called to mind forks and spoons and not the real world of emotional truths beyond, or perhaps under, the table. In this context, it’s worth bringing to mind that the accusation of fraudulence is routinely used against those who question certain conventional wisdom, including conventional literary wisdom. The charge of fraud not only says that the poems are no good but also that those involved in editing or pub-lishing them, or critics who praise them, or even readers who enjoy them are somehow on the aesthetic take, conspiring with the fake poets to pull a fast one on authentic literary values. Accusing someone of being a char-latan, rather than simply a bad artist or one who has ideas with which you disagree, is the fastest way to end discussion: it short-circuits the kind of ideal speech situation envisioned by Jürgen Habermas or Richard Rorty. It reinforces an us/them consciousness on both sides of the erected barrier. Ironically, outrage at the frauds of charlatans is one of the main sources of literary frauds, as if the only way you could exorcise the fraudulent is through fraud—to teach these snake oil salesmen a lesson. This is where I want to begin a brief discussion of ressentiment  in James McAuley and 
Harold Stewart’s Ern Malley, Timothy Barrus’s Nasdijj, Kent Johnson’s Araki Yasusada, and Alan Sokal’s Alan Sokal, each of which uses a fraud as a way of 
ridiculing what the perpetrators see as the fraud of modernism, poststruc-
tualism, or multiculturalism.
Literary fraud is an ethically troubling activity not because it under-
mines the rhetoric of sincerity, which it may or may not do, but because it violates the good-faith relationship of parties making a cultural exchange, in particular undermining the trust between editor and authors necessary especially for literary presses where contracts are rare and legal suits im-practical (which is what makes the Ern Malley affair so unusual). Note that literary fraud does not, in itself, destabilize truth claims or authorship, since in many cases, as in the three just mentioned, the fraud depends on a highly stable idea of authorship for the deception to work. Once unmasked, the authority of the author is all the more crucial; or to put this more accurately, what remains stable is an assumption that there is a true state of affairs that underlies the deceptive surface of the fraud—this is a prerequisite for the fraud to be a fraud. Indeed, the frauds of Sokal, McAuley and Stewart, and Johnson are not critiques of moral discourse—that is, attacks on the social codes of honesty and integrity. On the contrary, these frauds were used as a way of shoring up moral discourse against the perceived relativism of con-temporary culture. These authors embraced fraud not in a joyous or comic 
dance with the improbabilities or insufﬁciencies of authenticity, but rather 
out of a sense of moral outrage—speciﬁcally of white male rage.
Let me begin with Sokal. The Spring/Summer 1996 “Science Wars” is -
sue of Social Text included an article by New York University physicist Alan Sokal entitled “Transgressing the Boundaries: Towards a Transformative Hermeneutics of Quantum Gravity. ” But the boundary it was transgressing was not related to quantum theory but to authorial sincerity. Sokal’s intent, as he noted in articles and interviews, was to mock the gravity of antifounda-tional literary theory; Social Text was viewed as a veritable witches’ coven of 
this treacherous approach to reality. The story of Sokal’s duplicity received front-page attention in the New York Times. Indeed, Sokal’s fraud was widely hailed as exposing the fraud of both postmodernism and poststructualism.
The Sokal affair solicited the kind of moral indignation that draws lines 
in the sand at the beach of the Ideological State Apparatus. Consider a com-ment by Dr. Jonathan Katz, from the October 1999 issue of the journal Phys-
ics Today , cited in a New York Times article by James Glanz. Dr. Katz, the 
Times reports, assures us that “the only reasonable conclusion [to be drawn from the hoax] is that postmodernism is nothing more than a scheme to obtain cushy university jobs for its practitioners. ”
6
Alan Sokal’s deception was aimed at exposing what he viewed as an intel-
lectual fraud. If Sokal had wanted to dispute the premises of Social Text  editor 
Andrew Ross or others’ views about science, he could, of course, have writ-ten an essay on this topic—as polemical or scathing as he chose to be—and submitted it to Social Text . Presumably, Sokal’s choice to ventriloquize argu-
ments that he would later expose as preposterous was motivated by his sense that the editors of the special issue of Social Text in which his essay appeared 
were pulling the wool over someone’s eyes—not Sokal’s, who knows which way is up (but alas not which way is upside-down and sideways), but those of more tender readers who may not have the intellectual acuity to fend off the seduction of this intellectual con. Sokal wished to expose Social Text ’s 
assault on truth for what it was—irrational, gibberish, nonsensical—patent nonsense, let’s say, in the sense of patent medicines, if not patent leather tap shoes. To expose this deception he chose to be deceptive, ﬁghting fraud with fraud, and so entering into that genre of literary fraud I want to term “hos-tile or retributive frauds”—frauds without a sense of humor, which is not to  say they may not be quite funny. (Brian McHale sees this type of fraud as 
6. James Glanz, “Reconciling Nothingness in the Universe and the Soul, ” New York Times , 
December 7, 1999, sec. 5, p. 5, col. 2. Fraud’s Phantoms 211
212 THE FATE OF THE AESTHETIC
punitive—hoaxes with a trap.)7 Sokal’s fraud was necessitated by moral out-
rage, with all the self-righteousness such outrage typically entails. The Ern 
Malley affair is the now classic example (see especially the account by Mi-chael Heyward in The Ern Malley Af fair).
8 And while those of us on the side-
lines may appreciate the Sokal affair as a literary event, a bit of mischievous fun, Sokal’s own glosses of the hoax give no comic relief and indeed are ﬁlled with high moral tone in the defense of empirical truth.
It should be noted that by their nature, the social and aesthetic effects 
of fraud are hard to predict. This is a volatile social medium. McAuley and Stewart would not likely have been able to be anticipate that their prank would end up having such an acute and chronic impact, just as they could not have imagined that the poems they wrote in ridicule would be valued for their comic innovation by the very audience they intended to send up. In Kent Johnson’s case, the author may well have been primarily concerned with the creation of the persona of Yasusada, and related literary docu-ments, and less concerned about the hoax through which this work entered the world. However, if that is the case, it raises further questions not only about reestablishing credibility after a hoax but also about the specter not just of deception of others but self-deception (as to motive and outcome). I don’t want to get trapped by an assertion of the author’s intentions. More useful is to read these works as social texts.
While considering the perplexing problem of ﬁghting fraud with fraud, I 
happened to have a conversation with Susan Howe in which she explained that during the seventeenth-century witch trials in New England, the courts were able to convict those accused of witchcraft on the basis of “specter evidence”—testimony about their phantom doubles. That is, testimony was accepted from the accusers not about what we might say were the actual ac-tions of the accused but rather based on the action of the accused’s ventrilo-quized “specter” (as reported by the accusers). In other words, those accused of projecting phantom devils onto innocent persons were convicted on the basis of ventriloquized projections of themselves. Specters ﬁghting specters, through the medium of ventriloquism. As if fraud could vanquish fraud.
Ern Malley is an invented ghost. The Australian trial of Max Harris, the 
young editor of the modernist journal Angry Penguins, who in 1944 had pub-
lished Ern Malley thinking it was a “real” person, used the testimony of this 
7. Brian McHale, “Archaeologies of Knowledge: Hill’s Middens, Heaney’s Bogs, Schwerner’s 
Tablets, ” in New Literary History 30.1 (Winter 1999): 236.8. Michael Heyward, The Ern Malley Af fair (London: Faber and Faber, 1993).
specter against him. Harris was convicted by the word of a ghost text of an 
invented dead poet. The text of Ern Malley was produced by the prosecutors as proof of the indecent thoughts of Max Harris; the specter text’s sexual and aesthetic indiscretion, as fantasized by the court, convicted Harris.
Sokal projected his own “bad” specter to pull down the specter of post-
structualism.
Kent Johnson’s Yasusada is a phantom set out in the world to destroy a 
phantom. In saying this I am not denying the temptation and indeed value in reading Doubled Flowering  strictly as a work of persona.
9 I am rather  
focusing on the way Doubled Flowering  entered into the world as ventrilo-
quism, through a series of concerted deceptions and choreographed du-plicities.
The Yasusada hoax took place over a period of a few years in a number 
of poetry magazines, including Conjunctions, American Poetry Review, and 
Grand Street . Translations of the work of a Japanese poet, Araki Yasusada, 
began to appear, with the explanation that Yasusada was a survivor of the atomic bombing of Hiroshima who had died a few years ago. The work was interesting, quite unexpected in its style from the little most of us knew about postwar Japanese poetry, oddly familiar. Only it turned out that the work was by an American, not a Japanese, and some of the editors who pub-lished it felt betrayed and duped. One said he would not have published it if he had known the actual authorship and, of course, this seems the reaction the forgery was set out to provoke. Is a work valuable as poetry because it is authentic in its witness? Is a poem worth publishing only because it is a poem by a survivor, otherwise not? Is the poet’s identity or autobiography more important than the poem? Is the value of poetry now primarily its value in conveying cultural information rather than aesthetic exploration (including the exploration carried out by the forgery)?
In this respect, the most straightforward of all the responses to Doubled 
Flowering, and the one that is, in a sense, least open to dispute as to the ﬁrst-order reality of this work, was written by Juliana Chang, Walter K. Lew, Tan Lin, Eileen Tabios, and John Yau—the only collective response amidst many quite intricate reactions to appear in the Summer 1997 is -
sue of the Boston Review.
10 Their response is notable because it reﬂects the 
9. Araki Yasusada [© Kent Johnson], Doubled Flowering: From the Notebooks of Araki Yasusada 
(New York: Roof Books, 1997).10. Juliana Chang, Walter K. Lew, Tan Lin, Eileen Tabios, and John Yau, “Displacements, ” in Boston Review  22.3 (Summer 1997), http://bostonreview.net/BR22.3/Chang.html, accessed 
February 2006.Fraud’s Phantoms 213
214 THE FATE OF THE AESTHETIC
views of several of the most formally innovative poets of the present mo-
ment, a group that, while acknowledging the signiﬁcance of their Asian American backgrounds, has worked to articulate identity in ways critical of the identity poetics of those who, presumably, might be disturbed most by the false witness of the Yasusada hoax. Ironically, Doubled Flowering has 
received commendation from those who lean toward a poetics of witness and authenticity. The response of Chang et al. is scathing, but not because of the issue of false witness, per se:
It is disturbing that Kent Johnson, the alleged perpetrator of the hoax, found 
it necessary to reprise the stereotype of the deferential Asian in order to point out the relationship between a classical Japanese form, renga, and the post-modern practice associated with Ron Silliman’s “new sentence. ” In so doing, as Perloff notes, Johnson displaces and diminishes the accomplishments of contemporary Japanese poets. This is not an isolated incident: Beneath a Single 
Moon, the anthology of contemporary American Buddhist poetry that John-son co-edited with Craig Paulenich, similarly displaces Asian American poets from the practice of Buddhism. As Walter K. Lew has written of that volume:
 The 45 American poets whose essays and poetry on Buddhist practice comprise the anthology are all Caucasian, and the book only mentions Asians as distal teachers (ranging from Zen patriarchs to D. T. Suzuki), not as fellow members or poets of the sangha. . . . When one consid-ers the relative obscurity of some of the poets included in the book, one wonders how it was possible not to have known the Buddhistic poetry of such writers as [Lawson Fusao] Inada, Al Robles, Garrett Kaoru Hongo, Alan Chong Lau, Patricia Ikeda, and Russell Leong. . . . [Gary] Snyder’s in-troduction deliberates the question—“Poetry is democratic, Zen is elite. No! Zen is democratic, poetry is elite. Which is it?” . . . Perhaps he should have also asked whether Zen and poetry, as reconﬁgured in American Orientalism, are racist.
The response by Chang and company ends this way:
Like most hoaxes, Johnson’s is fueled mainly by the potential for self-gain. And like all hoaxes it is complex—his act of yellowface at once plays into an existing and apparently vigorous orientalist fantasy, exposes American ignorance of both Japanese poetry and recent Japanese history, and levels a critique against an experimental writing community to which the author 
also seeks to ingratiate himself. In this last respect, Johnson’s act is doubly 
disturbing: he wants the taint of scandal without having to take responsibil-ity for the stereotypes he celebrates.
While sales for Doubled Flowering  have been modest (about seven hun-
dred copies in ten years since publication, according to publisher James 
Sherry),11 the book has received an enormous amount of attention—not as 
much as Alan Sokal, but for small-press standards, an extraordinary num-ber of papers and essays as well as international media exposure, in Japan, Australia, and the U.S. I think it is safe to say that much more has been written on the imaginary Japanese poet Araki Yasusada than on any work of Japanese poetry published in English translation in the 1990s. A 1998 
bibliography compiled by Johnson listed a couple of dozen reviews or arti-
cles regarding Doubled Flowering, and this number has doubled in the years 
since.
12 Compare this to approximately one review received by May Sky, ed-
ited by Violet Kazue de Cristoforo, both a history and a collection of haiku by Japanese Americans interred in U.S. concentration camps, published by Sun & Moon Press in 1997.
13 The idea that Doubled Flowering might increase 
interest in or understanding of the poetry of Japanese holocaust survivors or Japanese poetry in general appears unsupported. Nor should this be a cri-terion in judging this work. Doubled Flowering is a work of American poetry 
and its reception has taken place within this frame.
It is an important part of the story that the substantial interest in the 
Doubled Flowering hoax has not translated into a comparable interest in the poems themselves. Indeed, the hoax is what is primarily interesting about this work. In contrast, the Ern Malley poems continue to engage a great deal of interest and have emerged as among the great poetic works of the 1940s, 
despite their author’s desire to write the worst possible poems (something 
like writing a “pits” or “Flarf” poem from the Experiments List).
14 Ironically, 
and unlike James McAuley and Harold Stewart, Kent Johnson appears to 
11. James Sherry, publisher of Roof Books, personal correspondence, June 24, 2007.
12. Kent Johnson, “Araki Yasusada: A Partial Bibliography” (September 1998), http://www  
.lang.nagoya-u.ac.jp/~nagahata/yasusada-bib.html, accessed February 22, 2006.13. Violet Kazue de Cristoforo, ed.,  May Sky: There Is Always Tomorrow—An Anthology of Japa-
nese American Concentration Camp Kaiko Haiku  (Los Angles: Sun & Moon Press, 1997). The 
epigraph quoted above (p. 206) is from p. 269. 14. Experiments List, http://writing.upenn.edu/bernstein/experiments.html, accessed  
February 22, 2006.Fraud’s Phantoms 215
216 THE FATE OF THE AESTHETIC
have wanted to write poems of great value. The “gotcha” of the Malley hoax 
was to show that nonsensical poems would be published in Angry Penguins 
because the editor was himself a fraud, making nonsensical literary judg-ments. It turns out that McAuley and Stewart were quite wrong about this; Max Harris had made a good choice. The “gotcha” of the Yasusada hoax was quite different, exposing the fact that good poems would be overlooked be-cause of who their author was, that the “authenticity” of the author’s iden-tity was eclipsing aesthetic merit.
What I am suggesting is that the way Doubled Flowering entered into the 
world is an indelible part of its meaning. If it had been initially presented as the work of Kent Johnson, as a work of a literary persona, part of a vener-able literary tradition, it would not only have received far less attention, but it would be far less interesting as a literary work. The social aggressiveness of the hoax is deﬁning and not biodegradable. At the same time, the nature of this deception apparently means that the author cannot, or in any case has so far been unwilling to, fully confront the more dystopian politics of resentment at its core. In a 1998 interview, Johnson makes the implausible 
claim that “there was never any desire to taunt anyone through this work—
only to present poems that imagined another life in the most compelling way possible to their author. . . . The Yasusada author did not try to hide the work’s ﬁctionality—it was there from the start, for everyone to see. ”
15 But 
isn’t this what every conﬁdence man says to himself: let the buyer beware; if only you had paid attention you would have seen; it’s your own fault for believing what I said. That really, in the end, this fraud is no fraud at all, just another literary work. What’s the fuss all about?
Let me spell this out. The idea of the hoax, though not necessarily the 
persona, was to trick unsuspecting editors into showing that they publish work not on the basis of its intrinsic aesthetic merit but rather on the basis of who is writing it, with presumed favor being shown to victims, whether of discrimination or tragedy. For the hoax to work—to show up the editors and the values of the larger literary world in which they operate—enough clues to the fraudulent signature of the poems must be given, so that the perpetrator can claim a kind of moral justice in entrapping the editors who commit the crime of sloppy reading, making politically and socially—rather than aesthetically—motivated literary judgments, and, not the least, laps-ing into sentimentality toward the plight of the author as survivor. Indeed, 
15. Kent Johnson, “An Interview with Kent Johnson, Conducted by Norbert Francis, ”  Jacket 5 
(1998), http://jacketmagazine.com/05/yasu-larsen.html, accessed February 22, 2006.
the perpetrator of the fraud actually gets to claim the moral high ground, 
gets to be not the criminal but the police on a sting operation. This moral-ism fatally compromises the aesthetic giddiness that is possible with more comic or destabilizing frauds or spoofs.
The memoir frauds of James Frey and Nasdijj (Timothy Barrus) are worth  
considering in this context. The epigraph from Nasdijj (quoted above,  p. 206)
16 is from a website now removed by the author, Timothy Barrus, a 
white man, winner of the 2004 PEN/Beyond Margins Award,17 who suc-
cessfully posed as a troubled American Indian named Nasdijj. A bio of Nasdijj was posted on the website of the Native American Authors Project,  Internet Public Library, of University Michigan School of Information (it has since been removed from the site):
Nasdijj, 1950–
NavajoNasdijj, whose name means “to become again” in Athabaskan, was born in the southwestern U.S. to a mother of Navajo heritage and a cowboy father. His ﬁrst published essay, “The Blood Runs Like a River Through My Dreams, ” appeared in Esquire in June, 1999. It has since been published in a collection 
of autobiographical essays that bears the same title. He currently lives in Chapel Hill, NC.
18
According to Matthew Fleischer’s LA Weekly story on the fraud, “ ‘The cover 
letter was this screed about how Esquire  had never published the work of an 
American-Indian writer and never would because it’s such a racist publica-
tion,’ recalls editor in chief David Granger. ‘And under it was . . . one of the most beautiful pieces of writing I’d ever read.’ By the time the piece was published in the June issue, the writer (who lives on an Indian reservation) had a book contract. ”
19
16. Nasdijj website, http://www.nasdijj.typepad.com, accessed February 22, 2006 [since re-
moved].17. PEN Beyond Margins Award website, http://www.pen.org/page.php/prmID/929, accessed September 19, 2010.18. Internet Public Library, Native American Authors: http://www.ipl.org/div/natam/bin/browse.pl/A500, accessed February 22, 2006 [since removed].19. Matthew Fleischer, “Navahoax, ” in  LA Weekly , January 23, 2006, http://www.laweekly 
.com/index3.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=12468&Itemid=9&pop=1&page=0, accessed February 22, 2006.Fraud’s Phantoms 217
218 THE FATE OF THE AESTHETIC
If Nasdijj’s “memoir” trafﬁcs in loss and tragedy, his blog revealed “a very 
angry man, ” according to the LA Weekly piece. “If in the books his passion 
and ﬁerceness are modulated and concentrated, his blog posts are full of 
rants and denunciations. Targets include the American health care sys-tem, government treatment of Indians, middle-class values and, especially, the publishing industry. ” Fleischer offers this quote: “Jews [in publishing] would sell the gas chamber shower heads if they thought it might make a buck. ”
Commenting on the Nasdijj affair in Time magazine, Sherman Alexie 
wrote:
As a Native American writer and multiculturalist, I worried that Nasdijj was 
a talented and angry white man who was writing as a Native American in order to mock multicultural literature. I imagined that he would eventually reveal himself as a hoaxer and shout, “You see, people, there is nothing real or authentic about multicultural literature. Anybody can write it. ” . . . So why should we be concerned about his lies? His lies matter because he has cyni-cally co-opted as a literary style the very real suffering endured by genera-tions of very real Indians because of very real injustices caused by very real American aggression that destroyed very real tribes.
20
Unlike McHale, I view Doubled Flowering as a retributive/punitive hoax, 
what he calls a “trap hoax” (238). It seems to me this is not only an essential 
part of the work but also one of the things that is more aesthetically and his-torically interesting about it. The attempt to efface the hoax after the initial “gotcha” has been realized is itself a hoax , a double cross that comes with 
a double scold—ﬁrst against those who fell for the trap and then against those who can’t take a joke, who recoil from the ﬁrst hoax. This double is the doubled ﬂowering of the title, if we take the ﬂowers to be Baudelaire’s ﬂeurs du mal . Under this interpretation, Doubled Flowering goes beyond its 
initial highly volatile deception to lead a second, fraudulent life as an au-thentic work of persona. For this reason, Doubled Flowering  may actually 
be closest to McHale’s category of “genuine hoax” (236). To deﬂower this doubly retributive hoax, to make Doubled Flowering  more palatable, ends 
up undervaluing the work; making it more genial takes away not only its noxious odor but also its double edge.
20. Sherman Alexie, “When the Story Stolen Is Your Own, ” Time , January 29, 2006, http://
www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171 ,1154221,00.html, accessed February 22, 2006.
We see this deﬂowering of Doubled Flowering as a persistent note in sev-
eral of the critical responses to it, whether positive in the case of Forrest 
Gander and Eliot Weinberger or negative in the case of Charles Simic. All insist it really doesn’t matter who wrote it; what matters is the poems them-selves. According to Simic,
Our literary politics being what they are, we can expect more hoaxes. I have 
no objection to them whatsoever. If the poems are ﬁrst-rate, I’ll bow down to them in deepest reverence even if the claim is being made that they were composed by a left-behind space alien or a love-starved orangutan in the San Diego Zoo. No matter what anyone tells you, as in music, carpentry and all the other ancient arts and true crafts, it always comes down to the work itself. [Boston Review symposium.]
Gander, in his review in The Nation,  takes a more positive tack: “Let’s 
consider a Yasusada poem and ask ourselves whether the ﬁction of the po-
em’s authorship makes it less emotionally authentic. ”21 He goes on to sug-
gest that Doubled Flowering ’s use of persona is an “act of solidarity” that 
produces an “astonishing success” (31).
Finally, Weinberger writes that—
those who dismiss the Yasusada poems as a cruel imperialist joke are assum-
ing the author is a white American male, which in turn is based on the as-sumption that anyone who is not a white Euro-male wants to speak only in an “authentic” voice. The identity of the Yasusada Author has become so re-fracted that we are approaching the condition where We Are All Yasusada—though I prefer to think of the author as a young woman in Senegal.
22
Weinberger suggests that the meaning of Doubled Flowering would be com-
parable whether its author were an African woman facing the ravages of 
AIDS in her country or an American college professor from the Midwest contemplating the rejection of his manuscript from poetry magazines be-cause of perceived reverse discrimination. It seems to me this misses what is most profoundly interesting, and disturbing, about Doubled Flowering —
that the effect of the hoax depends on the fact that it was written by a white, 
21. Forrest Gander, “Poetic License & the Bomb, ” in The Nation 267.2 (July 13, 1998): 30.
22. Eliot Weinberger, “Can I Get a Witness?” and “Postscript: I Found a Witness, ” Jacket  5 
(1998), http://jacketmagazine.com/05/yasu-wein.html, accessed February 22, 2006. Repr. in part from Village Voice Literary Supplement (July 1996).Fraud’s Phantoms 219
220 THE FATE OF THE AESTHETIC
male, heterosexual American. It is not insigniﬁcant that all of the hostile 
literary frauds I am discussing here were written by men. The gender of these frauds is as much a part of their social poetics as any other fact about them. “We” are not the world and the world is not “U.S. ”
The idea that it doesn’t matter who actually wrote the poem is a tried but 
not so true shibboleth from New Criticism. Of course it matters; it always matters. Who speaks in a poem is never inconsequential, and the identical text written by someone else would not be the same poem. I take that to be 
the lesson of Doubled Flowering, not the opposite. A poem shorn of historical and social being in the world amounts to almost nothing, an empty husk. There is no poem “itself” but only a work that exists in a social space in which such a hoax plays itself out. To deny the meaning of the fraud is to negate the work almost entirely. This works exist, fundamentally and pri-marily as a social text—a social text whose meaning cannot be controlled by its author, much less its publishers. Taking away the issue of fraudulent au-thorship strips Doubled Flowering, as it would the Ern Malley poems, of what makes it signiﬁcant as a poem . Indeed, the authorship of Doubled Flowering  
is even more, not less, crucial for this work than it is for most contemporary poems, and this is only highlighted by the author’s dramatics concerning authorship. The claim that Doubled Flowering  proves the insigniﬁcance of 
who wrote it brings up a basic problem with Doubled Flowering, for the idea 
that there is any such thing as the poem itself is a species of the jargon of authenticity. Doubled Flowering  does not so much give lie to the idea that 
only “white Euro-males” question authenticity as demonstrate the desire for authenticity of at least some “white Euro-males. ” The problem with Doubled 
Flowering is not that it is a fake, but that it is not fake enough.
Johnson makes this problem explicit when he writes, in the 1998 inter -
view, “Rather than being ‘fakes,’ I would offer that the Yasusada writings represent an original and courageous form of authenticity—one that is per-haps difﬁcult to appreciate because of the extent to which individual autho-rial status and self-promotion dominate our thinking about, and practice of, poetry. ”
This could hardly be stated better: the point of the fraud is authentic-
ity; but this authenticity can be claimed only at the price of falling prey to the very enshrining of authorial status and self-promotion that the author claims to want to critique.
As Marjorie Perloff points out, the Doubled Flowering  hoax makes a valu-
able critique of the primacy of the authentic witness in a poem: the belief that actually being there is more important than the literary artifact that 
results.23 But for all that, it still must be registered that this attack on au-
thenticity comes from a member of the race and gender group most appar-
ently undermined by the interest, for American literary circles in the past two decades, with the authenticity of the witness of “others. ” If the Western canon often took the work of white males as universal witness of human experiences, the new emphasis on witness and testimony can seem to have replaced the insistence on the white male point of view with everything but. White male backlash has been intense, ingenious, and unrelenting. And this backlash often comes with a lesson to us all about its own ultimate high-order authenticity; for, in case you didn’t know, the most abusive be-havior is the most authentic because it alone is not coached in liberal nice-ties. Macho über alles.
Like Ern Malley and Nasdijj, Yasusada is not a nice or happy literary af-
fair: it is constituted by bitter social aggression. Frauds like those of Sokal, Nasdijj, McAuley and Stewart, and Johnson require that the perpetrators see their projects as in some ways more authentic than what they are debunk-ing. The idea that the deception of the fraud falls away to reveal an ulterior truth is the anti-historical fantasy of this set of frauds of forged identities. The paradox goes back to Epimenides: The author is a liar . The liar’s claim 
to authenticity, like the Cretan’s, has no face value. But it is just this truth that these frauds wish to overcome. And yet the more they struggle to free themselves from the knot they have so carefully tied, the tighter is its hold.
Echoing Alexie’s remarks on Nasdijj, Doubled Flowering  can be seen 
to represent the apotheosis of the poetics of resentment in the 1990s—  
resentment against the apparent new entitlements to those often invisible or inaudible in previous representations of contemporary literature; resent-ment, that is, against feminism, gay rights, and multiculturalism as arbiters of literary taste. Ironically, the more this motivation is denied (or repressed or unintended), the more the hoax assumes its grim ofﬁce. The common theme of the critique of literary reverse discrimination is the idea that lit-erature is now more about victimization than aesthetics. The perverse ge-nius of Doubled Flowering is that by putting on not only “yellowface” (in the words of Chang et al.) but also the mask of grief of the holocaust survivor, the ventriloquizing author of Doubled Flowering  willfully subjects himself  
23. Marjorie Perloff, “In Search of the Authentic Other: The Poetry of Araki Yasusada, ” origi-
nally published in Boston Review (April/May 1997), collected at Perloff’s EPC page, http://epc 
.buffalo.edu/authors/perloff/boston.html, accessed February 22, 2006.Fraud’s Phantoms 221
222 THE FATE OF THE AESTHETIC
to denunciation and humiliation, thus achieving identiﬁcation as the vic-
tim he could otherwise not be as an American white, male heterosexual.
If an epic is a poem including history, then a fraud is a failed epic, a poem 
dissolving into its historicity.
Let me now take an abrupt turn to a literary fraud entirely unknown in 
the United States.
In the early summer of 1986, two young Austrian poets, Franz Josef  
Czernin and Ferdinand Schmatz, had the idea to write poems that closely resembled the poems they found most typical and at the same time most de-plorable in contemporary poetry volumes—for example, the work of Reiner Kunze, Günter Kunert, and Sarah Kirsch. At ﬁrst they had the idea to call the poet Irene Schweighofer (silent court), a poet born in a little town in upper Austria, who, familiar through schooling with the tenets of modern-ism, would need no time to forge her own distinctive style and upon being published would proceed to win many prizes and much praise. However, Czernin and Schmatz felt this process would take too long, and in order to shorten the “difﬁcult and boring” process, decided to give authorship of the poems to Czernin. They completed the work in a few weeks, and the book was immediately accepted for publication under the title Die Reise 
(the journey). The book received positive attention, some of which sug-gested that at last Czernin had given up his thrashing about in the waters of experimentation and found a more profound and authentic voice. When Czernin broke the news of his own duplicitous relation to the poems in Der 
Spiegel in March 1987, a furious hail of criticism descended upon him, not the least from the publisher of the book, who felt he had been betrayed. Later the same year, Czernin and Schmatz published a book-length account of the story together with exchanges between them and several interlock-ing essays.
Here is of one of the poems from Die Reise: In achtzig Gedichten um die 
ganze Welt:
fahr-plan
ist mein blick
nicht eine schere,deren beineschritte machen,die alle fernenauseinanderschneiden?
hat denn die schere
keine augen,die zu ringen werdenjener ﬁnger,die auf ihre ziele zeigen?
und gehen diese ziele
nicht auf zwei füssen,deren zehenauf nägel treten,die meine ganze reisezusammennageln?
24
agenda
is my glance
not a scissorwhose legmakes stepsthat cut throughall distances?
had, then, this scissor
no eyeswhich will striveto ﬁngerloins of desire?
and will not such loins
walk on two feetwhose toestread on pinsfastening togethermy whole journey?
24. Franz Josef Czernin, Die Reise: In achtzig Gedichten um die ganze Welt  (Salzburg und Wien: 
Residenz Verlag, 1987), 30. Fraud’s Phantoms 223
224 THE FATE OF THE AESTHETIC
Schmatz and Czernin created a literary scandal with this and the other po-
ems in the collection, but they were able to focus the discussion of issues of quality and judgment and to avoid the more abusive aspects of the Ern Malley and Yasusada hoaxes. Indeed, Die Reise  is motivated by a desire to 
critique the jargon of authenticity rather than to reinscribe it, as we ﬁnd in the Yasusada case. There is no claim here that these are necessarily good po-ems or that we should look to the “poems themselves” for the meaning. The texts here have meaning in relation to the literary valuations into which they make an intervention; their meaning is social and diacritical. Indeed, late in 1987, Schmatz and Czernin published Die Reise: In achtzig ﬂachen 
Hunden in die ganze tiefe Grube , a book about the affair in which they address 
explicitly the questions of authorship and motivation. In this book, Czernin describes Die Reise  as a form of literary self-criticism. “Perhaps one must, 
to make a better poem, know how one makes a worse poem, ” he writes. “I think it was Novalis who said that good literature is made from worse literature. He was right that there must be, in any case, worse poetry from which better poetry can originate, whereas for me it is self-evident that the contrary can also be valuable. ”
25 Die Reise , then, can be understood as an 
investigation of aesthetic judgment. And yet, as the Ern Malley poems also show, what is written out of a desire to expose the limits of a particular style (or rhetoric) may ultimately become exemplary of unrealized potential in the style; ironizing of the style may create a thickening of the artiﬁce and with it an intensiﬁcation of the aesthetic experience. Over time, the poems of Die Reise take on charm that goes beyond parody.  In any case, Czernin is 
not asserting the objectivity of any such judgments, but rather that “every objectivity is ﬁctional. ” His purpose then, as beﬁts a poet who has written a study of Karl Kraus, is satiric adjudicative: the fraud remains a fraud.
I want to end this brief on literary fraud by revealing one for the ﬁrst time. 
I am thinking of the meteoric rise of Nick Gallansky, who has recently had poems in APR and an interview in AWP  (so far his major publications have 
been restricted to magazines with titles abbreviated by three letters). Gal-lansky’s AWP  interview is particularly revealing:
25. Franz Josef Czernin, “Die Verdopplung des Igels, ” in Czernin and Ferdinand Schmatz, 
Die Reise: In achtzig ﬂachen Hunden in die ganze tiefe Grube  (Linz-Wien, Austria: Edition Neue 
Texte, 1987), 21.
As a member of Gen X, I reject the ideologized poetry wars of the seventies 
and eighties. I don’t have to choose. I can like x and y, from the elegant ele-giacs of Pinsky to the radical disjuncture of Graham to the exhilarating new formalism of Timothy Steele. I am particularly engaged with recuperating white male identity as both gentle and engaging.
Here is an excerpt of Gallansky’s most critically acclaimed poem:
The sweet smell of nicotine on my ﬁngersA glimmering surrender to the charred forcesBelow the surfaces of my coy gracesAs if all that I know is in smoke that lingersSwayed by the push and pull of my paces
It is my duty to tell you all this evening: Gallansky is a fraud.Fraud’s Phantoms 225
FULCRUM INTERVIEW
What is and what isn’t poetry? What is poetry’s essential nature (if any)?
Poetry is not an essence but a practice. The term is not honoriﬁc but ge-
neric. A bad poem’s still a poem. A newspaper article presented as a poem is a poem. By the same token, a song lyric printed in a CD insert is not a poem, though presented in another context that designation might change.
Poetry is the art of (verbal) language.
What is the most important poetry?
What is being written now.Who are the greatest poets?The ones who write the greatest poems.What do they accomplish?Nothing.What is the relationship between poetry and truth?Poetry is to truth like rubber to the rubber tree: it bounces.Is there such a thing as poetic truth?From time to time.
Fulcrum 4 (2005).
228 THE FATE OF THE AESTHETIC
How does poetry relate to the human condition?
Poetry doesn’t relate to the human condition, it articulates ways of encoun-
tering & acknowledging it; sometimes it changes it.
Poetry, by necessity, rejects the human condition.
Is there (or can there be) a meaningful philosophy of poetry?
Meaningful to whom? The poem, the poet, the reader, the human condition, 
or the kid on the street who is right now dancing on the head of a pine?
Can there be a poetry of philosophy?Can there be a meaningful philosophy of philosophy?Anyway, why call it a philosophy of poetry when the name is poetics?
Does the fundamental nature of poetry change over time?
There is no fundamental nature of poetry & it changes over time.
It just changed while you were reading this. It changed in a different way 
while I was writing this.
There.
It done did it again.
Is there one “poetry” or are there “poetries”?
All poetries are equal but some are more equal than others.
Now the new Pope, he’s got a sure answer to this kind of question.
It is our duty as poets to repudiate the doctrines of the new Pope.I will not endorse any poet who proclaims allegiance to the Pope.Each of the pervious sentences is false.The space between the sentences pertains to truth as long as you con-
sider at least three such spaces.
What makes a genuinely great poem?Chutzpah.What is the relationship between tradition and innovation in poetry?Tradition is the record of innovation. Innovation is a response to tradition. 
There are no ﬁrst acts in poetry & no last acts either.
Fulcrum Interview 229
Is a particular poetic method (e.g., the “lyricist,” “formalist,” “free verse,” “experi-
mental,” or any other approach) preferable?
Yes, depending on time & motive.
Free verse is not a method but an imperative, which we ignore at our 
peril. But verse can only be as free as we are.Are there deep associations between poetics and politics?Yes, & superﬁcial ones too. Commonly, the two levels are confused, with 
the superﬁcial associations (for example, a poem’s theme) taking the role as deep & vice versa. See immediately prior answer.
Please give some evidence.I prefer not to.What fundamental misconceptions about poetry annoy you most, and how would 
you correct or refute them?
I get annoyed early & often. An occupational hazard.
A change of fortune will never abolish irritation.
RADICAL JEWISH CULTURE /  
SECULAR JEWISH PRACTICE
1. Some years ago, one of the editors of a forthcoming, prominent anthology 
of Jewish American literature mentioned to me that he thought Gertrude Stein (among other poets of particular importance for innovative American poetry) would not be included in the book. It struck me as deliciously odd that in a time of afﬁrmation of the many distinct cultures that make up U.S. literature, these editors would consider leaving out of their anthology perhaps the most famous Jewish poet of the modernist period. Evidently, being Jewish was not enough to be a Jewish poet. By the same token, my children go to a Jewish camp for those who have no religious Jewish beliefs, a camp with a seventy-ﬁve-year history of secular Jewish commitment; but I wonder whether there are Muslim or Pentecostal or Catholic camps for nonbelievers? But that’s because, at least in some sense, you can’t really be a lapsed Jew.
Yes I know I am trading on the ambiguity of religion and ethnicity. I 
mean to continue to do so.
9. Here is the set of questions I posed to a 2004 panel on “Radical Jewish 
Poetry / Secular Jewish Practice”: What are the innovations and inventions of American Jewish poets, over the past century? Can we say that there is a distinctly Jewish component to radical modernist and contemporary  
Presented as part of a program I organized for the American Jewish Historical Society at 
the Center for Jewish History in New York on September 21, 2004. Paul Auster, Kathryn Hellerstein, Stephen Paul Miller, Marjorie Perloff, and Jerome Rothenberg joined me on the panel. A video of the panel and a related 2010 dialog with Norman Fischer on the topic is at PennSound, http://writing.upenn.edu/pennsound/x/AJHS.html (accessed May 30, 2010). The panel was a spark for what became Radical Poetics and Secular Jewish Practice , edited 
by Stephen Paul Miller and Daniel Morris (Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press, 2010), where this essay was ﬁrst published.
232 THE FATE OF THE AESTHETIC
poetry? What is the relation of Jewish modernist and contemporary poets to 
the historical avant-garde and to contemporary innovative poetry? How do Jewish cultural life and ethnic and religious forms and traditions manifest themselves in the forms, styles, and approaches to radical American poetry? What role does a distinctly secular approach to Jewishness by poets and other Jewish artists mean for “radical Jewish culture”?
4. Over the past weeks leading up to the panel, several of the participants, 
but most notably me, expressed confusion about the topic—are we being asked to put forward some positive correlation between Jewish poets, or we might say poets of Jewishness, and innovative poetic practice, or to afﬁrm the value of Jewishness in reading or valuing such work? I feel a deep ambiv-alence on all these issues, and I want to insist that this ambivalence itself, the questioning of Jewishness, is just as Jewish as the designer yarmulkes and Glatt kosher Peruvian restaurants of my neighborhood, the deep Upper West Side.
Remember Kafka’s question: “What have I in common with Jews? I don’t 
know what I have in common with myself. ”
1 Or, in a recent translation, I 
wouldn’t want to have an ethnicity that would automatically count me in its number . . . when the saints go marching in . . .
Am I Jewish? Is this Jewish? I am no more Jewish then when I set my 
Jewishness adrift from fundamentalist religious practice. I am no more Jew-ish than when I refuse imposed deﬁnitions of what Jewishness means. I am no more Jewish than when I attend to how such Jewishness lives itself out, plays tunes not yet played. Jewishness can, even must, in one of its multiple manifestations, be an aversion of identiﬁcation—as a practice of dialogue and as an openness to the unfolding performance of the everyday. Call it the civic practice of Jewishness.
10. Amos Oz, in an essay published in 1993 writes:
Now suppose a new Kafka is growing up right now, here in San Francisco, 
California: Suppose he is fourteen years old right now. Let’s call him Chuck Bernstein. Let’s assume that he is every bit of a genius as Kafka was in his time. His future must, as I see it, depend on an uncle in Jerusalem or an expe-
1. See Kafka’s Diaries 1914–1923, edited by Max Brod (New York: Schocken, 1976), entry for 
January 8, 1914, 252. Joseph Kresh translates the second sentence, in full, as “I don’t have 
anything in common with myself and would be content to stand quietly alone in a corner, satisﬁed that I can breathe. ”
Radical Jewish Culture / Secular Jewish Practice 233
rience by the Dead Sea, or a cousin in a kibbutz or something inspired by the 
Israeli live drama: Otherwise, with the exception of the possibility that he is growing up among the ultra-Orthodox, he will be an American writer of Jew-ish origin—not a Jewish American writer. He may become a new Faulkner, but not a new Kafka.
2
If would be as if I wrote:
Now suppose a new Kafka is growing up right now, in Tel Aviv. Suppose he is fourteen years old right now. Let’s call him Amachi Oz. Let’s assume that he is every bit of a genius as Kafka was in his time. His future must, as I see it, de-pend on an uncle in Miami or an experience learning Yiddish in the Catskills or the complete DVD set of Curb Your Enthusiasm and all Mel Brooks’s mov-
ies, or something inspired by Bob Dylan or Jerry Lewis. Otherwise, with the exception of the possibility that he is growing up among transplanted Upper West Siders who have memorized Gershwin, Berlin, and Sondheim, he will be an Middle Eastern writer of Jewish origin—not a Jewish writer. He may become a new Darwish, but not a new Kafka.
No one would accept this except as a spoof, but is the Oz quote any less 
problematic? In the absence of a proliferating European secular Jewish cul-
ture in the wake of the Systematic Extermination Process, the United States has developed its own Jewish culture, and more to my point its own secular Jewish culture, that doesn’t play second ﬁddle to Israel, which has over this time cultivated its own distinct brands of Jewishness, no more or less au-thentic than ours (and certainly no less treacherous). Israeli writers don’t get to dictate who’s Jewish or what’s Jewish (and neither do Israeli rabbis). Israel does not provide a litmus test for Jewish identity, and indeed Ameri-can Jewish culture has as much claim to the continuation of the culture of the European Jews as does any other Jewish culture. Judaism is a religion whose practices are marked by an inﬁnite series of historical disputes/com-mentaries/reconstructions. Jewishness, in contrast, is cultural: a social practice and set of afﬁnities, subject to change. The Jews who thought they were excommunicating Spinoza really just cut themselves off from a main-line Jewish culture that persists to this day; they became less Jewish. This 
2. “Imagining the Other: 1” in The Writer in the Jewish Community: An Israeli–North American 
Dialogue, edited by Richard Siegel and Tamar Sofer (London: Associated University Presses, 1993), 122. I quote the same passage in the autobiographical interview in My Way: Speeches and Poems (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999).
234 THE FATE OF THE AESTHETIC
is what it means to practice Midrashic Antinomianism. Want your “birth 
right” as a Jew? Come to Brooklyn and have a blintz.3
Fortunately, we have America so as not to need a Mr. Oz to police who 
is Jewish or, indeed, what is Jewish. But this America, unfortunately, is still somewhere over the rainbow.
333. My friend Kenny Goldsmith, after a Jewish poetics panel at the Sixth 
Street Synagogue in New York, wrote me that I had a lot invested in the dis-cussion. I agreed: it’s an investment made for me that I am trying to make the best of, or maybe just acknowledge, or just not sink under the weight of, or free myself from without selling at a loss, or then again selling to you, wholesale.
A blogger, responding to a talk by Norman Fischer and me at the Jewish 
Meditation Center in Brooklyn, wrote that, as much as he liked our talk he didn’t want to be “boxed in” by Jewish identiﬁcation. If he meditated just a little longer he’d realize we are always boxed in. Get used to it:  it’s already 
used to you. “The chosen people” doesn’t mean you get to choose: you’ve been chosen and you can ﬁght it, deny it, explain it away, or accept it, but none of that changes if not the historic, than the psychiatric insistence (not to say intrusiveness) of Jewishness.
When the Messiah comes . . . then you will be freed from this burden or 
opportunity or challenge or irrelevance or calling or curse.
I come to this discussion out of annoyance, not conviction or belief. I 
don’t want other people speaking for the Jews rather than some Jews. As for 
me, I’m just a Jew and not a particularly good (or bad) one at that.
I am a Jewish man trapped in the body of a Jewish man.Jewishness is not a condition, an essence, a religion, a stigma, an aspira-
tion, an albatross. Not only. It’s a frame. And not just a frame that queues the 
way people interpret (interpolate) me, but a frame that taints (or illumines, as you prefer) the way I interpret the world. I can no more cast off the chains or frames of my Jewishness than I can escape history or dematerial-ize my body.
2. The obsessive focus in literary journalism on the American Jewish novel 
has had the effect of cutting off consideration of the formal and processural 
3. The two preceding paragraphs are from a 2010 response to Robin Tremblay-McGraw linked 
at http://abigjewishblog.blogspot.com/2010/05/norman-ﬁscher-charles-bernstein-on.html, accessed May 30, 2010.
Radical Jewish Culture / Secular Jewish Practice 235
features of secular Jewish art. We have ended up with a set of representative 
ﬁgures for an approach in and to a culture that highly values the rejection of such graven representations.
In other words, the often frame-locked focus on Jewish content as the 
sine qua non of Jewish literature has distracted from recognition—not so much of Jewish forms, whatever they might be, as of formal, rhythmic, dia-lectical and dialogical and colloquial dimensions of literary, musical, and visual works that do not have explicit Jewish thematic focus. In happy con-trast, we do have such recent anthologies as The Norton Anthology of Jewish American Literature  and Jewish American Poetry: Poems, Commentary, and 
Reﬂections, edited by Eric Selinger and Jonathan Barron, along with Jerome Rothenberg’s groundbreaking A Big Jewish Book (and its shorter version, Ex-iled in the World).
5. & yet, increasingly, ofﬁcial American Jewish discourse has been domi-
nated by concerns for Jewish demographic sustainability viewed through the frame of Jewish family life and deﬁned by afﬁliation to organized reli-gious institutions, when it is not strafed by concern over the catastrophe of Israel. This duel focus—the Scylla of ethnic preservation (as if Jewish life were already a museum show, a kind of Lower East Side Sturbridge Village) and the Charybdis of Palestine—is explicitly (and legitimately) paranoid in orientation; but the effect is counterproductive insofar as it disenfranchises sectors of current and future, and indeed historical, Jewish life, just that part of Jewish culture that can be called secular—and which had its greatest ﬂourishing in the United States in the left Yiddishkeit culture of the 1920s and ’30s, that world of nonreligious, indeed often antireligious, Jewish art-ists, intellectuals, socialists, comedians, musicians and songwriters, and as-sorted freethinkers that thrives in New York even to this day.
7. While Jewish secular culture has sometimes, maybe often—well some-
times or often, I really can’t be sure—wanted to erase (or shall we say put under erasure?) its explicit Jewishness, especially insofar as such identity-politics might remove or ghettoize us from the larger culture of which we are an integral part—nonetheless there is no particular reason, in other words, no necessity, to take such bracketing of Jewishness as anything other than Jewish. Read the text of this aversion. Interpret it. Talk back to it. Within historical Jewish time there are certain icons of radical secular Jewish thought, icons that don’t deﬁne a poetic practice for Americans but suggest a constellation of possibility. This is a constellation most explicitly noted 
236 THE FATE OF THE AESTHETIC
by Isaac Deutscher in his Non-Jewish Jew  and that includes Spinoza, the 
three Marxes (Chico, Karl, and Groucho), & the three Steins—Ein, Witt-
gen, & Gertrude; our own Yiddishe Trinity—Freud, Kafka, and Celan; Ir-ving Berlin’s “White Christmas” and the Gershwins’ “It Ain’t Necessarily So”; Emmanuel Levinas’s faces, Emma Goldman’s dancing at the revolution, & Fanny Brice’s Baby Snooks; Alfred Stieglitz & Chaim Gross; Allen Gins-berg’s “Kaddish, ” Edmond Jabes’s imaginary rabbis, and Jacques Derrida’s midrashic commentary; Hannah Weiner’s dialogic voices and Larry Eigner’s linguistic ﬁelds; Ad Reinhardt’s shades of black & Lenny Bruce’s “Religion, Inc. ”; the space between Morton Feldman’s notes and Arnold Schoenberg’s scales; and, lest we forget, Mickey Katz’s foundational “Borscht Riders in the Sky. ”
In this respect, I want to acknowledge the important work of John Zorn’s 
Radical Jewish Culture series & beyond that the work of Sander Gilman and Daniel and Jonathan Boyarin and Maria Damon.
6. The weekend before the panel, several of us participated in a centen-
nial celebration at Columbia and Barnard for Louis Zukofsky, who along with Charles Reznikoff, George Oppen, Muriel Rukeyser, and Laura Riding constitute an important constellation of Jewish Second Wave Modernist poets. The interest in this work should not be understated: the capacious philosophy hall lounge was ﬁlled to capacity. But of course the interest was not primarily because of Zukofsky’s Jewishness.
The ﬁrst conference to celebrate the Objectivist poets, and, in effect, 
Jewish American modernist poetry, was not in America at all but in France, in 1989 at Royaumont. I remember after a talk I gave on Reznikoff,
4 Carl 
Rakosi sternly reprimanded me for the Jewish motifs in my piece: “We were secular, ” he said, and Jewishness was not a legitimate lens through which to read the work. While Rakosi’s remarks seemed particularly ill-suited to Reznikoff, for whom Jewishness is an explicit and central concern, it is, nonetheless, an important statement of poetic license that I do not wish—entirely—to ignore. (An even more striking rejection of Jewish iden-tiﬁcation is to be found in Laura [Riding] Jackson.) But you can’t separate Jewishness, and in particular the Jewish cultural context from which, for example, Zukofsky emerges as a poet, from his work, even if this aspect of his poetry was rarely mentioned at the conference (Rothenberg’s conclud-ing address being a signiﬁcant exception). Consider only that Zukofsky’s 
4. “Reznikoff’s Nearness, ” in My Way: Speeches and Poems.
Radical Jewish Culture / Secular Jewish Practice 237
ﬁrst major work, “A Poem Beginning ‘The,’ ” is not only a Jewish response 
to Eliot’s “The Waste Land” but also an extraordinary poem about the ten-sions of assimilation for the young poet with Yiddish in his ears into an Anglophilic literary culture. In this respect, I want to commend Stephen Fredman’s recent book on Reznikoff, A Menorah for Athena , the title itself 
playing out the tensions that would underlie some of the most important formal innovations in Second Wave Modernist American poetry, for exam-ple the way Reznikoff, Oppen, and Zukofsky insist on resistant particulars against airy generalization.
8. Several years ago I wrote the libretto for Shadowtime , an opera about 
Walter Benjamin.
5 A collaboration with composer Brian Ferneyhough, 
Shadowtime was commissioned by the Munich Biennale. The opera opens 
with the death of Benjamin; not the suicide, by the way, because whatever 
else, to think Benjamin committed suicide is too easy an out for all of us. Perhaps “suicided. ” After this scene, the opera envisions a journey for “our” imagined Benjamin, as told, largely, through a chorus of angels, a chorus of  the angels of history. Much of the secular Jewish culture in Europe was wiped out between 1937 and 1945, along with the rest of European Jewish culture. What would have become of all these intellectuals and artists? We have to imagine our character “Benjamin” living in New York. It is interest -
ing that two people living in America created an opera in English, com-missioned and premiered in Munich, on this character. Our “Benjamin” is born in the space of contemporary American thought. The historical person leaves the face of the earth, but not our imagination. How do we “hear” him? How do we hear the ﬂapping of the wings of history? That’s also a translation: how is “Beniamin” translated into “Benjamin”?
In other words, at a certain point it became apparent to me, and not 
just me of course, that the secular Jewish culture that was wiped out in the Second War—I realize this was not the only Jewish culture destroyed—stranded the correlative developments in America. Imagine Klezmer music played by Jews in Poland, not as museum pieces but as a living culture? Imagine European poetry and philosophy by the descendents of Benjamin and Heine? But, to a large extent, this is not to be, or anyway, insofar as it is to be, it too must be the task of secular Jewish culture on this side of the 
5. The libretto was published by Green Integer in 2005; for the synopsis and extensive com-
mentary on the opera see, http://epc.buffalo.edu/authors/bernstein/shadowtime, accessed May 30, 2010.
238 THE FATE OF THE AESTHETIC
Atlantic and of our radical poetry and ambiguating poetics. I think it is dif-
ﬁcult to acknowledge this unwanted and perhaps even insufferable task; certainly it has been difﬁcult for me. But perhaps this is what we have been chosen for.
11. Not long ago I had an extended discussion with the secular Jewish 
Zen poet and priest Norman Fischer. Our questions wove in and out of the midrashic practice of textual dialog and interpretation: the insistence that the ﬁxed text was nonetheless open to multiple, possibly inﬁnite (but then again, maybe not) interpretations; the revelation that any text, like any 
word, poem, event, person, or people, requires complex interpretation in terms of its multiple levels. Call it the PRDS of interpretation—the truthful-ness of the refusal of the literal in the pursuit of meaning:  
Peshat —literal 
meaning; Ramez  (remez)–suggested meaning; Drash  (derush)—allegori-
cal meaning; Sod—hidden or mystical or esoteric meaning. You can call 
it Paradise but maybe it’s just People Really Digging the Secular. We won-dered whether such a practice of deliberately delicious ambiguation and intoxicating complexifaction could lead to a greater ethical and aesthetic responsiveness in and resonance with the social world, such as we associate with secular Jewish politics and art. Some dare call it reason.  Norman and I 
ended with more questions than we started with; this is how we knew that the conversation had value for us. But how Jewish was it? As Bartleby might put it, I’d prefer not to say.
POETRY SCENE INVESTIGATION:  
A CONVERSATION WITH  
MARJORIE PERLOFF
Marjorie Perlof f: Charles, almost twenty years have gone by since that fate-
ful MLA when you delivered the lecture “The Academy in Peril: William Carlos Williams Meets the MLA” (1983). I still remember what a tempest you caused and how furious the old timers like M. L. Rosenthal were at your demolition job. You were, in those days, a great ﬁghter against “ofﬁcial verse culture. ” How does the “situation in poetry” today relate to that earlier moment? Do you feel the ﬁght against ofﬁcial verse culture has been won? Can it ever be won? How would you describe the current scene vis-à-vis that of 1983?
Charles Bernstein:  I remember after that speech—and it was more a speech 
than a “paper”—Allen Ginsberg told me that while he liked what I said, I 
should talk more slowly and breathe between phrases. I think I must have been going at twice the words per minute of other people at the MLA, but they seemed to get the drift. I don’t think I’ve slowed down in the mean-time, but then I’m more a tortoise type than quick like a bunny.
MP: You a tortoise?? You’ll have a hard time convincing your friends of that 
because you are in fact super-quick on the uptake, though I agree you’re not a bunny!
CB: Well, slow and steady and all that, if not unrelenting.
This e-mail conversation took place between October 15 and November 22, 2002. I moved 
from Buffalo to Penn the next year.  Fulcrum 2, 2003.
240 THE FATE OF THE AESTHETIC
I take it as a given that the situation has changed; but I believe the ne-
cessity to respond to our current predicament is as acute now as ever. In 
1983, I didn’t anticipate that my remarks would provoke repeated waves of applause, though I did expect the ire. The response to that talk, and lots of other interventions many of us were making at the time, suggested that certain long-entrenched views about American modernist poetry were col-lapsing under the weight of their own dogmatism, if dogmatism can be said to have weight and not just bark. It was a commonplace, in those distant days of yore, to accuse those of us questioning such dogmatism of being dog-matic; but I have long found that some of the more narrow-minded people are the quickest to cry “Ideologue!” at those who question their preroga-tives. Of course—
Today we live in far different times:
We have no poetry wars, no aesthetic crimes;At last, we are all one big familyUnder the tent of art and harmony.
(I sometimes ask Felix, my ten-year-old son, if my silliness is going to cause 
him some future harm—I mean things like breaking out into doggerel in the middle of lunch, or telling jokes that are all schtick and no punch line.)
What I think has changed is that the radical modernism I was putting 
forward in that address—poets and poetics—has received much greater acknowledgment since that time, both inside and outside the academy, as the result of the advocacy of many poets, scholars, and editors. At the same time, modern and contemporary poetry is, if anything, becoming more pe-ripheral to literary studies, in the universities but also in elementary and high schools. Nor has the problem with “ofﬁcial verse culture” disappeared, despite far greater prominence for several of my contemporaries and the continued resilience of many of the approaches to poetry that met with so much resistance in the ’70s and ’80s. I do think that creative writing pro-grams, taken in aggregate, are more open now to alternative approaches to poetic composition; but when I read the Writer’s Chronicle of the Associated 
Writing Programs, I mostly see the same problems many of us criticized two decades ago, though now expressed with the kind of embattled, nostalgic tinge of those who know their ground is more like thin ice: better to skate on than to pound. I ﬁnd the publication rather charming, in a perverse way.
Almost any poet will tell you not enough poetry gets reviewed in  
publications-with-wide-circulation (PWC): big city newspapers, the news-
Poetry Scene Investigation 241
weeklies, and the national journals of culture and opinion. Part of the prob-
lem would simply be solved if poetry were treated by these publications as a national cultural “beat”: if poetry were covered the way art or TV is. But the reality is that poetry is economically too small-potatoes (even if the potatoes are sweet) to be able to count this way. The larger problem is that contemporary poetry books suffer the same neglect as contemporary philosophy books (as Peter Hare pointed out to me recently) or really any number of “scholarly” books, books not intended for a “general” audience partly because the general audience is kept ignorant of their existence and the chronic signiﬁcance for their lives, if we consider the life of the mind essential for the body politic. And while you might make an argument for the fact that poetry ought to be of greater “general” interest than these other “difﬁcult” books, I wouldn’t, since I see the fate of all of us as related to a lack of judgment, a lack of cultural and intellectual commitment, on the part of the PWC. In contrast, I am impressed and grateful that such small publications as the Boston Review and Rain Taxi  can offer more thorough 
and thoughtful book reviewing than the combined efforts of the PWC.
When it comes to poetry, the PWC do a great disservice to their read-
ers: their coverage is, to use the terms of opprobrium so popular in their reviews, inadequate and of poor quality. Almost no coverage is given of the ﬁeld, something that is otherwise the prerequisite of journalism, and the choices of what is reviewed seem at best arbitrary, though obviously skewed to the trade presses, even though these presses, by almost anyone’s measure, are responsible for only a small proportion of the signiﬁcant poetry of our time. (Sometimes this point gets misunderstood: It’s not that I think that any given book that is reviewed is no good or that no book I care about is ever reviewed nor that I think only the books I prefer should be reviewed or that if a few of them were that would solve the problem.)
In any case, and to put it baldly, I think only a very few of the poetry 
books published over the past twenty years that you or I would value most highly have received any attention in the PWC; no matter how important these works may be for many of us involved with the art, they remain invis-ible to the literate reader who relies on these publications for news of what is going on in poetry. There is a connection here to literary prizes, too: not so much who wins them—since there are a great number with many differ-ent perspectives—but which ones get reported in the PWC. The Pulitzer, one among many prizes at least its equal (and one with a track record as bad  as, but similar to, the PWC)—gets the most attention because it comes packaged with so many journalism awards. Given by a group that cares little 
242 THE FATE OF THE AESTHETIC
or nothing for poetry, the Pulitzer is covered as a signiﬁcant poetry award 
because it serves the PWC’s self-promotion. I recall when Jackson Mac Low won the lifetime achievement award (then called the Dorothea Tanning and now the Wallace Stevens prize) from the Academy of American Poets in 1999, there wasn’t even a mention of that in the New York Times, which 
nonetheless has often reported on the award, calling it poetry’s best-paying prize; but then Mac Low, even when honored by nothing less than Ofﬁcial Verse Culture at its best, is presumably one of the unmentionables in the land of the PWC.
Does it matter? It’s not that the books don’t circulate or are not taught 
in universities or discussed in small press and web journals or on listserv discussion groups. What difference does it make? I know a lot of people are indifferent, criticizing universities more than they criticize the PWC. Yet I think what Andrew Ross called “the oxygen of publicity” matters quite a bit. Poetry survives and thrives nurtured by its committed readers and practi-
tioners; I think the value of poetry is not just for us but indeed for this wider 
public, and that the culture suffers when it isolates itself from its poets.
MP: What you describe seems to me entirely accurate, but it’s more symp-
tom than cause, isn’t it? If the PWCs felt that the public “out there” had even the slightest interest in the material in question, of course they would review it and write articles about it. And the university presses would want to do more to promote the work. So where did this vacuum come from? Is it that English Departments themselves have abdicated their “literary” role, wanting desperately to teach and study anything but “literature”? Is it just a general dumbing down of the culture? But if the latter is the case, why do certain very difﬁcult works get quite a bit of attention? For instance Oulipo. Perec’s Life: A User’s Manual had, I recall, a front-page review in the TLS, and even La Disparition, translated by Gilbert Adair, did relatively well. And then in the architecture world, people will pour into shows of very ar-cane and avant-garde material—I’m thinking of a recent Coop Himmelblau exhibit at the Schindler House in LA—and my hairdresser, to give just one example, went all the way to Bilbao to see the Frank Gehry Guggenheim Museum and he’ll go see Surrealist art shows at this or that museum.
So what is it about “poetry” today that makes it seem so “specialized” 
to people? Or, to put the question another way, why do people accept the “new” and unexpected in architecture and often in the visual arts in gen-eral, but want their poetry to be “clear” à la Billy Collins?
Poetry Scene Investigation 243
CB: You tell me. There are so many directions to go in answer to your ques-
tion I feel like the guy at the end of Bergman’s The Passion of Anna  who is 
pacing from the left to the right of the screen with that drop-dead chilling voiceover, “This time his name is Andreas Winkelman. ” This time its name is 
American poetry.  On the one hand, yes of course the PWCs are responding to 
a profound lack of interest in poetry as an art form; but, on the other hand, do they aid or even foment this disinterest, or are they just the messengers reporting the news? Why do they cover the poetry they do cover rather than something else? Why is the aesthetic right given such free reign to trash “radical poetry” while the views of the other sides (all 44 and a half of them) go largely unheard? By the standards of the “massed” media, none of this poetry—not any of it—amounts to a hill of beans in Iowa or a barrel of orangutans in the new Times Square. On the one hand (if you can keep all these hands away from the threshing machines), some poets and poetry do-gooders think the answer is to go with the ﬂow, to try to make poems that, while still unpopular at the Prom of American Culture are a little more popular (and don’t assume I am not one of them). The classic ’50s response is to become Raincoat Adolescents, the hip-without-being-cool dropouts or rebel saints that ﬁgure, as social gesture, into the Romantic Ideology of a Rock ’n’ Roll culture that replaces poetic work with poetic attitude and whose heroes are not poets at all but pop stars like Jim Morrison or Bob Dylan or Patti Smith. I don’t really need easy listening poetry if I can listen to the Sex Pistols, or New Formalism if I have Randy Newman. For “My Generation” (formally the journal of the American Association of Retired Persons), it’s not the antimodernist poetry championed by the Mediocracy that is clawing at poetry’s share of the consciousness of the American mud-dled class, but the Golden ’60s Boxed Set rerereleases of The Who’s Greatest 
Hits (What’s on second, Leonard Cohen shortstop, Joni Mitchell on bass). 
They paved Poetry Paradise and put up a Pop Music Lot.
Popularity or immediate accessibility is not a criterion of value for poetry 
in our time. Poetry can provide not an extension of the dominant values in American culture—as the poetry favored by the PWC does—but mul-tiple, discrepant alternatives to them: often messy, inchoate, disturbing, unhappy—indeed sometimes worse—alternatives to boot. How the culture and how the PWC respond to this is a judgment on them. A culture’s refusal of its poetry is not without consequence or redress. So when you ask if “the public [has] even the slightest interest in the material in question, ” I would say that the PWC’s spurning of this, indeed, material in question , is a direct 
244 THE FATE OF THE AESTHETIC
violation of the public interest, that we won’t have a public worthy of the 
name until we engage with such material, in poetry, philosophy, history, sociology, theology, and, indeed, politics.
MP: Touché. I think there’s also a “skill” or “expertise” problem. To be an 
architect, you do have to learn very speciﬁc things. And a composer obvi-
ously has to know something about music. But anyone, it seems, can be a poet. The New York Times praised Dana Gioia precisely because he had 
worked for ten years for General Foods and made his mint before turning to poetry—evidently something one can do by a sheer act of will. One declares oneself a poet, period. So then anyone of course can also be a poetry critic and comment on the quality of the poetry. This past week the  Wall Street 
Journal announced that Gioia was one of “our ﬁnest poets” without ever saying how or why. It seems their columnists simply know. And in response to the staggering multimillion-dollar Gertrude Lilly bequest to Poetry  maga-
zine, Joseph Parisi, the venerable journal’s current editor, produced some sobering statistics. For instance, the circulation of Poetry  today is 10,000. 
But every year the journal gets 90,000 submissions. Poetry, it would seem, is much more fun to write than to read!
Clearly, PhD programs like the Poetics Program at Buffalo have gone a 
long way in rectifying this situation and demanding some knowledge on the part of their would-be poets. Could you comment on how this has worked at Buffalo? Since the program is largely your brainchild, how did you go about inventing it? What are its best features? Are there things you would now do differently?
CB: In terms of reviewing and awards, there is sometimes a presumption 
that a person who never reads poems and has no apparent interest in poetry should be able to judge what’s good or bad in poetry, because we are all “human beings” after all, as the coordinator of a recent very-minor-award panel informed me a few days ago. Sometimes that goes for the “general reader” qualiﬁcations of the reviewer/judge and sometimes it’s a criterion used to evaluate poetry. The “we’re all humans” proposition is not just a harmless shibboleth: it is a chief means of riding roughshod over aesthetic and ideological differences and enforcing—now here’s a ten-buck word—uniformitarianism. The poets I most care about are, maybe, trying to become 
human—or nonhuman; anyway, they are not so quick to assume what the human is or how it manifests itself.
Poetry Scene Investigation 245
The problem with lots of poetry that bills itself as easy reading is that 
there’s not a lot of there there, or what there there is doesn’t hold up to 
more than a quick and casual glance. The irony is that “difﬁcult” poetry may actually provide a good deal more immediacy and affect than much of the more “I am my subject matter and don’t you forget it” variety. That’s why I would cast the issue in terms not just of aesthetics but aestheticism— lin-
guistic sensation. There is much still made of the alleged problem that lots of the poems you and I like to read are not point, click, and play; but the alternative provided is not like asking the readers to write their own po-ems (though that’s a ﬁne activity too, for another time) or stare into the abyss (though that may be something that comes up along the way). The difference is more like the one between riding a motorbike and taking a taxi (substitute your own engine-free metaphor if you like). Personally, I prefer teleportation, since that gives me more time for reading hard-core  poetry.
As to the Poetics Program: university English departments typically sep-
arate poetry writing courses from poetry reading courses and we all know that the former are on the rise while the latter are on the wane. The Poet-ics Program, as we formed it in the early 1990s in Buffalo, rejected this dichotomy, not just in an informal, or class-by-class, basis, but as a matter of policy; and not just at an undergraduate or master’s level, but also, and even primarily, in the PhD program. The poets teaching in our graduate Poet-ics Program—Susan Howe, Robert Creeley, Myung Mi Kim, Loss Pequeño Glazier, Dennis Tedlock—teach not creative writing but rather doctoral seminars; the students don’t submit poems or manuscripts, but essays and dissertations. The Poetics Program students are often poets, and we sup-port the activity of writing poetry as a positive contribution to teaching literature classes, writing criticism, and doing scholarship. This is not to say that all the Poetics students are poets, but lots of them are, and they have formed their own immediate local context of exchanging work, publishing magazines and books, and organizing reading series.
No poetry community is without troubles, and ours has its share, but it is 
vital and sizable and even formidable, since our program, having surprising little competition among PhD programs, has attracted (in early and not-so-early stages) some great poets, scholars, critics, and editors over the years. Because we have some funds available, we are able to provide a small amount of money to any of the students who want to have a series or press—and that little bit of money goes a long way. This approach to funding—giving to a 
246 THE FATE OF THE AESTHETIC
highly decentered not to say idiosyncratic set of projects can lead, as Joel 
Kuszai put it a while back, to a place with “all leaders and no followers”; but at least it avoids the committee-driven decision making of many ofﬁcial university magazines and reading series, where money is centralized and consensus is emphasized. Anyway, this has been my philosophy. We also have lots and lots of visitors, who meet with students in seminars as well as give readings or lectures. So it’s all very poetry-intense, with lots of fellow poetry devotees and lots of activities. And also a strong web presence, with the Electronic Poetry Center and also the Poetics List.
Looking back, I think the Poetics Program was an intervention particu-
larly relevant for the 1990s and so one that now needs to undergo some serious and necessary transformations, as I think all institutions do, less they become stagnant, victims of their own successes or preoccupied with their own failures.
There is always a lot of concern expressed among poets about the rela-
tion of poetry to the academy. (I wish I could say there was comparable concern in the literary academy for this topic.) Without jumping into the quicksand of this topic, I would say that my own commitment has been to ﬁnd ways to use the university and its resources to support poets and poetry, especially poets outside the academy. As I said in an interview with Andrew Epstein for Lingua Franca on this topic, the issue isn’t that, as a poet, you 
have a university job, but what you do with it.
MP: I’ve always felt that the “issue” of the poet in the academy was a red her-
ring. Poets have to make a living somehow, and some choose teaching even as others (Kit Robinson, Ron Silliman) work in the computer industry, and others as lawyers or psychiatrists. But enough sociology; I want to turn now to your poetry, which, it seems to me, has gotten somewhat short shrift vis-à-vis your essays, manifestos, lectures, etc. Especially in the UK, critics and reviewers talk of you as the chef d’école of the Language school rather than 
as the very particular poet that you are.
Suppose we look at what I take to be a particularly brilliant recent poem, 
“The Manufacture of Negative Experience, ” in With Strings  (Chicago, 2001). 
What was the actual process of composing this long poem? Where did you begin? Do you start with a particular conception and then “ﬁll in, ” or does one perception immediately lead to a further perception, as Olson put it? Do you assemble the found texts ahead of time? Do you move passages around a lot? In short (ha!), can you describe for our readers how the com-position took place.
Poetry Scene Investigation 247
CB: I wrote the poem, using some notes I had assembled over the previous 
year, in Provincetown in August 1992. I was there with Susan of course, but also with Emma, who was seven (echoes of her presence in §41—“When I say ‘no’ I mean / maybe, probably not, what’s / the matter with you?, do I / make myself clear? . . . ”), and Felix, who, at a few months old, may well be the “beeper” of §333. Like most of my poems, I wrote this one in a bound “sketch”-type notebook, then typed it up and revised.
“The Manufacture of Negative Experience” is one of a number of longish 
serial poems: loosely linked stanzas, all bouncing off, or getting sucked into, the black hole of the title. It’s a constellation or array, or then again maybe something like a charm bracelet. One of the charms is §482: the set of jokes in the form of one-line questions, all with same answer, “No. ” One of my obsessions has been to include—fully and faithfully (or is it faithlessly, I always get those confused)—a set of Henny Youngman-style jokes within a poem. So here it’s eleven questions spread over ﬁfteen lines. And those questions also rhyme with similar jokes or quasi jokes in other parts of the poem. (Was that a real joke or did you just mess it up?)
There are thirteen parts to the poem. Another way I think of this is as 
something like conical sections arcing around a numinous center (negative experience). That’s one way to understand the erratic numbering (3, 17, 37, 38, 41, 46a, 57, 71, 333, 334, 482, 501, 788), which is both one of those stock jokes I like so much, while at the same time giving a sense of the space between the sections. The form is probably more like Wittgenstein’s Philo-
sophical Investigations  than Olson’s Projective Verse , but it’s true I want the 
parts to concatenate.
Lots of contrasting materials by way of language, style, prosody, subject 
matter: fractured aphorisms and slogans (§38), semi-nursery rimes (§17, §57), speech acts (§41), riddles with no answer if not no for an answer, and some parts that combine these (§3). A lot of the poem sounds like you’ve heard it before but can’t place it or just when you think you remember, it’s on the slip of your tongue until it gets bounced out of mind by a quick dis-solve to the next illusionless allusion or allusive elision, or a pop ﬂy to third when you still don’t know who’s on ﬁrst.
And that, again, brings up the title as organizing principle: less nega-
tive experience as in “I had a very negative experience at polka night at the supper club” and more as in Adorno’s “Negative Dialectics”: “Truth is the antithesis of existing society” (which is the epigraph to a related poem, “Emotions of Normal People” in Dark City ). Or like that great “Not this” in 
Ron Silliman’s Tjanting.
248 THE FATE OF THE AESTHETIC
Section 37 is taken from a school report on my twin nephews, who were 
in elementary school at the time. I jotted those sentences down when I was 
over to my sister- and brother-in-law’s house for Thanksgiving. I am one of these mildly unsocial people at family gatherings who do things like that: scribble things in my notebook from school reports, scan the popular maga-zines on the table, record overheard conversation, all in the endless quest for material. School reports are classic fodder for my hypnopompic mill: such school-blotter characterizing may not kill you, but the wounds . . . they don’t so much heal as morph. I identify with everything that’s said about David and Ian, and so those statements form the poetics of the piece.
I guess, to get back to your question, a lot of the poem is pulled from the 
air, from signs in my mind and on the street, from what I am reading in the newspaper or hearing on the radio; everything gets considered as possible material to be transmuted, sputtered, turned topsy turvy or tipsy ﬂopsy. As if “negative experience” could be the portal into a world next to the one we usually pretend to inhabit, less through the looking glass than the blank side of the mirror that doesn’t reﬂect but allows for reﬂection.
For example, in writing this I was casting around for an adjective to go 
with “mill” to describe the fuzzy logic of interconnections in the poem; for some reason hypnogogic came to mind, but I wanted something that meant the opposite, which is when I lit on hypnopompic: a state of dawn-ing consciousness, just after sleep. Meanwhile, while I was working on this explanation, and it was getting late, Emma wanted to use the computer to play a biology CD-ROM, so all of a sudden, out of the blue, I heard this dis-embodied, hypercalm voice, talking about the plasma membrane of a cell as a “ﬂuid mosaic, ” and I realized this was another way of talking about poetic structure; in this case, the internal elements that make up each section as well as the relations among the sections.
Which leads me to §3: “Madder / than a scratched eel at a / Crossing 
Guard kettle-shoot. ” The kettle shoot is always the highlight of the Cross-ing Guard annual convention in Whipsalantamariaozoola, even though the scratched eel underwater diving meet is my personal favorite. Well you’d have to have been there to take it in fully; this was the best way to evoke the experience, a painful one that I will remember for the rest of my life.
What else to say? As you see, I guess I am more tempted to write another 
stanza than offer up an explanation. Not that I mind explaining anything, which anyway is always more a supplement than a substitute, or so I would hope.
Poetry Scene Investigation 249
MP: Your account shows how absurd it is to talk of yours as a poetry where 
“anything goes, ” indeed, how carefully you plan the poem’s overall architec-ture. But I still have some questions. First and foremost—and this would ap-ply to most of your poems, whether in With Strings or in earlier volumes—
how does the reader deal with the hermeticism of the allusions? In §37, for example, once you explain that Ian and David are your sister-in-law’s twins, the section is perfectly clear. But if I didn’t know that, I would assume that Ian is a character, perhaps in Cowper’s Task , perhaps in another Cowper 
poem or related text, and that you’re modernizing the situation for parodic effect. Now, you can say it doesn’t matter, that the thematic import would be the same. But it does help (I’ve found) if the reader knows the New York world you’re so often referring to—a world of those Henny Youngman jokes and phrases like “a wolf in schlep’s clothing. ” So I wonder whether you think some day your poems will or should be annotated by editors? And of course if this were the case, the annotations would be longer than the original poem or perhaps themselves a new poem, which might be fun.
I’m of two minds about the question of reference. Part of me feels that 
anyone living in today’s media world, whether in Helsinki or Hackensack, will read “The Manufacture of Negative Experience” with a big smile and a great shock of recognition. But then I’m always surprised how many people even in (or perhaps especially in) our own social circles have never heard of NoDoz, pastrami, the Aswan Dam, or the self-help movement. For ex-ample, at the recent Modernist Studies Association meeting in Madison, I was astonished to learn that none of the people I was dining with—the poet Cole Swensen, the philosopher Jean-Pierre Cometti (French visitor, very sophisticated, who writes on Wittgenstein and Musil), or the young poet-critic-academic Craig Dworkin—had ever seen The Godfather or knew 
anything about it. I assumed 
EVERYONE  had seen that ﬁlm, or part of it, at 
one time or another.
So—to pose what is probably an impossible question: how do we deal 
with difﬁculty in the Age of Billy Collins and Dana Gioia? Yours is, to quote William James on Gertrude Stein, “a ﬁne new kind of realism. ” I see you as one of the central chroniclers of our culture. But can we ask readers to know what Charles Bernstein knows?
CB: We have to make the reader an offer she can’t refuse, can’t even imagine 
refusing, whether or not all the references are known, and all this within the limits of poetry alone (that is, the threat is not of diminished physical  
250 THE FATE OF THE AESTHETIC
capacity but of diminished aesthetic capacity, which remains a looming 
threat for many Americans). By refuse, I mean that turning away in the face 
of the daunting challenge of decoding the references, conceits, forms, be-fore even starting to read the poem. My idea, and certainly not mine alone, was to make poems that allowed for ambient access, that you start by get-ting the hang of, more than ﬁguring out. It doesn’t mean that at some other point in your experience with the poem you won’t ponder those obscure references, but that the poem encourages you to go on what you experience, not just what you already know. Pragmatism, pragmatism, joggity jag.
You’ll remember the Chinese translator, in the giddy conclusion to A Test 
of Poetry (in My Way), who asked just the question you raise about the title of my poem “No Pastrami” (“Does the pastrami refer to a highly seasoned shoulder cut of beef?”). But, then, what is the meaning of pastrami? Would 
it be enough to deﬁne it ethnically, or would you really have to have a slice and not just a slice but a pastrami on rye at the Carnegie, but wouldn’t the Stage be better?, or maybe only the Second Avenue Deli would do.
Yes we have no pastrami, yes we have no pastrami today.The interesting thing about the translator’s questions in A Test of Poetry 
is that the difﬁculties posed by the poems were not syntactic or grammatic or even structural but rather questions of cultural reference, especially from American popular, local, and mass culture. That’s partly because this par-ticular translator was a scholar of American poetry and was able to navigate through those formal aspects of the poems more readily; though another reader, someone who shared my mass and pop cultural experience but not my poetic interests, might have just the opposite difﬁculty. Still, the Chinese translator’s predicament is hardly unique to non-Americans, but, rather, is a deﬁning condition for everyone in American culture.
Anyone who teaches contemporary literature will have the experience 
that the most common cultural references of their own younger days are as obscure as Greek myths to those waves of ever younger people who were not “in” the culture at that time. The bigger they are, the harder they fall. (“All right, Mr. DeMille, I’m ready for my close-up, ” as some of us will recall Norma Desmond saying in Sunset Boulevard .) You sometimes hear people 
lament the decline of the big three TV networks as creating a crisis of de-centralization, as if Lloyd Bridges on Sea Hunt  provided a shared national 
experience that we now suffer from the lack of, as we contend with the dispersed sons of Lloyd: Beau and Jeff. I use this example—knowing full well that you may never have heard of Sea Hunt, which had its TV ﬁrst run 
from 1957 to 1961 and which had a kind of ominous, not quite existential, 
Poetry Scene Investigation 251
feel—because it was turned down by the networks and was an early ex-
ample of syndication that ultimately robbed “us in the U.S. ” of the common 
culture . . . like they had over there in Russia, with the one TV station?! The 
web, which makes ’50s TV syndication seem like the tiniest hairline fracture of network hegemony, provides quick information on an amazing range of once-famous references, Sea Hunt  and the Aswan Dam included. (I guess 
for my work you can’t go too far wrong thinking of the ’50s and the Cold War as a possible backdrop, once you start to see the pattern.) Google is both a veritable Guide to the Perplexed and a fomenter of perplexity, both a handle on, and a downward slope into, the Babel (or is it Bible?) of information on the Internet and the concomitant eclipse of central authority. (Lately I’ve been fascinated by the difference between the websites developed for poets, say on the EPC, and the fan sites you get for every manner of thing, like the one for Sea Hunt.)
You touch on some of these issues in fundamental and illuminating ways 
in your recent essay, “The Search for Prime Words: Ezra Pound as Nominal-ist, ” on the use of proper names in Pound; and Yunte Huang also addresses this issue in a recent piece, “Was Ezra Pound a New Historicist?” The ques-tion in both your essays is—How are we supposed to know the signiﬁcance of certain anecdotal references in The Cantos ? In both Eliot’s and Pound’s 
modernist practice, there is a professed commitment to a canon of Histori-cal Events and Cultural Works that are presented with the (implied) injunc-tion that readers have an obligation to know what they are or, if not, learn about them. Stein and Williams might stand for the opposite if those Proper Names weren’t ones that you and I, after all is done and said, would expect those reading this exchange to know about (or if they didn’t, possibly prompt them to ﬁnd out). The problem you and Yunte raise in regard to Pound’s work is whether we are to take his anecdotal references as such luminous details, especially if they refer to his own particular experiences, such as restaurants he visited in New York or Paris. (Do readers of this exchange really need to know the difference between the Stage and the Carnegie?) Yunte argues that you always need paratextual information and that there is not necessarily a value in imagining a poem as self-evident: I stare at the page and all the signiﬁcance of the Proper Names immediately manifests itself to me, to ponyback (or is it pigtail?) on Pound’s famous and equally problematic remark about the status of the Chinese written character.
Poems can’t go it alone and never could, relying, as they so often do, not 
only on the kindness of strangers but the testimony of friends.
Poetry is too important to be left to its own devices.
252 THE FATE OF THE AESTHETIC
Interpretation is act, editing a form of writing, translation a condition 
of reading.
There is no end to what you might need to know to read a poem and 
maybe no beginning either. In my textual economy, each poem is an initia-
tion into a world of particulars both inside and outside the reader’s infor-mation databank. The question is: Does that which is unrecognized in the poem make the work more forbidding or more beckoning. In the kind of poems I want, you don’t need secret “abracadabra” words or some special knowledge or even explanatory annotations to open the door of the poem. Rather, all that’s needed is a willingness to jump into the middle of a ﬂow of experience, just as you do every time you open up the door to your house onto that other world we sometimes call everyday life. The fact is that as a culture we don’t share a ﬁxed set of given, all-purpose, cultural and his-torical references or, insofar as we do, there are relatively few of them and, taken as topological points, they make an inadequate map of our history, our contemporaneity, our aspirations and destinies. I don’t want my poems to impose a sense of what’s most important on the world or on those readers who care to take the journey the poems offer. But the ecology of reference does concern me: creating a mix so that everyone gets some things but no one can get everything—and counting on both.
You mention the wolf in schlep’s clothing, but I remain more concerned 
about the schleps in wolf’s clothing, the paper tigers of poetry. Or there is the one about the difference between the schlemiel and schlemazel: the schlemiel is the one who spills the soup; the schlemazel is the one it gets spilled on. You could say that this is just the difference between the poet and the reader, in my semiotic economy.
So maybe, going back again to §37, the dedication to William Cowper’s 
The Task  is the more signiﬁcant frame, and I was leading you down the 
garden path of anecdote in my comments on David and Ian. Negative expe-rience necessarily engages what you don’t know: The manufacture of nega-tive experience—going on in the midst of uncertainty of reference, bear-ing, morality, truth—is the task of poetry. In The Task (1782–1785), Cowper 
writes:
When Winter soaks the ﬁelds, and . . . feet
Too weak to struggle with tenacious clay,Or ford the rivulets, are best at home,The task of new discoveries falls on me.
Poetry Scene Investigation 253
At such a season and with such a charge
Once went I forth, and found, till then unknown . . .
If the task of poetry is “new discoveries, ” what is the task of criticism?
MP: I love the aphorism “ Poetry is too important to be left to its own devices. ” 
Vintage Bernstein in that it sounds at once wholly familiar (we’re always 
talking about something being too important to be left to its—or his or her—own devices) and yet it is completely absurd. Or is it? Poetry does have “devices”—rhyme, repetition, anaphora, assonance, onomatopoeia, metaphor, metonymy, pun, simile—but device alone can’t make something poetry, as too few “poets” realize. So your little proverb is only too true, it turns out. The particular feat of your poetry, I’d say, is this doubleness or tripleness or quintupleness. . . . Every statement looks in more than one di-rection, which is, of course, what poetry is all about and always has been.
The reader needn’t know all the allusions. When I ﬁrst read “Gertrude 
and Ludwig’s Bogus Adventure” ( My Way) I had no idea what those Pete 
Hewitt “Excellent Adventure” ﬁlms were. Boy ﬁlms, kid ﬁlms, science ﬁc-tion—not at all my thing. But even without knowing the actual ﬁlms re-ferred to, the meanings come through well enough. On the other hand, once told about the ﬁlms, I became quite intrigued with looking them up, rather the way I now love reading about “the cake shops on the Nevsky” Pound writes of and which he never saw any more than I’ve seen them! That’s what makes poetry so inﬁnitely re-readable. And poetry that has none of this thickness quickly gets boring.
But there’s another point. Yes, one can do without knowing all the refer-
ences, but there’s also the unavoidable fact that sooner or later, readers 
WILL  
look them up. In twenty years’ time, someone will write an essay or thesis on your poetry and they’ll go to the Stage and the Carnegie and have a look at the pastrami!! After all, in their day, Eliot and Pound, not to mention Stein or Duchamp, were felt to be hopelessly hermetic, and now students talk about the Oculist Witnesses in the Large Glass , as if it were all part of 
normal discourse. And in the case of Frank O’Hara, where I used to think most of the person and place names were intentionally fortuitous, now scholars are writing solemn treatises about the signiﬁcance of lunching at Larré’s on 56th Street, or on the meaning of Gauloises. And since younger 
people have no idea who Billie Holiday was, there’s much writing about her voice, cultural role, and so on.
254 THE FATE OF THE AESTHETIC
So time catches up with the poetry! And that’s OK because, in the end, 
nothing substitutes for “close reading, ” which needn’t be arid New Criti-
cal exercise at all, but just the habit of paying attention to the words and sentences on the page or on a CD—whatever. I will sound like an Old Wolf in kvetch clothing when I say it’s a practice that has been largely lost. So afraid are teachers and their students of actually looking at a text, so fearful that they will be endowing that text with “autonomy, ” that crucial things get missed. I was dismayed the other day in my graduate class when, in reading Stein’s “Miss Furr and Miss Skeene, ” three of the eighteen seminar members thought Helen Furr was the same person as Mrs. Furr and that she had left her husband to be with Georgine Skeene because she was stiﬂed by bourgeois capitalism, or some such thing. The seven-page story does refer to Helen not liking to live “where she had always been living, ” which—com-mon sense tells us—could hardly have always been with her husband, could it? And on the next page we read explicitly that Helen Furr went home to visit “her mother and father. ” Accordingly, when you get this kind of read-ing, you know the student hasn’t actually read through the text.
Teaching poetry thus remains a challenge. And I can’t think of a more 
perfect comment on all this than your words in “What’s Art Got to Do with It?”:
The shortest distance between two points is a digression. I hold for a wander-
ing thought just that I may stumble upon something worthy of report.
Who knows, ahead of time, what those items worthy of report, might 
be?
CB: And that goes as much for criticism as poetry, where the value, in part, 
comes from the searching for something not yet deﬁned. Maybe close read-ing would get a better rap if we called it PSI: Poetry Scene Investigation . Of 
course, that would mean treating the poem as a crime, but maybe it is: a crime against mass culture.
“Poetry is too important to be left to its own devices” also means that 
poems can’t do all the work of poetry by themselves. For poems to come into being, we need editors, publishers, designers, proofreaders, booksell-ers, websites, teachers, critics, detractors, supporters, and of course, not to leave them out of the picture entirely, poets and readers. I think the phobia about explication comes from the fact that some of what calls itself that is obtuse, dishearteningly literal or thematic, in short, deadening. But bad 
Poetry Scene Investigation 255
teaching about poetry is a problem comparable to bad writing of poetry; 
poetry as an art may seem to suffocate under the blankets applied in a well-meaning effort to keep it warm (as if the body of the text were growing as cold as a corpse), but poems go their merry way irrespective and irregard-less. Cut-’em up, mangle their meanings, weigh them down with unsup-portable symbolism, reduce them to a sentiment, strip them to their empty cores . . . and they still keep coming back for more. Poems are remarkably resilient, and far less likely to be injured by incursions into their autonomy or excursions into their associations, than we have any reason to expect.
Yet if poems are uncannily resilient, poets, alas, are not.But, there I go again, off on a tangent. (How many tangents can play the 
harp on the edge of a pin? Or is it pine?)
That is, I don’t mean to suggest that criticism is always, or even mostly, 
agonistic. Your own approach to close reading is not as a contest between poem and reading, but like dance, the two in tango. Moreover, without such external interventions, poetry would, indeed, be a dead art.
The poem is not ﬁnished even when it is completed . Completion or publi-
cation marks not the end of the poem but rather its entry into the world through the responses to it. And that’s another dimension of the sort of close reading you encourage; for the poems we reread over time become cultural time capsules, linguistic dioramas in which each phrase is an imagi-nary hyperlink for our further exploration of—or reentry into—a particular time and place. In other words, crucial to any sense of the cultural details in a poem is the world they constitute; not only what the particulars are but also the economy of the particulars—how they are distributed and ar-ranged. That’s the way poems lend themselves, are made for, reinhabita-tion; why chasing down the references or the milieu the references evoke doesn’t detract from the poem but rather opens it up.
Inspiration is not what comes before the poet writes the poem but what 
happens when the poem is read (or heard).
A criticism is responsible to the degree it is able to respond.Criticism engages and extends the work of the poem, but criticism is 
not the end of poetry. Nor is the poem the ﬁnal destination of a process of analysis and research.
The poem is an initial point of embarkation on journeys yet to come, on 
earth as they are in the imaginary space between here and there, now and then, is and as.
So, hey, if you have time now, let’s go together on a trip to those cake 
shops on the Nevsky.
IS ART CRITICISM FIFTY YEARS  
BEHIND POETRY?
In Frank O’Hara: The Poetics of Coterie ,1 Lytle Shaw’s ostensive subject is how 
“coterie” works in the poetry and poetics of Frank O’Hara. The opening 
chapters provide a cogent discussion of the role of proper names in O’Hara’s poetry within the context of a linguistics-inﬂected examination of naming and reference. Shaw notes the different levels of proper naming in O’Hara’s work—ﬁgures of popular culture, political and social ﬁgures—as well as different levels of his personal circle (from identiﬁable artists and poets to obscure names).
For Shaw, coterie is not a closed world of intimates but an interlocking, 
open-ended set of associations and afﬁliations. He links coterie to the socio-historically self-conscious poetics of the local, community, and other collec-tive formations. The poetics of coterie is presented by Shaw as an alterna-tive to universalizing conceptions of poetry. O’Hara’s location of himself not in a homogenous elite but rather in intersecting constellations of persons (real and imagined afﬁliations), together with his famous time-stamping of his poems (it’s 12:18 in New York as I rewrite this sentence) both work against the Romantic Ideology of timeless poems by great individuals.
Still, no discussion of coterie can completely free itself from the negative 
connotations of clique and scene. For best effect, the ﬁrst chapters of Shaw’s book should be read beside Andrew Epstein’s Beautiful Enemies: Friendship 
and Postwar American Poetry .
2 Epstein offers exemplary Emersonian read-
ings of the intricate web connecting individual talent and collective invest-ment in the poetry and poetics of John Ashbery, Amiri Baraka, and O’Hara. Averting the Cold War myth of the individual voice in the wilderness of conformity, Epstein gives us voices in conversation and conﬂict, suggesting 
1. Frank O’Hara (Iowa City: University of Iowa Press, 2006).
2. Beautiful Enemies (New York: Oxford University Press, 2006).Parkett 84 (2009).
258 THE FATE OF THE AESTHETIC
that resistance to agreement is at the heart of a pragmatist understanding 
of literary community.
The role of proper names and the nature of O’Hara’s personal circle are 
not the only concerns of Frank O’Hara: The Poetics of Coterie . In the book’s 
ﬁnal chapters, another theme emerges with equal force: O’Hara’s approach to the visual arts in his poems and criticism. Shaw sees O’Hara’s art writ-ing as a powerful and necessary counter to the monological and hyperpro-fessional rigidity that descends from Clement Greenberg (who dismissed O’Hara’s art writing) to Michael Fried and, I’d add, extends to the October  
brand, the epitome of, let’s just say, High Orthodoxical art criticism. For if the luminous rigor and prodigious insights of Greenberg and Fried end in the tragedy of misrecognition, the self-serious vanguardism of the High Orthodoxical ends in the farce of academic gatekeeping and market valida-tion. In other words, Greenberg’s and Fried’s insistence on conviction  and 
agonism morphed into a practice of regulation by exclusion.
For Shaw, the aversion of poetry in both formalist and High Orthodoxical 
art criticism is a sign of its own aesthetic failure. In contrast to Greenberg’s and Fried’s rebuke of “poetic” art criticism, he suggests that O’Hara was doing an “art-critical” poetry that, for example, has resonances with Rob-ert Smithson’s writing.
3 “O’Hara moves toward modes of hybridization and 
proliferation that are diametrically opposed to the narrowing lexical range Greenberg and Fried imagined as the cure to a threatened art criticism of the 1950s and the 1960s” (171). Shaw illustrates his point with a section of O’Hara’s poem “Second Avenue” that explicitly addresses DeKooning:
The silence that lasted for a quarter century. All
the babies were born blue. They called him “Al” and “Horseballs”in kindergarten, he had an autocratic straw face like a darkin a DeKooning where the torrent has subsided at the very centerclassism, it can be many whirlpools in a gun battle
3. See Robert Smithson, The Collected Writings , edited by Jack Flam (Berkeley: University of 
California Press, 1996). One of Smithson’s signature works for poetics, and by extension criti-
cism, is his 1967 “Language to Be Looked at and/or Things to Read”: “Simple statements are often based on language fears, and sometimes result in dogma and non-sense. . . . The mania for literalness relates to the breakdown in the rational belief in reality. Books entomb words in a synthetic rigor mortis, perhaps that is why ‘print’ is thought to have entered obsolescence. The mind of this death, however, is unrelentingly awake. . . . My sense of language is that it is matter and not ideas—i.e., printed matter” (61).
Is Art Criticism Fifty Years Behind Poetry? 259
or each individual pang in the “last mile” of electrodes, so
totally unlike xmas tree ornaments that you wonder, uhmmm?what the bourgeoisie is thinking of. Trench coat. Broken strap.
4
O’Hara practiced a complicit5 and promiscuous criticism that stands in 
stark contrast to the ideologies of formalist criticism of his time and the 
October-tinged orthodoxicalities of the 1970s and 1980s. As Shaw puts it, “O’Hara’s painting poems present . . . a special kind of interdisciplinarity, or what Michael Fried would call ‘theatricality.’ . . . They . . . initiate almost inﬁnite substitutions among discourses in their rapid, line-to-line attempt to imagine contexts for painting. It is for that reason that they seem, and are, 
antiprofessional” (179; italics added).
Both formalist and the later October -branded criticism and its many 
knockoffs preached views of meaning that, while at odds with one an-other, were sufﬁciently proscriptive as to void the full range of aesthetic approaches in the art championed and to simply dismiss (as “pernicious, ” as Fried called “Dada”)
6 work that contested the limits of received ideas of 
meaning-making. This criticism operated not by “negating” or deconstruct-ing meaning (the empty encomium of the High Orthodoxical Art) but by articulating newly emerging constructions of meaning-as-constellations (a poetics of afﬁliation, association, combine, conglomeration, collage, and coterie). In effect, both formalist and High Orthodoxical criticism see theatrical or allegorical methods, respectively, as emptying meaning. But while the former decries the putative demise of opticality and the latter valorizes it, neither has a sufﬁciently pliable approach to engage with the new semantic embodiments of the “frail / instant, ” as O’Hara puts it in his poem “For Bob Rauschenberg. ”
7 O’Hara’s “frail / instant” could be called the 
weak absorption of coterie, which, like the “unevenness” of everyday life is both discontinuous and ﬂuid, self-aware and constructive, “semantically  
4. Donald Allen, ed., The Collected Poems of Frank O’Hara  (Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 1995), 148–49.
5. See Johanna Drucker, Sweet Dreams: Contemporary Art and Complicity  (Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press, 2005).6. Shaw, 204, quoting Fried’s 1965 “Three American Painters, ” from Art and Objecthood  
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998), 259. Fried’s object of scorn is the neo-Dada of Rauschenberg and Cage. 7. Quoted by Shaw on 200, from O’Hara’s Collected Poems, 322.
260 THE FATE OF THE AESTHETIC
various and unstable, ” atomized and chaining.8 O’Hara—in his reviled  
poeticizing—was able to articulate a poetics of adjacency, of queer juxtapo-
sitions, to which his critical others remained blind.
Thomas McEvilley makes the point very succinctly in his 1982 essay 
“Heads It’s Form, Tales It’s Not Content, ” prefacing his remarks with a quote from O’Hara’s “Having a Coke with You”—
and the portrait show seems to have no faces in it at all, just paint
you suddenly wonder why in the world anyone ever did them . . .
Here’s McEvilley:
In the attempt to free art from the plane of content, the formalist tradition denied that elements of the artwork may refer outside the work toward the embracing world. Rather, the elements are to be understood as referring to one another inside the work, in an interior and self-subsistent esthetic code. The claim is imprecisely and incompletely made, however, because the formalists take much too narrow a view of what can constitute “content. ” Greenberg, for example, often uses the term “non-representational” to de-scribe “pure” artworks—those puriﬁed of the world. But as he uses it, the term seems to rule out only clear representations of physical objects such as chairs, bowls of fruit, or naked ﬁgures lying on couches. Similarly, Fried as-sumed that only “recognizable objects, persons and places” can provide the content of a painting. But art that is nonrepresentational in this sense may still be representational in others. It may be bound to the surrounding world by its reﬂection of structures of thought, political tensions, psychological attitudes, and so forth.
9
As Shaw acidly notes, to cast “the poetic” as the last bastion of private 
insights, or indeed “as a kind of metaphysics of content, of pure meaning, ” 
8. “Unevenness” is Shaw’s word to describe the mixed textures (both surfaces and ﬁelds of 
reference) in O’Hara’s poem (202). “Semantically various and unstable” is Shaw’s term for a work by Robert Rauschenberg (207).9. McEvilley’s essay was originally published in Artforum , November 1982. It was collected 
in his Art & Discontent: Theory at the Millennium  (Kingston, NY: Documentext/McPherson, 
1991); the passage is from p. 29, and the Fried citation is from “Three American Painters” (see note 2). 
Is Art Criticism Fifty Years Behind Poetry? 261
requires a concerted effort to ignore the formally radical poetries outside 
the domain of Ofﬁcial Verse Culture and especially those poetries that ex-plore collage, collision, disjunction, overlay, and contradiction. Mispre-sented “as such it is no wonder that the poetic has had a long list of detrac-tors—stretching from Greenberg and Fried to Benjamin Buchloh and James Meyer” (220). Indeed, “they” —both the prophets of a sublime late modern-
ism and the apostates who argued for dystopian postmodernism—“were all cheated of some marvelous experience / which is not going to go wasted on me which is why I am telling you about it, ” as O’Hara wryly puts it in the ﬁnal lines of “Having a Coke with You. ”
10 O’Hara is not, not nearly, a better 
critic than Greenberg and Fried, and Shaw shows O’Hara’s allegiances as be-ing more to the in between  than to any one of his shifting positions—curator, 
poet, critic, lover, social magnet, arts administrator. But more than “they” he recognized that “form is never more than an extension of content. ”
11
This is certainly not to say that the normative, descriptive, fashion- and 
market-driven modes of art criticism are to be preferred, whether written by poets or not. The problem is not that art criticism is too conceptually complex but, on the contrary, that—even at its putatively most theoreti-cal—its poetics and aesthetics are too often willfully stunted, marked by a valorized incapacity to respond to how meaning is realized through mul-tiple, incommensurable, or overlaid discourses— kinship , in Shaw’s terms—
within a single work. Meaning is not an end but a between.
12
The signiﬁcance of O’Hara (or McEvilley or Shaw) is not that they are 
poets who do criticism, which is also true of Fried, but the polymorphous dexterity of their writing; their aversion of simple description (of visual appearance or of ideas) in pursuit of phenomenological unevenness (in Shaw’s terms) or complexity found in the visual artwork they address. This is the legacy of Baudelaire, Mallarmé, Apollinaire, and Stein, not the “belle lettristic” approach that is often, and banally, contrasted with orthodoxical criticism.
10. “Having a Coke with You, ” in The Collected Poems of Frank O’Hara (Berkeley: University of 
California Press, 1995), 360.
11. Robert Creeley quoted by Charles Olson in his 1950 essay “Projective Verse, ” in his Col-
lected Prose, edited by Benjamin Friedlander (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1997), 240. 12. “The poem is at last between two persons instead of two pages, ” as O’Hara puts it in his 1959 essay “Personism: A Manifesto, ” in Collected Poems, 498.
262 THE FATE OF THE AESTHETIC
Shaw’s approach provides a useful historical context for such projects 
as M/E/A/N/I/N/G .13 In doing so, it helps to explain not only the aversion 
of radical poetics and poetry in formalist and October-ﬂavored criticism of 
the 1960s to 1980s, but also the fear of the taint of poetry by even such ap-
parently poetry-related artists as Lawrence Weiner (who declines to have his work exhibited in poetry-related contexts). Consider, for example, that Meyer, in his introduction to a recent collection of the poetry (and other writings) of Carl Andre, barely mentions contemporary poetry or poetics as an active context in which to consider this work.
14 The lesson is that 
linguistic works of Weiner or Andre (Vito Acconci or Jenny Holzer) can be deemed signiﬁcant as art only if they are purged of any connection to (radi-
cally impure, content-concatenating) poetry and poetics.
As Dominique Fourcade noted at the (Poetry Plastique) symposium, 
poetry literarily devalues visual art (we were talking about how Philip  Guston’s collaborations with Clark Coolidge had a lower economic value than comparable works without words).
15 But perhaps this devaluation pro-
vides a necessary route for removing visual art from any Aesthetic System that mocks both aesthesis and social aspiration.
16
Reading Shaw’s study of the 1950s and ’60s underscores, once again, 
how, indeed, pernicious is the cliché that poetry is ﬁfty years behind visual art. On the contrary, art criticism, insofar as it succumbs to a paranoiac 
13. M/E/A/N/I/N/G focused on artists’ writing about the visual arts, with an emphasis on con-
siderations of both feminism and painting, and included many essays by poets.  Edited by 
Susan Bee and Mira Schor, it published twenty issues from 1986 to 1996 and continues to 
publish, intermittently, online. See http://writing.upenn.edu/pepc/meaning, accessed July 6, 2009. This essay continues my reﬂections in “For M/E/A/N/I/N/G, ” which was published in  the ﬁrst issue of the magazine, December 1986,  and collected in M/E/A/N/I/N/G : An Anthology 
of Artists’ Writings , Theory , and Criticism , edited by Susan Bee and Mira Schor (Durham, NC: 
Duke University Press, 2000).14. Carl Andre, Cuts: Texts 1959–2004, edited by James Meyer (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2005). Since Andre himself refers to his work as poetry, some history of Andre’s childhood relation to poetry, and to the contemporary poetry of his youth most unlike his own, is provided. But Meyer does little to situate Andre’s poetry into the context of related poetic work, either radi-cal modernist or contemporary, and prefers not to address the formal and aesthetic issues foregrounded by Andre’s poetry with reference to the considerable body of critical writing on poetry (including visual poetry) that explores similar issues. 15. Several collaborations by Coolidge and Guston were shown at the “Poetry Plastique” show, which I cocurated with Jay Sanders, at the Marianne Boesky Gallery in 2001. See http://epc .buffalo.edu/features/poetryplastique. See also catalog essay above, p. 187.16. Johanna Drucker addresses some of these issues in “Art Theory Now: from Aesthetics to Aesthesis, ” a lecture given at the School of Visual Arts, New York, on December 11, 2007.
Is Art Criticism Fifty Years Behind Poetry? 263
fear of theatricality that induces frame-lock, lags behind poetry at its peril. 
Meanwhile, the visual and verbal arts remain complicit with one another ﬁfty years ago and today.
POST SCRIPT: IS POETRY FIFTY YEARS BEHIND POETRY? 
IS ART FIFTY YEARS AHEAD OF ART? THE SHOCKING  
AND UNEXPURGATED TRUTH . . . TOLD HERE FOR THE 
FIRST TIME
In a response to this essay on the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art blog (July 5, 2009), Kevin Killian gently chides me for not giving the origi-nal source of my ironic title, which I guess I took for granted. But the senti-ment has become a kind of received wisdom, removed from the speciﬁcs of Brion Gysin’s original remark:
Writing is ﬁfty years behind painting. I propose to apply the painters’ tech-
niques to writing; things as simple and immediate as collage or montage. Cut right through the pages of any book or newsprint . . . lengthwise, for example, and shufﬂe the columns of text. Put them together at hazard and read the newly constituted message. Do it for yourself. Use any system which suggests itself to you. Take your own words or the words said to be “the very own words” of anyone else living or dead. You’ll soon see that words don’t belong to anyone. Words have a vitality of their own and you or anybody else can make them gush into action.
17
Killian and I would both be sympathetic to Gysin’s point—and indeed my 
“experiments list” (based in part on Bernadette Mayer’s) is indebted to  Gysin (http://writing.upenn.edu/bernstein/experiments.html). Gysin was arguing for a poetry that challenged the conventional norms of Ofﬁcial Verse Culture—that would use cut-ups, visual display, parataxis, and appro-priated language to create a new kind of poetry. But it was never true that the actual practice of poetry was ahead or behind the visual arts. Gertrude Stein may get less respect in the mainstream than Pablo Picasso, but the 
17. Brion Gysin, Cut-Ups Self-Explained, in William S. Burroughs and Brion Gysin, The Third 
Mind (New York: Seaver Books, 1978), 34.
264 THE FATE OF THE AESTHETIC
one is neither ahead or behind the other. Frank O’Hara is as signiﬁcant in 
his poetry as Robert Rauschenberg in his art, to take an example from my review. And poetry has one advantage in the postwar period: its publication and criticism is not dominated by market values. (Of course, for the poète chétif this is hardly an advantage at all.) Certainly, naïve conceptions of representations, narrative continuity, and expression (what I once called “ideational mimesis”) have great credibility in Ofﬁcial Verse Culture, but no more so than in the stylistically straitjacketed critical writing (and enforced copyediting) of the major art magazines. (As I’ve said before: I don’t blame the writers, but the market-driven focus of the editors/publishers.)
No one owns art. You can own the objects, but no one—not museums, 
not artists, and not art critics, not art historians or poets—can contain how they come to mean in the world, what they mean to us, what we make them mean. What I value most in art criticism and art history (the two are as if one intertwined ﬁgure) is thinking that deﬁes the established norms, that refuses to bow to received values, that reinvents the aesthetic at every turn.
A critical writing that is dialogic rather than proscriptive. (But is that 
itself a prescription?)
Art criticism and art history, just as literary criticism and literary history, 
are made up of words and can’t avoid poetics, can’t avoid the problems of representation or the implications of tone. When art criticism represses its own writerly investments, then it falls prey to the same naïve positivism as the most conventional representational portrait, no matter how sophisti-cated it claims to be. The modes of representation in art criticism are just as much at issue as they are in a work of visual art or a poem. That’s, of course, where O’Hara comes in.
I hadn’t given that much thought to the signiﬁcance of O’Hara’s art criti-
cism until I read Shaw’s book. O’Hara’s art criticism had always seem slight, compared to his poetry and also to the art criticism of many of his contem-poraries. But Shaw makes a compelling and complex case for O’Hara’s art writing and its interconnection to his poetics. Shaw’s book is primarily, or at least at ﬁrst, about “coterie”—a term he turns from dark to light, a feat of transvaluation that is at the center of this exemplary historical study. Killian makes the crucial point that coterie has been used homophobically, 
belittling those stigmatized with it, from O’Hara’s circle to Jack Spicer’s; and there is a lesson to be drawn from that, well known, but relevant: that it is often those who claim to be free of “special” interests that have the greatest vested interests. It occurs to me that you could look at art criticism in terms of coterie too, but by reversing the stigma, pointing how much the tone of 
Is Art Criticism Fifty Years Behind Poetry? 265
interest-free imperious authority, self-assured knowledge, and doctrinaire 
aesthetics functions because it is . . . coterie criticism.
We are all coteries now (only some are in more denial about it than oth-
ers, and they are the ones that trouble my sleep).
My idea is not that we should all get along, and certainly not that the 
same things should be on our radar, but rather that we’d be better off not to cast our disagreements in terms of the ignorance of those with whom we disagree. This is harder than it may seem. Stigmatizing aesthetic or ideolog-ical disagreement as if it were the results of ignorance, fraudulence, or in-signiﬁcance is too often the way both art (and poetry) business is conducted by those who ﬁercely police what they too often regard as their own turf.
No Trespassing!Don’t get me wrong: I am ignorant, I make mistakes at every turn; it’s my 
awareness of that, to the degree I can be, that is my guide.
I am as partial and partisan as anyone. Preference and selection are a 
necessary part of aesthetic judgment. Yet, my radar might be the exact map of another person’s exclusions, just as another’s exclusions might begin to map my paradise. The relation of these two ideas (conviction in one’s aesthetic judgment and its inevitable limitations) is not irreconcilable but  dialectical.
The axiomatic wounds art. And yet art seeks this wound and deepens 
in relation to it. The fashion of the day is almost never fashionable enough unless you make it so yourself. This is as much a problem for poetry as for visual art, for poetics as much as art criticism.
It is the same problem.
POETRY BAILOUT WILL RESTORE 
CONFIDENCE OF READERS
Chairman Lehman, Secretary Polito, distinguished poets and readers—I regret 
having to interrupt the celebrations tonight with an important announcement.
As you know, the glut of illiquid, insolvent, and troubled poems is clog-
ging the literary arteries of the West. These debt-ridden poems threaten to infect other areas of the literary sector and ultimately to topple our culture industry.
Cultural leaders have come together to announce a massive poetry buy-
out: leveraged and unsecured poems, poetry derivatives, delinquent poems, and subprime poems will be removed from circulation in the biggest poetry bailout since the Victorian era. We believe the plan is a comprehensive ap-proach to relieving the stresses on our literary institutions and markets.
Let there be no mistake: the fundamentals of our poetry are sound. The 
problem is not poetry but poems.  The crisis has been precipitated by the esca-
lation of poetry debt—poems that circulate in the market at an economic loss due to their difﬁculty, incompetence, or irrelevance.
Illiquid poetry assets are choking off the ﬂow of imagination that is so 
vital to our literature. When the literary system works as it should, poetry and poetry assets ﬂow to and from readers and writers to create a produc-tive part of the cultural ﬁeld. As toxic poetry assets block the system, the poisoning of literary markets has the potential to damage our cultural insti-tutions irreparably.
As we know, lax composition practices since the advent of modernism 
led to irresponsible poets and irresponsible readers. Simply put, too many poets composed works they could not justify. We are seeing the impact on 
A statement read at an event marking the release of Best American Poetry  2008, at the New 
School, New York on September 25, 2008. David Lehman is the series editor of Best American 
Poetry, and Robert Polito is the director of the writing program at the New School. Published 
the following day on Harper’s website.
268 THE FATE OF THE AESTHETIC
poetry, with a massive loss of conﬁdence on the part of readers. What began 
as a subprime poetry problem on essentially unregulated poetry websites, has spread to other, more stable, literary magazines and presses, and con-tributed to excess poetry inventories that have pushed down the value of responsible poems.
The risks poets have taken have been too great; the aesthetic negligence 
has been profound. The age of decadence must come to an end with the imposition of oversight and regulation on poetry composition and publish-ing practices.
We are convinced that once we have removed these troubled and dis-
tressed poems from circulation, our cultural sector will stabilize and read-ers will regain conﬁdence in American literature. We estimate that for the buyout to be successful, we will need to remove from circulation all poems written after 1904.
This will be a fresh start, a new dawn of a new day. Without these illiquid 
poems threatening to overwhelm readers, we will be able to create a literary culture with a solid aesthetic foundation.
I’m Charles Bernstein and I approved this message.
IV
Recantorium
RECANTORIUM  
(A BACHELOR MACHINE, AFTER DUCHAMP AFTER KAFKA)
I, Charles, son of the late Joseph Herman, later known as Herman Joseph, 
and Shirley K., later known as Sherry, New Yorker, aged ﬁfty-eight years, arraigned personally before this Esteemed Body, and kneeling before you, Most Eminent and Reverend Readers, Inquisitors-General against hereti-cal depravity throughout the entire Poetry Commonwealth, having before my eyes and touching with my hands, the Books of Accessible Poets, swear that I have always believed, do believe, and by your help will in the future 
believe, all that is held, preached, taught, and expressed by the Books of 
Accessible Poets.
I was wrong, I apologize, I recant. I altogether abandon the false opinion 
that National Poetry Month is not good for poetry and for poets. I abjure, curse, and detest the aforesaid error and apostasy. And I now freely and openly attest to the virtues of National Poetry Month in throwing a national spotlight on poetry, so crucial to keeping verse alive in the twenty-ﬁrst  century.
I was wrong, I apologize and recant. I altogether abandon the false opinion 
that only elitist and obscure poetry should be praised. I abjure, curse, detest, and renounce the aforesaid error and aversion. And I now freely and openly 
First publicly attested at “Conceptual Poetry & Its Others, ” Poetry Center, University of Ari-
zona, Tucson, May 29, 2008; subsequently attested with codicil at Ecole normale supérieure in Lyon at “Modernisme et illisibilité”  on October 23, 2008; later translated into French by 
Abigail Lang and published in Nioque 5 (2009); reattested and conﬁrmed, with additional 
codicil, at the Museum of Chinese in America in New York, as part of Performa 2009, on  November 14, 2009. Published in Critical Inquiry 35.2 (Winter 2009) and (excerpts) in Harp-
er’s (January 2009).
272 RECANTORIUM
attest that the best way to get general readers to start to read poetry is to 
present them with broadly appealing work, with strong emotional content and a clear narrative line.
I was wrong, I apologize, I recant. I altogether abandon the false opinion 
that, to raise the proﬁle for poetry, events involving celebrities reading po-ems, such as the one each year that is the centerpiece of National Poetry Month, are not as valuable as events presenting poets reading their own work. I acknowledge and regret my error. Poets would turn off the large and wealthy audience of arts patrons. Like the retarded or crippled stepchildren in fairy tales, it is for the best to have the poets stay in the back room during the party, lest they frighten the guests.
I was wrong, I apologize, I recant. I altogether reject, abjure, and denounce 
the sarcasm that just now has undercut the sincerity of my confession. My comments about poets as retarded or crippled stepchildren are offensive. I abase and prostrate myself in humbly and sincerely asking your forgiveness and the forgiveness of all those who seek, above all, sincerity and authentic-ity in poetry.
I was wrong, I apologize, I recant. Midway in my journey as a poet, I have 
given my name in encomium and book cover endorsement, both for ads and announcements, catalogs and brochures, print and digital, to works that are not of the highest order as established by Time, Authority, and Fashion, lapsing into stubborn selection based on personal preference or apprecia-tion or liking, on intuitions and hunches, rather than rational principle and promulgated theory.
I was wrong, I apologize, I recant. I altogether abandon and renounce the 
false opinion that poetry is a social and ideological construction and not the expression of the Pure Feeling of the Poet (PFP) and declare the Sovereign Human Self (SHS) to be the sole origin of authentic expression and mean-ing. In full recognition and acknowledgment of my error, I hereby declare and swear, to all present company, that I must not hold, defend, or teach in any way whatsoever, verbally or in writing, the said false doctrine.
I was wrong, I apologize and I recant. I altogether abandon the false opinion 
that the head of a major writing organization was out of line when he called 
Recantorium 273
me “morally repugnant” for not sharing his views about poetry. As one of 
the Blessed of the doctrine of Authentic Poetry pointed out in rebuking me, he is entitled to his views, and my criticism of him was divisive and partisan and morally repugnant.
I was wrong, I apologize, I recant. I altogether abandon the false opinion 
that Ofﬁcial Verse Culture, through prestigious prizes awarded for merit and reviews in nationally circulated publications selected for major im-portance, and including the appointments of the poets laureate, does not represent the best and the ﬁnest, the most profound and signiﬁcant, the richest and most rewarding, poetry of our nation. And now that I myself, in my person and through my work, have ascended into this Exalted Company, and joined the rareﬁed and incorrigible company of Ofﬁcial Verse Culture, do here cast stones and sticks and call an abomination and curse and scorn and repudiate any who would not cherish and adore both the process and product of that Ofﬁcial Verse Culture that has embraced, with trepidation and embarrassment, and with noses tightly pinched and ear muffs in place, my unworthy ascent.
I was wrong, I apologize and recant. I altogether abandon the false opinion 
that there was a value in working together collaboratively with other poets along the lines of shared aesthetic engagements. I abjure, curse, and detest the aforesaid error and aversion. I now see clearly and openly, and without coercion acknowledge to all virtually or actually present, now and in the future, in this life and in all subsequent lives, on earth as well as on other planets populated by intelligent beings, that only poets working in solitude and individually can produce poems of enduring value.
I did wrong, I’m sorry, I recant. Having advocated, in youth, a set of radical 
approaches to poetry, I later abandoned or altered or undermined these very approaches of my own and my comrades, devising, shifting my views with the tides, putting my personal aesthetics above these principles, my preferences and interests above the ideals and interests of the group.
I did wrong and was wrong, I recant and renounce. The time for my ways 
erroneous and peripatetic, errant and wandering, has expired; the time for a poetry of the doggedly particular and the quotidian detail, of the unsymboli-cal, of the minor and the off-key, has expired; just as the time has expired 
274 RECANTORIUM
for obscurantist theories propping up obscurantist poems, poems that turn 
their backs on meaning, story, emotion, and pleasure, as these values have been promulgated in the Books of the Accessible Poets, which is the only sure guide away from empty rhetoric and toward the pure achievement of meaning, story, emotion, and pleasure. I now, and I aver this before you as-sembled here, virtually and actually, before you I aver and embrace, a poetry without limits of time or place, a poetry of universal address and true to the timeless human spirit.
I was wrong, I apologize, I recant. I altogether abandon the false doctrine 
of social poetics in which poems are read in their cultural and bibliographic contexts. I abjure, curse, and detest the aforesaid error and apostasy. I now declare, openly and without fear of punishment, ridicule, neglect, dispar-agement, or coercion, to all virtually or actually present, now and in the future, in this life and in all subsequent lives, on earth as well as on other planets populated by intelligent beings, that social poetics demeans poetry, which should be read, in its purest form, as a Timeless Expression of Uni-versal Human Feeling (UHF).
Wrong was I and wrong still am I, yet and still, ’til now as I renounce my 
unseemly and self-mocking infatuation with performance and here declare for all of you to hear clearly and without equivocation: the performance of a poem undermines its essential and heart-felt meaning, for poetry is the Su-preme Art of the written word and the written word only. To contaminate poetry with performance, as I have done and advanced with arguments both sophistical and deplorable, is an abomination to be scorned with stigmas.
I was wrong, I apologize, I recant. I totally and absolutely, with shame and 
guilt, abandon the false doctrine that social and cultural history might in-clude poetry in its ﬁeld of study or use poetry as models for thinking about society and culture. I abjure, curse, detest, and renounce the aforesaid er-ror and aversion. I now admit and acknowledge, proclaim and announce, openly and without coercion or fear or punishment or ridicule or disparage-ment, to all virtually or actually present, now and in the future, in this life and in all subsequent lives, on earth as well as on other planets populated by intelligent beings, that prose narratives are the only suitable works for cultural and historical study and that expository prose can provide the only suitable models for such study.
Recantorium 275
I was wrong, I apologize, I recant. I altogether and totally, completely and 
thoroughly, without reservation, quibble, or question, and with newly faithful heart, abandon the false doctrine that meandering, digressive, or paratactic prose, prose that fails to state clearly its meaning, sentences that get caught up in their own rhythms and sounds and cadences, nu-ances and nooks, rather than in getting to the point or meat or heart of the matter or meaning or substance, as I say, I abandon and renounce the false doctrine that crooked and bent prose can have any value for truth-ful discourse or accurate representation. I abjure, curse, and detest the aforesaid error and aversion and the many related errors and aversions that ﬂow inevitably as a consequence of the aforesaid error and aversion, as a baby inevitably ﬂows from its mother or an ocean from its rivers or a false conclusion from a ﬂawed premise or a disease from a virus or death from repeated blows with a blunt instrument or gorging from a starving child given food. Clearly written expository prose, with a delineated argument including a beginning, middle, and end, is the only guarantor of Rational  Mind.
I done and went wrong, disregarding the views of Joe Sixpack in my desire 
to ingratiate myself with Nunnely Ninepack. I here before you assembled renounce the idea that American poetry has anything to learn from French poetry, whether from its Baudelairean decadence, its Rimbaudian dark mys-ticisms, its Lautréamontian obfuscation, or from its Mallerméan dandifying and aestheticism, a dandyism and aestheticism that takes us away from the thinking of the common man and toward a fetishizing of language and its sounds and its placement on the page, on unhealthy and irrational thought processes, on chimerical values that lead away from manly truth and toward a girly preciousness and pretentiousness. I furthermore denounce and re-nounce the value of difﬁculty—of illisibilité— in poetry, which is no more 
than a cynical ploy to garner attention from work that is empty. And so I to-day renounce the white space of the page as empty, meaningless, signifying nothing to no one, no way no how, a void, a black hole of erased life, from vitality and vibrancy and natural meaning, which is, which must always be, red, white, and blue.
I was wrong, I apologize and recant. I altogether abandon the false doctrine 
that ambiguity and irony are anything more than sophistry. I abjure, curse, and detest the aforesaid error and apostasy, which I have lapsed into again 
276 RECANTORIUM
and again, like a habitual drinker seeking his ﬁve o’clock martini, or an ero-
tomaniac seeking nonprocreative sexual experiences, or a worker idling on the job, or a habitual truant passing notes in class.
I was wrong, I apologize, I recant. I altogether abandon the false opinion 
that abnormal poetry techniques such as fragmentation, dissociation, dis-continuity, collage, disjunction, seriality, constellation, and unnatural con-straints of whatever kind have any contribution to make to poetic craft. After it had been notiﬁed to me that the said doctrine was contrary to the Books of the Accessible Poets, I wrote and published works in which I dis-cuss this new doctrine already condemned, and adduced arguments of great cogency in its favor, without presenting any negation of these, and for this reason I have been vehemently rebuked. I abjure, curse, detest, and renounce the aforesaid errors and aversions, which are symptoms of a queer and degenerate avoidance of meaning, coherence, truth, morality, and the literary tradition (if rightly understood). I must not hold, defend, or teach in any way whatsoever, verbally or in writing, the said false doctrine.
I was wrong, I apologize, I recant. I altogether abandon the false opinion 
that form in poetry is political and social. I abjure, curse, and detest the aforesaid error and aversion, which is a symptom of a queer and degenerate avoidance of meaning, coherence, truth, morality, and the literary tradition (if rightly understood). Form in poetry is a transparent means of conveying the emotional truth of the poem and should never interfere with, or contra-dict, the emotional truth of the poem.
I was wrong, I apologize, and I recant. I altogether abandon, disavow, and 
retract the false doctrine that the Imagination is anything more than can be grasped by Rational Mind. I abjure, curse, and detest the aforesaid error and aversion, which I have lapsed into again and again, like a milkman singing on his route or a pony that refuses to be ridden.
I was wrong, I most humbly apologize, I recant. I altogether abandon, dis-
avow, and retract the false doctrine that poets should write poetics and criti-cism. I recant my cant. I abjure, curse, detest, and renounce the aforesaid error and apostasy and the many related errors and apostasies that ﬂow inevitably as a consequence of the aforesaid error and apostasy, as a baby inevitably ﬂows from its mother or an ocean from its rivers or a false conclu-sion from a ﬂawed premise or a disease from a virus or death from repeated 
Recantorium 277
blows with a blunt instrument or gorging from a starving child given food. 
Poetics and critical thinking inhibit the creativity of the poet and should be left to academics.
I am ﬁlled with regret and overcome with the errors of my ways, for I have 
preferred the crooked path over the straight, the bent over the upright, the hunched over the erect. I recant my cant. I recant and cant my recanta-tion. While supporting the work of small and independent and noncom-mercial publishers, presses, magazines, zines, mags, rags, periodicals, blogs, organizations, groups, galleries, websites, series, centers, and noncenters,  I nonetheless, with callous disregard for these loyalties and afﬁliations, have betrayed, abandoned, and disappointed these publishers, presses,  magazines, zines, mags, rags, periodicals, blogs, organizations, groups, web-sites, series, centers, and noncenters by arranging and agreeing to have my work published, presented, and co-opted by established and mainstream and commercial publishers, presses, magazines, journals, periodicals, blogs,  
organizations, groups, galleries, websites, series, and centers.
I am with regret ﬁllèd and by errors o’erwhelmed, having chosen the broken 
path over the righteous, the warped over the erect. I cant and recant. I alto-gether abandon the false doctrine that poets can remain radical while work-ing as academics. After it had been notiﬁed to me that the said doctrine was contrary to the Books of the Accessible Poets, I wrote and published works in which I discuss this new doctrine already condemned, and adduce argu-ments of great cogency in its favor, without presenting any negation of these, and for this reason I have been vehemently and justly rebuked. I abjure, curse, and detest the aforesaid error and aversion. Academic employment is the mark of a compromised poet who has sold out. Radical poets prove their authenticity through poverty.
I am with regret ﬁllèd and by errors o’erwhelmed, having chosen the broken 
path over the righteous, the warped over the erect. I cant and recant. I alto-gether abandon the false opinion that advocacy or partisan positioning has any place in poetry and poetics. Poetry and poetics should be reserved for those who look beyond the contentions of the present into the eternal veri-ties, the truths beyond this world that never change, as represented in the Books of the Accessible Poets. I further stipulate that I recant, categorically, that poetry is an activity of the intellect and herewith and hereby declare and proclaim that true poetry is an affair of the heart and only the heart.
278 RECANTORIUM
I was wrong, I apologize most humbly before you, and with great contri-
tion I recant. I altogether abandon, renounce and revile the use of found or  appropriated texts in poems, whether attributed or unattributed, or the use of any external constraints, operations, procedures, algorithms, engines, or devices, whether machinic or manual, automated or calculated, digital or analogic, real or imaginary, virtual or actual. Such approaches to poetry soil, defame, and besmirch all traces of human expression, which is the neces-sary foundation for all poetry, and in pernicious and insidious ways foster depersonalization and inauthenticity by means of the substitution of the plagiarized and manufactured for the original and creative.
I was wrong, I apologize, I recant. I altogether abandon, renounce, and re-
vile syntactic and grammatical turpitude, improper coupling of subjects and verbs and objects, run-on sentences and sentence fragments, suppression of natural connectives, erosion of necessary subordination of clauses, inten-tional and unconscious solecisms, or any relaxation, deviation, perversion, or inversion of the highest and strictest standards for English.
I am with regret ﬁllèd and by errors o’erwhelmed, having chosen the bro-
ken path over the righteous, the warped over the erect. I cant and recant. I altogether abandon and renounce the false opinion that American poetry is founded on a mixed and miscegenated overlay of languages from the native tongues of immigrants to the echoes of Africa to the lost language of natives, indigenous to our social space. I abandon and altogether renounce the false opinion that slangs, patois, pidgins, accents, dialects, and ideolects are any more than bad grammar deserving an F and a slap on the face by those who uphold grammatical correctness and decry the deterioration of proper En-
glish usage and pronunciation. I altogether abandon and renounce the false 
opinion that bilingualism, trilingualism, and n-lingualisms have any place 
in our literature and I endorse those efforts, real and imaginary, to build a wall, from shore to shore, that separates us from any foreign contamination of our linguistic norms.
I am ﬁlled with regret and overcome with the errors of my ways, for I have 
preferred the crooked path over the straight, the bent over the upright, the hunched over the erect. I recant and cant my recantation. I altogether aban-don the fetishizing of the sounds and forms and appearances and rhetoric of a poem. The innermost meaning of poems reveals itself when sound, form, appearance, rhetoric, and oratory fall away.
Recantorium 279
I was wrong, I apologize, I recant. I altogether abandon the false opinion 
that beauty can be found in the tattered, torn, ripped, battered, crippled, crumpled, odd, discounted, inconsequential, or in the asymmetric, particu-lar, approximate, conceptual, cacophonous or cacophanous, in the clotted or off-key, in stray marks on the page, or in the transient or ephemeral. Beauty is always and only the manifestation of the ideal or perfect; beauty is only and always the image of the eternally true. After it had been notiﬁed to me that the said doctrine was contrary to the Books of the Accessible Poets, and the beliefs and doctrines of all poets and readers who believe in authen-ticity of expression, whether true or not, memoir or fake memoir, lyric or epic, nonetheless and still, even though I had been warned and cursed, I persisted, wrote, and published works in which I discuss this new doctrine already condemned, and adduced arguments of great cogency in its favor, without presenting any nulliﬁcation of these arguments, in accord with de-cency and right thinking and the moral approach to poetry and poetics, and for this reason I have been vehemently rebuked. And I say and declare, vow and proclaim, to all assembled here or who may read this document, in printed or digital form, or who may hear it through audio recordings: I must not hold, defend, or teach in any way whatsoever, verbally or in writing, the said false doctrine.
I was wrong, I apologize, I recant. Like the black sheep who strays too far 
from the adoring ﬂock, or like the drunk with a pale green beret who, deep into the night, and desperate for one more absinthe before closing time, babbles uncontrollably to the deaf and crippled barkeep, I embraced an elit-ism that put me out of touch with the sentiments, feelings, convictions, beliefs, preferences, perspectives, and dyspepsia of everyday, ordinary, run-of-the-mill people, the Johns and Joans and Janes and Jills, the Billys and Bobs, the Shirleys and Toms, the Frans and Fritzes, Millys and Moes, not only thinking I was better than John and Joe, Mary and Harry, but that their sentiments, feelings, convictions, beliefs, preferences, perspectives, and dyspepsia did not matter. I spent my time hunting for thoughts rather than hunting quail. My solipsism overcame me, so that I wrote, and pro-fessed for others to write, words that communicated to no one, that meant  nothing, that deﬁed the laws of meaning and the fundamentals of gram-mar; praising—over and above clear sense and good syntax—the incoher -
ent, the nonsensical, the aberrant, the foolish, the deformed, the contra-dictory, the awkward, the frivolous, the ungainly, the self-indulgent, the infantile, the stubborn, the phony and fake, the prevaricating, the disorderly.  
280 RECANTORIUM
In my promiscuous dalliance with affect rather than emotion, I cast my lot 
with the excessively cerebral and the cerebrally excessive. I recant this cant. Now I stand before you to repudiate and abjure, to cast away and revile, this stiff-necked arrogance in order to dedicate myself to the freedom in right thinking.
I was wrong, I apologize, I recant. Like a rat seeking a dark cavity to eat 
its hapless prey, I succumbed to the dictatorship of relativism, a state of profound confusion in which I could not recognize anything as deﬁnitive and based my judgments solely on my own ego and desires. In this graceless state, I falsely believed that the real tyranny was intolerance to those who do not adhere to the aesthetic values of honesty, coherence, clarity, and truth as revealed to all with a moral conviction and a commitment to the time-less human story. I repudiate this gutless indulgence toward benighted and fallen ideas and commit myself to the dictatorship of obedience.
I was in error, I apologize, I recant. I altogether abandon the false doctrine 
of Midrashic Antinomianism and Bent Studies, which I have promulgated in writings, lectures, and teaching, with its base and cowardly insistence on ethical, dialogic, and situational values rather than ﬁxed and immutable moral laws. I loved language more than truth, discourse more than reality, and so allowed to spread, in myself and in others, an intellectual virus that uproots the plain sense of the word.
I was wrong, I apologize, I recant. I altogether abandon the false opinion that the 
sun is the center of the world and immovable, and that the earth is not the center of the world, and moves. I must not hold, defend, or teach in any way whatsoever, verbally or in writing, the said false doctrine.
Quivering with tiny, rapid oscillations, these recantations are inscribed 
upon the bed of my thought, as a harrow incises the ground before the seeds are planted. My sentence is written onto me as I merge with it, yet I cannot comprehend it, even as it apprehends me. For yet, you have already seen, my errors abound around me and I, I am engulfèd by them, as a harpooned whale is overcome by the very waters that had buoyed him. I am in anxi-ety and in sorrow, for my wrongs known and unknown. For I have, here, now, in this very moment, done badly and wrongly with the hypocrisy, the bad faith, of this recantation, which reﬂects pride and arrogance, ﬂippancy, sarcasm, resentment, hyperbole, and a fundamentally false analogy, and I 
Recantorium 281
regret, already as my mouth speaks the words, my unsupportable and of-
fensive identiﬁcations, in placing myself, even if only imaginatively or rhe-torically or didactically, even if only parodically or satirically or ironically, in the position of poets and writers and artists and scientists in the past who confronted most cruel, most terrible, and most violent sanctions for their work, for their thinking, and for their discoveries, but also poets and writers and artists and scientists in the present, now, in this moment, as we speak and as we listen, here and in other places, at home and abroad, who daily and even hourly confront most violent, most terrible, and most cruel sanctions for their work, for their thinking, and for their discoveries, while I am at leisure, relatively free of ﬁerce and wounding reprisals and may cant and recant, recant and cant, for the most part, at my own discretion. So, verily, I have fallen into error deep, an error I cannot ironize or satirize or joke my way out of, and I have a queasy feeling of unease in my regret, for I realize I am making a mistake, that these words are all out of propor-tion and grotesquely exaggerated in suggesting an equivalence of violent political repression with often minor and petty, silly and stupid, ignorant and harmless, doctrines, beliefs, and sentiments, or, indeed, sometimes perfectly reasonable views and perspectives, with which I have had cause to quarrel, and whose only crime is my disagreement, fomented by an increas-ingly inexcusable and unjustiﬁed crankiness, ungratefulness, belligerence, and abetted by a morbid fascination with the structure of such disciplining machines, perfected by a series of reigns of terror, from all of which I have been spared (or else such exercises as this would be impossible, since it is my freedom, however relative and circumscribed, that both lets me com-pose this and is the measure of its failure). For after all is done and said, after the fury and the sound, after the pomp and bombast and self-regard, after the myopia and insufferably inappropriate and unjustiﬁed delusions of persecution, this recantation enacts a false and offensive analogy to woe-fully pernicious, life-destroying belief systems, states, or religions. And for this I recant my cant, cant and recant. I am wrong, I have strayed from the path of decency, restraint, and honor.
Therefore, desiring to remove from the minds of your Eminences, and of 
all faithful Poets and Poetry Readers, this vehement suspicion, justly con-ceived against me, with sincere heart and unfeigned faith I abjure, curse, and detest the aforesaid errors and aversions, and generally every other er-ror, apostasy, and sect whatsoever contrary to the said Books of Accessible 
Poets and I swear that in the future I will never again say or assert, verbally 
282 RECANTORIUM
or in writing, anything that might furnish occasion for a similar suspicion 
regarding me; but that should I know any dissenter, or person suspected of dissent, I will denounce him to the Inquisitor of the place where I may be and also to the Inquisitor that is in me, that I have become. Further, I swear and promise to fulﬁll and observe in their integrity all penances that have been, or that shall be, imposed upon me. And, in the event of my contraven-ing any of these promises and oaths, I submit myself to all the pains and penalties imposed and promulgated in the canons and other constitutions, general and particular, against such delinquents as myself.
I, the said Charles Bernstein, have abjured, sworn, promised, and bound 
myself as above; and in witness of the truth thereof I have with my own hand subscribed the present document of my abjuration and abjection, and recited it word for word at Tucson, formally S-cuk Son, at the base of the Black Mountain, in the long shadow of Baboquivari, in the County of Pima, State of Arizona, on the border of Estados Unidos Mexicanos, on the Last Day of May, in the year Two Thousand and Eight of the current era.
