Derrida, an Egyptian 
On the Problem of the Jewish Pyramid 
PETER SLOTERDI]K 
TRANSLAT ED BY WIELAND HOBAN 
polity 
First published in French as Derrida, un Egyptien © Maren Sell Editeurs, 
Paris, 2006. Translated from the original German text. 
This English edition © Polity Press, 2009 
Polity Press 
65 Bridge Street 
Cambridge CB2 1 UR, UK 
Polity Press 
350 Main Street 
Maiden, MA 02148, USA 
All rights reserved. Except for the quotation of short passages for the 
purpose of criticism and review, no part of this publication may be 
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by 
any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, 
without the prior permission of the publisher. 
ISBN-13: 978-0-7456-4638-1 (hardback) 
ISBN-13: 978-0-7456-4639-8 (paperback) 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library. 
Designed and typeset in 12/17pt ITC Garamond Light 
by Peter Ducker MISTD 
Printed and bound in Great Britain 
by MPG Books Limited, Bodmin, Cornwall 
The publisher has used its best endeavours to ensure that the URLs for 
external websites referred to in this book are correct and active at the 
time of going to press. However, the publisher has no responsibility for 
the websites and can make no guarantee that a site will remain live or 
that the content is or will remain appropriate. 
Every effort has been made to trace all copyright holders, but if any have 
been inadvertently overlooked the publishers will be pleased to include 
any necessary credits in any subsequent reprint or edition. 
For further information on Polity, visit our website: 
www.politybooks.com 
Contents 
Acknowledgements vii 
Preliminary Note viii 
1 Luhmann and Derrida 1 
2 Sigmund Freud and Derrida 11 
3 Thomas Mann and Derrida 19 
4 Franz Borkenau and Derrida 29 
5 Regis Debray and Derrida 41 
6 Hegel and Derrida 51 
7 Boris Groys and Derrida 65 
Index 75 
v 
Acknowledgements 
I would like to take this opportunity to thank 
Daniel Bougnoux, who told me during an 
encounter in Villeneuve-Ies-Avignons about the 
event 'A Day of Derrida', which was planned for 
21 November 2005 at the Centre Pompidou in 
Paris. 
He later suggested to me that I too should thank 
Derrida by commemorating him. It was this invi­
tation that led me to write the present text. 
vii 
Preliminary Note 
Nothing seems more natural than for the living to 
forget the dead, and nothing is as obvious as the 
fact that the dead haunt the living. Of all the things 
said by Derrida with reference to his approac hing 
death in the summer of 2004, the statement that 
occurs to me most often is the one in which he 
professed to harbour two utterly contradictory 
convictions relating to his posthumo us 'existence ': 
he was certain that he would be forgotten as soon 
as he died, yet at the same time that something of 
his work would survive in the cultural memory. 
These two certainties, he explained, both existed 
within him in an almost unrelated fashion. Each 
was accompanied by the feeling of complete self­
evidence, and each was conclusive in its own way 
without having to take the opposing claim into 
account. 
viii 
Preliminary Note 
In the following, I would like to attempt to 
approach the figure of Derrida in the light of this 
declaration. It seems to me that this statement 
shows us more than simply a person in his fortu­
itously contradictory nature. Rather, through its 
unreconciled positing of two alternatel y valid 
observations, it has an expressive dimension that 
reveals something of Derrida's 'fundamental posi­
tion' [Grundstellung] -if I might be allowed to 
apply that Heideggerian expression ad hominem 
just this once. Derrida's words amount to a self­
description that almost has the character of a 
metaphysical statement. He thus concedes that in 
'the real', whatever that might mean, there are 
oppositions that are incapable of synthesis, and 
coexist despite being mutually exclusive . Because 
these oppositions form part of the speaker's own 
thoughts and experience and determine him, this 
concession at once leads us to an observation 
about the philosopher: that he experienced him­
self as a place in which the non-uni fying 
encounter between mutually incompa tible evi­
dences occurred. One could probably take this 
ix 
Preliminary Note 
observation as a point of departure, and ask 
whether the tireless insistence on the ambiguity 
and polyvalence of signs and statements that is 
inseparably associated with the physiognomy of 
this author could perhaps have indicated that he 
experienced himself as th� vessel or collection 
point of oppositions that refused to join and form 
a simple identity. 
This comment could already provide the main 
outline for a philosophical portrait of Derrida: his 
path was defined by a constantly alert concern not 
to be pinned down to one particular identity - a 
concern that was no less profound than the 
author's conviction that his place could only be at 
the forefront of intellectual visibility. One of the 
most admirable achievemen ts of this philosoph­
ical life is the fact that it was able to maintain the 
simultaneity of the utmost visibility and a resolute 
non-identity with any specific image of itself -in 
a shimmering parabola extending over four 
decades of his existence as a public character. 
There are essentially only two ways to do justice 
to a thinker. The first is to open his works and 
x 
Preliminary Note 
encounter him in the movements of his sentences, 
the flow of his arguments and the architecture of 
his chapters -one could refer to this as a singu­
larizing form of reading in which justice is inter­
preted as an assimilation to the unique. It would 
be an especially natural choice in the case of such 
an author as Derrida, who never wanted to be 
anything other than a radically attentive reader of 
the major and minor texts whose sum total con­
stitutes the occiden tal archive -assuming one 
gives the word 'reader' a sufficiently explosive 
meaning . The other way is to move from the text 
to the context and locate the author in relation to 
metapersonal horizons that reveal something 
about his true meaning -at the risk that his own 
text may be assigned less importance than the 
larger context in which his words echo. This 
approach amounts to a desingularizing reading in 
which one understands justice as a feeling for con­
stellations. Derrida himself clearly preferred the 
first approach and did not expect many favourable 
results from the second, as he knew very well that 
it was especially attractive for those who wanted 
xi 
Preliminary Note 
to make him all too easy to deal with. Hence, 
when the occasion arose, he defended himself 
politely and clearly against Jurgen Haberm as's 
attempt to declare him a Jewish mystic. In answer 
to this uncomfortable identification he remarke d, 
with subtle irony: 'so I am not demanding that one 
should read me as if my texts could transport 
anyone into a state of intuitive ecstasy, but I do 
demand that one should be more careful about 
mediations and more critical towards translations 
and diversions via contexts that are often very far 
from my own' 
If I have chosen, keeping this warning in mind, 
to take the second path in the following, there are 
two very different reasons for this. The first is that 
there is already no lack of ecstatic and literal, not 
to say hagiographic readings of Derrida to be found 
everywhere; the second is that I cannot shake off 
the impression that, with all the justified admiration 
for this author, it is rare to find a sufficien tly 
In Florian R6tzer, Franzosische Philosophen im Gespriich [French 
Philosophers in Conversation] (Munich: K. Boer Verlag, 1987), 
p.74. 
xii 
Preliminary Note 
distanced assessment of his position in the field of 
contemporary theory. lbis call for distance is an ex­
pression of esteem; for if one can also understand 
it as an antidote to the dangers of a cultic recep­
tion, it is all the more necessary in order to develop 
an image of the mountain range from which la mon­
tagne Derrida rises up as one of the highest peaks. 
In the following I shall sketch seven vignettes ex­
amining this thinker in relation to authors from re­
cent tradition and the present day: Niklas Luhmann, 
Sigmund Freud, Thomas Mann, Franz Borkenau, 
Regis Debray, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel and 
Boris Groys. 
xiii 
1 I Luhmann and Derrida 
Of all the constellations in which Derrida's work 
could be placed, the one involving Luhmann 's 
ceuvre is the most outlandish -but also the most 
revealing. Each of the two thinkers has been hon­
oured with the highest and most problematic 
praise that can be bestowed upon an author in the 
field of theory: that he was the Begel of the twen­
tieth century. Titles of this kind may be attractive 
for superficial reflection and useful for public rela­
tions, but they can hardly accompany any serious 
interest. None the less, they possess a certain char­
acterizing power in the case of both these emi­
nent figures, in so far as 'Begel' is not simply a 
proper name, but also refers to a programme or a 
position in an educational process. To mention 
Begel is to speak of culminat ion, the non plus 
ultra and exhaustion; at the same time, the name 
1 
Luhmann and Derrida 
stands for synthetic and encyclopedic energies 
that can only appear in the calm after the storm­
or, as Kojeve and Queneau might have put it, on 
the Sunday after history. These names mark a con­
fluence of imperial and archival ambitions . 
It would obviously be complet ely pointless to 
examine Derrida and Luhmann in terms of their 
respectively unique Hegeliani sm. Nor were the 
two men Sunday thinkers, but rather the opposite: 
tireless workers who made Sunday a working day 
-literally and for fundamental reasons -and fur­
thermore held the conviction that on holidays, one 
either takes care of private correspondence or 
remains silent. What can be said is that both 
thinkers were concerned with completion and, 
while conveying the appearance of innovati on, 
were perfecting and retouching the finished image 
of a tradition that could not be extended any fur­
ther. There is a certain irony in the fact that, as we 
can see today, all those who thought that de con­
struction and systems theory -constructs that 
emerged with a distinct profile from the 1970s on 
had ushered in a new age of thought that 
2 
Luhmann and Derrida 
opened up unlimited horizons for theoretical 
work were mistaken. In reality, both conceptual 
approaches were the finished result of logical 
processes that had shaped the thought of the nine­
teenth and twentieth centuries. In the case of Der­
rida, this involved the conclusion of the linguistic 
or semiological turn according to which the twen­
tieth century had belonged to the philosophies of 
language and writing; in the case of Luhmann, on 
the other hand, it was the completion of the aban­
donment of philosophy called for by Wittgenstein, 
achieved through a resolute withdrawal of thought 
from the tradition of philosophies of the spirit and 
language in order to reposition themselves in the 
field of metabiology, the general logic of differ­
ences between system and environment. What 
both effects have in common with the case of 
Hegel is that they use the final possibilities of a 
given grammar to the full, and thus give their suc­
cessors the initially euphoric feeling of starting at 
a high point. This subsequently gives way to the 
alarming realization that if one starts at the peak, 
the only way to continue is downwards. 
3 
Luhmann and Derrida 
In all other respects , the differences between the 
two Hegels of the twentieth century could hardly 
be greater. A certain superiority on Derrida's part 
is most evident in the fact that -like no other 
thinker except Heidegger -he always operated at 
the outermost edges of tradition, and thus kept tra­
dition, however fractured, on his side. This ex­
plains the incredible effect of his work in the 
academic world, where de construction proved to 
be the last chance of a theory that achieves inte­
gration through disintegration� by breaking 
through the boundaries of the archive, it offered a 
possibility of holding it together. Luhmann , by 
contrast, left the philosop hical archive behind, 
contenting himself with the ostensibly modest ti­
tle of a sociologist of world society. To him, the 
only significance the philosophical library of the 
Old Europe still had was as a reservoir of verbal 
figures with which the priests and intellectuals of 
former times attempted to grasp the whole. From 
the perspective of general systems theory, philos­
ophy as a whole is an exhausted, totalizing lan­
guage game whose instruments corresponded to 
4 
Luhmann and Derrida 
the semantic horizon of historical societies, but can 
no longer do justice to the primary fact of moder­
nity, namely the progressive differentiation of the 
social system. 
It is regrettable that the two Hegels of the twen­
tieth century did not respond extensively and 
reciprocally to each other; thus we have no com­
prehensive minutes of the virtual logical summit 
conference of postmodern thought . It would have 
been immeasu rably exciting for the intellectual 
community to experience the two eminent intelli­
gences of our epoch interacting in a situation of 
elaborated dialogue. As both Derrida and Luh­
mann were of an extremely polite nature , each 
would naturally have resisted the temptation to 
treat the other's work reductively, let alone canni­
balistically, as is normally the case among rivals 
for the highest position in the field of intellectual 
observation. None the less, each would have had 
to attempt assimilating though not absorptive 
translations of the other into his own terms -
which, with two such masters of scepticism 
towards the very concept of the own, would have 
5 
Luhmann and Derrida 
proved a stimulating exercise, and the observers 
of these translations would have had the privilege 
of being able to observe the reciprocal observa­
tions of the most conceptually powerful observers . 
Luhmann certainly paid close attention to Der­
rida's work, though nothing is known about 
Derrida returning the observation - it would seem 
that he never explicitly acknowledged the work 
of the scholar from Bielefeld. 
Luhmann saw Derrida's deconstruction of the 
metaphysical tradition as an undertaking closely 
related to his own intentions, in the sense that he 
saw the same post-ontological energies at work in 
it that drove his own systemic theory project. He 
openly admitted that de construction was and 
would remain a relevant option: that it indeed did 
precisely 'what we can do now' 1 This means that 
de construction is a strictly dated form of theoreti­
cal behaviour -dated in the sense that it could 
1 Niklas Luhmann, 'Dekonstruktion als Beobachtung zweiter 
Ordnung' [Deconstruction as Second-Order Observation], in 
Aujsiitze und Reden [Essays and Speeches] , ed. Oliver Jahraus 
(Stuttgart: Reclam, 2001), p. 286. 
6 
Luhmann and Demda 
only appear on the scene after the conclusion of 
conventional theory's historical formation, and 
thus consisten tly remains connected to a 'situa­
tion' to which Luhmann assigns five attributes: 
post-metaphy sical, post-ontological , post-conven­
tional, postmodern and post-catastrophic.2 
Deconstruc tion, according to Luhmann, presup­
poses the 'catastrophe of modernity' which 
should be thought of as a shift from the form of 
stability existing in traditional hierarchical-central­
ist society to the form of stability found in our 
modern , differentiate d, multifocal society. Once 
multifocality is taken as a point of departure, all 
theory moves to the level of second-order obser­
vation: one no longer attempts a direct descrip­
tion of the world, but rather re-descr ibes -and 
thus deconstructs -existing descriptions of the 
world. One could say that Luhmann honoured 
Derrida by crediting him with the achievement of 
finding a solution to the fundamental logical task 
of the postmodern situation: switching from 
2 Ibid., p. 286. 
7 
Luhmann and Derrida 
stability through cenfring and solid foundations 
to stability through greater flexibility and decen­
tring. With a sure feeling for the latent pathos of 
deconstruction, Luhmann adds the following to 
his concluding acknow ledgemen t: 'Thus under­
stood, deconstruction will survive its own de con­
struction as the most relevant description of 
modern society's self-descriptio n.'3 
The decisive element here is the seemingly 
harmless verb 'survive' In using it, Luhmann may 
have touched on the motivational core of the 
other Hegel's work. One could indeed think that 
Derrida devoted his ambition to the development 
of a form of theory that would always have a 
future and the potential to become a tradition; this 
would be achieved by permitting and even 
demanding an application to itself, in the certainty 
that it would always emerge from such a test in a 
regenerated and re-consol idated state. This trick 
could only be pulled off by a theory that was 
always already lying in its own grave, so to speak, 
3 Ibid. p. 291. 
8 
Luhmann and Derrida 
rising from it only for repeated burials. Could it 
be that the core impulse of deconstruction was to 
pursue a project of construction with the aim of 
creating an undeconstructible survival machine? 
2 I Sigmund Freud and Derrida 
Such questions, which are really suggestions , put 
one in a dreamlike frame of mind. In its inner drift 
one finds the motifs of classical metaphysics 
re-establishing themselves as if under an associa­
tive compulsion. For me, a reverie of this kind 
involuntarily calls up memorie s of Sigmund 
Freud's late works. I am thinking in particular 
of the text Moses and Monotheism, which was 
written by the psychologist on the threshold of 
death and has remained a constant bone of con­
tention since the publication of the first version in 
1937 and the revised book form in 1939 -irksome 
to Jews, foolish to Europeans . As is well known, 
the first part under the heading 'Moses, an 
Egyptian' -shows Freud developing the 'mon­
strous notion' that the 'man Moses, the liberator 
of his people, who gave them their religion and 
11 
Sigmund Freud and Derrida 
their laws'! was in reality an Egyptian by culture 
and nationali ty. In the second section, with the 
hovering title 'If Moses Was an Egyptian 
Freud develops the theory, carefully considered 
and bold at the same time, that the distinguished 
Egyptian Moses must then have been a follower of 
the solar-monotheistic Aten religion, introduced 
by Akhenaten in the fourteenth century BC, who, 
after the reactions of the priests of Amon, saw no 
possibili ty of propagating the unpopular new faith 
in his homeland and among his own people. Sub­
sequently he joined the captive Jewish people to 
lead them out of Egypt -with the intention of 
resuming the monotheistic experiment in a new 
location with other people. Thus he taught the 
Jews the Egyptian custom of circumcision, the 
conventions of religious arrogance and also 
the strictness towards oneself that a strictly mono­
latrous religion must demand of its followers -
or rather its test subjects. The ability to be 
1 Sigmund Freud, Moses and Monotheism (New York: Vintage, 
1967), p. 3. 
12 
Sigmund Freud and Demda 
strict towards oneself is the source of the mental 
transformations summar ized by Freud in the for­
mula 'progress in spiritualization' 
In the context of a reverie there is a certain jus­
tification for bringing up this 'monstrous' revision 
of Jewish history by the Jew Freud, as it consti­
tutes a manner of prelude to what will later be 
referred to with Derrida's key term differance. In 
Freud's interpretati on, this 'shift' or distortion first 
of all concerns the real recasting of roles in the 
monotheistic game -but equally the redaction of 
accounts of this, which are always subject to 
the tendentious requirement of making what 
happened as unidentifiable as possible. Freud 
writes: 
The distortion of a text is similar to that of a 
murder. The difficulty lies not in carrying out 
the deed, but rather in removing its traces. 
One is inclined to give the word 'distortion' 
the double meaning to which it is entitled, 
though it makes no use of it today. It should 
not only mean to change something in its 
13 
Sigmund Freud and Derrida 
appearance, but also: to take it to a different 
place, to shift it elsewhere.2. 3 
Then differance, viewed in the context of Freud's 
comment, refers not only -and not primarily -to 
the break with a full present (as a temporal 
mode), but rather first of all -and primarily -to 
spatial displacement and redisposition in the 
casting of roles for a theological stage play. 
According to Freud, the true Egyptian drama is 
never played in the presence of true Egyptians 
from that point on. From the Mosaic intervention 
onwards, Egypt itself takes 'place' in a different 
location -while the literal Egypt, from the per­
spective of the emigrants, is no more than a dead 
shell that serves exclusively to indicate the neces­
sary starting point of the escape to their own oth­
erness. To be a monotheistic neo-Egyptian in the 
true Akhenatenic sense, one had in future to take 
2 Ibid. 
3 [Translator's note: this passage can only be understood with ref­
erence to the original word for 'distortion', Entstellung (verb: 
entstellen). The noun Stelle means 'place', and its combination 
with the negational prefix ent-indicates a displacement.] 
14 
Sigmund Freud and Derrida 
part in the religious experiment of Judaism as con­
ceived by the man Moses. Consistently enough 
this people, enlisted for a travesty, had to deal 
from the days of the exodus onwards with the 
problem of its uncertain territorialization, or -to 
use an expression Derrida especially favoured -it 
was chronica lly 'haunted' by this problem. The 
original content of his hantologie, namely the sci­
ence of haunting by unresolved matters from the 
past Chauntol ogy), thus becomes obvious Cone 
finds this ingenious play on words in Spectres of 
Marx, probably Derrida's most significant political 
study, with a double allusion to both ontologie 
and Lacan's pun hontologie): it can only consist in 
the obsessive traces of Jewish-Eg yptian ambiva­
lence. Their origins had to be sought in the fact 
that Moses wanted 'to lead the Jews out of the 
country', as Freud says, and through circumcision 
impose a custom 'that virtually made Egyptians of 
them' 4 With his analysis of hauntings, Derrida for­
malizes the idea, elaborated by Freud, that one 
4 Freud, Moses and Monotheism, loco cit. 
15 
Sigmund Freud and Derrida 
cannot be a Jew without, in a certain sense, 
embodying Egypt - or a ghost thereof. 
This late work by Freud is not only notable for 
its development of the concept of 'distortion'; it is 
even more impressive through the inexorable con­
sistency with which it 'deconstructs' the myth of 
the exodus. Read in the context of Freud's specu­
lations, the term 'exodus' now no longer refers to 
the secession of Judaism from foreign rule by the 
Egyptians, but to the realization of the most rad­
ical Egypticism by Jewish means. From that point 
on, the history of ideas takes the form of a mas­
sive game of displacement in which motifs from 
Egyptian universalism are acted out by non­
Egyptian protagonists. 
What might be especially conspicuous to a psy­
chologist here is that, in his final study, Freud 
barely referred to the concept of the unconscious 
in its established definition any longer -as if it 
had been rendered superfluous by the introduc­
tion of 'distortion' One can view Moses and 
Monotheism to an extent as the self-correction of 
psychoanalysis at the last minute. The message of 
16 
Sigmund Freud and Demda 
Freud's late works would then be: ultimately it is 
not the unconscious that decides the fate of 
humans ; what truly counts is the incognito that 
conceals the origin of the dominant ideas. Because 
distortion goes far beyond active concealment, it 
protects the Egyptian incognito in a way that is 
much more secure than the directorate of a con­
spiracy could ever achieve. Naturally the figure of 
Moses had to be the first to be affected by the dis­
tortion. Once it had done its work, the leader of 
Judaism was himself no longer able to say with 
certainty whence he truly came. In such a situa­
tion, projects become more important than origins. 
Now any consideration for descent takes a back 
seat to the prospect of the Promised Land. 
If one pursues Freud's reflections on the cryptic 
fabrication of Jewish identity to their logical con­
clusion, the irreversible effect of the exodus 
becomes palpable: the departure from Egypt, 
according to Freud, spawned the Mosaic Jews as 
a hetero-Egyptian people that could not under any 
circumstances have returned to a previous sense 
of the own, even if it had desired to. The trace of 
17 
Sigmund Freud and Demda 
the other had imprinted itself indelibly within the 
innermost part of the own, no matter how it might 
be disguised and covered up by new pro­
gramme s. This imprint was so deep that even the 
symbol for the most intimate aspect of the own 
had been taken from the strangers : if circumcision 
truly indicated chosenn ess, as Freud tirelessly 
claimed , this symbol was borrowed from those 
from whom the Jews, as an emigrant people, 
would in future seek to set themselves apart at all 
costs. 
18 
3 I Thomas Mann and Derrida 
At this point I am reminded of Derrida's insistence 
that one should be careful with translations and 
diversions via contexts that are often very far from 
his own. This insistence contains a distant echo of 
Nietzsche's well-known admonition: 'Above all, 
do not mistake me for someone else!' I admit that 
these indications will become particularly relevant 
in the following, where we shall venture a con­
textualization that exceeds the frame of Derrida's 
own statements about himself and yet, as 
extreme as the de familiarization may be, will pos­
sibly bring us very close to the nucleus of his most 
momentous operations. 
I will take the liberty of imagining in the fol­
lowing that the dizzying career of the Algerian­
born thinker beginning in France, then 
continuing in the USA and finally in the rest of the 
19 
Tbomas Mann and Derrida 
world -was prophesied in an indirect, but per­
sonally apt manner by one of the greatest novel­
ists of the twentieth century. It goes without 
saying that this does not apply to Derrida as an 
individu al, but rather to the general type of the 
Jewish outsider who, coming from the edges of 
the empire, attains an eminent position in the log­
ical power centre through dangerou s and excep­
tional achievemen ts. I am not unaware that a 
thinker such as Derrida, for whom respect for the 
singular meant a great deal, would have been pro­
foundly suspicious towards attempts to under­
stand the indivi dual in terms of typical forms -
none the less, I believe that on this occasion a 
journey in the sedan chair of the general type can 
also take us to our goal (or at least closer to the 
critical zone) without doing an injustice to the 
interests of the unique. 
Thomas Mann became aware of the current rel­
evance of Old Testament subject matter at a 
notably similar time to the aged Freud, and from 
the late 1920s on -as he later said in a well­
known statement -he had set himself the task of 
20 
Thomas Mann and Derrida 
wresting myth from the hands of intellectual fas­
cism and remoulding it in a humanist form. One 
can assign his novel tetralogy Joseph and His 
Brothers, written between 1933 and 1943, a key 
position in the history of literature and ideas in the 
twentieth century -first because it constitutes the 
secret main text of modern theology, whose 
public emergence took place outside of theolog­
ical faculties; and secondly as a grand parallel 
project to Freud's explorations in which Mann 
probed the immeasurable implications of a psy­
choanal ytical and novelistic subversion of the 
exodus narrative . If the departure of the Jews from 
Egypt was genuinel y a continuation of Egyptian 
culture by other means -and, in his own way, 
Thomas Mann reached similar conclusions to 
Freud - it could only be a matter of time before it 
would occur to the Jewish hetero-Eg yptians to 
examine their connections to the homO-Egypt ians, 
if one can call them that. 
Thomas Mann found the pivotal point between 
the exodus from Egypt and the immigration there 
in the tale of young Joseph. As we know, he was 
21 
Thomas Mann and Derrida 
the youngest son of ]acob, and his favourite -for 
which he was hated by his brothers ; as a result, 
they ambushed him one day and sold him to Mid­
ianite slave traders in order to be rid of him. As the 
narrator shows, there is a profound ambiguity to 
this crime. It is not only suited to representing the 
secret of the injustice that is inseparable from pref­
erential love and contributes to the birth of jeal­
ousy; it also provides an excellen t opportunity to 
examine the problem of a revision of the] ewish 
relationship with Egypt, which was initially only 
conceivable as blasphemy. For the reader who is 
prepared to take the hint, Thomas Mann's irony 
supplies a hidden clue that, for a talented son of 
the progenitor ]acob, the best thing that could 
happen in his whole life was in fact to be sold to 
Egypt. Though this same ]oseph could have 
become a respected shepher d at the fountains of 
Israel if his brothers had left him alone, or an olive 
farmer listening in pious serenity to the growing of 
the trees, there were other career options for him 
in Egypt -assuming the newcomer were able to 
turn his involuntary immigration to his advantage. 
22 
Thomas Mann and Derrida 
Thomas Mann's tale provides the most expansive 
commentary on the topos of a blessing in disguise. 
A sharp-witted hetero-Egyptian brought into Egypt 
through a second distortion could indeed have the 
ability to understand the homo-Eg yptians better 
than they understood themselve s. This hermeneu­
tical superiority would be a gift bestowed by his 
specific marginality -and would in fact transpire 
to be the key to Joseph's successes in Egypt. Suf­
fice it to say here that Thomas Mann's depiction, 
through a subtle parody of psychoanaly sis, of the 
interpretation of Pharaoh's dreams by the young 
hermeneutic ian, who wou ld soon become indis­
pensable, is one of the most sonorous scenes in 
modern world literature.1 
My suggestion that the novelist Thomas Mann 
may have succeeded in offering an involuntary 
prediction of the phenomenon of Derrida relates 
1 As I am developing a purely typological argument here, it is not 
necessary to take into account the fact that the chronology of the 
situation contradicts my interpretation. As the biblical story of 
)oseph takes place in the period before the exodus, the schema 
of 'back to Egypt' is not yet as applicable to the firstJoseph as to 
the later protagonists in his position. 
23 
Thomas Mann and Derrida 
to the wondrous figure of ]oseph - or rather the 
]osephian position as such, whose key character­
istic must be revealed as that of being damned to 
success in Egypt. Having arrived empty-handed, 
the new arrival achieves his Egyptian successes, 
as we know, by a hair's breadth: purely through 
the art of reading signs that are unintelligible to 
the Egyptians -including, where necessary, the 
interpretation of dreams. What Thomas Mann had 
in mind was the career of Sigmund Freud, who, 
by suggesting a science of dream analysis, had 
succeeded in making the late feudal society of the 
Habsburg Austro- Egyptians dependent on his 
interpretations. Freud had made the ]osephian 
position current once again in his own way, thus 
leaving his numerous successors a clue that the 
younger ones should not ignore. Naturally these 
authors no longer had to take the roads of the 
slave trade for their journeys back to Egypt; 
through the diaspora, the exodus became a partial 
change of direction for many. Even in modern 
times, however, one could only penetrate the log­
ical and psychological citadel of Egyptian culture 
24 
Thomas Mann and Demda 
by no less demanding means than in]oseph's day: 
through the science of signs. Hence the interpre­
tation of dreams is not only the royal road to the 
psyche; it is also the tightrope on which the 
hetero-Egyptian semiologist has to balance on his 
way into the inner sanctums of the pharaonic insti­
tutions. In doing so, he will realize from the outset 
that he can only try his luck by subjecting the sym­
bolic fabrications of the powerful to an analysis 
that is sufficien tly fascinating for them. 
This is the right point to mention that Marxist 
readings of messianism such as those of Ernst 
Bloch and WaIter Benjamin, only a generation 
after Freud, attempted the timely task of devel­
oping a second, non-Freudian interpretation of 
dreams. This did not so much revolve around the 
dreams of the rulers (and their wives) -these 
authors were rather concerned with realizing a 
mass interpretation of dreams in whose course the 
proletarian and traditional dreams of a better life 
would be elevated to a political productive force. 
The core of the second interpretation of dreams 
was the interpretation of signs and traces with 
25 
Thomas Mann and Derrida 
which, according to the messianic reading , 
humanity had anticipated communism since anti­
quity. What was notable was the fact that the ther­
apeutic restriction to nocturnal dreams was now 
laid aside, so that mainly daydreams and con­
scious utopian constructs were now to be inte­
grated into the busi ness of the new hermeneutic s. 
Admittedly the case of Benjamin also shows how 
a ]osephian career can fail against such a back­
ground. From Ernst Bloch, however, we can learn 
that the interpreter of dreams, if he has a suffi­
ciently intense prophetic fire, is ultimately indif­
ferent to whether the masses are interested in the 
politico-theological interpretation of their dreams. 
Having presented these contexts , it is self-evi­
dent why Derrida's de construction must be under­
stood as a third wave of dream interpretation from 
the ]osephian perspective. For de construction it 
was clear a priori that it could only succeed if it 
went sufficien tly far beyond the models of psy­
choanalysis and messianic hermeneuti cs. In 
keeping with the current state of affairs, this had 
to occur in the form of a radical semiology that 
26 
Thomas Mann and Derrida 
would show how the signs of being never pro­
vide the wealth of meaning they promise -in 
other words: being is not a true sender, and the 
subject cannot be a place of complete collection. 
Derrida interpreted the J osephian chance by 
showing how death dreams in us -or, to put it 
differently: how Egypt works in us. 'Egyptian' is 
the term for all constructs that can be subjected to 
de construction - except for the pyramid, that most 
Egyptian of edifices. It stands in its place, 
unshakeable for all time, because its form is 
nothing other than the undeconstructible 
remainder of a construction that, following the 
plan of its architect, is built to look as it would 
after its own collapse. 
27 
4 I Franz Borkenau and Derrida 
Returning from this typifying framing of Derrida's 
approach, I would like to suggest a further con­
textualization of his a:uvre that brings us closer to 
the philosoph er's text once more. This time we are 
dealing with a great tale of the responses of civi­
lizations to death as detailed by the brilliant cul­
tural historian Franz Borkenau (1900-57) , a thinker 
with a wide-ranging interdisciplinary approach, 
in his posthumously published historico-philo­
sophical magnum opus End and Beginning: On 
the Generatio ns of Cultures and the Origin of the 
West. 1 The confession by Derrida quoted at the 
start, namely that he held two completely oppos­
ing convictions as to his continued presence as an 
1 Franz Borkenau, End and Beginning: On the Generations 
of Cultures and the Origin of the West (New York: Columbia 
University Press, 2001). 
29 
Franz Borkenau and Derrida 
author simultaneously or alternately, reminds me 
directly of the fundamental theses of Borkenau 's 
historical speculation. Born in Vienna and of half­
Jewish descent, Borkenau had turned to commu­
nism early on after a strict Catholic upbringing; he 
was intermittently a functionary of the Western 
European office of the Comintern, then a fellow at 
the Institute of Social Research in Frankfurt. After 
his abandonment of communism he became one 
of the earliest critics of what he called 'totalitari­
anism' -his work The Totalitarian Enemy was 
published in London in 1940, more than a decade 
before Hannah Arendt put her stamp on the sub­
ject with the political best-seller The Origins ofTo­
talitarianism. In his cultural philosophy he deals 
with the opposing stances of cultures towards 
death. While one type of culture rejects death and 
reacts to it with a doctrine of immortality, the 
other type accepts the fact of death and develops 
a culture of committed worldliness on the basis of 
this. Borkenau referred to these bipolar options as 
the antinomy of death. It represents the cultural 
formulation of the dual stance towards death 
30 
Franz Borkenau and Derrida 
found with more or less clear outlines in every in­
dividual: that one's own death is certain, but as 
such remains incomprehensible . Borkenau's am­
bition as a macro-historian was to use his doctrine 
of the opposing yet interconnected attitudes of cul­
tures towards death to disprove the historico­
philosophical doctrine of Oswald Spengler, who 
argued that every culture aris es like a windowless 
monad from its own unmistakable 'primal experi­
ence' -today we would call it a primary irritation 
-flourishing and declining in an exclusively en­
dogenousl y determined life cycle, without any 
real communication between cultures. In reality, 
Borkenau posits, cultures join to form a chain 
whose individual links are connected according to 
the principle of opposition to the respectively pre­
ceding link. This is the meaning of his references 
to cultural generations . 
It is not surprising that Borkenau was unable to 
expand these ambitious concepts into a general 
cultural history. At most, he was able to give a rea­
sonably convincing account of a single chain of cul­
tural generations -not just any chain, however, but 
31 
Franz Borkenau and Derrida 
rather the sequence in which the main protagonists 
of the occidental cultural drama are involved. The 
series inevitably begins with the Egyptians, whose 
construction of pyramids, mummifications and ex­
tensive cartographies of the hereafter form a last­
ing and impressive monument to their obsession 
with immortality. The antithesis of Egypticism was 
developed by the subsequen t cultures of death ac­
ceptance that we refer to as antiquity -including 
the Greeks and Jews, and in the second rank also 
the Romans. Among these peoples, enormous men­
tal energies that had been bound through the work 
of immortalization under the Egyptian regime 
(and the Indus Valley Civilizations were freed up 
for 'alternative tasks' These could consequen tly be 
used to shape political life in finite time -this may 
be one of the reasons why the invention of the po­
litical can be viewed as the joint achievement of an­
cient Mediterranean cultures of mortality. It is quite 
revealing that in this respect there is no real dif­
ference between the poles of Athens and Jerusalem, 
which are normally played off against each other. 
Both function according to the tenet that public life 
32 
Franz Borkenau and Derrida 
in morally substantial communities or among pro­
ductively co-operating citizens' assemblies can only 
come about if the people are not constantly 
thinking about the survival of their bodies or souls 
in the hereafter, but rather have their minds and 
hands free for the tasks of the polis and the empirical 
communio. 
The excessive grip of political citizens' assem­
blies on the lives of mortals inevitably resulted, ac­
cording to Borkenau , in a new immortalist reaction 
- it led, with the mediation of a barbaric interlude, 
to the start of the Christian era in Western Europe. 
On account of its new emphasis on immortality, 
'Christian culture ' (though there is some uncer­
tainty as to the aptness of the cultural concept ) 
quite obviously constituted the grandchild of Egyp­
ticism, though it now made the immortality of the 
soul its focus -the Catholic cult of relics alone 
forms an indirect continuation of the Egyptian 
concern for the eternal body. But Christian im­
mortalism, according to Borkenau's schema, in 
turn provoked its own antithesis through its ex­
cesses: the Modern Age, beginning with the 
33 
Franz Borkenau and Derrida 
Renaissance, was once again a culture of death ac­
ceptance, and again led to the investment of hu­
man energies in political projects. (One of these, 
in keeping with the fundamental technical char­
acter of modernity, was the alliance of empower­
ment and facilitation of life, which would 
ultimately lead to the consumer society of today.) 
In the chain of cultural filiations , modernity would 
therefore be the grandchild of antiquity (hence eo 
ipso the great-grandchild of Egypt). Their common 
choice to accept death would then supply the 
deeper reason for the oft-noted resonance be­
tween them. It is in this choice that one would find 
the motifs that made a paradigmatic author of 
modernity such as Freud feel so conspicuousl y at 
home in the company of ancient philosop hers -
Stoics, Epicureans and sceptics alike. 
The appeal of Borkenau's model obviously lies 
not so much in its capacity for historical explana­
tion, which clearly remains precariou s; nor would 
his aim of supplying an alternative to Spengler still 
be considered an attractive one today. What 
makes these speculative reflections on the 
34 
Franz Borkenau and Derrida 
antinomy of death current and fruitful is the fact 
that they do not present the transition from a 
metaphysical to a post-metaphysical semantics as 
a form of evolutionary progress or a deepening of 
logic. Instead they declare it the effect of an 
inevitable epochal fluctuation based on an objec­
tively irresolvable antinom y, or an inescapable 
and irreducible double truth. Derrida's position 
within this fluctuation initially seems the same as 
Freud's, which positions itself clearly on the side 
of the modern extreme (and the ancient, Jewish 
and Hellenic cultures allied with it). What the 
philosopher calls de construction is initially no 
more than an act of the most thorough semantic 
secularization -semiological materialism in action. 
One could describe the deconstructionist method 
as a guide to returning the churches and castles of 
the metaphysical-immortalist Ancien Regime to the 
mortal citizens. 
The strange thing about the approach, however, 
is that Derrida -to continue the architectural 
imagery does not believe in the power of 
modernity's exponents to create authentic new 
35 
Franz Borkenau and Derrida 
buildings. (As his conversations with Peter 
Eisenman and the Viennese architectural group 
Coop Himmelblau show fairly unambigu ously, he 
always remained distant from the world of 
modern architecture, and used such terms as con­
structing/d econstructing purely metaphor ically, 
without ever developing a material connection to 
the practice of building truly contemporary, i.e. 
demystified edifices free of historical baggage .) He 
apparently had the same tendency, symbolically 
speaking, as people who are condemned always 
to live in old houses -or even haunted castles, 
even if they think they are residing in the neutral 
buildings of the present. For him it is clear that, 
even in the quarters of modern people, the 
undead from the otherworldly era walk in and 
out, just as the one God from Egypt never stopped 
casting his shadow across the huts of the post­
Mosaic Jews. 
In my view, one of the virtues of Borkenau's 
model lies in the fact that it helps to understand 
the complexity of Derrida's position a little more 
clearly. For, although Derrida paid tribute to the 
36 
Franz Borkenau and Derrida 
mortalist choice in the modus operandi of his 
analyses, the choice that is so characteristic of the 
Judaeo-Greek culture and its modern grandchi ld, 
he always retained a connection to Egyptian 
immortal ism, and to a much lesser extent also the 
Christian form. This connection did not revolve 
purely around enlightenment or exorcism, how­
ever. Derrida did not simply want to drive away 
the ghosts of the immortalist past; he was rather 
concerned with revealing the profound ambiva­
lence resulting from the realization that both 
choices are equally possible and equally powerful. 
Hence the pathos of his confessions, according to 
which one could never fully leave the realm of 
metaphys ics. Essentially, however, Derrida always 
insists on his right always to retain his metaphys­
ical incognito ; he does not want an entry in his 
passport under 'unchangeable features' reading 
Jewish denier of immortality' -let alone 'crypto­
Egyptian follower of overcoming of death' 
One can, in a certain sense, therefore regard 
Derrida as a philosopher of freedom, though cer­
tainly not in the tradition of Old European idealisms . 
37 
Franz Borkenau and Derrida 
His discreet idea of freedom is inseparable from the 
effort to withdraw constantly from the initially 
inevitable identifications and pinnings-down as­
sociated with the use of certain idioms -which, in­
cidentally, is why some readers seek to label him 
a neo-sceptic who, like the members of that school, 
declared a state of suspension between different 
opinions the highest intellectual virtue. If scepticism 
initially expresses no more than a reluctance to 
choose between the dogmatic teaching systems of 
antiquity (the Platonic, the Aristotelian, the Stoic and 
the Epicurean) , then Derrida is more than a mere 
sceptic. His constitutive fluctuation relates not to al­
ternative philosophical doctrine s, but rather to the 
pre-philosophical choice of the antinomy of death; 
and this fluctuation incorporates the simultaneously 
necessary and impossible choice between meta­
physics and non-metaphy sics. 
The word 'fluctuation' should not, of course, be 
taken as a reference to personal indecision -it is 
rather an indication that the situation involves a 
choice whose opposing options can be viewed 
from both sides by the chooser . When the thinker 
38 
Franz Borkenau and Derrida 
chooses, he not only senses the injustice he has 
done towards the rejected option; he also notices 
that the trap around him is closing. Whoever 
chooses exposes themselves to the risk of identi­
fication, which is precisely what Derrida was 
always most concerned to avoid. Perhaps one 
could view de construction primarily as a method 
of defending intelligence against the conse­
quences of one-sidedness. It would then amount 
to an attempt to combine membership in the 
modern city of mortals with an option in favour of 
Egyptian immortalism. 
If the deconstructionist use of intelligence is a 
preventative measure against one-sidedness, how­
ever, its successful application becomes particu­
larly important when preparing for one's own end. 
For Derrida, who, as an unidentified thinking 
object, was always ready to answer to his stu­
dents, friends and opponents as a present partner, 
the preservation of this sovereign indecision came 
at the price of having to keep the option of a 
double burial open for himself, for the time of his 
absence. One would take place in the earth of 
39 
Franz Borkenau and Derrida 
the country he had inhabited critically, the other 
in a colossal pyramid that he himself had built in 
a lifetime's work on the edge of the desert of 
letters. 
40 
5 I Regis Debray and Derrida 
Since the death of Hegel, talk of the end of phi­
losophy has become a fixed topos in the 
continuing discourse on philosophy. In the post­
Hegelian context, the word 'end' primarily 
denoted completion and exhaustion. Later 
thinkers thus only seemed to have a choice 
between coming to terms with their epigonal sit­
uation or becoming original by doing something 
entirely different. Around 1900, the emergence of 
the philosophies of life marked an attempt to 
overcome this dichotomy -now thinkers wanted 
to combine spirit-philosophical epigonali ty with 
originality in terms of the vital substrate of 
thought : life. In this manner, the vitalists believed 
they could save philosophy by taking leave of it 
philosophically. It is well known how Heidegger's 
intervention ruptured this approach in order to 
41 
Regis Debray and Derrida 
deprive the thesis of the end of philosophy of its 
fatal significance. What had truly come to an end, 
according to Heidegger, was the era of philoso­
phy as metaphysics or ontotheology. An older and 
younger approach than metaphysics, however, 
would be thought of as asking after the meaning 
of being. The destruction of metaphysics was not 
simply intended to open up the possibility of a 
different beginning of thought deeper in the past, 
but also to enable a different continuation of 
thought in a more current currentne ss. At its cen­
tre Heidegger finds the doing and the suffering of 
language , interpreting substantial language as the 
commanding proclamation of being. Hence 
[Gadamer's] statement: 'Being that can be under­
stood is language' -for the sake of clarity, one 
should probably say: 'Being that can be obeyed is 
language .' Hence one encounters in Heidegger a 
metaphysically coloured form of the linguistic turn 
that dominated the philosoph y of the twentieth 
century. As we know, Derrida, by turning from 
the philosophy of language to the philosoph y of 
writing, also uncovered remains of a metaphysics 
42 
Regis Debray and Derrida 
of presence in Heidegger's project -he revealed 
the idealism of being-centred thought as a final 
metaphysics of the strong sender, and it was prob­
ably only through this that he brought the series 
of philosoph y's terminations by means of philos­
ophy to an end. From that point on, we read the 
texts of the history of ideas as orders that we can 
no longer obey. On one occasion, Derrida 
remarks that his basic stance towards the texts and 
voices of the classics is determined by 'a bizarre 
mixture of responsi bility and irreverence' -the 
most perfect description of the post-authoritarian 
receptivity that character ized Derrida's ethics of 
reading. 
Among the contemporary authors who acted on 
this situation, Regis Debray is one who stands out 
especially. He seems to have understood before 
many others that the business of philosophy 
demanded a paradigm shift. If the last word of 
philosophy, driven to its limits, had been 'writing', 
then the next word in thought would have to be 
'medium '. By founding the French school of medi­
ology which differs from the slightly older 
43 
Regis Debray and Derrida 
Canadian school through its more deep-sea ted 
political orientati on, but shares a sense of the 
weight of religion as a historical medium of social 
synthesis -he not only provided post-philosoph­
ical thought with a new material horizon, but also 
established the vital connection to culture-scien­
tific research and the theoretical sciences of 
symbolically communic ating systems. Debray is 
therefore a useful adviser if the concern is to 
locate the phenomenon of Derrida within the cog­
nitive household of postmodern knowledge 
economies. 
To me, Debray's 2001 book God: An Itineraryl 
contains the most important hint at a mediolog­
ical re-contextualization of Derrida. This is not the 
place to pay tribute to the genre of what one 
might call theo-biographical discourse, which 
Debray founded with his hybridization of theology 
and historical mediology - it is perhaps sufficien t 
to say provisionally that he initiated a new type of 
secular, semi-blasphemous religious science which 
1 Regis Debray, God: An Itinerary, trans. Jeffrey Mehlman (London 
and New York: Verso, 2004). 
44 
Regis Debray and Derrida 
provokes a comparison with Niklas Luhmann 's 
1977 work Funktion der Religion. (Whoever wants 
to distinguish such a functionalist- blasphemous 
approach from complete and poetic blasphem y 
should read it critically against Franco Ferrucci's 
distantly congenial book The Life of God. 2) 
Naturally the migrations play a decisive part in 
Debray's account of the life of God, for the God 
of monotheism who is being discussed would not 
have any biography worth mentioning or 
describing if he had forever remained a God-in­
residence , condemned to stay in the place of his 
creation or self-invention. It is thanks to the medi­
ological intuition of Debray that we can now 
explicitly ask what media enabled God to travel. 
The answer to this can be found in an inspiring 
new interpretation of the Jewish secession from 
the Egyptian world. It presupposes that Debray's 
concept of mediality also incorporates the quality 
of transportability. The science of the religions 
becomes a sub-disci pline of transport science. 
2 Franco Ferrucci, The Life of God (as Told by Himselj), trans. 
Raymond Rosenthal (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1997). 
45 
Regis Debray and Derrida 
Transport science, for its part -or political semio­
kinetics -becomes a sub-discipli ne of writing and 
media theory. Mediolog y supplies the necessar y 
tools to understand the conditions of the possi­
bility of 'distortions' One now recognizes distor­
tion not simply as an effect of writing operations , 
as declared by deconstruct ion, but beyond this as 
a result of the connection between writing and 
transport. 
We are thus in a position to view the constella­
tion containing the concepts of differance and 
'distortion' mentione d above in a different light . If 
the 'distortion' of something, as Freud suggests , 
involves not simply a renaming, but also a repo­
sitioning, i.e. a shifting of its location in the geo­
graphical and political space, then one must, for 
better or for worse, understand the differing 
activity as a transport phenomen on. One can see 
how this can be conceived of concretely from the 
archetype of all transport histories: the account of 
Israel's escape from Egy pt. The biblical exodus 
story may leave a great deal unclear for 
example , the origin of the angel of death that visits 
46 
Regis Debray and Derrida 
the Egypt ians' houses on that critical night while 
passing over the posts of the Jewish huts, which 
are smeared with lamb's blood -but it undoubt­
edly tells us how the first salvifically significant 
transport adventure was to be staged. The myth 
of exodus is tied to that of total mobilizati on, in 
which an entire people transforms itself into a for­
eign, movable thing that abducts itself. At that 
moment all things are re-evaluated in terms of 
their transportability -at the risk of having to 
leave behind everything that is too heavy for 
human carriers. The first re-evaluation of all values 
therefore concerned weight. Its main victims were 
the heavy gods of the Egypt ians, whose immov­
able stone bodies prevented them from travelling. 
The people of Israel were able to change into a 
theophoric entity from that point on, omnia sua 
secum portans in a literal sense, because it had 
succeeded in recoding God from the medium of 
stone to that of the scroll. Debray writes: 
All of a sudden, the divine changes hands: is 
passed from the architects to the archivists. 
47 
Regis Debray and Derrida 
From a monument, it becomes a document. 
The Absolute recto-verso economizes a 
dimension, two instead of three. The result: 
the flat sacral (as miraculous as a squared 
circle) Thus were water and fire reconciled: 
mobility and loyalty, errancy and affiliation 
With the Absolute in safekeeping, God in a 
chest, the place one comes from counts less 
than the place one is going to, in keeping 
with a history endowed with meaning and 
direction. Without such logistics, would the 
flame of monotheism have been able to 
survive so many routS?3 
We should note that the word 'survive' returns 
here, a word that, as we have seen, belongs to the 
central terms of the deconstructionist problem 
field. If there is mention of a flame that must be 
handed down on paper, we understand immedi­
ately how hazardous the operation must be that 
will, in future, bind the eternal to the ephemer al 
through the mortal becoming a vehicle for the 
3 Debray, op. dt., pp. 88f. 
48 
Regis Debray and Derrida 
immortal. The abandonment of the world of pet­
rified transcendences resulted eo ipso in a sepa­
ration from the pyramid s, which served as 
immortalizing machines for the great dead. So if 
the Jewish textualization of God involved his 
translation into transportable registries, it would 
be reasonable to suppose that the Jewish people 
may also have achieved a translation of the arche­
type of the pyramid into a portable format -
assuming it still felt a need for the pyramid after 
the exodus. We shall now consult Derrida on the 
matter. 
49 
6 I Hegel and Derrida 
No one who has even a passing familiarity with 
Derrida's work will be surprised if we feel com­
pelled to modify this comment immediately. For 
no matter what we might undertake, we will 
scarcely be able to induce the inventor of decon­
struction to make any direct statements on the 
matter of the pyramid. In the age of discourse 
analysis, as we know, any kind of directne ss has 
been abolished. A very wide range of authors 
have adopted the custom of not speaking or 
writing about a matter in their own voices, but 
rather via other authors who have spoken or 
written about the matter. This observing of obser­
vations and describing of descriptions character­
izes a period that has turned the necessity of 
coming too late into the virtue of second-order 
observation in all areas. Someone regarding these 
51 
Hegel and Demda 
logical games with a malicious eye could easily 
suspect that they show the nihilistic mediocr ity of 
the commentators taking revenge on the genius 
of the authors of primary texts. Such a suspicion 
becomes unfounded, however, as soon as the first 
author is Hegel and the second Derrida. So if 
Hegel had been willing to make any first -order 
statements on the subject of the pyramid, we 
would have an opportunity to hear indirectly 
Derrida's thoughts on the matter. With a constel­
lation of this level one can speak once again of 
an inter-Hegelian relationship, and even if it does 
not have the appeal of a direct encounter, it none 
the less shows the characteristics of a key scene. 
With this scene in view we become third-order 
observers -and, as such, witnesses of a dramatic 
operation. It is like the final session of a drawn-out 
psychoanal ytical treatment in which the last 
pharaoh of metaphysics is treated by its last 
)oseph. Derrida sits down silently behind Hegel, as 
is the custom, and allows the latter's monologue to 
unfold. Naturally the philosopher does not speak 
lying down, but rather standing at the pulpit of his 
52 
Hegel and Derrida 
university in Berlin, delivering the encyclopedia of 
philosophical sciences at the peak of conceptual 
power, bending slightly forward to do justice to his 
manuscript and the gravity of the matter. The de­
constructionist analyst initially does nothing except 
listen to the metaphors, the leaps, the gaps and slips 
of the tongue, which possibly reveal motifs at work 
in this transmission of complete knowledge that sab­
otage its full closure from within. 
Suddenly the tension mounts: Hegel has just be­
gun to speak about the function of signs in the 
movement of the id ea's return to self-pr esence -
we are in the middle of the paragraph on the the­
ory of the imagination or general 'phantasiology', 
an important chapter in the discourse about the sub­
jective spirit. While Hegel is speaking, we see that 
Derrida, who had been listening motionlessly un­
til now, is beginning to take notes. We can read 
these in the volume Margins of Philosophy, where 
they were published under the title 'The Pit and the 
Pyramid: Introduction to Hegel's Semiology' It 
1 ]acques Derrida, Margins of Philosophy, trans. Alan Bass 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1982), pp. 69-108. 
53 
Hege/ and Derrida 
immediately becomes clear: the fate of decon­
struction will be decided in this scene -for when 
Derrida showed in his early studies on Husserl how 
writing clouds the diaphanous entente cordiale be­
tween the voice and the phenomen on, he had to 
clear the highest hurdle in his confrontation with 
Hegel in order to demonstrate how the mate ri­
ality, differentiality, temporality and externality of 
signs obstruct the idea's return to complete self­
ownership . 
It does not require much effort for Derrida to 
show that Hegel's semiolog y is Platonically 
inspired: if signs have a sense, it is because their 
spiritual side equals a soul that inhabits a body -
or which, as Derrida states with revealing caution, 
is 'deposited' within a body.2 The inert body of 
the signifier is animated by the intention of the 
signified, so to speak. This animation is none the 
less assigned a strict limit because, even if the 
living soul is present within it, the sign as such 
remains irredeemably dead. The sign is a place in 
which the living directly encounters the dead, 
2 Ibid. p. 82. 
54 
Hegel and Den"ida 
without the dead ceasing to be dead or the living 
ceasing to live -albeit in a mortified form, namely 
as a post-mortal soul. Signifieds would then be 
immortal souls following their interment in the 
dead signifier -whose deadness , however, testi­
fies to the triumph of the soul, which asserts its 
primacy over the external material through pres­
ence in the foreign. 
Thus the familiar schema somalsema returns: 
the body, in keeping with the eternal refrain of 
Platonism , is the monument of the soul. If signs 
are monuments in which immortalized living souls 
reside, however, then one can see the pharaonic 
grave -the pyramid -as the sign of all signs . 
Hegel does not hesitate for a moment in drawing 
this conclusion. Semiolog y would then, in a cer­
tain sense, only be possible as a general science of 
pyramids -every encyclopedia would contain 
nothing but the avenues of vocal pyramids 
together with the written signs in which the ever­
living signifieds are preserved, bearing witness to 
the hegemony of the buried breath over its shell 
with every single entry. Every sign, according to 
55 
Hegel and Derrida 
Hegel, is 'the pyramid into which a foreign soul 
has been conveyed and is preserved' (Ency­
clopaedia, § 458). The decisive aspect here is that 
Hegel does not merely introduce the doctrine of 
the arbitrariness of signs that will later become the 
trademark of Saussure; this doctrine also takes on 
a philosophical motivation, for only through the 
random choice of signs does the freedom of the 
spirit come to power -in contrast to the het­
eronomy of symbols and symptoms. 
From this perspective , it is not difficult to see 
why Hegel's interest in signs moves in a direction 
leading as far away as possible from Egypticism. If 
he is to bring his theory of the spirit to its goal, he 
cannot waste any time with the weight of the pyr­
amids or the enigmatic nature of the hierogly phs; 
both must be overcome, until the spirit can clothe 
itself in a shell of language whose lightness and 
translucence allow it to forget that it requires any 
external addition. This permission to forget is not 
a mistake; it testifies to the creation of a language 
that is sufficien tly light and diaphanous to avoid 
placing any obstacles in the path of the idea as it 
56 
Hegel and Derrida 
returns to itself from without. In this sense, the 
Egyptians remain eternal prisoner s of externality 
to Hegel, like the Chinese, whose language and 
writing form one giant system of barriers and dis­
turbances that render impossible the fulfilled 
moment in which the spirit, distancelessly atten­
dant on itself, hears itself speak. 
It is unnecess ary to show here how de con­
struction treats these claims in detail. The basic 
operation of the third dream interpretation is clear 
enough : it consists in using minimally invasive 
gestures to relate the text of metaphysics to its 
inner dream drift, the delirium of unim peded self­
appropriation, and show its inevitable failure. It is 
sufficient if it proves the impediment that hinders 
this fulfilment fantasy. Therefore Derrida must 
develop a passionate interest in the Egyptian 
pyramid, for it constitutes the archetype of the 
cumbersome objects that cannot be taken along 
by the spirit on its return to itself. But even Hegel, 
the thinker in the age of light and seemingly sur­
mountable signs, suffers the fate of being hindered 
in his final closure of the circle by a cumbersome 
57 
Hegel and Derrida 
obstacle. Even if the spirit's path through the cul­
tures equals a circular exodus on which exces­
sively heavy objects are left behind until the 
wandering spirit is sufficiently light, reflexive and 
transparent to feel ready to return to the start, 
there is one printed book left that, despite its 
handiness, still possesses too much externality and 
contrariness to be passed over entirely. Even as a 
paperback, the Phenomenol ogy of Spirit is still an 
inert and opaque thing that denies its own con­
tent. As soon as someone points their finger at its 
cover and black letters, the celebration is spoiled 
for good. 
Even the pyramid, however, will not be as inter­
esting to Derrida as the dead king within it, as he 
is the only subject whose dreams are truly worth 
interpreting. One could even go so far as to say 
that a form of complicity comes about between 
the king and his dream interpreter; for in order to 
decipher the king's dreams, the interpreter must 
be able to dream them himself to a certain extent 
-although his main profession is the resistance to 
pharaonism and its politics of immortality. The 
58 
Hege/ and Demda 
deconstructionist philosopher is in constant dan­
ger of falling in love with the objects of 
de construction -this is the counter-transf erence 
in the post-metaph ysical rapport. As a reading 
intelligence he is the victim of his receptivity, just 
as Socrates was the victim of the Athenians ' gos­
sip, which he absorbed into the breadth of his 
ability to listen. When the people of Athens 
assembled for discussions in the agora, the ear of 
Socrates was the agora in the agora. It is no coin­
cidence that in one of Derrida's most brilliant 
essays, contributed to a Festschrift in honour of 
Jean-Pierre Vernant under the title Chora, he says 
the following about the proto-phi losopher: 
'Socrates is not chora, but if it were someone or 
something, he would resemble it very strongly.'3 
This bon mot contains, thinly veiled, Derrida's 
self-portrait: he characterizes the chora as a form 
of vessel without qualities, 'able and entitled to 
understand everything , and hence absorb every­
thing (as we are doing precisely here)' 4 It is 
3 ]acques Derrida, Chora (Vienna: Passagen Verlag, 1990), p. 46. 
4 Ibid., p. 56. 
59 
Hegel and Derrida 
permitted for the deliriums of the oldest pyramid­
builders to be absorbed into the comprehending 
soul of the deconstructionist, for there is nothing 
that cannot find a space -maybe even its rightful 
place -within this receptive breadth .5 As a radi­
cal partisan of non-one-sidedne ss, Derrida wanted 
to call the dream constructs of the immortalists to 
order through the reason of mortality; with his 
reminder of the politics of immortality, however, 
he also corrected the blind mortalism of merely 
pragmatic reason. 
We are still in search of convincing evidence 
that Derrida himself was aware of the continuity 
through which the pyramid as a real-estate ven­
ture remained connected to the Jewish project of 
giving God a mobile format. We find some proof 
in a passage from Derrida's meditation on the pit 
and the pyramid in which the author suddenly 
plunges into a dizzying speculation that goes far 
beyond the context. He has just expounded 
5 I am not in a position to judge whether, and to what extent, 
Derrida was aware of the similarity between his understanding of 
the Platonic chora and medieval theories of the active intellect. 
60 
Hegel and Derrida 
Hegel's theory of the imagination as memory, 
which states that the intelligence is like a pit 
(leading vertically into the depths in the manner of 
a well or a mine) at whose bottom images and 
voices from one's life are 'unconsciou sly pre­
served' (Encyclopaedia, § 453). From this per­
spective, the intelligence is a subterranean archive 
in which the traces of things past are stored like 
inscriptions before writing. Derrida suddenly says 
something very surprising about this: 'A path, 
which we will follow, leads from this night pit, 
silent as death and resonating with all the powers 
of the voice which it holds in reserve, to a 
pyramid brought back from the Egyptian desert 
which soon will be raised over the sober and 
abstract weave of the Hegelian text.,6 
What is conspicuous here is the reference to 
the pyramid 'brought back' from Egypt. The 
phrase is all the more expressive for being 
scarcely motivated by the context; it intrudes upon 
the development of the argument like a personal 
6 Derrida, 'The Pit and the Pyramid', loco cit., p. 77 
61 
Hegel and Demda 
declarat ion. It proves that Derrida thought of the 
pyramid as a transportable form -and the secret 
of this transpor tability undoubtedly lies in its light­
ening through textualization. But Derrida does not 
stop at this proof of the idea that not only the One 
God, but also the Egy ptian tomb sets off on a 
journey: he now takes the risk of presenting the 
dream factory of metaphysics in an image of 
extreme pathos. Here, as he remarks, lies a riddle 
that demands to be solved, namely: 'That the path 
still remains circular, and that the pyramid 
becomes once again the pit that it always will 
have been'. 7 How does Derrida know this? What 
is his statement that there is a way from the pit to 
the pyramid and back again based on? On the 
assumption that metaphysics as a whole, known 
after Heidegger as ontothe ology, took this very 
path itself! For what was metaphys ics if not the 
continuation of pyramid-building with the logical 
and scriptural means of the Greeks and Germans? 
Through this suggestion, which can claim the 
7 Ibid. 
62 
Hegel and Derrida 
status of a lucid phantasm, the philosopher 
implies that there is a single possibility of decon­
structing the otherwise undeconst ructible pyramid: 
by transpor ting it back along the entire route it has 
taken on the trail of textuality, from Cairo to Berlin 
via Jerusalem, Athens and Rome. One only has to 
dis-distort it long enough until it changes back into 
the pyramid that it initially was: this pit expresses 
the fact that human life as such is always survival 
from the start. It fundamentally possesses the form 
of self-recollection. Existing in the moment means 
having survived oneself up to that point. At every 
moment in which it reflects upon itself, life stands 
at its own sepulchre , remembering itself -while 
the voices of its own been-ness sound from the 
depths. Whoever comprehends this understands 
what it means to integrate the ghost of the 
pharaoh into the sphere of brotherline ss. One can 
easily imagine Derrida visiting Egypt and reciting 
Baudelaire 's line 'man semblabl e, man frere' at the 
eradicated monument to Amenhotep IV. 
63 
7 I Baris Grays and Derrida 
According to Hegel's well-known schema , the 
path of the spirit through history replicates the 
path of the sun from the orient to the occident. It 
is inseparable from the success story of freedom. 
While only one person was free in the despotic 
orient, the aristocratic-demo cratic society of 
Greece achieved the freedom of a larger number 
of people, and finally the Christian West created a 
world condition based formally on the freedom of 
all. One could relate this movement a second time 
in the light of the reflections above, nowempha­
sizing the politics of immortality -which results 
in a somewhat altered line. In Egypt, only a single 
person was immortal at first, and his conservation 
was the highest state concern (though one can 
already discern hints of later efforts to popu­
larize immortalit y); in Graeco-Roman and Jewish 
65 
Boris Groys and Derrida 
antiquity there was no immortality for anyone; in 
the Christian era it was available to all. In moder­
nity, a situation arose in which all humans were 
officially mortal once more, though relative 
immortality was de facto attainable for a number 
of people. 
I would like to place this schema at the start of 
my remarks on the work of Boris Groys, which 
conclude this series of contextualizations of the 
phenomenon of Derrida -in the firm belief that it 
is especially suited to illuminating the post-Der­
ride an situation. One can probably best describe 
the reuvre of Boris Groys, at least in its state so far, 
as the most radical of all possible reinterpretations 
of the pyramid phenome non. Groys is never very 
interested in the question of how one can make 
the body of the pyramid transporta ble, however. 
He focuses exclusively on the 'hot spot' of the 
pyramid, the burial chamber within it in which the 
mummy of the pharaoh is deposited. If there is a 
problem of transport or repositioning for Groys, 
then it is only in the question of whether one can 
extract the chamber from the pyramid and install 
66 
Borls Groys and Derrida 
it in a different location. The answer is positive 
and surprising . According to Groys, one will 
never understand the artistic system of modern 
culture unless one observes how the pharaonic 
chamber is reused in it. The pharaoh's last abode 
forms the archetype of a dead space that can be 
summoned and rebuilt els ewhere -in any place 
where bodies, including non-pharaonic ones, are 
to be deposited for the purpose of an immortaliz­
ing preservation. The pyramid's chamber is thus 
likewise an object that can be sent on a journey -
it especially likes to land in those areas of the 
modern world in which people are obsessed with 
the notion that artistic and cultural objects should 
be conserved at almost any cost. The Egyptian­
style dead space is thus reinstalled wherever there 
are museums , for these are nothing other than 
heterotopic locations in the midst of the modern 
'lifeworld' where selected objects are mortifie d, 
defunctionalized, removed from all profane uses 
and offered up for reverent viewing . 
Groys too, one could say, is a thinker operating 
from a ]osephian position, in so far as he - a post-
67 
Boris Groys and Derrida 
communist emigrant of Jewish descent -brings 
the gift of marginality with him from Russia. He 
does not, however, derive any ambition to con­
quer the centre from it. Unlike Derrida, he no 
longer practises any dream interpretation in the 
textural power centre; he rather replaced the busi­
ness of dream interpretation with that of dream 
curation. He is convinced that neither the dreams 
of the ancients nor those of our contemporaries 
require any new interpreters -there are more than 
enough of them already. What the dreams of the 
empire's inhabitants, their texts, their works of art 
and their waste products, require instead is orig­
inal collectors and curators. The curator of dreams 
eo ipso deals more with the body of dream objects 
than their deeper meaning -in this respect he fol­
lows on from Derrida's onto-semiological materi­
alism. But he is not sure whether he should give 
credence to Derrida's Romantic tendencies, his flir­
tation with eternity and absolute alterity -he sees 
in these figures something more like professional 
deformations that come about through a constant 
engagement with the fictions of the illuminated 
68 
Boris Groys and Derrida 
and immortal. Even Derrida's claim to the insight 
that there is no illumination is formulated too 
much in the mode of an illumination for his taste. 
Groys is extremely aware that Derrida, after Freud, 
Saussure, Wittgenstein and Heidegger, measured 
the boundaries of the philosophies of language 
and text, and was thus a completer. He therefore 
has no doubts about the quasi-Hegelian stature of 
the thinker -and is hence all the more convinced 
that the work of philosoph y from the neo-Der­
ridean position can only continue if its carriers 
change direction and do something else. 
One could define the change of direction sug­
gested by Groys in the apres-Derrida in the fol­
lowing terms: where there was grammato logy, 
there must now be museology -the latter could 
be termed archival theory. Groys is Derrida's 
Feuerbach - yet at the same time already his Marx. 
Just as Feuerbach comes back from God to real 
people, Groys takes the path from Derrida's spec­
tres to the real mummies. And just as thinkers like 
Kierkegaard and Marx, who invented existen­
tialism and the critique of political economy, were 
69 
Bons Groys and Derrida 
able to come after Hegel, Derrida is succeeded on 
the one hand by the political economy of hetero­
topic collections, and on the other by the alliance 
of philosophy with narrative literature -there are 
already examples of both today, and numerous 
other forms will develop in the course of the 
twenty-first century, with or without explicit ref­
erence to de construction and its consequences. 
The sense in which Groys is to Derrida what 
Marx was to Hegel can best be explained using 
the concept of the archive, which plays a key role 
in the thinking of both authors . For Derrida, the 
archive governs the infinite within the finite; it 
equals a building with fluid walls, the kind Sal­
vador Dall might have designed -in fact, a house 
without any walls, inhabited by an infinite number 
of residents with unpredictably differing opinions . 
For Groys, on the other hand, the archive is a 
finite and discrete institution. It is not the imagi­
nary, but rather the intelligent museum. This 
quality lends it a neo-Egyptian exclusivity. All that 
happens in the archive is that concrete innova­
tions are constantly compared with concrete 
70 
Borls Groys and Derrida 
objects and assessed in terms of their collectability. 
Groys's archive· is a funeral parlour for world art 
and world cultures - it is the place in which, as 
hinted, a number of persons can attain immortality 
with their works according to a law of selection 
that is never quite transparent. 
The museological turn in philosophy must not 
be mistaken for a change to a different genre; nor 
does it have any characteristics of a flight to less 
demanding areas. It remains philosophical in the 
precise sense, because it reinterprets the most pro­
found idea of metaphysics -the ontological dif­
ference as described by Heidegger -in the most 
compact of ways. The difference between Sein and 
Seiendes -previously between the eternal and the 
ephemer al -takes on a hard, concrete profile in 
Groys's thought : he now refers to the difference 
between what can be collected in the pyramid's 
generalized burial chamber, i.e. the archive or mu­
seum, and what forever remains outside of this 
chamber -the endless and arbitrary wealth of 
phenomena described with such terms as lifeworld, 
reality, existence, becoming, history and the like. 
71 
Baris Grays and Derrida 
It follows from this that Groys cannot agree with 
Derrida's interpretation of the Platonic chora, as 
brilliant as it might be. Such an absorptive space 
without qualities is not of a psychological or 
introscendent nature, it is not the Hegelian pit 
leading to the interior, it is not like the hearing 
soul of Socrates, and it is not one with the won­
derful patience Derrida has with texts. It is quite 
simply the burial chamber's dead space, reused in 
modernity as the showroom of art and culture. It 
is the space that interrupts the pitifulnesses of scat­
tered life and the pretensions of becoming in 
order to enable contemplat ion. By visiting it time 
and again and describing it anew with amaZing 
tirelessness, Groys, the philosophical commentator 
on the art of the present day, is in fact the last 
metaphys ician. As a meta-vitalist, he enquires as to 
the transformation of mere life through its trans­
ference to the archive. Of all Derrida's readers, he 
is the one who honours him by leaving the paths 
of imitation and exegesis. 
I would like to conclude this series of de-and 
recontextualizations of Derrida's work with a 
72 
Baris Grays and Derrida 
personal note. I will never forget the moment 
when Raimund Fellinger, my editor at Suhrkamp 
Verlag,l asked me during my visit to the Frankfurt 
Book Fair in October 2004: 'You know that Der­
rida died?' I did not know. It seemed to me as if a 
curtain was falling. The noise of the hall was sud­
denly in a different world. I was alone with the 
name of the deceased, alone with an appeal to 
loyalty, alone with the sensation that the world 
had suddenly become heavier and more unjust, 
and the feeling of gratitude for what this man had 
shown. What was it ultimately? Perhaps this: that 
it is still possible to marvel without reverting to 
childhood. To offer oneself up as an object for 
wonder at the summit of knowledge -is this not 
the greatest gift that intelligence can present to its 
recipients and partners? This gratitude has not left 
me since. It is accompanied by the notion that the 
burial chamber of this man touches a high heaven. 
What I have discovered since then is the happi­
ness of not being alone with this image. 
1 [Translator's note: Sloterdijk's German publisher.] 
73 
Index 
Akhenaten 12 
ambiguity x, 22 
ambivalence 15, 37 
antiquity 32, 34, 66 
architecture 35-6 
archival theory see 
museology 
archive xi, 4, 47-8, 61, 70-2 
Arendt, Hannah , The Origins 
a/Totalitarianism 30 
Aristotelianism 38 
Aten religion 12 
Baudelaire , Charles 63 
being 27, 42, 71 
Benjamin, Waiter 25, 26 
Bloch, Ernst 25, 26 
body 54-6 
Borkenau, Franz 29-40 
End and Beginning 29 
The Totalitarian Enemy 
30 
Catholicism 30, 33 Chinese 57 
Chora (Derrida) 59-60, 72 
Christian culture 33, 37, 65, 
66 
circumcision 12, 15, 18 
communism 26, 30 
completion 2-3, 4, 8--9 
consumer society 34 
Coop Himmelblau 36 
cultural generations 29-32 
cultural philosophy, 
Borkenau's 30-9 
cultures 31-4 
DaH, Salvador 70 
death 
the antinomy of 30-8 
Derrida on viii, 27, 29-30, 
35-40 
responses of civilizations 
to 29-40 
signs and 54-5 
Debray, Regis 41-9 
God, An Itinerary 44-9 
75 
Index 
decentring 8 
deconstruction 2, 4, 16-18, 
53, 57-63 
Luhmann on 6-9 
as semantic secularization 
35 
and survival 48-9 
as third wave of dream 
interpretation 26-7 
to defend intelligence 
against one-sidedness 
39, 59-60 
Derrida, Jacques 
death (2004) viii, 73 
self-portrait 59-60 
differance 13-14, 46 
difference, the ontological 
71 
discourse analysis 51, 53 
distortion 13-14,16-17, 
46 
dream interpretation 11, 
23-7, 57-60 
or dream curation 68 
Egypt, Jewish relationship 
with 11-18, 21-7, 36, 
45-9 
'Egyptian ', use of term 27 
Egyptians 11-16, 21-7, 32, 
65 
Hegel on the 57 
76 Egypticism 33, 34, 36, 37, 
56-7 
Eisenman, Peter 36 
Epicureans 34, 38 
existentialism 69 
exodus 12, 15-17, 21-2, 24, 
46-9 
Fellinger, Raimund 73 
Ferrucci, Franco, The Life of 
God 45 
Feuerbach, Ludwig 69 
freedom of choice 37-40, 
56, 65 
Freud, Sigmund 11-18, 20, 
21, 24, 34, 35, 46, 69 
Moses and Monotheism 
11-17 
Gadamer, Hans-Georg 42 
God, the life of 44-9 
grammar 3 
Groys, Boris 65-73 
Haberm as, Jurgen xii 
haunting (hantologie) 15-16, 
36 
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm 
Friedrich 1, 41, 51-64, 
65 
Phenomenolo gy of Spirit 
58 
Hegelianism 1-2, 3 
Heidegger, Martin 4, 41-3, 
69,71 
hermeneutics 23, 26-7 
humanism 21 
Husserl , Edmund 54 
identification, risk of x, 38-9 
imagination, Hegel's theory 
of the 53-6, 61 
immortalit y 30, 32, 33, 37, 
49, 54-5, 71 
politics of 58-60, 65-6 
incognito 17, 37 
Indus Valley Civilizations 32 
inscriptions 61 
intelligence 
as ability to marvel 73 
defence against one­
sidedness 39, 59-60 
like a pit 59-63 
irony 22-3 
Jacob 22 
Jews 11-18, 20, 21-7, 60, 68 
relationship with Egypt 
11-18, 21-7, 36, 45-9 
Joseph 21-7, 61 
Judaism 15-16 
Kierkegaard, S0ren 69 
knowledge economies 44 Index 
Kojeve, Alexandre 2 
Lacan, Jacques 15 
language 
for Hegel 56-7 
philosophy of 3, 42-3 
language game 4-5 
Lebensphilosophien see life, 
philosophies of 
life 
philosophies of 41-2 
as survival 34, 63 
transformation through 
the archive 72 
lifeworld 67 
linguistic turn 3, 42-3 
Luhmann, Niklas 1-9 
Funktion der Religion 45 
Mann, Thomas 19-28 
joseph and His Brothers 
21-7 
Margins of Philosophy 
(Derrida) 53 
Marx, Karl 69 
Marxism, readings of 
messianism 25-6 
materialism, semiological 35, 
68, 70 
mediology 44-9 
messianism, Marxist 
readings of 25-6 
77 
Index 
metabiology 3 
metaphysics 6, 11, 37, 38, 
42, 71, 72 
dream interpretation 11, 
57-60, 62 
of presence 43, 55 
see also ontotheology 
Modern Age 33-4 
modernity 5, 7, 34-5, 66, 72 
monotheism 11-18, 45-9 
mortality, cultures of 32-3, 
37, 60 
Moses 11-18 
multifocality 7 
museolo gy 67-73 
narrative literature, and 
philosophy 21-7, 70 
Nietzsche , Friedrich 19 
objects , artistic and cultural 
57-8, 67 
observation 5-6 
second-order 7, 51-2 
ontology 15 
ontotheology 42, 62 
opposition, the principle of 
31 
oppositions ix-x 
other, the 18, 68 
own, concept of the 5, 
17-18 
78 parody 23 
'phantasiology' 53 
philosophy 
abandonment of 3, 4-5, 
41-3 
linguistic or semiological 
turn 3,42-3 
museological turn 70-3 
and narrative literature 
21-7, 70 
'Pit and the Pyramid, The' 
(Derrida) 53-6, 61-3 
Platonism 38, 54-5, 72 
political 
dream interpretation and 
the 25-6 
invention of the 32-3, 34 
political economy, critique 
of 69 
postmodernism 5,7-9, 44 
presence, metaphysics of 43, 
55 
psychoanalysis 16-17, 21, 
23,52 
pyramid 32,40,49, 51 
as archive 71-2 
Groys on the 66-7 
and pit 53-6, 59-63 
as the sign of all signs 27, 
55-6, 57-63 
Queneau , Raymond 2 
reading xi-xii, 43, 59-60 
real, the ix 
receptivity 43, 59 
relics 33 
religion 
birth of monotheism 
11-18 
as a historical medium of 
social synthesis 44 
Renaissance 34 
Saussure, Ferdinand de 56, 
69 
scepticism 34, 38 
semiology 3, 24--7, 35, 55-6 
Hegel's 53-6 
signifier, and signified 54--5 
signs 
ambiguity and 
polyvalence of x 
the arbitrariness of 56 
Derrida on 54-6 
Hegel's function of 53-6 
reading 24--7 
situation (Luhmann's) 7 
social system, differentiation 
of the 5, 7 
sociology of world society 
4--5 
Socrates 59 
soul, immortality of the 33, 
54--5 Index 
spectres of Marx (Derrida) 
15 
Spengler, Oswald 31,34 
spirit, Hegel's 53-8, 65 
spirltualization, progress in 
13 
stability, forms of 7-8 
Stoics 34, 38 
subject 
and being 27 
dream interpretation 
58-60 
survival 8--9, 33, 48--9, 63 
symbols 18, 25, 56 
systems theory 2, 4--5, 6 
text xi-xii, 57-8 
distortion of a 13-14 
textualization 49, 62-3 
theology 
and mediology 44--9 
modern 21 
totalitarianism 30 
traces 13, 15, 17-18,61 
tradition, completion of 2-3, 
4, 8--9 
translations xii, 5-6, 19 
transportability 45-9, 60-3, 
66-7 
unconscio us, the 16-17 
79 
Index 
Vernant, Jean-Pierre 59 
vital ism 41-2, 72 
Wittgenstein, Ludwig 3, 69 
80 worldliness 30 
writing 
philosophy of 3, 43-4, 54 
and transport 46--8 
