Jacques Derrida
The Last of the Rogue States: The ‘‘Democracy
to Come,’’ Opening in Two Turns
Ihave already played a great deal with this ver-
bal thing voyou , this idiom of recent or modern
French invention (dating back only to the nine-
teenth century, to the beginning, therefore, of anurban society entering the age of industrial capi-talism), an idiom of popular origin and barelyFrench, but also, in spite of or actually because ofall this, an untranslatable, or barely translatable,incrimination, a sort of French interjection orexclamation, ‘‘ voyou! ’’ which, I neglected to say,
can be turned by means of an intonation intosomething tender, aﬀectionate, maternal (mymaternal grandmother used to call me this whenIw a sac h i l d ,p r e t e n d i n gt ob ea n g r yw i t hme, ‘‘ voyou, va! ’’ [‘‘you little rascal!’’]).
1Ih a v e
played a great deal with this word, which, whileremaining untranslatable, nonetheless becomesin the expression ‘‘ Etat voyou ’’ a more-than-recent
translation, almost still brand new, barely used,approximate, franglaise , of the Anglo-American
‘‘rogue state’’—that so-very-singular indictmentI discovered for the ﬁrst time in my own lan-guage a little more than a year ago, and doublyassociated with the state, when it was announcedafter a cabinet meeting that the president and
TheSouth Atlantic Quarterly 103:2/3, Spring/Summer 2004.
English translation copyright © 2004 by the Board of Trust-
ees of the Leland Stanford Jr. University.
324 Jacques Derrida
the prime minister at the time, in spite of their ‘‘cohabitation,’’ that is, in
spite of belonging to diﬀerent political parties, had agreed upon the devel-opment of a nuclear weapon aimed at combatting or deterring what thestatement read on the steps of the Elysée Presidential Palace called Etats
voyous . I have thus spoken a great deal of this word voyou (for the word
itself is a voyou of language), of what has recently become and, such is my
hypothesis, will remain for only a short time still, a useful slogan or rallyingcry for the coalition of what are called Western democracies. In this wordvoyou I have thus let appear by turns the noun and the attribute or adjective,
a nominal adjective sometimes attached to a ‘‘who’’ and sometimes accordedto a ‘‘what,’’ for example, Etat voyou . For in the French idiom, someone can
do something that’s voyou without actually being av o y o u .A n d ,i nb e g i n -
ning, I said successively, you may recall, using the word voyou four diﬀerent
times, sometimes as a noun, sometimes as an adjective qualifying some-one or something of someone: ‘‘It would no doubt be, dare I say, somewhat‘voyou’ on my part were I not to begin by declaring, yet one more time,my gratitude’’ ( voyou here qualiﬁes something, an attitude). I then added: ‘‘I
would thus be, you might think, not only ‘voyou’ but ‘a voyou,’ a real rogue,were I not to declare at the outset my endless and bottomless gratitude.’’(This time, after the attribute of a subject, of a who, the substantive le voyou ,
un voyou , ‘‘a rogue,’’ designated the subject, a ‘‘who.’’)
The attribute voyou can thus sometimes be applied to a subject that is not
substantially, that is, through and through, or naturally, av o y o u ,arogue.
The quality voyou is always precisely an attribution, the predicate or categoria
and, thus, the accusation leveled not against something natural but againstan institution. It is an interpretation, an assignation, and, in truth, always adenunciation, a complaint, or an accusation, a charge, an evaluation, and averdict. As such it announces, prepares, and begins to justify some sanction.TheEtat voyou must be punished, contained, rendered harmless, reduced
to a harmless state, if need be by force of law ( droit) and the right ( droit)
of force.
I am drawing attention to this idiomatic distinction between the adjec-
tive and the noun in order already to help us think about the fact that in thisFrench expression of very recent date, ‘‘ Etat voyou ,’’ which, even if untrans-
latable, as I said, will have been but an approximate translation of the Anglo-
American rogue state ,w ed on o tk n o we x a c t l yh o w voyou should be heard or
understood. We do not know whether it should be, as a substantive, linkedby a hyphen to the substantive state, thereby indicating that some state issubstantially a voyou and thus would deserve to disappear as a nonconstitu-
The Last of the Rogue States 325
tional state or state of nonlaw, or whether voyou is an attribute, the quality
temporarily attributed out of some strategic motivation by certain states to
some other state that, from some point of view or in some context, during alimited period of time, would be exhibiting voyou behavior, appearing not to
respect the mandates of international law, the prevailing rules and the forceof law of international deontology, such as the so-called legitimate and law-
abiding states interpret them in accordance with their own interests. These
are the states that have at their disposal the greatest force and are ready tocall the Etats voyous to order and bring them back to reason, if need be by
armed intervention—whether punitive or preemptive.
Here is where the problem of Etats voyous that I announced in the begin-
ning forms a real knot. To understand this knot—I am not saying to undoit—I will follow three threads of very unequal length. Very unequal for rea-
sons of economy and so as not to try your patience.
A.
Theﬁrst thread , the longest, though still little more than a quick connection,
would be the one that links the question of what we have called the ‘‘democ-
racy to come,’’ of what this syntagm might mean, to the current situation:states accuse other states of being Etats voyous (rogue states). They intend
to draw the conclusion, the armed conclusion, of this, namely, to use forceto confront them, in the name of a presumed right and the reason of thestrongest, according to modes that we no longer know, in principle and inall rigor, how to qualify, and which, according to my hypothesis, are and willremain forever foreign to every accredited qualiﬁcation or to every accept-able conceptual distinction: army as opposed to police, engaged in war (civilwar, national war, or partisan war) or in peace-keeping operations, or elsein state terrorism.
Every ‘‘democracy to come,’’ whatever meaning or credit we attribute to
this expression, will have to treat this problem and its urgency. It is onlyin post-Kantian modernity that the problematic, and ﬁrst of all the deﬁni-tion, of democracy gets fully implicated in the turbulent territory of rela-tions between states, in questions of war and peace. As at the end of On
the Social Contract , questions of foreign policy, of war and peace, were still
excluded, marginalized or deferred in the treatment of the concept andstakes of democracy. This democracy remained and still remains a modelof intranational and intrastate political organization on the inside of thecity. Despite some appearances, it is not certain that things have changed.
326 Jacques Derrida
Whether we follow the guiding thread of a post-Kantian political thought of
cosmopolitanism or that of the international law that governed throughoutthe twentieth century such institutions as the League of Nations, the UnitedNations, the International Criminal Tribunal, and so on, the democraticmodel (equality and freedom of sovereign state subjects, majority rule, andso on) sometimes seems to become or tends to become ‘‘in spirit’’ the normof this politics of international law. But this appearance is deceptive, and thequestion of a universal, international, interstate, and especially transstatedemocratization remains an utterly obscure question of the future. It is oneof the possible horizons of the expression ‘‘democracy to come.’’ The demo-cratic paradigm does not govern the tradition of Kant’s treatise Perpetual
Peace , which it would be necessary to read here closely, with its concept of
a ‘‘world republic’’ ( Weltrepublik ), which is not a democracy, and its distinc-
tion between a ‘‘treaty of peace’’ ( Friedensvertrag, pactum pacis ) and a ‘‘league
of peace’’ ( Friedensbund, foedus paciﬁcum ), this latter alone being capable of
assuring a perpetual peace in a federation of free, which is to say, sovereign,states.
2All this, we must never forget, is in the context of Kant’s claim that
the ‘‘majesty of the people,’’ that is to say, the sovereignty of the people, isan ‘‘absurd expression’’ ( Volksmajestät ist ein ungereimter Ausdruck )(PP16).
Majestas has always been a synonym of sovereignty .3O n l yas t a t ec a nb eo r
have a sovereign. A league of peoples ( Völkerbund ) cannot become a state
of peoples ( Völkerstaat )o rb ej o i n e di n t oas i n g l es t a t e .A sf o rd e m o c r a c yi n
the interstate or transstate relations, law, and institutions of today, the leastthat can be said is that it remains entirely to come. It is thus the place ofwhich we must speak: not necessarily fromthis place or in view of this place
but on the subject of the possibility or impossibility of such a place.
In saying that this place (possible, impossible, or unlocatable, but not
necessarily utopic) constitutes thep l a c eo rt h e proper place with any chance
of giving some weight or scope to the expression ‘‘democracy to come,’’ Ishould in all honesty commit myself, though I will not do so today, to apatient analysis of all the contexts and inﬂections that have marked thissort of motto that is not even a sentence (‘‘democracy to come’’): for I havemost often used it, always in passing, with as much stubborn determinationas indeterminate hesitation—at once calculated and culpable—in a strangemixture of lightness and gravity, with a casual and cursory, indeed some-what irresponsible, touch, a somewhat sententious and aphoristic reservethat leaves seriously in reserve an excessive responsibility.
Each time, the context and the inﬂection have diﬀered, to be sure, begin-
The Last of the Rogue States 327
ning with what was probably, though I am not certain, the ﬁrst occurrence,
inDu droit à la philosophie , in 1989–1990. Democracy was there deﬁned
as a ‘‘philosophical concept’’ and something that ‘‘ remains still to come.’’4
The same year, in the lecture that became the Force of Law , in the course
of analyzing in a more orless, more andless, deconstructive fashion the
already autodeconstructive discourse of Benjamin in his revolutionary cri-tique of parliamentary government and liberal democracy, I noted that,from Benjamin’s point of view, ‘‘democracy would be a degeneration of law,of the violence, the authority and the power of law,’’ and that ‘‘there is notyet any democracy worthy of this name. Democracy remains to come: to
engender or to regenerate.’’
5
The feeling of aporetic diﬃculty aﬀects not only some supposedly endless
approach of democracy itself, of the democratic thing, if one can still say this
(and precisely because of the autoimmunity of the same and the proper).This aporia-aﬀect aﬀects the very use of the word democracy in the syntagm
‘‘democracy to come.’’ That is what I tried to suggest in Sauf le nom (1993)
with regard to the meaning of sansin the apophatic discourse of so-called
n e g a t i v et h e o l o g y ,i n d e e do fa khôra or a spacing before any determination
and any possible reappropriation by a theologico-political history or reve-lation, and even before a negative theology, which is always fundamentallyrelated to some historical, and especially Christian, revelation. The democ-racy to come would be like the khôra of the political. Taking the example of
‘‘democracy’’ (but we shall encounter with the example of democracy theparadox of the example), one of the voices of this text (which is a polylogue)explains what the locution ‘‘democracy to come’’ should above all not mean,namely, a regulative Idea in the Kantian sense, but also what it remained ,
and could not but remain ( demeurer ), namely, the inheritance of a prom-
i s e :‘ ‘ T h ed i ﬃ c u l t yo ft h e‘ w i t h o u t ’( sans) spreads into what is still called
politics, morals, or law, which are just as threatened as promised by apopha-sis.’’
6It is thus indeed already a question of autoimmunity, of a double bind
of threat and chance, not alternatively or by turns, promise and/or threat,but threat inthe promise itself. And here is the example, which is certainly
not fortuitous:
Take the example of democracy, of the idea of democracy, of democ-racy to come (neither the Idea in the Kantian sense, nor the current,limited, and determined concept of democracy, but democracy as theinheritance of a promise). Its path passes perhaps today in the worldthrough (across) the aporias of negative theology . . .
328 Jacques Derrida
The other voice protests: ‘‘How can a path pass through aporias?’’
Once a response has been given to this question, the voice again protests,
recalling that this possibility seems just as impossible, and adds:
So diﬃcult in any case that this passage through aporia seems ﬁrstof all (perhaps) reserved as a secret for a few. This esoterism seemsstrange for a democracy, even for this democracy to come that youdeﬁne no more than apophasis deﬁnes God. Its to-come would bejealously thought, watched over, hardly taught by a few. Very suspect.(ON83)
This voice was trying to insinuate that this was not the most democratic
language, that is, the most commendable, in which to recommend democ-racy. An advocate for democracy should have learned to speak to the people,to speak democratically of democracy.
To this suspicion, the other voice responds by appealing to a double in-
junction, one that very much resembles the autoimmunitary contradictionor the counterindication of which we have been speaking today, as well asthe properly democratic paradoxy of the exemplary ‘‘anyone’’ or ‘‘no mat-ter who’’:
Understand me, it’s a matter of maintaining a double injunction. Twoconcurrent desires divide apophatic theology, at the edge of nondesire,around the gulf and chaos of the Khôra : the desire to be inclusive of
all, thus understood by all (community, koinè), and the desire to keep
or entrust the secret within the very strict limits of those who hear/understand it right, as secret, and are then capable or worthy of keep-
ing it. The secret, no more than democracy or the secret of democracy,must not, besides, cannot, be entrusted to the inheritance of no mat-ter whom. Again the paradox of the example: the no-matter-who (anysample example) must also give the goodexample. ( ON83–84)
Reference is thus made each time to the regulative Idea in the Kantian
sense, to which I would not want the idea of a democracy to come to bereduced.
Yet the regulative Idea remains, for lack of anything better, if we can
say ‘‘lack of anything better’’ with regard to a regulative Idea, a last resort.Though such a last resort or ﬁnal recourse risks becoming an alibi, it retainsa certain dignity. I cannot swear that I will not one day give in to it.
My reservations with regard to the regulative Idea would be, in short,
The Last of the Rogue States 329
ofthree sorts . Some concern ﬁrst of all for the very loose way in which this
notion of a regulative Idea is currently used, outside its strictly Kantian
determination. In this case, the regulative Idea remains on the order of thepossible , an ideal possible, of course, that is inﬁnitely deferred. It partakes
in what would still fall, at the end of an inﬁnite history, into the realm ofthe possible, of what is virtual or potential, of what is within the power ofsomeone, some ‘‘I can,’’ to reach, in theory, and in a form that is not whollyfreed from all teleological ends.
1. To this I would oppose, in the ﬁrst place , all the ﬁgures I place under the
t i t l eo ft h e im-possible , of what must remain (in a nonnegative fashion) for-
eign to the order of my possibilities, to the order of the ‘‘I can,’’ of ipseity, ofthe theoretical, the descriptive, the constative, and the performative (inas-much as this latter still implies a power for some ‘‘I’’ guaranteed by con-ventions that neutralize the pure eventfulness of the event; the eventful-ness of the to-come exceeds this sphere of the performative). It is a questionhere, as with the coming of any event worthy of this name, of an unfore-seeable coming of the other, of a heteronomy, of a law come from the other,of a responsibility and decision of the other—of the other in me, an othergreater and older than I. It is thus a question of separating democracy andauto-nomy, something that is, I concede, more than diﬃcult, indeed im-possible. It is more im-possible, and yet necessary, to separate sovereigntyand unconditionality, law and justice, as I proposed in ‘‘The University with-out Condition’’ (2001).
7
This im-possible is not privative. It is not the inaccessible, and it is not
what I can indeﬁnitely defer: it announces itself, sweeps down upon me,precedes me, and seizes me here and now in a nonvirtualizable way, in actu-
ality and not potentiality. It comes upon me from on high, in the form ofan injunction that does not simply wait on the horizon, that I do not seecoming, that never leaves me in peace and never lets me put it oﬀ until later.Such an urgency cannot be idealized , no more than the other as other can.
This im-possible is thus not a (regulative) ideaorideal. It is what is most
undeniably real. And sensible. Like the other. Like the irreducible and non-
appropriable diﬀer ance of the other.
2.In the second place , then, the responsibility of what remains to be de-
cided or done (in actuality) cannot consist in following, applying, or carry-ing out a norm or rule. Wherever I have at my disposal a determinablerule, I know what must be done, and as soon as such knowledge dictatesthe law, action follows knowledge as a calculable consequence: one knows
330 Jacques Derrida
what path to take, one no longer hesitates. The decision then no longer
decides anything but is made in advance and is thus in advance annulled.It is simply deployed, without delay, presently, with the automatism attrib-uted to machines. There is no longer any place for justice or responsibility(whether juridical, political, or ethical).
3. Finally, in the third place , if we come back this time to the strict mean-
i n gK a n tg a v et ot h e regulative use of ideas (as opposed to their constitutive
use), we would, in all rigor, and in order to say anything on this subject, andespecially in order to appropriate such terms, have to subscribe to the entireKantian architectonic and critique, something I cannot seriously undertakeor even commit myself to doing here. We would have to begin by askingabout what Kant calls ‘‘the diﬀerent interest in reason’’ ( ein verschiedenes Inte-
resse der Vernunft ),
8theimaginary (thefocus imaginarius , that point toward
which all the lines directing the rules of understanding—which is not rea-son—tend and converge and thus indeﬁnitely approximate ), the necessary
illusion , which need not necessarily deceive us, the ﬁgure of an approach
or approximation ( zu nähern ) that tends indeﬁnitely toward rules of univer-
sality, and especially the indispensable use of the as if(als ob )(CPR 533; A
644/B 672).9We cannot treat this here, but I thought it necessary at least
to note, in principle, how circumspect I would be to appropriate in any rig-orous way this idea of a ‘‘regulative Idea.’’ Let us not forget, since we havebeen talking so much about the world and the worldwide ( mondialisation ),
that the very idea of world remains a regulative Idea for Kant.
10It is the sec-
ond of the regulative Ideas, between two others that remain, so to speak,two forms of sovereignty: the ipseity of the ‘‘myself’’ ( Ich selbst ), as soul or
as thinking nature, and the ipseity of God.
Those are some of the reasons why I, without ever giving up on reason
and a certain ‘‘interest of reason,’’ hesitate to use the expression ‘‘regulativeIdea’’ when speaking of a to-come or of democracy to come. In The Other
Heading (1991), I explicitly set aside the ‘‘status of the regulative Idea in
the Kantian sense’’ and insisted at once on the absolute and unconditionalurgency of the here and now that does not wait and on the structure of the
promise, a promise that is kept in memory, that is handed down ( léguée ),
inherited, claimed and taken up ( alléguée ). Here is how the ‘‘to come’’ was
then deﬁned:
Not something that is certain to happen tomorrow, not the democ-racy (national or international, state or trans-state) of the future , but
The Last of the Rogue States 331
a democracy that must have the structure of a promise— and thus the
memory of that which carries the future, the to-come, here and now .11
A l lo ft h i sw a sw r i t t e ni nt h ec o n t e x to fas e r i e so fa p o r i a sa n da n t i n o m i e s
to which I cannot return here.
I should, it seems to me, clarify a bit better here what still remains envel-
oped in these gestures, which will become more frequent and somewhat
diﬀerently inﬂected in subsequent references to the ‘‘democracy to come.’’I shall do this all too quickly around ﬁve foci .
1. The expression ‘‘democracy to come’’ translates, to be sure, or calls for
a militant and interminable political critique. A weapon aimed at the ene-mies of democracy, it protests against all naiveté and every political abuse,every rhetoric that would present as a present or existing democracy, as ade facto democracy, what remains inadequate to the democratic demand,whether nearby or far away, at home or somewhere else in the world, any-where that a discourse on the rights of man and on democracy remains littlemore than an obscene alibi so long as it tolerates the terrible plight of somany millions of human beings suﬀering from malnutrition, disease, andhumiliation, grossly deprived not only of bread and water but of equality orfreedom, dispossessed of the rights of all, of everyone, of anyone. (This ‘‘any-one’’ comes before any other metaphysical determination as subject, humanperson, or consciousness, before any juridical determination as compeer(semblable ), compatriot, family member ( congénère ), brother, neighbor, fel-
low religious follower, or fellow citizen. Jean Paulhan says somewhere, andI’m here paraphrasing, that to think democracy is to think the ‘‘ﬁrst-comer’’:anyone, no matter who, at the permeable limit, in fact, between ‘‘who’’ and‘‘what,’’ the living being, the cadaver, and the ghost. The ﬁrst-comer: is thatnot the best way to translate ‘‘the ﬁrst to come’’?
The ‘‘to come’’ suggests not only the promise, but also the fact that democ-
racy will never exist, in the sense of a present existence: not because it willbe deferred but because it will always remain aporetic in its structure (forcewithout force, incalculable singularity andcalculable equality, commensura-
bility andincommensurability, heteronomy andautonomy, indivisible sov-
ereignty and divisible or shared sovereignty, an empty name, a despairingmessianicity or a messianicity in despair, and so on).
But, beyond this active and interminable critique, the expression ‘‘democ-
racy to come’’ takes into account the absolute and intrinsic historicity ofthe only system that welcomes in itself, in its very concept, this expression
332 Jacques Derrida
of autoimmunity that is called the right to self-critique and perfectibility.
Democracy is the only system, the only constitutional paradigm, in which,in principle, one has or assumes for oneself the right to criticize everythingpublicly, including the idea of democracy, its concept, its history, and itsname. Including the idea of the constitutional paradigm and the absoluteauthority of law. It is thus the only paradigm that is universalizable, whenceits chance and its fragility. But in order for this historicity—unique amongall political systems—to be complete, it must be freed not only from theIdea in the Kantian sense but from all teleology, all onto-theo-teleology.
2. This implies another thinking of the event (unique, unforeseeable,
without horizon, unmasterable by any ipseity or any conventional and thusconsensual performativity), which is marked in a ‘‘to come’’ that, beyondthe future (since the democratic demand does not wait), names the comingofwhocomes or of what comes to pass, namely, the newly arrived whose
irruption should not and cannot be limited by any conditional hospitalityon the borders of a policed nation-state.
3. This naturally presupposes, and this is what is most diﬃcult, most
inconceivable, an extension of the democratic beyond nation-state sover-eignty, beyond citizenship. This would come about through the creationof an international juridico-political space that, without doing away withevery reference to sovereignty, never stops innovating and inventing newdistributions and forms of sharing, new divisions of sovereignty. (I refertoinventing here because the to-come gestures not only toward the coming
of the other but toward invention—invention not of the event but throughthe event.) The discourse concerning the New International in Specters of
Marx (1993) tried to point in this direction. The renewed declaration of
h u m a nr i g h t s( a n dn o tt h e‘ ‘ r i g h t so fm a na n do ft h ec i t i z e n ’ ’ )a tt h ee n dof World War II remains an essential democratic reference for the institu-tions of international law, especially the United Nations. This reference isthus in virtual contradiction with the principle of nation-state sovereignty,which also remains there intact. It is by democratic reference to the Univer-sal Declaration of Human Rights that one tries, most often to no avail, toimpose limits upon the sovereignty of nation-states. One example, amongso many others, would be the laborious creation of an International Crimi-nal Tribunal.
The Declaration of Human Rights is not, however, opposed to, and so
does not limit, the sovereignty of the nation-state in the way a principle ofnonsovereignty would oppose a principle of sovereignty. No, it is one sover-
The Last of the Rogue States 333
eignty set against another. Human rights pose and presuppose the human
being (who is equal, free, self-determined) as sovereign. The Declaration ofHuman Rights declares another sovereignty; it thus reveals the autoimmu-
nity of sovereignty in general.
4. In Specters of Marx , the expression ‘‘democracy to come’’ is inextricably
linked to justice. It is the ergoor the igitur ,t h ethusbetween ‘‘democracy to
come and justice’’: ‘‘For the democracy to come and thus for justice,’’ as averbless phrase puts it in Specters of Marx .
12
This gesture inscribes the necessity of the democracy to come not only
into the axiomatic of the messianicity without messianism, the spectralityor hauntology, that this book develops, but into the singular distinctionbetween law and justice (heterogeneous but inseparable) which, ﬁrst devel-oped in Force of Law , gets further elaborated in Specters of Marx in the course
of a discussion of the Heideggerian interpretation of Dikè as gathering,
adjoining, and harmony. Contesting that interpretation, I proposed align-ing justice with disjointure, with being out of joint , with the interruption of
r e l a t i o n ,w i t hu n b i n d i n g ,w i t ht h ei n ﬁ n i t es e c r e to ft h eo t h e r .A l lt h i sc a nindeed seem to threaten a community-oriented or communitarian conceptof democratic justice. This discussion, which I cannot reconstitute here,plays a discreet though decisive role throughout the book. It could orientus toward the question of the future: Why are there so few democrat phi-losophers (if there have been any at all), from Plato to Heidegger? Why doesHeidegger remain, in this regard as well, still Platonic?
This conjunction of democracy andjustice is also one of the themes
ofPolitics of Friendship , which, a year later, explicitly says—still without a
verb—‘‘With regard to democracy andwith regard to justice,’’
13linking the
thought of the to-come of the event to the irreducible ‘‘perhaps,’’ question-i n gt h i sn a m e democracy by recalling what the Menexenus said of the regime
under which the Athenians had lived most of the time, ‘‘a form of govern-ment which receives various names, according to the fancies of men, andis sometimes called democracy ( demokratia ), but is really an aristocracy or
government of the best which has the approval of the many’’ ( PF95).
It is here that a certain question gets developed, more explicitly in Politics
of Friendship than anywhere else: the question of the name , of what is hap-
pening ‘‘today’’ ‘‘in the name of democracy.’’ I must be content to signal,so as then to put a bit ﬁner point on it, the place that then, in the courseof a deconstructive critique of Schmitt’s conceptuality (notably around theconcepts of decision and war—whether international war, civil war, or so-
334 Jacques Derrida
called partisan war), opens onto a whole series of questions surrounding
the ‘‘democracy to come.’’ I ask myself:
If, between the name on the one hand, the concept and the thing on the
other, the play of a gap oﬀers room for rhetorical [I emphasize this word
for reasons that will become apparent in a moment] eﬀects which arealso political strategies, what are the lessons that we can draw today?Is it still i nt h en a m eo fd e m o c r a c y that one will attempt to criticize such
and such a determination of democracy or aristo-democracy? Or, moreradically—closer, precisely, to its fundamental radicality (where, for
example, it is rooted in the security of an autochthonous foundation, in
the stock or in the genius of ﬁliation)—is it still in the name of democ-racy, of a democracy to come, that one will attempt to deconstruct aconcept, all the predicates associated with the massively dominant con-cept of democracy, that in whose heritage one inevitably meets againthe law of birth, the natural or ‘‘national’’ law, the law of homophilia orof autochthony, civic equality (isonomy) founded on equality of birth(isogony) as the condition of the calculation of approbation and, there-fore, the aristocracy of virtue and wisdom, and so forth?
What remains or still resists in the deconstructed (or deconstruct-
ible) concept of democracy which guides us endlessly? Which orders us
n o to n l yt o engage [I underscore orders andengage because I will return
to them in a moment] a deconstruction but to keep the old name? Andto deconstruct further in the name of a democracy to come? That is to
say, further, which enjoins [my emphasis] us still to inherit from what—
forgotten, repressed, misunderstood, or unthought in the ‘‘old’’ con-cept and throughout its history—would still be on the watch, giving oﬀsigns or symptoms of a stance of survival coming through all the oldand tired features? ( PF103–4; see PF305–6)
This did not thus exclude the possibility, or even the right, of perhaps
one day abandoning the inheritance or heritage of the name, of changingnames. But always in the name of the name, thereby betraying the heritagei nt h en a m eo f the heritage:
Saying that to keep this Greek name, democracy, is an aﬀair of con-text, of rhetoric or of strategy, even of polemics, reaﬃrming that thisname will last as long as it has to but not much longer, saying thatthings are speeding up remarkably in these fast times, is not neces-
The Last of the Rogue States 335
s a r i l yg i v i n gi nt ot h eo p p o r t u n i s mo rc y n i c i s mo ft h ea n t i d e m o c r a t
who is not showing his cards. Completely to the contrary: one keepsthis indeﬁnite right to the question, to criticism, to deconstruction(guaranteed rights, in principle, in any democracy: no deconstructionwithout democracy, no democracy without deconstruction).One keepsthis right strategically to mark what is no longer a strategic aﬀair: thelimit between the conditional (the edges of the context and of the con-cept enclosing the eﬀective practice of democracy and nourishing it inland and blood) and the unconditional which, from the outset, will haveinscribed a self-deconstructive force [I could have in fact said ‘‘auto-immunitary’’ force] in the very motif of democracy, the possibility andthe duty for democracy itself to de-limit itself. Democracy is the autos [I
would today say the ipseor ipseity] of deconstructive self-delimitation.
Delimitation not only in the name of a regulative Idea and an indeﬁ-nite perfectibility, but every time in the singular urgency of a here and
now.(PF105)
5. In speaking of an unconditional injunction or of a singular urgency, in
invoking a here and now that does not await an indeﬁnitely remote future
assigned by some regulative Idea, on e is not necessarily designating the
future of a democracy that is going to come or that must come, nor even ademocracy that isthe future.One is especially not speaking about some real
imminence, even if a certain imminence is inscribed in the strange conceptof democracy to come. One is not saying what is going to happen or whatis already in the process of happening, as Tocqueville did when he spoke ofbeing ‘‘constantly preoccupied by a single thought’’ when he wrote his book,a thought at once realistic and optimistic. Tocqueville announced , in eﬀect,
in the preface to the twelfth edition of his book, ‘‘the approaching irresist-ible and universal spread of democracy throughout the world.’’
14This was an
announcement .Tocqueville was announcing not simply the imminent future
but, in the present, the present: ‘‘A great democratic revolution is takingplace in our midst’’ ( DA3), he says in his introduction.
As for ‘‘democracy to come,’’ it actually announces nothing. But then what
are these three words doing? What is the modal status of this syntagm thatnames, in general, the ‘‘democracy to come’’ without forming a sentence,especially not a proposition of the sort ‘‘democracy isto come.’’ If I happen to
have written that it ‘‘remains’’ to come, this remaining ( restance ), as always
in my texts, at least since Glas, this democracy in waiting or as remaining
336 Jacques Derrida
(en restance ), pending ( en souﬀrance ), withdraws from its ontological depen-
dence. It does not constitute the modiﬁcation of an ‘‘is,’’ of an ontological
copula marking the present of essence or existence, indeed of substantialor subjective substance.
Now, I would wish to claim that the question of the obscure status or
mode of this phrase without a verb is already political and that it is also
thequestion ofdemocracy. For ‘‘democracy to come’’ can hesitate endlessly,
oscillate indecidably and forever, between two possibilities: it can, on the one
hand, correspond to the neutral, constative analysis of a concept. (In this
case, I would simply be describing, observing, limiting myself to analyz-ing, as a responsible philosopher and logician of language, as a semanticist,what the concept of democracy implies, namely, everything we have justspoken about: the semantic void at the heart of the concept, its rather ordi-nary insigniﬁcance or its disseminal spacing, memory, promise, the eventto come, messianicity that at once interrupts and accomplishes intrinsichistoricity, perfectibility, the right to an autoimmunitary self-critique, andan indeﬁnite number of aporias. This would amount to saying: if you wantto know what you are saying when you use this inherited word democracy ,
you need to know that these things are inscribed or prescribed within it; formy part, I am simply describing this prescription in a neutral fashion. I ammentioning the word democracy as much as using it.) But, on the other hand ,
no longer satisﬁed to remain at the level of a neutral, constative conceptualanalysis, ‘‘democracy to come’’ can also inscribe a performative attempt towin conviction by suggesting support or adherence, an ‘‘and yet it is nec-essary to believe it,’’ ‘‘I believe in it, I promise, I am in on the promise andin messianic waiting, I am taking action or am at least enduring, now youdo the same,’’ and so on. The ‘‘to’’ of the ‘‘to come’’ wavers between impera-tive injunction (call or performative) and the patient perhaps of messianicity
(nonperformative exposure to what comes, to what can always not come orhas already come).
Wavering between the two, the ‘‘to’’ can also, at the same time or by turns,
let the two ‘‘to’s’’ be heard. These two possibilities, these two modalities ofdiscourse or two postures, can alternate; they can be addressed to you byturns or else they can haunt one another, parasite one another in the sameinstant, each one becoming by turns the alibi of the other. In saying thismyself right now, in cautioning you that I can by turns or simultaneouslyplay on the two turns or turns of phrase, I withdraw into the secret of irony,of irony in general or of the particular rhetorical ﬁgure called irony. But
The Last of the Rogue States 337
here is yet one more turn, and it is political: is it not also democracy that
gives the right to irony in the public space? Yes, for democracy opens pub-lic space, the publicity of public space, by granting the right to a change oftone ( Wechsel der Töne ) ,t oi r o n ya sw e l la st oﬁ c t i o n ,t h es i m u l a c r u m ,t h e
secret, literature, and so on. And, thus, to a certain nonpublic public withint h ep u b l i c ,t oa res publica , a republic where the diﬀerence between the pub-
lic and the nonpublic remains an indecidable limit. There is something of ademocratic republic as soon as this right is exercised. This indecidability is,like freedom itself, granted by democracy, and it constitutes, I continue tobelieve, the only radical possibility of deciding and of making come about(performatively), or rather of letting come about (metaperformatively), andthus of thinking what comes or happens and whohappens by, the arriving
of whoever arrives. It thus already opens, for whomever, an experience offreedom, however ambiguous and disquieting, threatened and threatening,it might remain in its ‘‘perhaps,’’ with a necessarily excessive responsibilityo fw h i c hn oo n em a yb ea b s o l v e d .
B.
With these references to right or law and justice, I am already beginning
to pull on my second guiding thread, the one I will cut shortest. It indeed
concerns the connection between law and justice, these two heterogeneousyet inseparable concepts, but especially the connection between law, jus-tice, and force, particularly in relation to the international and transnationalstakes inscribed-prescribed, preinscribed, paradoxically, in the syntagm‘‘democracy to come.’’ As for law, justice, and force, as for knowing whetherthe reason of the strongest is always best, I ask your permission to make as
if, through an economical ﬁction, we had already agreed on the necessity of
this reinterpretation or reactivation of an enormous traditional problematicwith the question of rogue states in view. This problematic—always open,abyssal, chaotic—runs from at least Plato (for example, from Callicles’s dis-course in the Gorgias or Thrasymachus’s in the Republic ,b o t ho fw h i c h
maintain that the just or the right ( dikè,dikaion ) is on the side of or in the
interest of the strongest), to Machiavelli, Hobbes, and the Pascal of that well-known and vertiginous thought that has been so often and so well discussed(by Louis Marin and Geoﬀrey Bennington in particular): ‘‘Justice-migh t...
being unable to make what is just strong, we have made what is strongjust,’’
15t ot h eL aF o n t a i n eo f The Wolf and the Lamb (a couple that goes back
338 Jacques Derrida
to at least Plato and one that I submitted to an interminable analysis in my
seminar this year), to the Rousseau of On the Social Contract (‘‘On the Right
of the Strongest: The strongest is never strong enough to be master all thetime, unless he transforms force into righ t... ’ ’16), and especially, and I insist
on this, to a certain Kant whose deﬁnition of strict right ( das stricte Recht ),
whose doctrine of right proper ( eigentliche Rechtslehre ), implies in the very
concept of right the faculty or the possibility of a reciprocal constraint orcoercion ( wechselseitigen Zwanges ), and thus the possibility of force, of a rea-
son of the strongest in accordance with universal laws and consistent withthe freedom of all.
17This simple deﬁnition is meant to be pure and a priori.
It entails at once the democratic (the freedom of everyone), universality,the international, and cosmopolitical law, beyond the nation-state (univer-sal laws). It prescribes or authorizes the legal and legitimate recourse toforce (the a priori necessity of constraint), that is, some sovereignty, even ifit is not of the state.
We now have available to us, after this interminable detour, all the nec-
essary elements to approach the knot we spoke of earlier and so ﬁnallyaddress, by following our third thread , what I will provisionally call the epoch
of rogue states.
C.
If the expression rogue state appears rather recent, the word rogue ,a sa n
adjective or substantive, has inhabited the English language and haunted
its literature longer than the word voyou has the French language and lit-
erature. In use since the middle of the sixteenth century, it refers in every-day language, in the language of the law and in great works of literature,already in Spenser and often in Shakespeare, to beggars and homeless vaga-bonds of various kinds, but also, and for this same reason, to all sorts ofriﬀraﬀ, villains, and unprincipled outlaws (‘‘a dishonest, unprincipled per-son,’’ says the Oxford English Dictionary , ‘‘a rascal’’). From there the meaning
gets extended, in Shakespeare as well as in Darwin, to all nonhuman livingbeings, that is, to plants and animals whose behavior appears deviant orperverse. Any wild animal can be called rogue , but especially those, such as
rogue elephants , that behave like ravaging outlaws, violating the customs and
conventions, the customary practices, of their own community. A horse can
be called rogue when it stops acting as it should, as it is expected to act, forexample as a racehorse or a trained hunting horse. A distinguishing sign is
The Last of the Rogue States 339
thus aﬃxed to it, a badge or hood, to mark its status as rogue .T h i sl a s tp o i n t
marks the point rather well; indeed it brands it, for the qualiﬁcation rogue
calls for a marking or branding classiﬁcation that sets something apart. A
mark of infamy discriminates by means of a ﬁrst banishing or exclusionthat then leads to a bringing before the law. It is somewhat analogous tothe wheel, forerunner of the yellow star, of which I spoke earlier. Some-thing similar can be heard in the German word Schurke , which is used to
translate rogue in the expression rogue state , and which also means ‘‘rascal,’’
‘‘scoundrel,’’ ‘‘crook,’’ ‘‘thief, ‘‘villain,’’ and so on.
But whereas voyou ,Schurke ,canallia are used to speak only of human out-
laws, the English rogue can be extended to plants and, especially, animals,
as we just noted. This will be one of the reasons it has recently held suchap r i v i l e g e dp o s i t i o ni nA m e r i c a np o l i t i c a lr h e t o r i c ,a sw ew i l ls h o wi namoment. As an article in the Chronicle of Higher Education notes, ‘‘In the
animal kingdom, a rogue is deﬁned as a creature that is born diﬀerent. Itis incapable of mingling with the herd, it keeps to itself, and it can attack atany time, without warning.’’
18
—Translated by Pascale-Anne Brault and Michael Naas
Notes
1 This essay is a translation by Michael Naas of chapter 8 of Voyous (Paris: Editions Galilée,
2003), 115–35. An English translation of Voyous will be published in 2004 as Rogues by
Stanford University Press.
2 Immanuel Kant, Perpetual Peace , trans. Lewis White Beck (Indianapolis: The Bobbs-
Merrill Company, 1957), 20, 18. Subsequent citations are given in the text, denoted by PP.
3 At the foot of this word for sovereignty ,Majestas ,Ia d da footnote : like the word sovereignty ,
its synonym majesty suggests the greatest in size ( majestas comes from majus ,f o rmagius ,
major, greatness, height, superiority, the supreme or supremacy, that which, like the
superanus of the sovereign, comes above ). Sovereign majesty: a question of size, there-
fore, as with the democratic majority that assures sovereignty. But it is a question ofcalculable-incalculable size, for if the majority is numerical, the general will of the sover-eign or of the monarch cannot be divided. And the One (of God, of the monarch, or of thesovereign) is not greater, very great (comparatively or superlatively), superiorly great orsupremely high. It is absolutely great, and thus above measurable greatness. Higher thanheight, incommensurable in any case, even if it can sometimes take the form and havethe supreme power of the smallest and most invisible. In a modernity of nanotechno-
sciences, power is also measured in terms of how well it measures up to the potency of
the smallest possible. The sovereign One is a One that can no longer be counted; it ismore than one (plus d’un ) in the sense of being more than a one (plus qu’un ), beyond the
more than one of calculable multiplicity.
340 Jacques Derrida
4Du droit à la philosophie (Paris: Editions Galilée, 1990), 53. Translated in Derrida, Who’s
Afraid of Philosophy: Right to Philosophy I , trans. Jan Plug (Stanford: Stanford University
Press, 2002), 29.
5 Jacques Derrida, ‘‘Force of Law: The ‘Mystical Foundation of Authority,’’’ trans. Mary
Quaintance, in Derrida, Acts of Religion , ed.Gil Anidjar (NewYork: Routledge, 2002), 281.
6 ‘‘Sauf le nom,’’ trans. John P. Leavey Jr., in On the Name (Stanford: Stanford University
Press, 1995), 83. Subsequent citations given in the text, denoted as ON.
7 ‘‘The University without Condition,’’ in Without Alibi , trans. Peggy Kamuf (Stanford:
Stanford University Press, 2002), 202–37.
8 Kant, ‘‘Appendix to the Transcendental Dialectic; The Regulative Employment of the
Ideas of Pure Reason,’’ in Critique of Pure Reason , trans. Norman Kemp Smith (New York:
St. Martin’s Press, 1965), 547; A 666/B 694. Subsequent citations given in the text,
denoted as CPR.
9 We know the decisive and enigmatic role played by the als ob in all of Kant’s thought;
this is especially true of the regulative Idea. It is a matter of considering the connectionsbetween phenomena ‘‘ as ifthey were the ordinances of a supreme reason, of which our
reason is but a faint copy’’ ( als ob sie Anordnungen einer höchsten Vernunft wären, von der die
unsrige ein schwaches Nachbild ist )(CPR 555; A 678/B 706); ‘‘ as ifthis being, as supreme
intelligence, acting in accordance with a supremely wise purpose, were the cause of allthings’’ ( als ob diese als höchste Intelligenz nach der weisesten Absicht die Ursache von allem
sei)(CPR561; A 688/B 716). ‘‘For the regulative law of systematic unity prescribes that we
should study nature as ifsystematic and purposive unity, combined with the greatest pos-
sible manifoldness, were everywhere to be met with, in inﬁnitum ’’ (als ob allenthalben ins
Unendliche systematische und zweckmäßige Einheit bei der größtmöglichen Mannigfaltigkeitangetroﬀen würde )(CPR 568; A 700/B 728).
To continue in the direction I indicated above by distinguishing a ‘‘reservation’’ from
an ‘‘objection,’’ let’s say that I am sometimes tempted to make ‘‘as if’’ I had no objectionsto Kant’s ‘‘as if’s.’’ In ‘‘The University without Condition,’’ I treat the diﬃcult question ofthe ‘‘as if,’’ in Kant and elsewhere, and I propose another way of thinking this ‘‘as if.’’
10 ‘‘The second regulative idea of merely speculative reason is the concept of the world in
general’’ ( Die zweite regulative Idee der bloß spekulativen Vernunft ist der Weltbegriﬀ über-
haupt )(CPR 558; A 684/B 712).
11The Other Heading , trans. Pascale-Anne Brault and Michael Naas (Bloomington: Indiana
University Press, 1992), 78.
12 Derrida, Specters of Marx: The State of the Debt, the Work of Mourning, and the New Inter-
national , trans. Peggy Kamuf (New York: Routledge, 1994), 169.
13 Derrida, Politics of Friendship , trans. George Collins (New York: Verso, 1997), 64. Subse-
quent citations given in the text, denoted as PF.
14 Alexis de Tocqueville, Democracy in America , trans. George Lawrence (New York: Harper
& Row, 1966), lxxxvii. Subsequent citations given in the text, denoted as DA.
15 Blaise Pascal, Pensées, the Provincial Letters , trans.W. F.Trotter (NewYork: Random House,
1941), in section 5, ‘‘Justice and the Reason of Eﬀects,’’ 103, pensée 298.
16 Jean-Jacques Rousseau, On the Social Contract , trans. Donald A. Cress (Indianapolis:
Hackett Publishing, 1987), 19.
The Last of the Rogue States 341
17 Immanuel Kant, The Metaphysics of Morals , trans. Mary Gregor (New York: Cambridge
University Press, 1996), part 1, ‘‘Metaphysical First Principles of the Doctrine of Right,
Introduction to the Doctrine of Right,’’ paragraphs D–E, 25–26. Original German text inKantswerke , Akademische Textausgabe (Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 1968), 6:231–33.
18 Mark Strauss, ‘‘A Rogue by Any Other Name,’’ in Chronicle of Higher Education , Decem-
ber 15, 2000, B11.
