"To Do Justice to Freud": The History of Madness in the Age of Psychoanalysis
Author(s): Jacques Derrida, Pascale-Anne Brault, Michael Naas
Source: Critical Inquiry, Vol. 20, No. 2 (Winter, 1994), pp. 227-266 
Published by: The University of Chicago Press
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/1343910
Accessed: 20/09/2009 21:40
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=ucpress.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit organization founded in 1995 to build trusted digital archives for scholarship. We work with the
scholarly community to preserve their work and the materials they rely upon, and to build a common research platform that
promotes the discovery and use of these resources. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
The University of Chicago Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Critical
Inquiry.
http://www.jstor.org
"To Do Justice to Freud": The History of 
Madness in the Age of Psychoanalysis 
Jacques Derrida 
Translated by Pascale-Anne Brault and Michael Naas 
When Elisabeth Roudinesco and Rene Major did me the honor and kind- 
ness of inviting me to a commemoration that would also be a reflection, 
to one of these genuine tributes where thought is plied to fidelity and 
fidelity honed by thought, I did not hesitate for one moment. 
First of all, because I love memory. This is nothing original, of 
course, and yet how else can one love? Indeed, thirty years ago, this great 
book of Foucault was an event whose repercussions were so intense and 
multiple that I will not even try to identify much less measure them deep 
down inside me. Next, because I love friendship, and the trusting af- 
fection that Foucault showed me thirty years ago, and that was to last for 
many years, was all the more precious in that, being shared, it corre- 
sponded to my professed admiration. Then, after 1972, what came to 
obscure this friendship, without, however, affecting my admiration, was 
not, in fact, alien to this book, and to a certain debate that ensued-or at 
least to its distant, delayed, and indirect effects. There was in all of this a 
sort of dramatic chain of events, a compulsive and repeated precipitation 
that I do not wish to describe here because I do not wish to be alone, to 
be the only one to speak of this after the death of Michel Foucault- 
except to say that this shadow that made us invisible to one another, that 
made us not associate with one another for close to ten years (until 1 
On 23 November 1991, the Ninth Colloquium of the International Society for the History of Psychiatry and Psychoanal- 
ysis devoted a conference to Foucault's Histoire de lafolie to mark the thirtieth anniversary of its publication. This essay, 
which was given as a talk at that conference, was published in French in Penser lafolie: Essais sur Michel Foucault (Paris, 
1992). 
Critical Inquiry 20 (Winter 1994) 
English translation ?1994 by Editions Galilee. Used with permission. 
227 
228 Jacques Derrida 
January 1982 when I returned from a Czech prison), is still part of a story 
that I also love like life itself. It is part of a story or history that is related, 
and that thus relates me by the same token, to the book whose great event 
we are commemorating here, to something like its postface, one of 
its postfaces, since the drama I just alluded to also arose out of a certain 
postface, and even out of a sort of postscript added by Foucault to a post- 
face in 1972. 
While accepting wholeheartedly this generous invitation, I nonethe- 
less declined the suggestion that came along with it to return to the dis- 
cussion that began some twenty-eight years ago. I declined for numerous 
reasons, the first being the one I just mentioned: one does not carry on 
a stormy discussion after the other has departed. Second, because this 
whole thing is more than just overdetermined (so many difficult and in- 
tersecting texts, Descartes's, Foucault's, so many objections and re- 
sponses, from me but also from all those, in France and elsewhere, who 
later came to act as arbiters); it has become too distant from me, and 
perhaps because of the drama just alluded to I no longer wished to return 
to it. In the end, the debate is archived and those who might be interested 
in it can analyze as much as they want and decide for themselves. By 
rereading all the texts of this discussion, right up to the last word, and 
especially the last word, one will be better able to understand, I imagine, 
why I prefer not to give it a new impetus today. There is no privileged 
witness for such a situation-which, moreover, only ever has the chance 
of forming, and this from the very origin, with the possible disappearance 
of the witness. This is perhaps one of the meanings of any history of 
madness, one of the problems for any project or discourse concerning a 
history of madness, or even a history of sexuality: is there any witnessing 
to madness? Who can witness? Does witnessing mean seeing? Is it to 
provide a reason [rendre raison]? Does it have an object? Is there any 
Jacques Derrida is Directeur d'Etudes at the Ecole des Hautes 
Etudes en Sciences Sociales in Paris and professor of French, University 
of California, Irvine. His most recent contribution to Critical Inquiry is 
"Given Time: The Time of the King" (Winter 1992). Pascale-Anne 
Brault is assistant professor of French at DePaul University. She has writ- 
ten articles on contemporary French literature and drama and is cur- 
rently working on a book on the revisioning of female identity in classical 
Greek literature. Michael Naas is assistant professor of philosophy at De- 
Paul University. He has written articles on contemporary French thought 
and is the author of Turning: From Persuasion to Philosophy (1993). He is 
currently working on a book on the thought of Jacques Derrida. Brault 
and Naas have previously translated two books by Derrida: The Other 
Heading (1992) and Memoirs of the Blind (1993). The History of Madness 
Winter 1994 229 
object? Is there a possible third that might provide a reason without 
objectifying, or even identifying, that is to say, without examining [ar- 
raisoner]? 
Though I have decided not to return to what was debated close to 
thirty years ago, it would nevertheless be absurd, obsessional to the point 
of pathological, to say nothing of impossible, to give in to a sort of fetishis- 
tic denial and to think that I can protect myself from any contact with the 
place or meaning of this discussion. Although I intend to speak today of 
something else altogether, starting from a very recent rereading of The 
History of Madness in the Classical Age, I am not surprised, and you will 
probably not be either, to see the silhouette of certain questions re- 
emerge: not their content, of course, to which I will in no way return, but 
their abstract type, the schema or specter of an analogous problematic. 
For example, if I speak not of Descartes but of Freud, if I thus avoid a 
figure who seems central to this book and who, because he is decisive as 
far as its center or centering of perspective is concerned, emerges right 
from the early pages on, right from the first border or approach,' if I 
thus avoid this Cartesian reference in order to move toward another (psy- 
choanalysis, Freudian or some other) that is evoked only on the edges of 
the book and is named only right near the end, or ends, on the other 
border, this will perhaps be once again in order to pose a question that 
will resemble the one that imposed itself upon me thirty years ago, 
namely, that of the very possibility of a history of madness. The question 
will be, in the end, just about the same, though it will be posed from 
another border, and it still imposes itself upon me as the first tribute owed 
such a book. If this book was possible, if it had from the beginning and 
retains today a certain monumental value, the presence and undeniable 
1. See Michel Foucault, Folie et diraison: Histoire de lafolie a l'dge classique (Paris, 1961), 
pp. 53-57; hereafter abbreviated F Derrida refers here and throughout to the original 
edition of this work. The book was reprinted with different pagination in 1972 and in- 
cluded as an appendix "Mon corps, ce papier, ce feu," Foucault's response to Derrida's 
"Cogito et histoire de la folie," a lecture first given in 1963 and reprinted in 1967 in Der- 
rida, L'Ecriture et la difference (Paris, 1967). A much abridged version of Histoire de lafolie was 
published in 1964 and was translated into English by Richard Howard under the title Mad- 
ness and Civilization: A History of Insanity in the Age of Reason (New York, 1965); hereafter ab- 
breviated M. 
Since Derrida refers to the unabridged text of 1961 and works with the original title 
throughout, we have referred to this work as The History of Madness (or in some cases, The 
History of Madness in the Classical Age). This is in keeping with "Cogito and the History of 
Madness," Writing and Difference, trans. Alan Bass (Chicago, 1978), pp. 31-63. For the reader 
who wishes to follow Derrida's itinerary through Folie et diraison: Histoire de la folie a l'dge 
classique, we have given all references to the 1961 French version along with references to 
the English translation when they exist in the abridged version. Since all the other texts of 
Foucault cited by Derrida have been translated in their entirety, we have in each case given 
the French followed by the English page references. Translations have been slightly modi- 
fied in several instances to fit the context of Derrida's argument.-TRANS. Critical Inquiry 
230 Jacques Derrida 
necessity of a monument, that is, of what imposes itself by recalling and 
cautioning, it must tell us, teach us, or ask us something about its own 
possibility. 
About its own possibility today: yes, we are saying today, a certain to- 
day. Whatever else one may think of this book, whatever questions or 
reservations it might inspire in those who come at it from some other 
point of view, its pathbreaking force seems incontestable. Just as incon- 
testable, in fact, as the law according to which all pathbreaking opens the 
way only at a certain price, that is, by bolting shut other passages, by 
ligaturing, stitching up, or compressing, indeed repressing, at least provi- 
sionally, other veins. And so today, like yesterday, I mean in March of 
1963, it is this question of the today that is important to me, the question 
such as I had tried to formulate it yesterday. I ask you to pardon me this 
once, then, since I will not make a habit of it, for citing a few lines that 
then defined, in its general form, a task that seems to me still necessary, 
on the side of [du cote de] Freud this time rather than on the side of Des- 
cartes. By saying "on the side of Freud" rather than "on the side of Des- 
cartes," let us not give in too quickly to the naivete that would precipitate 
us into believing that we are closer to a today with Freud than with Des- 
cartes, though this is the opinion of most historians. 
Here, then, is the question of yesterday, of the today of yesterday, 
such as I would like to translate it today, on the side of Freud, trans- 
porting it in this way into the today of today: 
Therefore, if Foucault's book, despite all the acknowledged impossi- 
bilities and difficulties [acknowledged by him, of course], was capable 
of being written, we have the right to ask what, in the last resort, 
supports this language without recourse or support ["without re- 
course" and "without support" are expressions of Foucault that I had 
just cited]: who enunciates the possibility of nonrecourse? Who wrote 
and who is to understand, in what language and from what historical 
situation of logos, who wrote and who is to understand this history 
of madness? For it is not by chance that such a project could take 
shape today. Without forgetting, quite to the contrary, the audacity of 
Foucault's act in the History of Madness, we must assume that a certain 
liberation of madness has gotten underway, that psychiatry has 
opened itself up, however minimally [and, in the end, I would be 
tempted simply to replace psychiatry by psychoanalysis in order to 
translate the today of yesterday into the today of my question of to- 
day], and that the concept of madness as unreason, if it ever had a 
unity, has been dislocated. And that a project such as Foucault's can 
find its historical origin and passageway in the opening produced by 
this dislocation. 
If Foucault, more than anyone else, is attentive and sensitive to 
these kinds of questions, it nevertheless appears that he does not The History of Madness 
Winter 1994 231 
acknowledge their quality of being prerequisite methodological or 
philosophical considerations.2 
If this type of question made any sense or had any legitimacy, if the 
point was then to question that which, today, in this time that is ours, this 
time in which Foucault's History of Madness was written, made possible the 
event of such a discourse, it would have been more appropriate for me 
to elaborate this problematic on the side of modernity, a parte subjecti, in 
some sense, on the side where the book was written, thus on the side, for 
example, of what must have happened to the modern psychiatry men- 
tioned in the passage I just read. To modern psychiatry or, indeed, to 
psychoanalysis or rather to psychoanalyses or psychoanalysts, since the 
passage to the plural will be precisely what is at stake in this discussion. 
It would have thus been more imperative to insist on modern psychiatry 
or psychoanalysis than to direct the same question toward Descartes. To 
study the place and role of psychoanalysis in the Foucauldian project of 
a history of madness, as I am now going to try to do, might thus consist 
in correcting an oversight or in confronting more directly a problematic 
that I had left in a preliminary stage, as a general, programmatic frame, 
in the introduction to my lecture of 1963. That lecture made only one 
allusion to psychoanalysis. It is true, however, that it inscribed it from the 
very opening. In a protocol that laid out certain reading positions, I 
spoke of the way in which philosophical language is rooted in nonphilo- 
sophical language, and I recalled a rule of hermeneutical method that 
still seems to me valid for the historian of philosophy as well as for the 
psychoanalyst, namely, the necessity of first ascertaining a surface or man- 
ifest meaning and, thus, of speaking the language of the patient to whom 
one is listening: the necessity of gaining a good understanding, in a quasi- 
scholastic way, philologically and grammatically, by taking into account 
the dominant and stable conventions, of what Descartes meant on the al- 
ready so difficult surface of his text, such as it is interpretable according 
to classical norms of reading; the necessity of gaining this understanding 
before submitting the first reading to a symptomatic and historical inter- 
pretation regulated by other axioms or protocols, before and in order to 
destabilize, wherever this is possible and if it is necessary, the authority of 
canonical interpretations. Whatever one ends up doing with it, one must 
begin by listening to the canon. It is in this context that I recalled Fer- 
enczi's remark cited by Freud in The Interpretation of Dreams ("Every 
language has its own dream language") and Lagache's observations con- 
cerning polyglotism in analysis.3 
In its general and historical form, my question concerned the site 
2. Derrida, "Cogito et histoire de la folie," p. 61; "Cogito and the History of Madness," 
p. 38. 
3. See ibid., p. 53; p. 307.-TRANS. Critical Inquiry 
232 Jacques Derrida 
that today gives rise to a history of madness and thereby makes it possible. 
Such a question should have led me, it is true, toward the situation of 
psychiatry and psychoanalysis rather than toward a questioning of a read- 
ing of Descartes. This logic would have seemed more natural and the 
consequence more immediate. But if, in so strictly delimiting the field, I 
substituted Descartes for Freud, it was perhaps not only because of the 
significant and strategic place that Foucault confers upon the Cartesian 
moment in the interpretation of the Great Confinement and of the Classical 
Age, that is to say, in the layout of the very object of the book; it was 
already, at least implicitly, because of the role that the reference to a cer- 
tain Descartes played in the thought of that time, in the early sixties, as 
close as possible to psychoanalysis, in the very element, in truth, of a cer- 
tain psychoanalysis and Lacanian theory. This theory developed around 
the question of the subject and the subject of science. Whether it was a 
question of anticipated certainty and logical time (1945, in Ecrits) or, some 
years later (1965-1966), of the role of the cogito and-precisely-of the 
deceitful God in "La Science et la verite," Lacan returned time and again 
to a certain unsurpassability of Descartes.4 In 1945, Lacan associated Des- 
cartes with Freud in his "Propos sur la causalite psychique" and con- 
cluded by saying that "neither Socrates, nor Descartes, nor Marx, nor 
Freud, can be 'surpassed' insofar as they led their research with this pas- 
sion for unveiling whose object is the truth."5 
The title I have proposed for the few reflections I will risk today, 
"The History of Madness in the Age of Psychoanalysis," clearly indicates 
a change-a change in tense, in mode or in voice. It is no longer a ques- 
tion of the age described by a History of Madness. It is no longer a question 
of an epoch or period, such as the classical age, that would, inasmuch as 
it is its very object, stand before the history of madness such as Foucault 
writes it. It is a question today of the age to which the book itself belongs, 
the age from out of which it takes place, the age that provides it its situa- 
tion; it is a question of the age that is describing rather than the age that 
is described. In my title, it would be necessary to put "the history of mad- 
ness" in quotation marks since the title designates the age of the book, 
The History (historia rerum gestarum) of Madness-as a book-in the age of 
psychoanalysis and not the history (res gestae) of madness, of madness it- 
self, in the age of psychoanalysis, even though, as we will see, Foucault 
regularly attempts to objectify psychoanalysis and to reduce it to that of 
which he speaks rather than to that from out of which he speaks. What 
will interest me will thus be rather the time and historical conditions in 
which the book is rooted, those that it takes as its point of departure, and 
4. See Jacques Lacan, "Propos sur la causalite psychique" and "La Science et la v6rite," 
Ecrits (Paris, 1966), p. 209, pp. 219-44. The latter was translated by Bruce Fink under the 
title "Science and Truth," Newsletter of the Freudian Field 3, nos. 1-2 (1989):4-29.-TRANS. 
5. Lacan, "Propos sur la causalite psychique," p. 193. The History of Madness 
Winter 1994 233 
not so much the time or historical conditions that it recounts and tries in 
a certain sense to objectify. Were one to trust too readily in the opposition 
between subject and object, as well as in the category of objectification 
(something that I here believe to be neither possible nor just, and hardly 
faithful to Foucault's own intention), one would say for the sake of conve- 
nience that it is a question of considering the history of madness a parte 
subjecti, that is, from the side where it is written or inscribed and not from 
the side of what it describes. 
Now, from the side where this history is written, there is, of course, 
a certain state of psychiatry-as well as psychoanalysis. Would Foucault's 
project have been possible without psychoanalysis, with which it is con- 
temporary and of which it speaks little and in such an equivocal or ambiv- 
alent manner in the book? Does the project owe psychoanalysis anything? 
What? Would the debt, if it had been contracted, be essential? Or would 
it, on the contrary, define the very thing from which the project had to 
detach itself, and in a critical fashion, in order to take shape? In a word, 
what is the situation of psychoanalysis at the moment of, and with respect 
to, Foucault's book? And how does this book situate its project with re- 
spect to psychoanalysis? 
Let us put our trust for a moment in this common name, psychoanal- 
ysis. And let us delay a bit the arrival of proper names, for example Freud 
or Lacan, and provisionally assume that there is indeed a psychoanalysis 
that is a single whole: as if it were not, already in Freud, sufficiently di- 
vided to make its localization and identification more than problematic. 
Yet the very thing whose coming due we are here trying to delay will no 
doubt form the very horizon, in any case the provisional conclusion, of 
this talk. 
As you well know, Foucault speaks rather little of Freud in this book. 
This may seem justified, on the whole, by the very delimitation that a 
historian of madness in the classical age must impose upon himself. If 
one accepts the great caesura of this layout (even though this raises a 
question, or swarm of questions, that I prudently, and by economy, de- 
cide not to approach in order to get a better grasp on what Foucault means 
by Freud, situating myself, therefore, within the thesis or hypothesis of 
the partition between a classical and a postclassical age), then Freud does 
not have to be treated. He can and must be located at the very most on 
the borderline. The borderline is never a secure place, it never forms an 
indivisible line, and it is always on the border that the most disconcerting 
problems of topology get posed. Where, in fact, would a problem of to- 
pology get posed if not on the border? Would one ever have to worry about 
the border if it formed an indivisible line? A borderline is, moreover, not 
a place per se. It is always risky, particularly for the historian, to assign to 
whatever happens on the borderline, to whatever happens between sites, 
the taking-place of a determinable event. 
Now, Foucault does and does not want to situate Freud in a historical Critical Inquiry 
234 Jacques Derrida 
place that is stabilizable, identifiable, and open to a univocal understand- 
ing. The interpretation or topography that he presents us of the Freudian 
moment is always uncertain, divided, mobile, some would say ambiguous, 
others ambivalent, confused, or contradictory. Sometimes he wants to 
credit Freud, sometimes discredit him, unless he is actually doing both 
indiscernibly and at the same time. One will always have the choice of 
attributing this ambivalence to either Foucault or Freud; it can character- 
ize a motivation, the gesture of the interpreter and a certain state of his 
work, but it can also, or in the first place, refer simply to the interpreter 
or historian's taking account of a structural duplicity that his work reflects 
from the thing itself, namely, from the event of psychoanalysis. The moti- 
vation would thus be justly motivated, it would be just that-motivated; it 
would be called for and justified by the very thing that is in question. For 
the ambiguity of which we are going to speak could indeed be on the 
side of psychoanalysis, on the side of the event of this invention named 
psychoanalysis. 
To begin, let us indicate a few telling signs. If most of the explicit 
references to Freud are grouped in the conclusions of the book (at the 
end of "The Birth of the Asylum" and in the beginning of "The Anthro- 
pological Circle"),6 what I would here call a charniere, a hinge, comes ear- 
lier on, right in the middle of the volume, to divide at once the book and 
the book's relation to Freud. 
Why a charniere? This word can be taken in the technical or anatomi- 
cal sense of a central or cardinal articulation, a hinge pin (cardo) or pivot. 
A charniere or hinge is an axial device that enables the circuit, the trope, 
or the movement of rotation. But one might also dream a bit in the vicin- 
ity of its homonym, that is, in line with this other artifact that the code of 
falconry also calles a charniere, the place where the hunter attracts the 
bird by laying out the flesh of a lure. 
This double articulation, this double movement or alternation be- 
tween opening and closing that is assured by the workings of a hinge, this 
coming and going, indeed this fort/da of a pendulum [pendule] or balance 
[balancier]-that is what Freud means to Foucault. And this technico- 
historical hinge also remains the place of a possible simulacrum or lure- 
for both the body and the flesh. Taken at this level of generality, things 
will never change for Foucault. There will always be this interminable 
alternating movement that successively opens and closes, draws near and 
distances, rejects and accepts, excludes and includes, disqualifies and le- 
gitimates, masters and liberates. The Freudian place is not only the 
technico-historical apparatus, the artifact called charniere or hinge. Freud 
himself will in fact take on the ambiguous figure of a doorman or door- 
keeper [huissier]. Ushering in a new epoch of madness, our epoch, the 
6. This final chapter of Histoire de lafolie is not included in Madness and Civilization.- 
TRANS. The History of Madness 
Winter 1994 235 
one out of which is written The History of Madness (the book bearing this 
title), Freud also represents the best guardian of an epoch that comes to 
a close with him, the history of madness such as it is recounted by the 
book bearing this title. 
Freud as the doorman of the today, the holder of the keys, of those 
that open as well as those that close the door, that is, the huis: onto the 
today [l'aujourd'hui] or onto madness. He [Lui], Freud, is the double fig- 
ure of the door and the doorkeeper. He stands guard and ushers in. 
Alternatively or simultaneously, he closes one epoch and opens another. 
And as we will see, this double possibility is not alien to an institution, to 
what is called the analytic situation as a scene behind closed doors [huis 
clos]. That is why-and this would be the paradox of a serial law-Freud 
does and does not belong to the different series in which Foucault in- 
scribes him. What is outstanding, outside the series [hors-serie], turns out 
to be regularly reinscribed within different series. I am not now going to 
get involved in formal questions concerning a quasi-transcendental law 
of seriality that could be illustrated in an analogous way by so many other 
examples, each time, in fact, that the transcendental condition of a series 
is also, paradoxically, a part of that series, creating aporias for the consti- 
tution of any set or whole [ensemble], particularly, of any historical con- 
figuration (age, episteme, paradigm, themata, epoch, and so on). These 
aporias are anything but accidental impasses that one should try to force 
at all costs into received theoretical models. The putting to the test of 
these aporias is also the chance of thinking. 
To keep to the contract of this conference, I will restrict myself to a 
single example. 
The first sign comes right in the middle of the book (F, pp. 410-11; 
M, pp. 197-98). It comes at the end of the second part, in the chapter 
entitled "Doctors and Patients." We have there a sort of epilogue, less 
than a page and a half long. Separated from the conclusion by asterisks,7 
the epilogue also signals the truth of a transition and the meaning of a 
passage. It seems to be firmly structured by two unequivocal statements: 
1. Psychology does not exist in the classical age. It does not yet exist. 
Foucault says this without hesitation right at the beginning of the epi- 
logue: "In the classical age, it is futile to try to distinguish physical thera- 
peutics from psychological medications, for the simple reason that 
psychology did not exist." 
2. But as for the psychology that was to be born after the classical 
age, psychoanalysis would not be a part, it would no longer be a part. 
Foucault writes: "It is not psychology that is involved in psychoanalysis." 
In other words, if in the classical age there is notyet psychology, there 
is, in psychoanalysis, already no more psychology. But in order to affirm 
this, it is necessary, on the one hand, to resist a prejudice or a temptation, 
7. This is the case for the French versions but not for the English.-TRANS. Critical Inquiry 
236 Jacques Derrida 
to resist that which continues to urge so many interpreters of good sense 
(and sometimes, in part, Foucault among them) to take psychoanalysis 
for a psychology (however original or new it may be). Foucault is going 
to show signs of this resistance, as we will see. But it is also necessary, on 
the other hand, to accept, within this historical schema, the hypothesis of a 
return: not the return to Freud but the return of Freud to-. 
What return? Return to what? Return is Foucault's word, an under- 
scored word. If psychoanalysis is already no longer a psychology, does it 
not, at least in this respect, seem to suggest a certain return to the time 
when psychology was not yet? Beyond eighteenth-century psychology 
and, very broadly, beyond the psychologistic modernity of the nineteenth 
century, beyond the positivist institution of psychology, does it not seem 
as if Freud were joining back up with a certain classical age or, at least, 
with whatever in this age does not determine madness as a psychical ill- 
ness but as unreason, that is, as something that has to do with reason? In 
the classical age, if such a thing exists (an hypothesis of Foucault that I 
take here, in this context, as such, as if it were not debatable), unreason 
is no doubt reduced to silence; one does not speak with it. One interrupts 
or forbids dialogue; and this suspension or interdiction would have re- 
ceived from the Cartesian cogito the violent form of a sentence. For Freud 
too madness would be unreason (and in this sense, at least, there would 
be a neo-Cartesian logic at work in psychoanalysis). But this time one 
should resume speaking with it: one would reestablish a dialogue with 
unreason and lift the Cartesian interdiction. Like the word return, the 
expression "dialogue with unreason" is a quotation. The two expressions 
scan a final paragraph of this epilogue, in the middle of the book, that 
begins with the phrase with which I entitled this talk: "We must do justice 
to Freud" (F, p. 411; M, p. 198). 
When one says, "one must do justice," "one has to be fair" ["ilfaut 
etre juste"], it is often with the intention of correcting an impulse or re- 
versing the direction of a tendency; one is also recommending resisting 
a temptation. Foucault had to have felt this temptation, the temptation to 
do an injustice to Freud, to be unfair to him, that is, in this case, to write 
him into the age of the psychopathological institution (which we will de- 
fine in a moment). He must have felt it outside or within himself. Indeed, 
such a temptation must still be threatening and liable to reemerge since 
it is still necessary to call for vigilance and greater justice. 
Here, then, is the paragraph, which I read in extenso, since its inter- 
nal tension determines, it seems to me, the matrix of all future statements 
about psychoanalysis; it determines them in the very oscillation of their 
movement back and forth. It is like scales ofjustice [la balance d'unejustice] 
that not even the death sentence [arret de mort] would ever be able to stop 
[arreterait] in their even or just [juste] stability. It is as if justice were to 
remain its own movement: The History of Madness 
Winter 1994 237 
This is why we must do justice to Freud. Between Freud's Five Case 
Histories and Janet's scrupulous investigations of Psychological Healing, 
there is more than the density of a discovery; there is the sovereign 
violence of a return. Janet enumerated the elements of a division, 
drew up his inventory, annexed here and there, perhaps conquered. 
Freud went back to madness at the level of its language, reconstituted 
one of the essential elements of an experience reduced to silence by 
positivism; he did not make a major addition to the list of psychologi- 
cal treatments for madness; he restored, in medical thought, the pos- 
sibility of a dialogue with unreason. Let us not be surprised that the 
most "psychological" of medications has so quickly encountered its 
converse and its organic confirmations. It is not psychology that is 
involved in psychoanalysis: but precisely an experience of unreason 
that it has been psychology's meaning, in the modern world, to mask. 
[F, p. 411; M, p. 198]8 
"To mask": positivist psychology would thus have masked the experi- 
ence of unreason: an imposition of the mask, a violent dissimulation of 
the face, of truth or of visibility. Such violence would have consisted in 
disrupting a certain unity, that which corresponded precisely [justement] 
to the presumed unity of the classical age: from then on, there would be, 
on the one hand, illness of an organic nature and, on the other, unreason, 
an unreason often tempered by this modernity under its "epithetic" 
form: the unreasonable, whose discursive manifestations will become the 
object of a psychology.9 This psychology then loses all relation to a certain 
truth of madness, that is, to a certain truth of unreason. Psychoanalysis, 
on the contrary, breaks with psychology by speaking with the Unreason that 
speaks within madness and, thus, by returning through this exchange of 
words not to the classical age itself-which also determined madness as 
8. One will note in passing that we have here, along with very brief allusions to the 
Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality, Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis, and a couple of 
individual cases in Mental Illness and Psychology, and a reference just as brief to Totem and 
Taboo in The Order of Things, one of the few times that Foucault mentions a work of Freud; 
beyond this, he does not, to my knowledge, cite or analyze any text of Freud, or of any 
other psychoanalyst, not even those of contemporary French psychoanalysts. Each time, 
only the proper name is pronounced-Freud, or the common name-psychoanalysis. See 
Michel Foucault, Maladie mentale et psychologie (Paris, 1962), hereafter abbreviated MM, 
trans. Alan Sheridan, under the title Mental Illness and Psychology (Berkeley, 1987), p. 31, 
hereafter abbreviated MI; and Les Mots et les choses: Une Archeologie des sciences humaines (Paris, 
1966), hereafter abbreviated MC, trans. pub., under the title The Order of Things: An Archaeol- 
ogy of the Human Sciences (New York, 1973), p. 379, hereafter abbreviated OT. 
Discovery is underscored by Foucault, along with return and language. Freud is the event 
of a discovery-the unconscious and psychoanalysis as a movement of return-and what re- 
lates the discovery to the return is language, the possibility of speaking with madness, "the 
possibility of a dialogue with unreason." 
9. Foucault had earlier noted this in F, p. 195. Critical Inquiry 
238 Jacques Derrida 
unreason, but, unlike psychology, did so only in order to exclude or con- 
fine it-but toward this eve of the classical age that still haunted it. 
While this schema is firmly established by the page just cited, I was 
struck in rereading The History of Madness by a paradox in the form of a 
chiasm. I had not, in my first reading, given it the attention it deserves. 
What is the schema of this paradox? By reason of what we have just 
heard, in order to do "justice" to Freud we ought to give him credit- 
and this is what happens-for finding a place in the gallery of all those 
who, from one end of the book to the other, announce, like heralds of 
good tidings, the very possibility of the book: Nietzsche above all and, 
most frequently, Nietzsche and Artaud, who are often associated in the 
same sentence, Nietzsche, Artaud, Van Gogh, sometimes Nerval, and 
Holderlin from time to time. Their excess, "the madness in which the 
work of art is engulfed," is the gulf or abyss out of which opens "the space 
of our enterprise" (F, p. 643; M, p. 288). 
It is before this madness, in the fleeting moment when it is joined to 
the work, that we are responsible. We are far from being able to arraign it 
or make it appear, for it is we who must appear before it. Let us recognize, 
then, that we are responsible before it rather than being authorized to 
examine it [arraisonner], to objectify and demand an explanation from it. 
At the end of the last page, after having spent a good deal of time speak- 
ing of Nietzsche and after having mentioned Van Gogh, Foucault writes: 
"The moment when, together, the work of art and madness are born and 
fulfilled is the beginning of the time when the world finds itself arraigned 
by that work of art and responsible before it for what it is" (F, p. 643; M, 
p. 289). This is what The History of Madness, in responding to the sum- 
mons, takes note of and assumes responsibility for. It assumes responsibil- 
ity before that which is named by the names of Nietzsche and all these 
others who, as everyone knows, were deemed crazy by society (Artaud, 
and before him Van Gogh, and before him Nerval, and before him Hold- 
erlin). 
But what about Freud? Why is he, in the same book, sometimes asso- 
ciated with and sometimes opposed to these great witnesses of madness 
and excess, these great witnesses who are also great judges, our judges, 
those who judge us? Must we be arraigned before Freud? And why do 
things then get complicated? 
I would see the chiasm of which I just spoke appearing in a place 
where Freud is in fact found near Nietzsche, on the same side as he, that 
is, on our side, on the side of what Foucault calls "contemporary man": 
this enigmatic "we" for whom a history of madness opens today, for whom 
the door of today [l'huis d'aujourd'hui] is cracked open so that its possibility 
may be glimpsed. Foucault has just described the loss of unreason, the 
background against which the classical age determined madness. It is the 
moment when unreason degenerates or disappears into the unreason- 
able; it is the tendency to pathologize, so to speak, madness. And there The History of Madness 
Winter 1994 239 
again, it is through a return to unreason, this time without exclusion, that 
Nietzsche and Freud reopen the dialogue with madness itself (assuming, 
along with Foucault, that one can here say "itself"). This dialogue had, 
in a sense, been broken off twice, and in two different ways: the second 
time, by a psychological positivism that no longer conceived of madness 
as unreason, and the first time, already by the classical age, which, while 
excluding madness and breaking off the dialogue with it, still determined 
it as unreason, and excluded it precisely because of this-but excluded it 
as close as possible to itself, as its other and its adversary: this is the 
Cartesian moment, such as it is determined, at least, in the three pages 
that were the object of our debate nearly thirty years ago. 
I will underscore everything that marks the today, the present, the 
now, the contemporary, this time that is proper and common to us, the 
time of this fragile and divided "we" from which is decided the possibility 
of a book like The History of Madness, decided while scarcely being sketched 
out, while promising itself, in short, rather than giving itself over. 
Nietzsche and Freud are here conjoined, conjugated, like a couple, 
Nietzsche and Freud, and the conjunction of their coupling is also the 
copula-hinge or, if you prefer, the middle term of the modern propo- 
sition: 
If contemporary man, since Nietzsche and Freud, finds deep within 
himself the site for contesting all truth, being able to read, in what he 
now knows of himself, the signs of fragility through which unreason 
threatens, seventeenth-century man, on the contrary, discovers, in 
the immediate presence of his thought to itself, the certainty in which 
reason in its pure form is announced. [E pp. 195-96] 
Why did I speak of a chiasm? And why would we be fascinated by 
the multiple chiasm that organizes this entire interpretative scene? 
It is because, in the three pages devoted to Descartes at the begin- 
ning of the second chapter "The Great Confinement," Foucault spoke of 
an exclusion. He described it, posed it, declared it unequivocally and 
firmly ("madness is excluded by the subject who doubts"). This exclusion 
was the result of a "decision," the result (and these are all his words) of a 
"strange act of force" that was going to "reduce to silence" the excluded 
madness and trace a very strict "line of division." In the part of the Medi- 
tations that he cited and focused on, Foucault left out all mention of the 
Evil Genius. It was thus in recalling the hyperbolic raising of the stakes 
in the fiction of the Evil Genius that I had then confessed my perplexity 
and proposed other questions. When Foucault responds to me nine years 
later in the afterward to the 1972 Gallimard edition of The History of Mad- 
ness, he still firmly contests the way I used this Cartesian fiction 
of the Evil Genius and this hyperbolic moment of doubt. He accuses me 
of erasing "everything that shows that the episode of the evil genius is an 
exercise that is voluntary, controlled, mastered and carried out from start Critical Inquiry 
240 Jacques Derrida 
to finish by a meditating subject who never lets himself be surprised";'0 
(F, p. 601; such a reproach was indeed unfair, unjust, since I had stressed 
that this methodical mastery of the voluntary subject is "almost always" 
at work and that Foucault, therefore, like Descartes, is "almost always 
right [a ... raison]," and almost always wins out over [a raison de] the Evil 
Genius." But that is not what is at issue here, and I said that I would 
not reopen the debate.) And by accusing me of erasing this methodical 
neutralization of the Evil Genius, Foucault-once again in his response 
of 1972-confirms the claims of the three pages in question and main- 
tains that "if the evil genius again takes on the powers of madness, this is 
only after the exercise of meditation has excluded the risk of being mad." 12 
One might be tempted to respond that if the Evil Genius can again take 
on these powers of madness, if he once "again takes them on" afterwards, 
after the fact, it is because the exclusion of the risk of being mad makes 
way for an after. The narrative is thus not interrupted during the exclu- 
sion alleged by Foucault, an exclusion that is, up to a certain point at 
least, attested to and incontestable (and I never in fact contested this ex- 
clusion in this regard, quite the contrary); neither the narrative nor the 
exercise of the meditation that it retraces are any more interrupted than 
the order of reasons is definitively stopped by this same exclusion. But 
let us move on. As I said earlier, I am not invoking this difficulty in order 
to return to an old discussion. I am doing it because Freud is going to be, 
as I will try to show, doubly situated, twice implicated in the chiasm that 
interests me: on the one hand, in the sentence that I cited a moment ago 
(where Freud was immediately associated with Nietzsche, the only one to 
be associated with him, on the "good" side, so to speak, on the side where 
"we" contemporaries reopen the dialogue with unreason that was twice 
interrupted); this sentence is followed by a few references to the Evil Ge- 
nius that complicate, as I myself had tried to do, the reading of the scene 
of Cartesian doubt as the moment of the great confinement; but also, and 
on the other hand, since I will later try, in a more indirect way-and this 
would be in the end the essence of my talk today-to recall the necessity 
of taking into account a certain Evil Genius of Freud, namely, the pres- 
ence of the demonic, the devil, the devil's advocate, the limping devil, 
and so on in Beyond the Pleasure Principle, where psychoanaysis finds, it 
seems to me, its greatest speculative power but also the place of greatest 
resistance to psychoanalysis (death drive, repetition compulsion, and so 
on, andfort/da!). 
10. Foucault, "My Body, This Paper, This Fire," trans. GeoffBennington, Oxford Literary 
Review 4 (Autumn 1979): 26; trans. mod.; "Mon corps, ce papier, ce feu" was first published 
in Paideia (Sept. 1971) and was reissued as the appendix to the 1972 edition of Histoire de 
lafolie. 
11. Derrida, "Cogito et histoire de la folie," p. 91; "Cogito and the History of Madness," 
p. 58. 
12. Foucault, "My Body, This Paper, This Fire," p. 26. The History of Madness 
Winter 1994 241 
Thus, just after having spoken of "contemporary man, since 
Nietzsche and Freud," Foucault offers a development on the subject of the 
Evil Genius. The logic of this sequence seems to me guided by a "One 
must not forget" that I would be tempted to relate to the "One must do 
justice" of a moment ago. What must one not forget? The Evil Genius, of 
course [justement]. And especially, I emphasize, the fact that the Evil Ge- 
nius is anterior to the cogito, such that its threat remains perpetual. 
This might contradict (as I had attempted to do) the thesis argued 
150 pages earlier on the subject of the Cartesian cogito as the simple 
exclusion of madness. This could have, as a result, indeed this should 
have, spared us a long and dramatic debate. But it is too late now. Fou- 
cault reaffirms all the same, despite the recognized anteriority of the Evil 
Genius, that the cogito is the absolute beginning, even if, in this absolute 
beginning, "one must not forget" what has, in short, been forgotten or 
omitted in the discourse on the exclusion of madness by the cogito. The 
question thus still remains what a methodically absolute beginning would 
be that does not let us forget this anterior-and moreover perpetual- 
threat, nor the haunting backdrop that first lets it appear. As always, I 
prefer to cite, even though it is a long passage. Here is what Foucault says 
immediately after having evoked the "contemporary man" who, "since 
Nietzsche and Freud," meets in "what he now knows of himself" that 
"through which unreason threatens." He says, in effect, that what is called 
contemporary had already begun in the classical age and with the Evil 
Genius, which clearly, to my eyes at least, cannot leave intact the historical 
categories of reference and the presumed identity of something like the 
classical age (for example). 
But this does not mean that classical man was, in his experience of 
the truth, more distanced from unreason than we ourselves might 
be. It is true that the cogito is the absolute beginning [this statement 
thus confirms the thesis of F, pp. 54-57] but one must not forget [my 
emphasis] that the evil genius is anterior to it. And the evil genius is 
not the symbol in which are summed up and systematized all the 
dangers of such psychological events as dream images and sensory 
errors. Between God and man, the evil genius has an absolute mean- 
ing: he is in all his rigor the possibility of unreason and the totality 
of its powers. He is more than the refraction of human finitude; well 
beyond man, he signals the danger that could prevent man once and 
for all from gaining access to the truth: he is the main obstacle, not 
of such a spirit but of such reason. And it is not because the truth 
that gets illuminated in the cogito ends up entirely masking the 
shadow of the evil genius that one ought to forget its perpetually 
threatening power [my emphasis: Foucault had earlier said that one 
must not forget that the evil genius is anterior to the cogito, and he 
now says that one must not forget its perpetually threatening power, even after the passage, the moment, the experience, the certainty of Critical Inquiry 
242 Jacques Derrida 
the cogito, and the exclusion of madness that this brings about]: this 
danger will hover over Descartes' reflections right up until the 
establishment of the existence and truth of the external world. [F, 
p. 196] 
One would have to ask, though we will not have the time and this is 
not the place, about the effects that the category of the "perpetual threat" 
(and this is Foucault's term) can have on indications of presence, positive 
markings, the determinations made by means of signs or statements, in 
short, the whole criteriology and symptomatology that can give assurance 
to a historical knowledge concerning a figure, an episteme, an age, an ep- 
och, a paradigm, once all these determinations are found to be in effect 
[justement] threatened by a perpetual haunting. For, in principle, all these 
determinations are, for the historian, either presences or absences; as 
such, they thus exclude haunting; they allow themselves to be located by 
means of signs, one would almost say on a table of absences and pres- 
ences; they come out of the logic of opposition, in this case, the logic of 
inclusion or exclusion, of the alternative between the inside and the out- 
side, and so on. The perpetual threat, that is, the shadow of haunting 
(and haunting is, like the phantom or fiction of an Evil Genius, neither 
present nor absent, neither positive nor negative, neither inside nor out- 
side) does not challenge only one thing or another; it threatens the logic 
that distinguishes between one thing and another, the very logic of exclu- 
sion or foreclosure, as well as the history that is founded upon this logic 
and its alternatives. What is excluded is, of course, never simply ex- 
cluded, not by the cogito nor by anything else, without this eventually 
returning-and that is what a certain psychoanalysis will have also 
helped us to understand. Let me leave undeveloped this general prob- 
lem, however, in order to return to a certain regulated functioning in the 
references to psychoanalysis and to the name of Freud in The History of 
Madness in the Classical Age. 
Let us consider the couple Nietzsche/Freud, this odd couple about 
which there is so much else to say (I have attempted this elsewhere, espe- 
cially in The Post Card, and precisely [justement] in relationship to Beyond 
the Pleasure Principle). The affiliation or filiation of this couple reappears 
elsewhere. It is again at a filial limit, in the introduction to the third and 
final part, when the "delirium" of Rameau's Nephew sets the tone or gives 
the key, just as the Cartesian cogito had, for a new arrangement or divi- 
sion [partition]. For the "delirium" of Rameau's Nephew "announces Freud 
and Nietzsche." Let us set aside all the questions that the concept of "an- 
nouncing" might pose for the historian. It is not by accident that they 
resemble those raised a moment ago by the concept of haunting. As soon 
as that which announces already no longer completely belongs to a present 
configuration and already belongs to the future of another, its place, the 
taking-place of its event, calls for another logic; it disrupts, in any case, The History of Madness 
Critical Inquiry Winter 1994 243 
the axiomatics of a history that places too much trust in the opposition 
between absence and presence, outside and inside, inclusion and exclu- 
sion. Let us read, then, this sentence and note the recurring and thus all 
the more striking association of this announcement with the figure of the 
Evil Genius, but, this time, with the figure of "another evil genius": 
The delirium of Rameau's Nephew is a tragic confrontation of need 
and illusion in an oneiric mode, one that announces Freud and 
Nietzsche [the order of names is this time reversed]; it is also the 
ironic repetition of the world, its destructive reconstitution in the 
theater of illusion. [F, p. 422] 
An Evil Genius then immediately reappears. And who will see this 
inevitable repetition as a coincidence? But it is not the same Evil Genius. 
It is another figure of the evil genius. There would thus be a recurring 
function of the Evil Genius, a function that, in making reference to a 
Platonic hyperbole, I had called hyperbolic in "Cogito and the History of 
Madness." This function had been fulfilled by the Evil Genius, under the 
guise as well as under the name that it takes on in Descartes. But another 
Evil Genius, which is also the same one, can reappear without this name 
and under a different guise, for example, in the vicinity or lineage of 
Rameau's Nephew: a different Evil Genius, certainly, but bearing enough 
of a resemblance because of its recurring function that the historian, here 
Foucault, allows himself a metonymy that is legitimate enough in his eyes 
to continue calling it Evil Genius. This reappearance occurs after the sec- 
ond passage of Freud-and-Nietzsche, as they are furtively announced by 
Rameau's Nephew, whose laugh "prefigures in advance and reduces the 
whole movement of nineteenth-century anthropology" (F, p. 424). This 
time of prefiguration and announcement, this delay between the antici- 
patory lightning flash and the event of what is foreseen, is explained by 
the very structure of an experience of unreason, if there is any, namely, 
an experience in which one cannot maintain oneself and out of which 
one cannot but fall after having approached it. All this thus forbids us 
from making this history into a properly successive and sequential history 
of events. This is formulated in Foucault's question: "Why is it not pos- 
sible to maintain oneself in the difference of unreason?" (F, p. 425). 
But in this vertigo where the truth of the world is maintained only 
on the inside of an absolute void, man also encounters the ironic 
perversion of his own truth, at the moment when it moves from the 
dreams of interiority to the forms of exchange. Unreason then takes 
on the figure of another evil genius [my emphasis]-no longer the one 
who exiles man from the truth of the world, but the one who at once 
mystifies and demystifies, enchants to the point of extreme disen- 
chantment, this truth of man that man had entrusted to his hands, 
to his face, to his speech; an evil genius who no longer operates when 
244 Jacques Derrida 
man wants to accede to the truth but when he wants to restitute to 
the world a truth that is his own, when, thrown into the intoxication 
of the sensible realm where he is lost, he finally remains "immobile, 
stupid, astonished." It is no longer in perception that the possibility of 
the evil genius resides [that is, as in Descartes] but in expression. [F, 
p. 423] 
But immediately after this appearance or arraignment of Freud next 
to Nietzsche and all the Evil Geniuses, the pendulum of thefort/da is put 
back in motion; from this point on, it will not cease to convoke and dis- 
miss Freud from the two sides of the dividing line, both inside and out- 
side of the series from out of which the history of madness is signed. For 
it is here, in the following pages, that we find Freud separated from the 
lineage in which are gathered all those worthy heirs of Rameau's 
Nephew. The name of the one who was not crazy, not crazy enough in 
any case, the name of Freud, is dissociated from that of Nietzsche. It is 
regularly passed over in silence when, according to another filiation, 
Hoderlin, Nerval, Nietzsche, Van Gogh, Roussel, and Artaud are at sev- 
eral reprieves named and renamed-renowned-within the same 
"family." 
From this point on, things are going to deteriorate. "To do justice to 
Freud" will more and more come to mean putting on trial a psychoanaly- 
sis that will have participated, in its own way, however original that may 
be, in the order of the immemorial figures of the Father and the Judge, 
of Family and Law, in the order of Order, of Authority and Punishment, 
whose immemorial figures must, as Philippe Pinel had noted, be brought 
into play by the doctor, in order to cure (see F, p. 607; M, p. 272). There 
was already a disturbing sign of this long before the chapter on "The 
Birth of the Asylum" that will so strictly inscribe psychoanalysis into the 
tradition of Tuke and Pinel and will go so far as to say that "all nineteenth- 
century psychiatry really converges on Freud" (F, p. 611; M, p. 277). For 
the latter had already appeared in another chain, the chain of those who, 
since the nineteenth century, know that madness, like its counterpart rea- 
son, has a history. These will have been led astray by a sort of historicism 
of reason and madness, a risk that is avoided by those who, "from Sade 
to Holderlin, to Nerval and to Nietzsche," are given over to a "repeated 
poetic and philosophical experience" and plunge into a language "that 
abolishes history." As a cultural historian of madness, like others are of 
reason, Freud thus appears between Janet and Brunschvicg (F, p. 456). 
While accumulating the two errors, the rationalist historian of this 
cultural phenomenon called madness nonetheless continues to pay trib- 
ute to myth, magic, and thaumaturgy. Indeed thaumaturgy will be the 
word chosen by Foucault himself for the verdict. There is nothing sur- 
prising in this collusion of reason and a certain occultism. Montaigne and 
Pascal would have perhaps called it mystical authority; the history of rea- The History of Madness 
Winter 1994 245 
son and reason within history would exercise essentially the same vio- 
lence, the same obscure, irrational, dictatorial violence, serving the same 
interests in the name of the same fictional allegation, as psychoanalysis 
does when it confers all powers to the doctor's speech. Freud would free 
the patient interned in the asylum only in order to reconstitute him "in 
his essential character" at the heart of the analytic situation. There is a 
continuity from Pinel and Tuke to psychoanalysis. There is an inevitable 
movement, right up to Freud, a persistence of what Foucault calls "the 
myth of Pinel, like that of Tuke" (F, p. 577). This same insistence is always 
concentrated in the figure of the doctor; it is, in the eyes of the patient 
who is always an accomplice, the becoming-thaumaturge of the doctor, of 
a doctor who is not even supposed to know. Homo medicus does not exer- 
cise his authority in the name of science but, as Pinel himself seems to 
recognize and to claim, in the name of order, law, and morality, specifi- 
cally, by "relying upon that prestige that envelops the secrets of the Family, 
of Authority, of Punishment, and of Love; ... by wearing the mask of 
Father and of Judge" (F, pp. 607-8; M, p. 273; my emphasis). 
And when the walls of the asylum give way to psychoanalysis, it is in 
effect a certain concept of the secret that assures the tradition from Pinel 
to Freud. It would be necessary to follow throughout these pages all the 
ins and outs of the value-itself barely visible-of a secret, of a certain 
secrecy value. This value would come down, in the end, to a technique of 
the secret, and of the secret without knowledge. Wherever knowledge 
can only be supposed, wherever, as a result, one knows that supposition 
cannot give rise to knowledge, wherever no knowledge could ever be 
disputed, there is the production of a secrecy effect, of what we might be 
able to call a speculation on the capital secret or on the capital of the secret. The 
calculated and yet finally incalculable production of this secrecy effect 
relies on a simulacrum. This simulacrum recalls, from another point of 
view, the situation described at the opening of Raymond Roussel: the risk 
of "being deceived less by a secret than by the awareness that there is 
a secret." 13 
What persists from Pinel to Freud, in spite of all the differences, is 
the figure of the doctor as a man not of knowledge but of order. In this 
figure all secret, magic, esoteric, thaumaturgical powers are brought 
together-and these are all Foucault's words. The scientific objectivity 
that is claimed by this tradition is only a magical reification: 
If we wanted to analyze the profound structures of objectivity in the 
knowledge and practice of nineteenth-century psychiatry from Pinel 
to Freud [this is the definitive divorce between Nietzsche and Freud, 
the second coupling for the latter], we should have to show in fact 
that such objectivity was from the start a reification of a magical na- 
13. Foucault, Raymond Roussel (Paris, 1963), p. 10; trans. Charles Ruas, under the title 
Death and the Labyrinth: The World of Raymond Roussel (New York, 1986), p. 3. Critical Inquiry 
246 Jacques Derrida 
ture, which could only be accomplished with the complicity of the 
patient himself, and beginning from a transparent and clear moral 
practice, gradually forgotten as positivism imposed its myths of scien- 
tific objectivity. [F, p. 610; M, p. 276] 
In the name of Freud, one can read the call for a note. At the bottom 
of the page, Foucault persists, dates and signs, but the note introduces a 
slight precaution; it is indeed a note of prudence, but Foucault insists 
nonetheless and speaks of persistence: "These structures still persist in 
non-psychoanalytic psychiatry, and in many aspects or on many sides [par 
bien des c6tes] of psychoanalysis itself" (F, p. 610; M, p. 299). 
Though too discreetly marked, there is indeed a limit to what per- 
sists "on many sides." The always divisible line of this limit situates, in its 
form, the totality of the stakes. More precisely, the stakes are nothing 
other than those of totality, and of the procedures of totalization: what 
does it mean to say psychoanalysis "itself"? What does one thereby iden- 
tify in such a global way? Is it psychoanalysis "itself;" as Foucault says, that 
inherits from Pinel? What is psychoanalysis itself? And are the aspects or 
sides through which it inherits the essential and irreducible aspects or 
sides of psychoanalysis itself or the residual "asides" that it can win out 
over [avoir raison de]? or even, that it must, that it should, win out over? 
If the answer to this last question still seems up in the air in this note, 
it is soon going to come in a more determined and less equivocal form: 
no, psychoanalysis will never free itself of the psychiatric heritage. Its 
essential historical situation is linked to what is called the "analytic situa- 
tion," that is, to the thaumaturgical mystification of the couple doctor- 
patient, regulated this time by institutional protocols. Before citing word 
for word a conclusion that will remain, I believe, without appeal not only 
in The History of Madness but in Foucault's entire oeuvre-and right up 
to its awful interruption-I will once again risk wearing out your pa- 
tience in order to look for a moment at the way in which Foucault de- 
scribes the thaumaturgical play whose techne Pinel would have passed 
down to Freud, a techne that would be at once art and technique, the 
secret, the secret of the secret, the secret that consists in knowing how to 
make one suppose knowledge and believe in the secret. It is worth paus- 
ing here in order to point out another paradoxical effect of the chiasm- 
one of the most significant for what concerns us here, namely, a certain 
diabolical repetition and the recurrence of the various figures of the Evil 
Genius. What does Foucault say? That in the couple doctor-patient "the 
doctor becomes a thaumaturge" (F, p. 609; M, p. 275). Now, to describe 
this thaumaturgy, Foucault does not hesitate to speak of the demonic and 
satanic, as if the Evil Genius resided this time not on the side of unreason, 
of absolute disorder and madness (to say it quickly and with a bit of a 
smile, using all the necessary quotation marks, "on the good side"), but The History of Madness 
Winter 1994 247 
on the side of order, on the side of a subtly authoritative violence, the 
side of the Father, the Judge, the Law, and so on: 
It was thought, and by the patient first of all, that it was in the esoter- 
icism of his knowledge, in some almost daemonic secret of knowledge 
[I emphasize "almost": Foucault will later say-his relation to Freud 
surely being anything but simple-that the philistine representation 
of mental illness in the nineteenth century would last "right up to 
Freud-or almost"] that the doctor had found the power to unravel 
insanity; and increasingly the patient would accept this self- 
surrender to a doctor both divine and satanic, beyond human mea- 
sure in any case. [F, p. 609; M, p. 275] 
Two pages later, it is said that Freud "amplified the thaumaturgical 
virtues" of the "medical personage," "preparing for his omnipotence a 
quasi-divine status." And Foucault continues: 
He focussed upon this single presence-concealed behind the pa- 
tient and above him, in an absence that is also a total presence-all 
the powers that had been distributed in the collective existence of 
the asylum; he transformed this into an absolute Observation, a pure 
and circumspect Silence, a Judge who punishes and rewards in a 
judgment that does not even condescend to language; he made it 
the mirror in which madness, in an almost motionless movement, 
clings to and casts off itself. 
To the doctor, Freud transferred all the structures Pinel and 
Tuke had set up within confinement. [F, p. 611; M, pp. 277-78] 
Fictive omnipotence and a divine, or rather "quasi-divine," power, divine 
by simulacrum, at once divine and satanic-these are the very traits of 
an Evil Genius that are now being attributed to the figure of the doctor. 
The doctor suddenly begins to resemble in a troubling way the figure of 
unreason that continued to haunt what is called the classical age after the 
act of force [coup de force] of the cogito. And like the authority of the laws 
whose "mystical foundation" is recalled by Montaigne and Pascal,14 the 
14. "And so laws keep up their good standing, not because they are just, but because 
they are laws: that is the mystical foundation of their authority, they have no other.... 
Anyone who obeys them because they are just is not obeying them the way he ought to" 
(quoted in Derrida, "Force of Law: The 'Mystical Foundation of Authority,"' trans. Mary 
Quaintance, Cardozo Law Review 11 JUuly/Aug. 1990]: 939; Derrida's French text appears on 
facing pages). Elsewhere, Montaigne had mentioned the "legitimate fictions" on which "our 
law" "founds the truth of its justice" (ibid.). And Pascal cites Montaigne without naming 
him when he recalls both the principle of justice and the fact that it should not be traced 
back to its source unless one wants to ruin it. What is he himself doing, then, when he 
speaks of "the mystical foundation of its authority," adding in the same breath, "Whoever 
traces it to its source annihilates it" (ibid.)? Is he re-founding or ruining that of which he 
speaks? Will one ever know? Must one know? 
Power, authority, knowledge and non-knowledge, law, judgment, fiction, good stand- Critical Inquiry 
248 Jacques Derrida 
authority of the psychoanalyst-doctor is the result of a fiction; it is the 
result, by transfer, of the credit given to a fiction; and this fiction appears 
analogous to that which provisionally confers all powers-and even more 
than knowledge-to the Evil Genius. 
At the conclusion of "The Birth of the Asylum," Foucault is going to 
dismiss without appeal this bad genius of the thaumaturgical doctor in 
the figure of the psychoanalyst; he is going to do this-I believe one can 
say without stretching the paradox-against Descartes, against a certain 
Cartesian subject still represented in the filiation that runs from Descartes 
to Pinel to Freud. But he is also going to do this, more or less willingly, as 
Descartes, or, at least, as the Descartes whom he had accused of excluding 
madness by excluding, mastering, or dismissing-since these all come 
down to the same thing-the powers of the Evil Genius. Against Freud, 
this descendant of Descartes, against Descartes, it is still the Cartesian 
exclusion that is repeated in a deadly and devilish way, like a heritage 
inscribed within a diabolical and almost all-powerful program that one 
should admit one never gets rid of or frees oneself from without re- 
mainder. 
To substantiate what I have just said, I will cite the conclusion of this 
chapter. It describes the transfer from Pinel to Freud (stroke of genius, 
"masterful short-circuit"-it is a question of Freud's genius, the good like 
the bad, the good as bad)-and it implacably judges psychoanalysis in the 
past, in the present, and even in the future. For psychoanalysis is condemned 
in advance. No future is promised that might allow it to escape its destiny 
once it has been determined both within the institutional (and suppos- 
edly inflexible) structure of what is called the analytic situation and in the 
figure of the doctor as subject: 
To the doctor, Freud transferred all the structures Pinel and Tuke 
had set up within confinement. He did deliver the patient from the 
existence of the asylum within which his "liberators" had alienated 
him; but he did not deliver him from what was essential in this exis- 
tence; he regrouped its powers, extended them to the maximum by 
uniting them in the doctor's hands; he created the psychoanalytical 
situation where, by a masterful short-circuit [court-circuit genial; I un- 
derscore this allusion to the stroke of genius (coup de genie), which, as 
soon as it confirms the evil of confinement and of the interior asylum, 
is diabolical and properly evil (malin); and as we will see, for more 
than twenty years Foucault never stopped seeing in Freud-and 
quite literally so-sometimes a good and sometimes a bad or evil 
ing or credit, transfer: from Montaigne to Pascal onto others, we recognize the same net- 
work of a critical problematic, an active, vigilant, hypercritical problematization. It is diffi- 
cult to be sure that the "classical age" did not thematize, reflect, and also deploy the 
concepts of its symptoms: the concepts that one will later direct toward the symptoms that 
it will one day be believed can be assigned to it. The History of Madness 
Winter 1994 249 
(mauvais) genius], alienation becomes disalienating because, in the 
doctor, it becomes a subject. 
The doctor, as an alienating figure, remains the key to psycho- 
analysis. It is perhaps because it did not suppress this ultimate struc- 
ture, and because it referred all the others to it, that psychoanalysis 
has not been able, will not be able [I thus emphasize this future; it 
announces the invariability of this verdict in Foucault's subsequent 
work], to hear the voices of unreason, nor to decipher in themselves 
the signs of the madman. Psychoanalysis can unravel some of the 
forms of madness; it remains a stranger to the sovereign enterprise 
of unreason. It can neither liberate nor transcribe, nor most certainly 
explain, what is essential in this enterprise. [F, pp. 611-12; M, p. 278] 
And here, just after, are the very last lines of the chapter; we are far 
from the couple Nietzsche/Freud. They are now separated on both sides 
of what Foucault calls "moral imprisonment," and it will be difficult to 
say, in certain situations, who is to be found on the inside and who on the 
outside-and sometimes outside but inside. As opposed to Nietzsche and 
a few other great madmen, Freud no longer belongs to the spacefrom out 
of which The History of Madness could be written. He belongs, rather, to 
this history of madness that the book in turn makes its object: 
Since the end of the eighteenth century, the life of unreason no 
longer manifests itself except in the lightning-flash of works such as 
those of Holderlin, of Nerval, of Nietzsche, or of Artaud-forever 
irreducible to those alienations that can be cured, resisting by their 
own strength that gigantic moral imprisonment which we are in the 
habit of calling, doubtless by antiphrasis, the liberation of the insane 
[alienes] by Pinel and Tuke. [F, p. 612; M, p. 278] 
This diagnosis, which is also a verdict, is confirmed in the last chapter 
of the book, "The Anthropological Circle." This chapter fixes the new 
distribution of names and places into the great series that form the grid 
of the book. When it is a question of showing that since the end of the 
eighteenth century the liberation of the mad has been replaced by an 
objectification of the concept of their freedom (within such categories as 
desire and will, determinism and responsibility, the automatic and the 
spontaneous) and that "one will now untiringly recount the trials and 
tribulations of freedom," which is also to say, of a certain humanization 
as anthropologization, Freud is then regularly included among the exem- 
plary figures of this anthropologism of freedom. Foucault says, page after 
page: "From Esquirol to Janet, as from Reil to Freud or from Tuke to 
Jackson" (F, p. 616), or again, "From Esquirol to Freud" (F, p. 617), or 
again "since Esquirol and Broussais right up to Janet, Bleuler, and 
Freud" (F, p. 624). A slight yet troubling reservation comes just after to 
mitigate all these regroupings. Concerning general paralysis and neuro- Critical Inquiry 
250 Jacques Derrida 
syphilis, philistinism is everywhere, "right up to Freud-or almost" (F, 
p. 626) 
The chiasmatic effects multiply. Some two hundred pages earlier, 
what had inscribed both Freud and Nietzsche, like two accomplices of the 
same age, was the reopening of the dialogue with unreason, the lifting of 
the interdiction against language, the return to a proximity with madness. 
Yet it is precisely this or, rather, the silent double and hypocritical simula- 
crum of this, the mask of this language, the same freedom now objecti- 
fled, that separates Freud from Nietzsche. It is this that now makes them 
unable to associate or to be associated with one another from the two 
sides of a wall that is all the more unsurmountable insofar as it consists of 
an asylum's partition, an invisible, interior, but eloquent partition, that of 
truth itself as the truth of man and his alienation. Foucault was able, 
much earlier, to say that Freudian psychoanalysis, to which one must be 
fair or "do justice," is not a psychology as soon as it takes language into 
account. Now it is language itself that brings psychoanalysis back down 
to the status of a psycho-anthropology of alienation, "this language 
wherein man appears in madness as being other than himself," this "al- 
terity," "a dialectic that is always begun anew between the Same and the 
Other," revealing to man his truth "in the babbling movement of alienation 
or madness" (F, p. 631). 
Concerning dialectic and alienation or madness-concerning every- 
thing, in fact, that happens in the circulation of this "anthropological 
circle" wherein psychoanalysis is caught up or held-one should, and I 
myself would have liked to have done this given more time, pause a bit 
longer than Foucault did on a passage from Hegel's Encyclopedia. I am 
referring to the Remark of ?408 in which Hegel situates and deduces 
madness as a contradiction of the subject between the particular determi- 
nation of self-feeling and the network of mediations that is called con- 
sciousness. Hegel makes in passing a spirited praise of Pinel (I do not 
understand why Foucault, in quickly citing this passage, replaces this 
praise for Pinel by an ellipsis). More important, perhaps, is the fact that 
Hegel also interprets madness as the taking control of a certain Evil Gen- 
ius (der bise Genius) in man. Foucault elliptically cites a short phrase in 
translation ("mechant genie") without remarking on it and without link- 
ing these few extraordinary pages of Hegel to the great dramaturgy of 
the Evil Genius that concerns us here. 
Let me be absolutely clear about this: my intention here is not at all 
to accuse or criticize Foucault, to say, for example, that he was wrong to 
confine Freud himself (in general) or psychoanalysis itself (in general) to this 
role and place; on the subject of Freud or psychoanalysis themselves and in 
general, I have in this form and place almost nothing to say or think, 
except perhaps that Foucault has some good arguments and that others 
would have some pretty good ones as well to oppose to his. It is also not 
my intention, in spite of what it may look like, to suggest that Foucault The History of Madness 
Critical Inquiry Winter 1994 251 
contradicts himself when he so firmly places the same Freud (in general) 
or the same psychoanalysis (in general) sometimes on one side and some- 
times on the other of the dividing line, and always on the side of the Evil 
Genius-who is found sometimes on the side of madness, sometimes on 
the side of its exclusion-reappropriation, on the side of its confinement 
to the outside or the inside, with or without asylum walls. The contradic- 
tion is no doubt in the things themselves, so to speak. And we are in a 
region where the wrong (the being-wrong or the doing-someone-wrong) 
would want to be more than ever on the side of a certain reason, on the 
side of what is called raison garder-that is, on the side of keeping one's 
cool, keeping one's head-on the side, precisely, where one is right [a 
raison], and where being right [avoir raison] is to win out over or prove someone 
wrong [avoir raison de], with a violence whose subtlety, whose hyperdialec- 
tic and hyperchiasmatic resources, cannot be completely formalized, that 
is, can no longer be dominated by a metalanguage. Which means that we 
are always caught in the knots that are woven, before us and beyond us, 
by this powerful-all too powerful-logic. The history of reason embed- 
ded in all these turbulent idioms (to prove someone wrong [donner tort] or to 
prove them right [donner raison], to be right [avoir raison], to be wrong [avoir 
tort], to win out over [avoir raison de], to do someone wrong [faire tort], and so 
on) is also the history of madness that Foucault wished to recount to us. 
The fact that he was caught up, caught up even before setting out, in the 
snares of this logic-which he sometimes thematizes as having to do with 
a "system of contradictions" and "antinomies" whose "coherence" re- 
mains "hidden"-cannot be reduced to a fault or wrong on his part (F p. 
624). This does not mean, however, that we, without ever finding him to 
be radically wrong or at fault, have to subscribe a priori to all his state- 
ments. One would be able to master this entire problematic, assuming 
this were possible, only after having satisfactorily answered a few ques- 
tions, questions as innocent-or as hardly innocent-as, What is reason? 
for example, or more narrowly, What is the principle of reason? What 
does it mean to be right [avoir raison]? What does it mean to be right or 
to prove someone right [avoir ou donner raison]? To be wrong, to prove 
someone wrong, or to do them wrong [avoir, donner oufaire tort]? You will 
forgive me here, I hope, for leaving these enigmas as they are. 
I will restrict myself to a modest and more accessible question. The 
distribution of statements, such as it appears to be set out before us, 
should lead us to think two apparently incompatible things: the book 
entitled The History of Madness, as the history of madness itself, is and is 
not the same age as Freudian psychoanalysis. The project of this book 
thus does and does not belong to the age of psychoanalysis; it already 
belongs to it and already no longer belongs to it. This division without 
division would put us back on the track of another logic of division, one 
that would urge us to think the internal partitions of wholes, partitions 
that would make such things as madness, reason, history, and age-espe- 
252 Jacques Derrida 
cially the whole we call age-but also psychoanalysis, Freud, and so on, 
into rather dubious identities, sufficiently divided from within to threaten 
in advance all our statements and all our references with parasitism: it 
would be a bit as if a virus were introduced into the matrix of language, 
the way such things are today introduced into computer software, the 
difference being that we are-and for a very good reason-very far from 
having at our disposal any of these diagnostic and remedial antiviral pro- 
grams that are available on the market today, even though these same 
programs-and for a very good reason-have a hard time keeping pace 
with the industrial production of these viruses, which are themselves 
sometimes produced by those who produce the intercepting programs. 
A maddening situation for any discourse, certainly, but a certain mad 
panic is not necessarily the worst thing that can happen to a discourse on 
madness as soon as it does not go all out to confine or exclude its object, 
that is, in the sense Foucault gives to this word, to objectify it. 
Does one have the right to stop here and be content with this as an 
internal reading of Foucault's great book? Is an internal reading possible? 
Is it legitimate to privilege to this extent its relation to something like an 
"age" of psychoanalysis "itself"? The reservations that such presumptions 
of identity might arouse (the unity of an "age," the indivisibility of psy- 
choanalysis "itself," and so on-and I've made more than one allusion to 
them-would be enough to make us question this. 
One would be able to justify a response to this question, in any case, 
only by continuing to read and to analyze, by continuing to take into 
account particularly Foucault's corpus, his archive, what this archive says 
on the subject of the archive. Without limiting ourselves to this, think in 
particular of the problems posed some five to eight years later: (1) by The 
Order of Things concerning something that has always seemed enigmatic 
to me and that Foucault calls for a time episteme (there where it is said, 
"We think in that place" [MC, p. 396; DT p. 384]); a place that, and I will 
return to this in a moment, encompasses or comprehends the psycho- 
analysis that does not comprehend it, or more precisely, that compre- 
hends it without comprehending it and without acceding to it; (2) by The 
Archaeology of Knowledge concerning "The Historical a priori and the Ar- 
chive" (this is the title of the central chapter) and archaeology in its rela- 
tion to the history of ideas. 
It is out of the question to get involved here, in so short a time, in 
such difficult readings. I will thus be content to conclude, if you will still 
allow me, with a few indications (two at the most) along one of the paths 
I would have wanted to follow on the basis of these readings. 
1. On the one hand, I would have tried to identify the signs of an 
imperturbable constancy in this movement of the pendulum or balance. 
The oscillation regularly leads from one topological assignation to the 
other: as if psychoanalysis had two places or took place two times. Yet it 
seems to me that the law of this displacement operates without the struc- The History of Madness 
Winter 1994 253 
tural possibility of an event or a place being analyzed for itself, and with- 
out the consequences being drawn with regard to the identity of all the 
concepts at work in this history that does not want to be a history of ideas 
and representations. 
This constancy in the oscillation of the pendulum is first marked, of 
course, in books that are more or less contemporary with The History of 
Madness. Maladie mentale et psychologie [Mental Illness and Psychology] (1962) 
intersects and coincides at many points with The History of Madness. In the 
history of mental illness, Freud appears as "the first to open up once 
again the possibility for reason and unreason to communicate in the dan- 
ger of a common language, ever ready to break down and disintegrate 
into the inaccessible" (MM, p. 82; MI, p. 69). In truth, though profoundly 
in accord with the movement and logic of The History of Madness, this book 
of 1962 is, in the end, a bit more precise and differentiated in its refer- 
ences to Freud, although Beyond the Pleasure Principle is never mentioned. 
Foucault speaks both of Freud's "stroke of genius" (and this is indeed his 
word) and of the dividing line that runs down his work. Freud's "stroke of 
genius" was to have escaped the evolutionist horizon of John Hughlings 
Jackson (MM, p. 37; MI, p. 31), whose model can nevertheless be found 
in the description of the evolutive forms of neurosis and the history of 
libidinal stages,15 the libido being mythological (a myth to destroy, often 
a biopsychological myth that is abandoned, Foucault then thinks, by psy- 
choanalysts), just as mythological as Janet's "'psychic force,"' with which 
Foucault associates it more than once (MM, p. 29; MI, p. 24).16 
If the assignation of Freud is thus double, it is because his work is 
15. Insofar as, and to the extent that, it follows Jackson's model (for the "stroke of 
genius" also consists in escaping from this), psychoanalysis is credulous, it will have been credu- 
lous, for it is in this that it is outdated, a credulous presumption: "it believed that it could," 
"Freud believed." After having cited Jackson's The Factors of Insanities, Foucault in fact adds 
(I emphasize the verb and tense of to believe): 
Jackson's entire work tended to give right of place to evolutionism in neuro- and 
psycho-pathology. Since the Croonian Lectures (1874), it has no longer been possible to 
omit the regressive aspects of illness; evolution is now one of the dimensions by which 
one gains access to the pathological fact. 
A whole side of Freud's work consists of a commentary on the evolutive forms of 
neurosis. The history of the libido, of its development, of its successive fixations, resem- 
bles a collection of the pathological possibilities of the individual: each type of neurosis 
is a return to a libidinal stage of evolution. And psychoanalysis believed that it could write 
a psychology of the child by carrying out a pathology of the adult.... This is the cele- 
brated Oedipus complex, in which Freud believed that he could read the enigma of man 
and the key to his destiny, in which one must find the most comprehensive analysis of 
the conflicts experienced by the child in his relations with his parents and the point at 
which many neuroses became fixated. 
In short, every libidinal stage is a potential pathological structure. Neurosis is a 
spontaneous archeology of the libido. [MM, pp. 23-26; MI, pp. 19-21] 
16. For example: "It is not a question of invalidating the analyses of pathological re- 
gression; all that is required is to free them of the myths that neither Janet nor Freud 
succeeded in separating from them" (MM, p. 31; MI, p. 26). Critical Inquiry 
254 Jacques Derrida 
divided: "In psychoanalysis, it is always possible," says Foucault, "to sepa- 
rate that which pertains to a psychology of evolution (as in Three Essays on 
the Theory of Sexuality) and that which belongs to a psychology of individual 
history (as in Five Psychoanalyses and the accompanying texts)" (MM, p. 
37; MI, p. 31). 
Despite this consideration for the "stroke of genius," Foucault is in- 
deed speaking here of an analytic psychology. This is what he calls it. 
Insofar as it remains a psychology, it remains speechless before the lan- 
guage of madness. Indeed, "there is a very good reason why psychology 
can never master madness; it is because psychology became possible in 
our world only when madness had already been mastered and excluded 
from the drama" (MM, p. 104; MI, p. 87-a few lines before the end of 
the book). 
In other words, the logic at work in this conclusion, the conse- 
quences-the ruinous consequences-of which one would ceaselessly 
have to take into account, is that what has already been mastered can no 
longer be mastered, and that too much mastery (in the form of exclusion 
but also of objectification) deprives one of mastery (in the form of access, 
knowledge, competence). The concept of mastery is an impossible con- 
cept to manipulate, as we know: the more there is, the less there is, and 
vice versa. The conclusion drawn in the few lines I just cited thus ex- 
cludes both Freud's "stroke of genius" and psychology, be it analytic or 
some other. Freudian man remains a homo psychologicus. Freud is once 
again passed over in silence, cut out of both the lineage and the work of 
mad geniuses. He is given over to a forgetfulness where one can then 
accuse him of silence and forgetting. 
And when, in lightning flashes and cries, madness reappears, as in 
Nerval or Artaud, Nietzsche or Roussel, it is psychology that remains 
silent, speechless, before this language that borrows a meaning of its 
own from that tragic split [I emphasize this phrase; this is a tragic and 
romantic discourse on the essence of madness and the birth of trag- 
edy, a discourse just as close, literally, to that of a certain Novalis as 
to that of Holderlin], from that freedom, that, for contemporary 
man, only the existence of"psychologists" allows him to forget. [MM, 
p. 104; MI, pp. 87-88]17 
And yet. Still according to the interminable and inexhaustiblefort/da that 
we have been following for some time now, the same Freudian man is 
reinscribed into the noble lineage at the end of Naissance de la clinique [The 
17. A literally identical schema was at work a few pages earlier: "Psychology can never 
tell the truth about madness because it is madness that holds the truth of psychology." It is 
again a tragic vision, a tragic discourse on the tragic. Holderlin, Nerval, Roussel, and Ar- 
taud are again named through their works as witnesses of a "tragic confrontation with mad- 
ness" free of all psychology (MM, p. 89; MI, pp. 74, 75). No reconciliation is possible 
between psychology, even if analytic, and tragedy. The History of Madness 
Winter 1994 255 
Birth of the Clinic] (a book published in 1963 but clearly written during the 
same creative period). Why single out this occurrence of the reinscription 
rather than another? Because it might give us (and this is, in fact, the 
hypothesis that interests me) a rule for reading thisfort/da; it might pro- 
vide us with a criterion for interpreting this untiring exclusion/inclusion. 
It is a question of another divide, within psychoanalysis, or, in any case, 
a divide that seems somewhat different than the one I spoke of a moment 
ago between Freud, the psychologist of evolution, and Freud, the psy- 
chologist of individual history. I say "seems somewhat different" because 
the one perhaps leads back to the other. 
The line of this second divide is, quite simply-if one can say this- 
death. The Freud who breaks with psychology, with evolutionism and 
biologism, the tragic Freud, really, who shows himself hospitable to mad- 
ness (and I take the risk of this word) because he is foreign to the space 
of the hospital, the tragic Freud who deserves hospitality in the great 
lineage of mad geniuses, is the Freud who talks it out with death. This 
would especially be the Freud, then, of Beyond the Pleasure Principle, al- 
though Foucault never, to my knowledge, mentions this work and makes 
only a very ambiguous allusion in Mental Illness and Psychology to what he 
calls a death instinct, the one by which Freud wished to explain the war, 
although "it was war that was dreamed in this shift in Freud's thinking" 
(MM, p. 99; MI, p. 83). 
Death alone, along with war, introduces the power of the negative 
into psychology and into its evolutionist optimism. On the basis of this 
experience of death, on the basis of what is called in the final pages of 
The Birth of the Clinic "originary finitude"'8 (a vocabulary and theme that 
then take over Foucault's text and that always seemed to me difficult to 
dissociate from Heidegger, who as you know is practically never evoked, 
nor even named, by Foucault),'9 Freud is reintegrated into this modernity 
from out of which The History of Madness is written and from which he had 
been banished at regular intervals. It is by taking account of death as 
18. Foucault, Naissance de la clinique: Une Archeologie du regard medical (Paris, 1963), p. 
199; hereafter abbreviated N; trans. A. M. Sheridan Smith, under the title The Birth of the 
Clinic: An Archeology of Medical Perception (New York, 1975), p. 197; hereafter abbreviated B. 
19. Except perhaps in passing in Les Mots et les choses: "the experience of Holderlin, 
Nietzsche, and Heidegger, in which the return is posited only in the extreme recession of 
the origin" (MC, p. 345; OT, p. 334). 
This ponderous silence would last, I believe, right up until an interview that he gave 
not long before his death. Faithful to the Foucauldian style of interpretation, one might say 
that the spacing of this omission, of this blank silence-like the silence that reigns over the 
name of Lacan, whom one can associate with Heidegger up to a certain point, and thus 
with a few others who never stopped, in France and elsewhere, to dialogue with these two- 
is anything but the empty and inoperative sign of an absence. It gives rise or gives the place 
[donne lieu], on the contrary, it marks out the place and the age. The dotted lines of a sus- 
pended writing situate with a formidable precision. No attention to the age or to the prob- 
lem of the age should lose sight of this. Critical Inquiry 
256 Jacques Derrida 
"the concrete a priori of medical experience" that "the beginning of that 
fundamental relation that binds modern man to his originary finitude" 
comes about (N, pp. 198, 199; B, pp. 196, 197). This modern man is also 
a "Freudian man": 
the experience of individuality in modern culture is bound up with 
that of death: from Holderlin's Empedocles to Nietzsche's Zarathus- 
tra, and on to Freudian man, an obstinate relation to death pre- 
scribes to the universal its singular face, and lends to each individual 
the power of being heard forever. [N, p. 199; B, p. 197] 
Originary finitude is a finitude that no longer arises out of the infinity of 
a divine presence. It now unfolds "in the void left by the absence of the 
gods" (N, p. 200; B, p. 198). What we have here, then, is, in the name of 
death, so to speak, a reinscription of Freudian man into a "modern" 
grouping or whole from which he was sometimes excluded. 
One can then follow two new but equally ambiguous consequences. 
On the one hand, the grouping in question is going to be restructured. One 
should not be surprised to see reappear, as on the very last page of The 
Birth of the Clinic, the name of Jackson-and, before him, Bichat, whose 
Traite des membranes (1827) and Recherches physiologiques would have al- 
lowed death to be seen and thought. This vitalism would have arisen 
against the backdrop of "'mortalism"' (N, p. 147; B, p. 145). It would be 
a characteristic of the entire European nineteenth century, and it could 
be attested to just as well by Goya, Gericault, Delacroix, or Baudelaire, to 
name just a few: "The importance of Bichat, Jackson, and Freud in Euro- 
pean culture does not prove that they were philosophers as well as doc- 
tors, but that, in this culture, medical thought is fully engaged in the 
philosophical status of man" (N, p. 200; B, p. 198). 
But there is a second ambiguous consequence of this relation to 
death as originary finitude. And so, on the other hand, the figure or face 
that is then fixed, and in which one believes one recognizes the traits of 
"Freudian man," comes to occupy a rather singular place with respect to 
what Foucault calls the analytic of finitude and the modern episteme at the 
end of Les Mots et les choses [The Order of Things] (1966). From the stand- 
point of a certain epistemological trihedron (life, work, and language, or 
biology, economy, and philology), the human sciences are seen to be at 
once inclusive and exclusive; these are Foucault's words (see MC, p. 358; 
OT p. 347). 
As for this inclusive exclusion, Freud's work, to which Foucault un- 
waveringly assigns a model that is more philological than biological, still 
occupies the place of the hinge; Foucault in fact speaks about the place 
and workings of a "pivot": "all this knowledge, within which Western cul- 
ture had given itself in one century a certain image of man, pivots on 
the work of Freud, though without, for all that, leaving its fundamental 
arrangement" (MC, p. 372; OT, p. 361). The History of Madness 
Winter 1994 257 
"Though without, for all that, leaving its fundamental arrange- 
ment": that is how everything turns round the event or the invention of 
psychoanalysis. It turns in circles and in place, endlessly returning to the 
same. It is a revolution that changes nothing. Hence this is not, as Fou- 
cault adds at this point, "the most decisive importance of psychoanalysis." 
In what, then, does this "most decisive importance of psychoanalysis" 
consist? In exceeding both consciousness and representation-and, as a 
result, the human sciences, which do not go beyond the realm of the 
representable. It is in this respect that psychoanalysis, like ethnology in 
fact, does not belong to the field of the human sciences. It "relates the 
knowledge of man to the finitude that gives man its foundation" (MC, p. 
392; OT, p. 381). We are far from its earlier determination as an analytic 
psychology. And this same excessive character leads psychoanalysis to- 
ward the very forms of finitude that Foucault writes in capital letters, that 
is, toward Death, Desire, Law or Law-Language (see MC, p. 386; OT, p. 
375). It would be necessary to devote a more detailed and more probing 
reading to these few pages, something I cannot do here. To keep to the 
surest schema, let us simply say that, from this point of view and to this 
degree at least, psychoanalysis, as an analytic of finitude, is now granted 
an intimacy with the madness that it had sometimes been conceded but 
had most often been emphatically denied in The History of Madness. And 
this intimacy is a sort of complicity with the madness of the day, the mad- 
ness of today, "madness in its present form, madness as it is posited in 
the modern experience, as its truth and its alterity" (MC, p. 387; OT, 
p. 375). 
But let us not oversimplify things. What Foucault generously grants 
psychoanalytic experience is now nothing other than what is denied it; 
more precisely, it is the being able to see what is denied it. Indeed, the 
only privilege that is here granted to psychoanalysis is that of the experi- 
ence that accedes to that to which it can never accede. If Foucault here men- 
tions, under the name of madness, only schizophrenia and psychosis, it 
is because psychoanalysis most often approaches these only in order to 
acknowledge its own limit: a forbidden or impossible access. This limit de- 
finespsychoanalysis. Its intimacy with madness par excellence is an intimacy 
with the least intimate, a nonintimacy that relates it to what is most heter- 
ogenous, to that which in no way lets itself be interiorized, nor even sub- 
jectified: neither alienated, I woul say, nor inalienable. 
This is why psychoanalysis finds in that madness par excellence ["mad- 
ness par excellence" is also the title given by Blanchot many years ear- 
lier to a text on Holderlin, and Foucault is no doubt echoing this 
without saying so]-which psychiatrists term schizophrenia-its inti- 
mate, its most invincible torture: for, given in this form of madness, 
in an absolutely manifest and absolutely withdrawn form [this abso- 
lute identity of the manifest and the withdrawn, of the open and the Critical Inquiry 
258 Jacques Derrida 
secret, is no doubt the key to this double gesture of interpretation 
and evaluation], are the forms of finitude towards which it usually 
advances unceasingly (and interminably) from the starting-point of 
that which is voluntarily-involuntarily offered to it in the patient's 
language. So psychoanalysis 'recognizes itself' when it is confronted 
with those very psychoses to which, nevertheless (or rather, for that 
very reason), it has scarcely any means of access: as if the psychosis 
were displaying in a savage illumination, and offering in a mode not 
too distant but precisely too close, that towards which analysis must 
make its laborious way. [MC, p. 387; OT, pp. 375-76] 
This displacement, as ambiguous as it is, leads Foucault to adopt the 
exact opposite position of certain theses of The History of Madness and Men- 
tal Illness and Psychology concerning the couple patient-doctor, concerning 
transference or alienation. This time, psychoanalysis not only has nothing 
to do with a psychology but it constitutes neither a general theory of 
man-since it is above all else a knowledge linked to a practice-nor an 
anthropology (see MC, pp. 388, 390; OT, pp. 376, 378-79). Even better: 
in the movement where he clearly affirms this, Foucault challenges the 
very thing of which he had unequivocally accused psychoanalysis, 
namely, of being a mythology and a thaumaturgy. He now wants to ex- 
plain why psychologists and philosophers were so quick, and so naive, to 
denounce a Freudian mythology there where that which exceeds repre- 
sentation and consciousness must have in fact resembled, but only resem- 
bled, something mythological (see MC, p. 386; OT, p. 374). As for the 
thaumaturgy of transference, the logic of alienation, and the subtly or 
sublimely asylumlike violence of the analytic situation, they are no longer, 
Foucault now says, essential to psychoanalysis, no longer "constitutive" of 
it. It is not that all violence is absent from this rehabilitated psychoanaly- 
sis, but it is, I hardly dare say it, a good violence, or in any case what 
Foucault calls a "calm" violence, one that, in the singular experience of 
singularity, allows access to "the concrete figures of finitude": 
neither hypnosis, nor the patient's alienation within the fantasmatic 
character of the doctor, is constitutive of psychoanalysis; ... the latter 
can be deployed only in the calm violence of a particular relationship 
and the transference it produces.... Psychoanalysis makes use of the 
particular relation of the transference in order to reveal, on the outer 
confines of representation, Desire, Law, and Death, which outline, at 
the extremity of analytic language and practice, the concrete figures 
of finitude. [MC, pp. 388-89; OT, pp. 377-78] 
Things have indeed changed-or so it appears-between The History 
of Madness and The Order of Things. The History of Madness 
Winter 1994 259 
From where does the theme of finitude that seems to govern this 
new displacement of the pendulum come? To what philosophical event 
is this analytic of finitude to be attributed-this analytic in which is in- 
scribed the trihedron of knowledges or models of the modern episteme, 
with its nonsciences, the "'human sciences,'" according to Foucault (MC, 
p. 378; OT, p. 366), and its "'counter-sciences,"' which Foucault says psy- 
choanalysis and ethnology also are (MC, p. 391; OT, p. 379)? 
As a project, the analytic of finitude would belong to the tradition of 
the Kantian critique. Foucault insists on this Kantian filiation by speci- 
fying, to cite it once again: "We think in that place." Here is again and 
for a time, according to Foucault, our age, our contemporaneity. It is true 
that if originary finitude obviously makes us think of Kant, it would be 
unable to do so alone, that is-to summarize an enormous venture in a 
word, in a name-without the active interpretation of the Heideggerian 
repetition and all its repercussions, particularly, since this is our topic 
today, in the discourse of French philosophy and psychoanalysis, and es- 
pecially, Lacanian psychoanalysis; and when I say Lacanian, I am also 
referring to all the debates with Lacan during the past few decades. This 
would have perhaps deserved some mention here on the part of Fou- 
cault, especially when he speaks of originary finitude. For Kantian 
finitude is precisely not "originary," as is, on the contrary, the one to 
which the Heideggerian interpretation leads. Finitude in Kant's sense 
is instead derived, as is the intuition bearing the same name. But let 
us leave all this aside, since it would, as we say, take us a bit too 
far afield. 
The "we" who is saying "we think in that place" is evidently, tautolog- 
ically, the "we" from out of which the signatory of these lines, the author 
of The History of Madness and The Order of Things, speaks, writes, and 
thinks. But this "we" never stops dividing, and the places of its signature 
are displaced in being divided up. A certain untimeliness always disturbs 
the contemporary who reassures him or herself in a "we." This "we," our 
"we," is not its own contemporary. The self-identity of its age, or of any 
age, appears as divided, and thus problematic, problematizable (I under- 
score this word for a reason that will perhaps become apparent in a mo- 
ment), as the age of madness or an age of psychoanalysis-as well as, 
in fact, all the historical or archeological categories that promise us the 
determinable stability of a configurable whole. In fact, from the moment 
a couple separates, from the moment, for example, just to locate here a 
symptom or a simple indication, the couple Freud/Nietzsche forms and 
then unforms, this decoupling fissures the identity of the epoch, of the 
age, of the episteme or the paradigm of which one or the other, or both 
together, might have been the significant representatives. This is even 
more true when this decoupling comes to fissure the self-identity of some 
individual, or some presumed individuality, for example, of Freud. What Critical Inquiry 
260 Jacques Derrida 
allows one to presume the non-self-difference of Freud, for example? 
And of psychoanalysis? These decouplings and self-differences no doubt 
introduce a good deal of disorder into the unity of any configuration, 
whole, epoch, or historical age. Such disturbances make the historians' 
work rather difficult, even and especially the work of the most original 
and refined among them. This self-difference, this difference to self [d soi], 
and not simply with self, makes life hard if not impossible for historical 
science. But inversely, would there be any history, would anything ever 
happen, without this principle of disturbance? Would there ever be any 
event without this disturbance of the principality? 
At the point where we are, the age of finitude is being de-identified 
for at least one reason, from which I can here abstract only the general 
schema: the thought of finitude, as the thought of finite man, speaks both 
of the tradition, the memory of the Kantian critique or of the knowledges 
rooted in it, and of the end [fin] of this finite man, this man who is "near- 
ing its end," as Foucault's most famous sentence would have it in this final 
wager, placed on the edge of a promise that has yet to take shape, in the 
final lines of The Order of Things: "then one can certainly wager that man 
would be effaced, like a face drawn in sand at the edge or limit of the sea" 
(MC, p. 398; OT, p. 387). The trait (the trait of the face, the line or the 
limit) that then runs the risk of being effaced in the sand would perhaps 
also be the one that separates an end from itself, thereby multiplying it 
endlessly and making it, once again, into a limit: the self-relation of a 
limit at once erases and multiplies the limit; it cannot but divide it in 
inventing it. The limit only comes to be effaced-it only comes to efface 
itself-as soon as it is inscribed. 
2. I'm finished with this point, and so I should really finish it up 
right here. Assuming that I haven't already worn out your patience, I will 
conclude with a second indication as a sort of postscript-and even more 
schematically-in order to point once again in the direction of psycho- 
analysis and to put these hypotheses to the test of The History of Sexuality 
(1976-1984).20 
If one is still willing to follow this figure of the pendulum [balancier] 
making a scene before psychoanalysis, then one will observe that thefort/ 
da here gives a new impetus to the movement, a movement with the same 
rhythm but with a greater amplitude and range than ever before. Psycho- 
analysis is here reduced, more than it ever was, to a very circumscribed 
and dependent moment in a history of the "strategies of knowledge and 
power" (juridical, familial, psychiatric) (VS, p. 210; HS, p. 159). Psycho- 
20. Histoire de la sexualite is the name given by Foucault to his entire project on sexuality, 
of which three volumes have now been published: La Volonte de savoir (Paris, 1976), hereafter 
abbreviated VS, trans. Robert Hurley, under the title The History of Sexuality: An Introduction 
(New York, 1978), hereafter abbreviated HS; LUsage des plaisirs (Paris, 1984), trans. Hurley, 
under the title The Use of Pleasure (New York, 1985); and Le Souci de soi (Paris, 1984), trans. 
Hurley, under the title The Care of the Self (New York, 1986). The History of Madness 
Winter 1994 261 
analysis is taken by and interested in these strategies, but it does not think 
them through. The praises of Freud fall decisively and irreversibly: one 
hears, for example, of "how wonderfully effective he was-worthy of the 
greatest spiritual fathers and directors of the classical period-in giving 
a new impetus to the secular injunction to study sex and transform it 
into discourse" (VS, p. 210; HS, p. 159). This time, in other words, in 
reinscribing the invention of psychoanalysis into the history of a disciplin- 
ary dynamic, one no longer indicts only the ruses of objectivization and 
psychiatric alienation, as in The History of Madness, and no longer only the 
stratagems that would have allowed the confinement without confinement of 
the patient in the invisible asylum of the analytic situation. This time, it 
is a question of going much further back, and more radically than the 
"repressive hypothesis" ever did, towards the harsh ruses of the monar- 
chy of sex and the agencies of power that support it. These latter invest 
in and take charge of sexuality, so that there is no need to oppose, as one 
so often and naively believes, power and pleasure. 
And since we have been following for so long now the obsessive ava- 
tars of the Evil Genius, the irresistible, demonic, and metamorphic 
returns of this quasi-God, of God's second in command, this metempsy- 
chotic Satan, we here find Freud himself once again, Freud, to whom 
Foucault leaves a choice between only two roles: the bad genius and the 
good one. And what we have here is another chiasm: in the rhetoric of 
the few lines that I will read in a moment, one will not be surprised to 
see that the accused, the one who is the most directly targeted by the 
indictment-for no amount of denying will make us forget that we are 
dealing here with a trial and a verdict-is the "good genius of Freud" 
and not his "bad genius." Why so? In the final pages of the first volume 
of The History of Sexuality, the accusation of pansexualism that was often 
leveled against psychoanalysis naturally comes up. Those most blind in 
this regard, says Foucault, were not those who denounced pansexualism 
out of prudishness. Their only error was to have attributed "solely to the 
bad genius [mauvais genie] of Freud what had already gone through a long 
stage of preparation" (VS, p. 210; HS, p. 159; my emphasis). The opposite 
error, the symmetrical lure, corresponds to a more serious mystification. 
It is the illusion that could be called emancipatory, the aberration of the 
Enlightenment, the misguided notion on the part of those who believed 
that Freud, the 'good genius" of Freud, had finally freed sex from its re- 
pression by power. These 
were mistaken concerning the nature of the process; they believed 
that Freud had at last, through a sudden reversal, restored to sex 
the rightful share which it had been denied for so long; they had not 
seen how the good genius of Freud had placed it at one of the critical 
points marked out for it since the eighteenth century by the strate- 
gies of knowledge and power, how wonderfully effective he was ... Critical Inquiry 
262 Jacques Derrida 
in giving a new impetus to the secular injunction to study sex and 
transform it into discourse. [VS, p. 210; HS, p. 159; my emphasis]21 
The "good genius" of Freud would thus be worse than the bad one. 
It would have consisted in getting itself well placed, in spotting the best 
place in an old strategy of knowledge and power. 
Whatever questions it might leave unanswered-and I will speak in 
just a moment of one of those it suscitates in me-this project appears 
nonetheless exciting, necessary, and courageous. And I would not want 
any particular reservation on my part to be too quickly classified among 
the reactions of those who hastened to defend the threatened privilege 
of the pure invention of psychoanalysis, that is, of an invention that would 
be pure, of a psychoanalysis that one might still dream would have inno- 
cently sprung forth already outfitted, helmeted, armed, in short, outside 
all history, after the epistemological cutting of the cord, as one used to 
say, indeed, after the unraveling of the navel of the dream. Foucault him- 
self during an interview seemed to be ready for some sort of compromise 
on this issue, readily and good-spiritedly acknowledging the "impasses" 
(this was his word) of his concept of episteme and the difficulties into which 
this new project had led him.22 But only those who work, only those who 
21. It is perhaps appropriate to recall here the lines immediately following this, the last 
in the first volume of The History of Sexuality. They unequivocally describe this sort of Chris- 
tian teleology or, more precisely, modern Christianity (as opposed to "an old Christianity") 
whose completion would, in some sense, be marked by psychoanalysis: 
the secular injunction to study sex and transform it into discourse. We are often re- 
minded of the countless procedures which an old Christianity once employed to make 
us detest the body; but let us ponder all the ruses that were employed for centuries to 
make us love sex, to make the knowledge of it desirable and everything said about it 
precious. Let us consider the stratagems by which we were induced to apply all our 
skills to discovering its secrets, by which we were attached to the obligation to draw out 
its truth, and made guilty for having failed to recognize it for so long. These devices 
are what ought to make us wonder today. Moreover, we need to consider the possibility 
that one day, perhaps, in a different economy of bodies and pleasures, people will no 
longer quite understand how the ruses of sexuality, and the power that sustains its 
organization, were able to subject us to that austere monarchy of sex, so that we became 
dedicated to the endless task of forcing its secret, of exacting the truest of confessions 
from a shadow. 
The irony of this deployment is in having us believe that our "liberation" is in the 
balance. [VS, pp. 210-11; HS, p. 159] 
Some might be tempted to relate this conclusion to that of The Order of Things, to every- 
thing that is said there about the end and about its tomorrow, about man "nearing his end" 
right up to this "day" when, as The History of Sexuality says, "in a different economy of bodies 
and pleasures, people will no longer quite understand how," and so on. It is difficult not to 
hear in the rhetoric and tonality of such a call, in the apocalyptic and eschatological tone of 
this promise (even if "we can at the moment do no more than sense the possibility [of this 
event]-without knowing either what its form will be or what it promises" [MC, p. 398; OT, 
p. 387]), a certain resonance with the Christianity and Christian humanism whose end is 
being announced. 
22. See "Le Jeu de Michel Foucault," Ornicar? 10 (July 1977): 62-93; ed. Alain Grosri- 
chard, under the title "The Confessions of the Flesh," Power/Knowledge: Selected Interviews The History of Madness 
Winter 1994 263 
take risks in working, encounter difficulties. One only ever thinks and 
takes responsibility-if indeed one ever does-in the testing of the apo- 
ria; without this, one is content to follow an inclination or apply a pro- 
gram. And it would not be very generous, indeed it would be especially 
naive and imprudent, to take advantage of these avowals, to take them 
literally, and to forget what Foucault himself tells us about the confes- 
sional scene. 
The question that I would have liked to formulate would thus not 
aim to protect psychoanalysis against some new attack, nor even to cast 
the slightest doubt upon the importance, necessity, and legitimacy of Fou- 
cault's extremely interesting project concerning this great history of sex- 
uality. My question would only seek-and this would be, in sum, a sort 
of modest contribution-to complicate somewhat an axiomatic and, on 
the basis of this perhaps, certain discursive or conceptual procedures, 
particularly regarding the way in which this axiomatic is inscribed in its 
age, in the historical field that serves as a point of departure, and in its 
reference to psychoanalysis. In a word, without compromising in the least 
the necessity of reinscribing almost "all" psychoanalysis (assuming one 
could seriously say such a thing, which I do not believe one can: psycho- 
analysis itself, all psychoanalysis, the whole truth about all psychoanalysis) 
into a history that precedes and exceeds it, it would be a question of 
becoming interested in certain gestures, in certain works, in certain mo- 
ments of certain works of psychoanalysis, Freudian and post-Freudian 
(for one cannot, especially in France, seriously treat this subject by lim- 
iting oneself to a strictly Freudian discourse and apparatus), in certain 
traits of a consequently nonglobalizable psychoanalysis, one that is di- 
vided and multiple (like the powers that Foucault ceaselessly reminds us 
are essentially dispersed). It would then be a question of admitting that 
these necessarily fragmentary or disjointed movements say and do, pro- 
vide resources for saying and doing, what The History of Sexuality (The Will 
to Knowledge) wishes to say, what it means [veut dire], and what it wishes to 
do (to know and to make known) with regard to psychoanalysis. In other 
words, if one still wanted to speak in terms of age-something that I 
would only ever do in the form of citation-at this point, here on this 
line, concerning some trait that is on the side from out of which the his- 
tory of sexuality is written rather than on the side of what it describes or 
objectifies, one would have to say that Foucault's project belongs too 
much to "the age of psychoanalysis" in its possibility for it, when claiming 
to thematize psychoanalysis, to do anything other than let psychoanalysis 
continue to speak obliquely of itself and to mark one of its folds in a 
scene that I will not call self-referential or specular but whose structural 
complication I will not here try to describe (I have tried to do this else- 
and Other Writings, 1972-77, trans. Colin Gordon et al., ed. Gordon (New York, 1980), esp. 
pp. 196-97. Critical Inquiry 
264 Jacques Derrida 
where). This is not only because of what withdraws this history from the 
regime of representation (because of what already inscribes the possibility 
of this history in and since the age of Freud and Heidegger-to use these 
names as mere indications for the sake of convenience). It is also for a 
reason that interests us here more directly: what Foucault announces and 
denounces about the relation between pleasure and power, in what he 
calls the "double impetus: pleasure and power" (VS, p. 62; HS, p. 45), 
would find, already in Freud, to say nothing of those who followed, dis- 
cussed, transformed, and displaced him, the very resources for the objec- 
tion leveled against the "good genius," the so very bad "good genius," of 
the father of psychoanalysis. I will situate this with just a word in order to 
conclude. 
Foucault had clearly cautioned us: this history of sexuality was not 
to be a historian's history. A "genealogy of desiring man" was to be neither 
a history of representations nor a history of behaviors or sexual practices. 
This would lead one to think that sexuality cannot become an object of 
history without seriously affecting the historian's practice and the concept 
of history. Moreover, Foucault puts quotation marks around the word 
sexuality: "the quotation marks have a certain importance," he adds.23 We 
are thus also dealing here with the history of a word, with its usages start- 
ing in the nineteenth century and the reformulation of the vocabulary in 
relation to a large number of other phenomena, from biological mecha- 
nisms to traditional and new norms, to the institutions that support these, 
be they religious, juridical, pedagogical, or medical (for example, psycho- 
analytic). This history of the uses of a word is neither nominalist nor 
essentialist. It concerns procedures and, more precisely, zones of "prob- 
lematization." It is a "history of truth" as a history of problematizations, 
and even as an "archeology of problematizations," "through which being 
offers itself as something that can and must be thought."24 The point is 
to analyze not simply behaviors, ideas, or ideologies but, first of all, these 
problematizations in which a thought of being intersects "practices" and 
"practices of the self," a "genealogy of practices of the self" through 
which these problematizations are formed. With its reflexive vigilance 
and care in thinking itself in its rigorous specificity, such an analysis thus 
calls for the problematization of its own problematization. This latter must itself 
also question itself, and with the same archaeological and genealogical 
care, the same care that it itself methodically prescribes. 
When confronted with a historical problematization of such scope 
and thematic richness, one should not be satisfied with a mere survey, 
nor with asking in just a few minutes an overarching question so as to 
insure some sort of synoptic mastery. What we can and must try to do in 
such a situation is to pay tribute to a work that is this great and this un- 
23. Foucault, LUsage des plaisirs, p. 9; The Use of Pleasure, p. 3. 
24. Ibid., pp. 17-19; pp. 11-13. The History of Madness 
Winter 1994 265 
certain by means of a question that it itself raises, by means of a question 
that it carries within itself, that it keeps in reserve in its unlimited poten- 
tial, one of the questions that can thus be deciphered within it, a question 
that keeps it in suspense, holding its breath [tient ... en haleine]-and, 
thus, keeps it alive. 
One of these questions, for me, for example, would be the one I had 
tried to formulate a few years ago during a conference honoring Foucault 
at New York University.25 It was developed by means of a problematiza- 
tion of the concept of power and of the theme of what Foucault calls the 
spiral in the duality power/pleasure. Leaving aside the huge question of 
the concept of power and of what gives it its alleged unity under the 
essential dispersion rightly recalled by Foucault himself, I will pull out 
only a thread: it would lead to that which, in a certain Freud and at the 
center of a certain-let's say for the sake of convenience-French heri- 
tage of Freud, would not only not let itself be objectified by the Foucaul- 
dian problematization but would actually contribute to it in the most 
determinate and efficient way, thereby deserving to be inscribed on the 
thematizing rather than on the thematized border of this history of sexu- 
ality. I thus have to wonder what Foucault would have said, in this per- 
spective and were he to have taken this into account, not of "Freud" or 
of psychoanalysis "itself" in general-which does not exist any more than 
power does as one big central and homogeneous corpus-but, for ex- 
ample, since this is only one example, about an undertaking like Beyond 
the Pleasure Principle, about something in its lineage or between its filial 
connections-along with everything that has been inherited, repeated, 
or discussed from it since then. In following one of these threads or filial 
connections, one of the most discreet, in following the abyssal, unassign- 
able, and unmasterable strategy of this text, a strategy that is finally with- 
out strategy, one begins to see that this text not only opens up the horizon 
of a beyond of the pleasure principle (the hypothesis of such a beyond 
never really seeming to be of interest to Foucault) against which the whole 
economy of pleasure needs to be rethought, complicated, pursued in its 
most unrecognizable ruses and detours. By means of one of these filia- 
tions-another one unwinding the spool of the fort/da that continues to 
interest us-this text also problematizes, in its greatest radicality, the 
agency of power and mastery. In a discreet and difficult passage, an origi- 
nal drive for power or drive for mastery (Bemdchtigungstrieb) is mentioned. 
It is very difficult to know if this drive for power is still dependent upon 
the pleasure principle, indeed, upon sexuality as such, upon the austere 
monarchy of sex that Foucault speaks of on the last page of his book. 
How would Foucault have situated this drive for mastery in his dis- 
25. The following analysis thus intersects a much longer treatment of the subject in 
an unpublished paper entitled "Beyond the Power Principle" that I presented during this 
conference at New York University, organized by Thomas Bishop, in April 1986. Critical Inquiry 
266 Jacques Derrida 
course on power or on irreducibly plural powers? How would he have 
read this drive, had he read it, in this extremely enigmatic text of Freud? 
How would he have interpreted the recurring references to the demonic 
from someone who then makes himself, according to his own terms, the 
"devil's advocate" and who becomes interested in the hypothesis of a late 
or derived appearance of sex and sexual pleasure? In the whole problem- 
atization whose history he describes, how would Foucault have inscribed 
this passage from Beyond the Pleasure Principle, and this concept and these 
questions (with all the debates to which this book of Freud either directly 
or indirectly gave rise, in a sort of critical capitalization, particularly in 
the France of our age, beginning with everything in Lacan that takes its 
point of departure in the repetition compulsion [Wiederholungszwang])? 
Would he have inscribed this problematic matrix within the whole whose 
history he describes? Or would he have put it on the other side, on the 
side of what allows one on the contrary to delimit the whole, indeed to 
problematize it? And thus on a side that no longer belongs to the whole, 
nor, as I would be tempted to think, to any whole, such that the very idea 
of a gathering of problematization or procedure, to say nothing any 
longer of age, episteme, paradigm, or epoch, would make for so many 
problematic names, just as problematic as the very idea of problemati- 
zation? 
This is one of the questions that I would have liked to ask him. I am 
trying, since this is, unfortunately, the only recourse left us in the solitude 
of questioning, to imagine the principle of the reply. It would perhaps be 
something like this: what one must stop believing in is principality or 
principleness, in the problematic of the principle, in the principled unity 
of pleasure and power, or of some drive that is thought to be more ori- 
ginary than the other. The theme of the spiral would be that of a drive 
duality (power/pleasure) that is without principle. 
It is the spirit of this spiral that keeps one in suspense, holding one's 
breath-and, thus, keeps one alive. 
The question would thus once again be given a new impetus: is not 
the duality in question, this spiralled duality, what Freud tried to oppose 
to all monisms by speaking of a dual drive and of a death drive, of a death 
drive that was no doubt not alien to the drive for mastery? And, thus, to 
what is most alive in life, to its very living on [survivance]? 
I am still trying to imagine Foucault's response. I can't quite do it. I 
would need him to take it on himself. 
But in this place where no one can answer for him, in the absolute 
silence where we remain nonetheless turned toward him, I would ven- 
ture to bet that, in a sentence that I will not construct for him, he would 
have associated and yet also dissociated, he would have placed back to 
back, mastery and death, that is, the same-death and the master, death 
as the master. The History of Madness 
