Biodegradables Seven Diary Fragments
Author(s): Jacques Derrida and Peggy Kamuf
Source: Critical Inquiry, Vol. 15, No. 4 (Summer, 1989), pp. 812-873 
Published by: The University of Chicago Press
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/1343692
Accessed: 20/09/2009 21:26
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=ucpress.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit organization founded in 1995 to build trusted digital archives for scholarship. We work with the
scholarly community to preserve their work and the materials they rely upon, and to build a common research platform that
promotes the discovery and use of these resources. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
The University of Chicago Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Critical
Inquiry.
http://www.jstor.org
On Jacques Derrida's "Paul de Man's War" 
Vll 
Biodegradables 
Seven Diary Fragments 
Jacques Derrida 
Translated by Peggy Kamuf 
Saturday, 24 December 1988, 5 A.M. 
What is a thing? 
What remains? What, after all, of the remains ... ? [Quoi du reste 
... ?] 
Ergo je suis-the question of the thing. It is going to be necessary 
once again to quibble [ergoter]. 
(This morning's decision: upon waking, take notes on what remains 
of certain of my dreams, before they sink back into oblivion. Retain in 
particular those-they are finally rather rare-that already have a verbal 
consistency. This promises them an ideal identity, an autonomous existence 
of sorts, at the same time lighter and more solid. For me, the duration 
of these words is like the solitary persistence of a wreck. Its form run 
aground is stabilized in the sand. One might see it surge up through the 
morning fog in the manner of a damp ruin, jagged, covered with algae 
and signs. A chance as well for the deciphering to come when the thing 
resists. The promise of work and reading, at least for a little while. On 
Saturday, day of rest, distraction, or meditation, I will reassemble these 
remains while reflecting them a little. Filtering and ordering. We'll see 
what can be saved of them. But to float on the surface [surnager] does 
not necessarily mean to survive [survivre] ... ) 
Critical Inquiry 15 (Summer 1989) 
? 1989 by The University of Chicago. 0093-1896/89/1504-0004$01.00. All rights reserved. 
812 
Summer 1989 813 
Longtempsje me suis, for a long time I have'-been interested in the 
"biodegradable." In the word or the thing? Difficult to distinguish, in 
any case in this case. It is a question of the case. The case: what falls, 
the fall [la chute], the falling due [echeance], or the waste [dechet]. In French, 
one also speaks of the "chute de papier."2 On the one hand, this thing is 
not a thing, not-as one ordinarily believes things to be-a natural thing: 
in fact "biodegradable," on the contrary, is generally said of an artificial 
product, most often an industrial product, whenever it lets itself be de- 
composed by microorganisms. On the other hand, the "biodegradable" is 
hardly a thing since it remains a thing that does not remain, an essentially 
decomposable thing, destined to pass away, to lose its identity as a thing 
and to become again a non-thing. Preliminary question, this night or in 
the small hours of the morning, thinking again of the amnesia of which 
a culture is made: Can one say, figuratively, that a "publication" is bio- 
degradable and distinguish here the degrees of degradation, the rhythms, 
the laws, the aleatory factors, the detours and the disguises, the trans- 
mutations, the cycles of recycling? Can one transpose onto "culture" the 
vocabulary of "natural waste treatment"-recycling, ecosystems, and so 
1. Almost all the paragraphs on these two pages begin with a sentence that is playing, 
in a semiparodic or citational mode, with other texts. "What is a thing?" is a question that 
returns in numerous texts of Heidegger that have often been interpreted by Derrida, 
notably in The Post Card: From Socrates to Freud and Beyond, trans. Alan Bass (Chicago, 1987), 
and The Truth in Painting, trans. Geoff Bennington and Ian McLeod (Chicago, 1987). This 
question, in this very form, was both treated and parodied in Glas, trans. John P. Leavey, 
Jr. and Richard Rand (Lincoln, Nebr., 1986). A book constantly worked over by the motif 
of the remainder or of "remnance" [restance], as will be the present article, Glas began thus: 
"Quoi du reste?" On this subject, see as well Derrida's Limited Inc, ed. Gerald Graff (Evanston, 
Ill., 1988). As for the "Ergoje suis" and "Longtempsje me suis," these are more transparent 
allusions. The difficulty in translating the famous "Longtemps je me suis couche de bonne 
heure" from the Recherche du temps perdu is well known. There are at least three English 
versions. I cannot tell whether, with a smile or a groan, Derrida is here alluding to time 
lost. But, as we shall see, he often rises early to note down his dreams.-TRANS. 
2. That is, the surplus or residue that falls or that overflows when large quantities of 
paper are cut (for books or newspapers, for example).-TRANS. 
Jacques Derrida is Directeur d'Etudes at the Ecole des Hautes Etudes 
en Sciences Sociales (Paris) as well as professor at the University of Cal- 
ifornia, Irvine, and visiting professor at the Graduate School of the City 
University of New York. His most recent publication in English is the 
collection Limited Inc (1988), which includes a new afterword, "Toward 
an Ethic of Discussion." Peggy Kamuf is professor of French at the 
University of Southern California. Her most recent book is Signature 
Pieces: On the Institution of Authorship (1988). She has also contributed 
essays to Reading de Man Reading (1989) and Responses: On Paul de Man's 
Wartime Journalism (1989), and is currently editing A Derrida Reader. Critical Inquiry 
814 Biodegradables 
on-along with the whole legislative apparatus that regulates the "en- 
vironment" in our societies? (Recall, but with vigilance-it's true I was 
just waking up-the "logic of the unconscious," censorship and repression, 
displacements and condensations. According to such a "logic," whose 
pertinence is, I believe, considerable but limited, nothing is destroyed 
and thus no "document" "biodegrades," even if it is, according to some 
criterion or other, the most degraded or the most degrading. As soon 
as the unconscious is in the picture, no law could regulate purification 
or reassure the ecologists. Those of "nature" and those of "culture." 
Unless the unconscious is already an ecosystem regulated by so many 
laws, and so on.) But can one say that, given this or that condition, one 
publication is more biodegradable, more quickly decomposed than another? 
Often, going from one to the other within the same hour and the same 
place, we read one thing that we know has resisted or will resist centuries 
of erosion and hermeneutic microorganisms, and then another thing 
that, from the very first page, we know we will forget on the plane even 
if it was nevertheless necessary to read and X-ray it while sighing all the 
way to the airport ("Why me again? Was it really necessary to read this? 
These lines are made to self-destruct, after a very brief passage; they 
poison themselves even before poisoning others, and carry within them- 
selves their own microorganisms, and so on"). 
I wouldn't know how to qualify or delimit my interest in the question 
of the "biodegradable": scientific interest? philosophical? ethico-ecological? 
political? rhetorical? poetic? prag(ram)matological?3 As for the word 
"biodegradable," which is not a thing and which in any case one cannot 
reduce to the state of the thing called "natural," no more than one can 
reduce its presumed "support" (paper, magnetic tape, diskette, and so 
on), how to define it?4 Does it designate a rigorous concept? Does it have 
a proper meaning? And if it has a figurative meaning, which one? Must 
one prescribe "sound," nonpollutable rules for its use? 
Tonight brought three other series of questions-but lacking for 
time, I will try to answer them some other Saturday. 
3. This word was forged by Derrida to designate the internal and necessary link 
between two types of research, "at the intersection of a pragmatics and a grammatology," 
in "My Chances/Mes Chances: A Rendezvous with Some Epicurean Stereophonies," trans. 
Irene Harvey and Avital Ronell, in Taking Chances: Derrida, Psychoanalysis, Literature, ed. 
Joseph H. Smith and William Kerrigan (Baltimore, 1984), p. 27. There, the questions of 
the remainder, waste, the fall, and decay, which will come up often in this diary, are treated 
at length, as well as in the works cited in note 1, especially Limited Inc. -TRANS. 
4. "Microbiological purification is generally associated with the assimilation of oxidizable 
organic wastes, which includes, for example, domestic sewage effluent and various industrial 
effluents such as those from paper manufacturing and food processing. The degradation 
of many hydrocarbons also proceeds to some extent by microbial action. A pollutant that 
is subject to decomposition by microorganisms is termed biodegradable" (Jay Benforado 
and Robert K. Bastian, "Natural Waste Treatment," in McGraw-Hill Yearbook of Science and 
Technology, 1985 (New York, 1984), p. 38. Jacques Derrida 
Summer 1989 815 
1. Is not the word "biodegradable" a recent artefact? All words in a 
so-called natural language are also, in their own way, artefacts, of course. 
But "biodegradable'? overloads language with a supplement of artifice. 
It adds a prosthesis to it, a synthetic object, a modern and unstable graft 
of Greek and Latin in order to designate primarily that which is opposed 
to the structure of certain products of modern industry, products that 
are themselves artificial and synthetic, from plastic bags to nuclear waste. 
Is this synthetic object, the word "biodegradable," biodegradable? One 
might think that this very artificial word, this pluri-etymological, tech- 
noscientific, and synthetic composite is more decomposable than some 
other word. It would be called on to disappear or to let itself be replaced 
at the first opportunity. What is more, it barely belongs to a language. 
Is this foreigner, this graft-a little Greek, a little Latin, a little 
technoscience-first of all English, French? Will I have the time to look 
up the archive of the word? And what if it had decomposed itself, and 
so on? Well, precisely, it is perhaps this parasitic nonbelonging and this 
character of artificial synthesis that render the word less biodegradable 
than some other word; because it does not belong to the organic compost 
of a single natural language, this strange thing may be seen to float on 
the surface of culture like the wastes whose survival rivals that of the 
masterpieces of our culture and the monuments that we promise to 
eternity. A question is taking shape; I don't know what will remain of it: 
like biodegradable, nonbiodegradable can be said of the worst and the 
best. 
2. Consequently, can one make a figure of the word "biodegradable"? 
Can one say, figuratively, "the biodegradable word"? Can one say of a 
word that it is biodegradable? And, along with the word, everything that 
is attached to words, everything that delivers itself over to words, everything 
that is delivered up by words? A publication, for example, a problematic 
but very strict notion that I am distinguishing provisionally from the text 
in general? In the publication, distinguish, if possible, the survival of the 
support (paper, magnetic tape, film, diskette, and so on) from the semantic 
content that also takes place, has a "place." Major question of the historicity 
of ideal objects (Husserl, the Krisis, the destruction of the archive,5 the 
biodegradable, and so on). 
3. Is not what we call rhetoric a large discourse, itself in a constant 
state of recycling, of that which in discourse submits to composition, 
decomposition, recomposition? These processes could affect the very 
essence of language and the proper meaning of words. Can one speak 
nonfiguratively of biodegradability with regard to the identity attributed 
to a supposedly proper meaning? As a result of the action of certain 
bacteria (here, what are the "bacteria" of language? and the parasites 
5. See Derrida, Edmund Husserl's Origin of Geometry: An Introduction, trans. Leavey, ed. 
David B. Allison (Stony Brook, N.Y., 1978).-TRANS. Critical Inquiry 
816 Biodegradables Jacques Derrida 
and viruses that I've talked about at length elsewhere? Leave this connection 
for another occasion), the aforementioned proper meaning would de- 
compose in order to pass, having become unrecognizable, into other 
forms, other figures. It would let itself be assimilated, circulating anon- 
ymously within the great organic body of culture, as would one of those 
metaphors called "dead." 
Practice the most intractable vigilance, I said to myself last night in 
a half-sleep, with regard to all this bio-organicist rhetoric, if indeed a 
certain use of the word "biodegradable" gives in to that rhetoric. All the 
more so since, within its own physico-chemico-biological order, the concept 
of biodegradability is probably not fixed by definitive and rigorous limits. 
No doubt it is believed to be useful, pragmatic, provisional, and destined 
for recycling transformations. 
One may also follow (I did it in Memoires)6 a certain itinerary of 
de Man as that of a progressively acute thinking of disjunction, that is, 
a progressively coherent critique of the "symbolist" and organicist total- 
ization. Culler puts it well: "This political context gives a new dimension 
to de Man's attempt-from the early critiques of Heidegger to his late 
critiques of phenomenality-to undo totalizing metaphors, myths of im- 
mediacy, organic unity, and presence, and to combat their fascinations" 
("'Paul de Man's War' and the Aesthetic Ideology," pp. 780-81; my em- 
phasis). 
"Quoi du reste ..." Case and chute de papier, paper scraps. 
More often than ever before, with the case of what has become a 
"case" in the newspapers-the "de Man case"-I have wondered: What 
will remain of all this in a few years, in ten years, in twenty years? How 
will the archive be filtered? Which texts will be reread? I have a few 
hypotheses, of course; I will not formulate all of them publicly, but at 
some later time I ought to say why, sometimes, I prefer to abstain. 
I have never confused-indeed I have never stopped urging others 
not to confuse-traces or writing generally with what is said or written 
in books and newspapers, with archives and "publications." Thus the 
question "what will remain?" does not concern only, as I see it, libraries 
and the academic world. It is, like the question of the remainder7 in 
general, more vast, more reticent, more divisible, and thus more difficult. 
Even if one could draw a rigorous borderline around a particular jour- 
nalistic-academic culture, which I do not believe is possible, the question 
"what will remain?" would still be of interest here. It has already been 
displaced, with great speed, in this limited sequence of history ("the 
6. See Derrida, Memoiresfor Paul de Man, trans. Cecile Lindsay, Eduardo Cadava, and 
Jonathan Culler (New York, 1986). 
7. See above, notes 1 and 3; although the remainder, the remains, the rest are used 
here to translate "le reste," there is an untranslatable remainder: "reste" is also the form 
of the familiar imperative, "stay," as in "reste avec moi," stay with me.-TRANS. 
Summer 1989 817 
de Man case") after scarcely more than a year, since the beginning of 
the "public" events, that is, since the moment when (must I recall this 
once again?) I myself believed (me, and none of those I am being urged 
to respond to in Critical Inquiry) I had to take the initiative to propose 
public discussion and, quite simply, publication of what is called today 
Paul de Man's WartimeJournalism, 1939-1943 and Responses (about 1000 
pages!).8 Since then, people are beginning to forget the articles and the 
names of so many confused, hurried, and rahcorous professor-journalists. 
Even if I wanted to recall here those articles and those names, I couldn't 
do it. What has saved a few of them from oblivion, according to a formidable 
paradox, a perverse law of cultural memory, have been the corrections, 
the responses, the calls to order and honesty-when, that is, certain 
newspapers have consented to publish them. 
But if someone were tempted to conclude from this, judging by 
appearances and good sense, that these precipitous and compulsive pub- 
lications were essentially "biodegradable" because destined in advance to 
oblivion, I would right away protest: the use of this figure demands many 
more precautions, as I would like to try to demonstrate. Conversely, the 
serious work of students, of young and not-so-young researchers on or 
in the wake of Paul de Man-and I am not the only one able to testify 
to this-has done nothing but grow in number and quality. This is even 
spectacular. One need not be a prophet to be able to predict that, like 
the books of Paul de Man (how many have been published since his 
death?), the articles and books that are proliferating on the subject of 
his work will have a longer and richer destiny-not an infinite one, of 
course, one cannot assert that about anything-but a much more inter- 
esting one in any case. (That is why, with the exception of Jonathan 
Culler's response, which reproaches me for a certain "exceedingly severe 
statement" to which I will return, the "critical responses" to which I am 
urged to reply by Critical Inquiry appeared to me to be so behind the 
times and thus so tedious. They were behind the times from the beginning, 
if one can say that, but have become more and more so as of this date, 
and notably in relation to all the analyses and all the information we 
have at our disposal from now on.) Nonetheless, after some reflection, 
which, alas, does not mean that my decision is the right one, I have made 
it my duty to respond, to leave nothing without response. Yet, even as I 
force myself to face up to these attacks (half a dozen of them, what a 
disproportion!), I will advise the exacting reader to ignore this dossier, 
including my diary, and especially, especially to read, besides the work 
of Paul de Man (yes, again, again: the books published during his life 
and those that have been added since his death), the large quantity of 
8. See de Man, Wartime Journalism, 1939-1943, ed. Werner Hamacher, Neil Hertz, 
and Thomas Keenan (Lincoln, Nebr., 1988), and Responses: On Paul de Man's Wartime 
Journalism, ed. Hamacher, Hertz, and Keenan (Lincoln, Nebr., 1989). Critical Inquiry 
818 Biodegradables 
research it has inspired, not only in the United States, as well as the two 
volumes I mentioned above. 
The difference in the predictable survival of these texts is strange, for 
at least three reasons: 
1. The richness, the rigor, and the fertility of Paul de Man's work. 
One may or may not agree with him, in general or on a particular point. 
The two things are possible and both have happened to me, be it a question 
of theory or politics, and concerning the most decisive stakes. This has 
not escaped the notice of those who have been willing to read each of 
us, with any lucidity and good faith, for more than twenty years. But it 
is not necessary to be in agreement with him about anything in order to 
recognize that the debates in which he participated, like the contribution 
he made to them, have an unquestionable-and moreover rarely ques- 
tioned-necessity. 
2. It is to the extent to which this original work is difficult to ignore 
that the articles from 1940-42 have resurfaced. People are not interested 
in all the writings of all those who pass as politically above suspicion, and 
simply for this latter reason. Fortunately. People are much less and too 
little interested, alas, in the writings and actions that are infinitely more 
serious and culpable, politically, than those of the young journalist Paul 
de Man. But the simple fact is their authors did nothing else or nothing 
better. A worrisome paradox, a disconcerting law of cultural memory: 
everything thus happens as if de Man, by his relentless work, by the 
richness of what he wrote or taught during almost forty years in the 
United States, had saved from immediate "biodegradation" some old 
newspaper articles that no one would have otherwise gone and exhumed 
(for this, there had to be an admirer of the succeeding generation, a 
whole generation of admirers and disciples; the ambivalence and re- 
sentment accumulated elsewhere, which had nothing to do with the war, 
at least with Le Soir of 1940-42, will have done the rest). Perhaps even 
de Man wished this to happen, secretly or unconsciously. Perhaps he 
foresaw it even as he denied it. Until the end, he denigrated his own 
work as juvenilia and inadequate essays. And that is a little what I had 
meant to suggest by titling my article "Like the Sound of the Sea Deep 
within a Shell: Paul de Man's War" (trans. Peggy Kamuf, Critical Inquiry 
[Spring 1988]: 590-652). Montherlant's phrase quoted by de Man ventured 
something on the subject of the "biodegradability" of press publications. 
I was especially interested in the paradoxes or complications that were 
overlooked by this phrase and in particular by its citation. First of all, I 
was interested in the history of this phrase, in its possible survival, in the 
"nonbiodegradability" of this strange artefact, a sort of nuclear waste (I 
will have to come back to this next Saturday or later). 
3. Those who have sought to exploit these revelations, those who 
have given in to the temptation to annihilate, along with the work of a 
whole life, all that which, from near or far, came to be associated with Jacques Derrida 
Summer 1989 819 
it ("Deconstruction," they say),9 have produced, in spite of themselves, 
a premium of seduction. In spite of themselves? Perhaps, I am not sure 
of that. In any case, too bad for them. It is an effect that may be deemed 
perverse. One had to have a lot of ingenuousness and inexperience not 
to have foreseen it. Many of those who have taken part in this crusade 
against de Man and against "Deconstruction" are getting more and more 
irritated: now it turns out that, in part thanks to them, people are talking 
more and more about that which the crusaders wanted, without delay, 
to reduce to silence by denouncing the alleged hegemony that seems to 
cause them so much suffering. They should have thought of that. "Things" 
don't "biodegrade" as one might wish or believe. Some were saying that 
"Deconstruction" has been in the process, for the last twenty years, of 
extinguishing itself ("waning," as I read more than once) like the flame 
of a pilot light, in sum, the thing being almost all used up. Well, here 
they go and think they see, at the bottom of the little bit of oil remaining, 
a black stain (the specter of 1940-42, the diabolical de Man!). Certain 
this time that they will be able to get rid of it, without further delay and 
thus without any other precaution, they rush forward like children in 
order to wield the final blow and destroy the idol. And, of course, the 
flaming oil spreads everywhere, and now here they are crying even louder, 
angry with their own anger, frightened by their own fear and the fear 
they wanted to cause. Without them, would it have consumed itself; 
would the thing have been degraded on its own? False or useless question: 
too late, they were on the program, as was the unconscious. 
Saturday, 31 December, 6 A.M. 
Reread last night five of the six "critical responses." It's true, as I 
noted last week, these people are frightened. And so they want to frighten. 
A familiar scene. They are frightening sometimes, it's true. What I see 
of them frightens me, I won't hide the fact, and I will even say why. 
But-a distinction I hold to and always uphold, especially when I 
write-this fear does not intimidate me. 
Those who have read me, in particular those who have read "Paul 
de Man's War," know very well that I would have quite easily accepted 
a genuine critique, the expression of an argued disagreement with my 
reading of de Man, with my evaluation (theoretical, moral, political) of 
these articles from 1940-42, and so on. After all, what I wrote on this 
subject was complicated enough, divided, tormented, most often hazarded 
9. Derrida writes "la deconstruction," thereby underscoring the singular and general 
sense conferred by the definite article. Since English drops the article altogether in this 
case, we have substituted a capital initial ("Deconstruction") to convey this sense and will 
do so wherever Derrida similarly calls attention to this misapprehension.-TRANS. Critical Inquiry 
820 Biodegradables Jacques Derrida 
as hypothesis, open enough to discussion, itself discussing itself enough in 
advance (on every page, indeed within every sentence, and from the very 
first sentence) for me to be able to welcome questions, suggestions, and 
objections. Provided this was done so as to demonstrate and not to intimidate 
or inflict wounds, to help the analysis progress and not to score points, 
to read and to reason and not to pronounce massive, magical, and im- 
mediately executory verdicts. Five of the six "responses" that I reread 
last night are written, as one used to say, with a pen dipped in venom. 
Less against the de Man of 1940-42, perhaps, than against me (I who 
said things that were nevertheless judged by Culler "exceedingly severe" 
against de Man and who have nothing whatever to do with everything that 
happened; I who, at the time, was rather on the side of the victims- 
shall I dare to recall this once again and will they forgive me for doing 
so?-struck by a numerus clausus that it will be necessary to talk about 
again). Less against me, in truth, than against "Deconstruction" (which 
at the time was at year minus twenty-five of its calendar! This suffices 
to shed light on this whole scene and its actual workings). How can the 
reader tell that these five "critical responses" are not "responses," critical 
texts or discussions, but rather the documents of a blinded compulsion? 
First of all, the fact that they are all monolithic. They take into account 
none of the complications of which my text, this is the very least one can 
say, is not at all sparing. They never seek to measure the possibility, the 
degree, or the form, as always happens in an honest discussion, of a 
partial agreement on this or that point. No, everything is rejected as a 
block; everything is a block and a block of hatred. Even when, here or 
there, someone makes a show of being moved by my sadness or my 
friendship for de Man, it is in order to get the better of me and suggest 
that I am inspired only by friendship, which will appear ridiculous to all 
those who have read me. Inspired by friendship means for those people 
misled by friendship. How foreign this experience must be to them! 
Come on, am I going to waste time and paper (recyclable or not), 
spend the time and the money of my readers in commenting on someone 
who, for example, seriously wonders whether de Man knew that Kafka 
wasJewish ("How much did the youngjournalist really know about Kafka 
and his Jewishness?" ["Jacques Derrida's Apologia," p. 791]) and, in the 
same breath, cannot resist the urge to associate the names de Man and 
Goring? Is it still possible to correct a professional "historian" who, having 
once defined de Man as an "academic Waldheim," shows no regret for 
that and still today, apparently, has no idea of the enormity of a formula 
such as: "Only a small number of French and Belgian intellectuals cast 
their lot with the Nazis, as de Man did" (["The Responsibilities of Friend- 
ship: Jacques Derrida on Paul de Man's Collaboration," p. 800]!!! good 
God! He should do a little work, this guy. Such a show of ignorance 
Summer 1989 821 
appears all the more dismaying in that the best historians of this period 
are American and the best literature on this subject is in English, supposing, 
that is, that a historian reads only one language)? What's the point, on 
the other hand, of discussing with someone who, taking constant cover 
behind some history books, nevertheless compares de Man to Mengele, 
or at any rate gives in to the same compulsive desire to associate the two 
names in an analogy ("Response to Jacques Derrida," p. 775)? Or with 
still someone else who, in all seriousness, compares de Man to the author 
of Tintin ("in the case of Paul de Man, as in the similar case of Herge" 
["On Paul de Man's War," p. 766])? 
It's really too much, too much confusion and dishonesty. Am I going 
to have to point out that (1) de Man could not not know that Kafka was 
Jewish (even if, for obvious reasons, he could not add a note saying "you 
know, I know, let's not forget it, Kafka is Jewish and his work is moreover 
on the index, as everyone knows"); (2) French or Belgian intellectuals 
collaborated in very large numbers and, alas, in much more serious ways; 
(3) de Man was neither Waldheim, nor Goring, nor Mengele, nor an 
author of comic books. These elementary reminders risk insulting my 
readers, even if, despite their impatience, they wanted for a moment to 
have a good laugh. And yet, it will indeed be necessary to respond and 
to do so, precisely, out of respect for the readers, and for the ethics of 
discussion, if anything can still be done on that score. So on these points 
and on all the others, I will respond. I've made my decision. Telephone 
C.i. [...] 
5 P.M. 
There are now so many examples of this! One of the most necessary 
gestures of a deconstructive understanding of history consists rather (this 
is its very style) in transforming things by exhibiting writings, genres, 
textual strata (which is also to say-since there is no outside-the-text, 
right-exhibiting institutional, economic, political, pulsive [and so on] 
"realities") that have been repulsed, repressed, devalorized, minoritized, 
delegitimated, occulted by hegemonic canons, in short, all that which 
certain forces have attempted to melt down into the anonymous mass 
of an unrecognizable culture, to "(bio)degrade" in the common compost 
of a memory said to be living and organic. From this point of view, 
deconstructive interpretation and writing would come along, without any 
soteriological mission, to "save," in some sense, lost heritages. This is not 
done without a counterevaluation, in particular a political one. One does 
not exhume just anything. And one transforms while exhuming. The 
presumed signatories of certain documents, for example, have no interest 
perhaps in seeing these documents assured of survival. Difficult to know 
how best to serve them, and what is true generosity. When someone 
writes a bad text or a nasty text [un mauvais texte ou un texte mauvais], is Critical Inquiry 
822 Biodegradables 
he or she asking to be saved or lost? And which response, in this case, 
is the most generous, the most friendly, the most salutary, the mostjust? 
The response or the nonresponse? It happens that people write bad 
things, libels or lampoons in which they know they are wrong or do 
wrong, but they do so, precisely, with the sole aim of provoking a response 
that will make them stand out and put them on stage, even if it is to 
their detriment and provided that a certain visibility is thus assured. And 
with public visibility comes the chance to endure. In this case, what to 
do? What would you be doing by responding "no" to someone who says 
to you "beat me so at least people see me or hear me crying and don't 
forget me"? No one gets out of such a situation unscathed, on one side 
or the other. I will have to return later to the relation between this scene, 
the proper name, and cultural "biodegradability." [ ... ] 
9 P.M. 
Jonathan Culler contests and discusses certain remarks of mine in 
order to advance the understanding of things and shed light on those 
things that (I acknowledged it, said it, and said it again in "Like the 
Sound") sometimes remain enigmatic for me. In so doing, he does not 
seek to manipulate, inflict wounds, or denigrate. His procedure is honest. 
First of all because it is addressed to me. Not only to me, of course, but 
also to me, that is, to someone with whom one does not agree, to be 
sure, but with whom one discusses, and whom one is not trying from 
the outset to insult-in his intentions, his person, and his work. Even if 
he does not agree with me, he recognizes that I opened a debate (p. 
783); he clearly condemns that which must be condemned in this or that 
article of 1941 (p. 779) without trying to mix everything up, without 
raging furiously [s'acharner] in the void in order to execute a dead young 
man, a dead old man, and a dead dead man, as others do who can no 
longer contain their violence against the name of a departed and only 
raise their heads above the funerary urn, their hands still shaking, so as 
to cry out for death and threaten again those who try to convince them 
and appease them, to reason with them by saying to them calmly, "I 
think you are wrong, but even if you are somewhat right, you ought to 
calm down a little. We'll talk about all this again when you will have 
regained your composure." 
So in return I will address myself to Jonathan Culler, and later I 
will attempt, perhaps in an open letter, to explain to him why, on the 
contested point, I believe I must, with certain nuances, maintain what I 
wrote on the subject of de Man's wartime articles; that is, that "the massive, 
immediate, and dominant effect of all these texts is that of a relatively coherent 
ideological ensemble which, most often and in a preponderantfashion, conforms 
to official rhetoric, that of the occupation forces," which are lines that, 
along with so many others in a similar vein, the five other "respondents" Jacques Derrida 
Summer 1989 823 
seem not to have even read, that they cannot not have read, and thus 
they pretend dishonestly and in badfaith (I am weighing my words carefully) 
to know nothing about. It would be necessary to invent a new category 
here. "Bad faith" or "denegation" are insufficient. We're talking about 
something that falls between the "I-cannot-read" and "I-do-not-want-to- 
read" [je-ne-peux-pas-lire et je-ne-veux-pas-lire]. This new category, which 
has a relation to the question of the "remainder," naturally displaces the 
category of responsibility. How can one pronounce judgment against 
someone who can/will not read [ne "pveut" pas lire]? How could one bear 
him or her any ill will? [Comment pourrait-on lui en vouloir?]. Moreover, I 
bear these five no ill will; I have nothing against them; I would even like 
(if only in order to avoid this spectacle) to help them free themselves 
from this frightened, painful, and truly excessive hatred. What are they 
afraid of exactly, and what are they suffering from? Even if I happen to 
respond harshly to them, it will be with this concern, and especially the 
concern for the public, moral, and political consequences of this whole 
debate. 
Was I "exceedingly severe" with de Man as Culler says? Or not? 
Culler on the one hand, the five others united on the other, thus seem 
to be saying, with regard to the same text-"Like the Sound"-absolutely 
contradictory things, at the extreme opposite from one another. Well, they 
can't all be right at the same time. So I wonder whether between the 
two, perhaps . . . (Get it? Will they see what I mean? No? Yes ... yes, 
yes, they will see very well, nothing more to add, I could stop there, they 
will see very well that the question is other and elsewhere). 
11 P.M. 
So, none of them saw, none of them read that in "Like the Sound" 
the question is other and elsewhere, the question that preoccupies me, for 
example, the question of response and responsibility. At bottom and in 
the final analysis, I did not try to be either severe or indulgent. Or 
equitable in some juste milieu between two iniquitous judgments. Or to 
convince anyone that one must be severe or indulgent. 
Midnight 
Later, it will take time, people will understand that in this whole 
affair, and a few others, there are better things to do than to know 
whether one ought to be severe or indulgent. [ ... ] 
Since more room must be found in the "ecosystem" of an archive 
(the NEH is already concerning itself with these problems of storage for 
American university libraries, and the process will have to accelerate), 
let us suppose that one day the complete collection of Critical Inquiry has 
to be destroyed or moved. A young librarian is hastily given the task of Critical Inquiry 
824 Biodegradables 
indexing on computer the abstracts of the questions or the principal 
theses treated there. He comes across our dossier. Something of it has 
to be saved at all costs, since the journal received an award for "Best 
Special Issue of a Journal" (from the Conference of Editors of Learned 
Journals) for the Spring 1988 issue. So the young man has to summarize 
the two issues on Paul de Man in two sentences, preferably by citing 
some words in quotation marks (that looks more authentic). I see the 
sentences stretching across the green screen: "Seven authors accuse an 
eighth of having engaged in an 'exceedingly severe' 'apology' on the 
subject of a ninth author, apparently dead for six or forty-six years. The 
eighth has as much trouble understanding as he does making himself 
understood." [ . . . ] 
Here is the most problematic thing in the "double binding" figure 
of the "biodegradable": the worst but also the best that one could wish 
for a piece of writing is that it be biodegradable. And thus that it not be 
so. As biodegradable, it is on the side of life, assimilated, thanks to bacteria, 
by a culture that it nourishes, enriches, irrigates, even fecundates but on 
the condition that it lose its identity, its figure, or its singular signature, 
its proper name. And yet, is not the best way to serve the said "culture," 
indeed the "agriculture," "the natural-culture-of nature" (these words 
are no good. I keep them only in quotation marks; in fact I keep them 
just long enough to wear them out and throw them away like useless 
waste products, but ones that are perhaps very resistant, like the mutism 
of the quotation marks) to oppose a certain resistance to living biode- 
gradability? Is it not the case that, as "nonbiodegradable," the singularity 
of a work resists, does not let itself be assimilated, but stays on the surface 
and survives like an indestructible artefact or in any case one which is 
less destructible than another? Important question of physis beyond the 
opposition nature/culture. I have never been convinced by what Heidegger 
has said on this subject. And precisely because of the remains that remain 
to be thought. Try later to show how the proper name-the proper 
name function-finally corresponds to this function of nonbiodegradability. 
The proper name belongs neither to language nor to the element of 
conceptual generality. In this regard, every work survives like and as a 
proper name. It shares the proper name effect (because there is no purely, 
uncontaminable proper name and no absolute indestructibility) with all 
other proper names. It shares and divides [partage] this effect in all its 
parts, even beyond its title and the name of its presumed signatory. In 
the manner of a proper name, the work is singular; it does not function 
like an ordinary element of natural language in its everyday usage. That 
is why it lets itself be assimilated less easily by culture to whose institution 
it nevertheless contributes. Although more fragile, having an absolute 
vulnerability, as a singular proper name it appears less biodegradable Jacques Derrida 
Summer 1989 825 
than all the rest of culture that it resists, in which it "rests" and remains, 
installing there a tradition, its tradition, and inscribing itself there as 
inassimilable, indeed unreadable, at bottom insignificant. A proper name 
is insignificant. But there are several ways to be insignificant. More or 
less interesting. One might as well say that meaning is not the measure 
of interest-or of wearing away [usure].10 
Saturday, 7 January, 6 A.M. 
In my response, I ought to set out from a fact that will have escaped 
no reader's attention: like the fingers of the same hand, the five insulting 
texts all take aim at the same principal target, that "deconstruction" about 
which the authors visibly understand nothing, I mean really nothing, 
and this goes equally for all of them. What can I do? "Deconstruction" 
is for them the threat, the common and public enemy. This war is the 
most urgent in their view. Since the five authors take no account of that 
most massively obvious fact, which I clearly pointed out (p. 649), to wit, 
that what happened in 1940-42 in Brussels cannot, by definition, have 
anything to do with deconstruction, their argument cannot be taken 
seriously. Nor, therefore, can anything which follows from that argument 
in the five "responses," which is to say just about everything. I could stop 
here. It so happens, moreover, that deconstruction has no more relation 
with what may have happened in a Belgian newspaper in 1940-42 than 
it does with the uninformed, uneducated, and grotesque descriptions (I 
am weighing my words carefully) that these five "respondents" give of 
it. It goes without saying that I will not be able to dissipate such dense 
confusions about "Deconstruction" in a few sentences. I give up trying 
in advance. I will merely point out that for all these people the "de Man 
case" offers what they believe is a propitious occasion to attack what they 
believe to be "Deconstruction." 
Demonstration: 
1. One of them takes aim at the "standard deconstructionist practice" 
(p. 794) or what, according to him, would be "entirely typical": "the 
failure to distinguish between existential and rhetorical categories (and 
the tendency to reduce the former to the latter) is an earmark of the 
mode of philosophizing that has been given currency by de Man and 
Derrida" (p. 792). And, of course, so that it might be clear that my case 
is more serious than de Man's, he adds: "I, for one, believe (and so do 
many others) that there is a strongly mystifying element in de Man's 
writings-sometimes almost (though never quite) as mystificatory as Der- 
rida's apologia for de Man" (p. 796). This definition of the "standard 
10. See Derrida's "White Mythology: Metaphor in the Text of Philosophy," Margins 
of Philosophy, trans. Bass (Chicago, 1982), pp. 209-71.-TRANS. Critical Inquiry 
826 Biodegradables 
deconstructionist practice" and what would be "typical" within that "prac- 
tice" is gratuitous, confused, perfectly irrelevant. I recognize nothing 
whatsoever in it, close up or from afar, and especially nothing of what 
I myself (since it is a question of me) may have ever thought or written. 
As for the sentence that begins "I, for one, believe (and so do many 
others)": what can it prove? Only this: someone believes that what he 
believes is true and interesting, and (classic technique but far too crude 
for anyone to be taken in by it) he wants to make others believe that he 
has an army of people behind him who believe as he does, who believe 
as he does that what they believe is true and even interesting. Everything, 
thus, still remains to be proved. And even if one could prove that "so 
do many others," that would not prove that they are doing anything 
more than believing or that their belief brings the least proof that their 
belief has the least value. 
2. Another respondent concentrates his whole argumentation around 
what is derisively called "the prestige of deconstruction" ("Resetting the 
Agenda," p. 805) and announces clearly that if one fails to clear de Man 
(which, need I remind anyone, is something I never sought to do; see 
pp. 599, 600-610, 616-19, 621-23, 631, 633, and passim), deconstruction 
would be definitively compromised and "the wager will be lost" (!) (p. 
805; I shall not fail to come back to this scene, one of the most comical 
ones in this whole corpus). 
3. Another respondent lays into what he believes to be "the decon- 
structive method" (p. 799) and believing, since he has obviously never 
read me,11 that it consists in taking no account of the "context" (!!!) and 
of "authorial intention," here he is ready to give me a lesson in decon- 
struction: "But of course Derrida's appeal to context and to authorial 
intention constitutes an abandonment of the deconstructive method" (p. 
799). Then, by substituting "post-structuralist" for "deconstructive," he 
leaves me the choice only between "the unified subject" and "the post- 
structuralist critique of the unified subject." Ah, if only things could be 
that simple! Ah, if only one knew what a "subject" was and whether it 
could be only "unified" or "nonunified"! After having recalled the "post- 
structuralist critique of the unified subject," just so many words that have 
no meaning for me and that one would have a lot of trouble articulating 
with anything I have ever written, the same author calmly adds this, 
which has no meaning for me: "But Derrida apparently doesn't believe 
11. Derrida has underscored on numerous occasions that deconstruction cannot be 
defined or practiced as a method. "Point de methode [No method/point of method]," he 
writes in "The Double Session" (Derrida, Dissemination, trans. Barbara Johnson [Chicago, 
1981], p. 271). See also Derrida, "Letter to a Japanese Friend," trans. David Wood and 
Andrew Benjamin, in Derrida and "Differance," ed. Wood and Robert Bernasconi (Evanston, 
Ill., 1988), p. 3.-TRANS. Jacques Derrida 
Summer 1989 827 
the critique of the unified subject applies to de Man" (p. 801). Come on, 
would anyone ever have talked or heard talk of deconstruction for more 
than ten minutes if it came down to such derisory dogmas or such stupid 
monoliths as these (of the sort: "I don't believe there is any context! 
There is no authorial intention! There is no subject! No unified subject! 
We have to stop paying attention to these things!"). One shows considerable 
contempt for many colleagues or students if one believes they are silly 
enough or credulous enough to interest themselves in such simple and 
pitiful discourses. Unless it is quite simply reading that is the object of 
one's contempt and one's fear. On ne pveut pas lire. 
It is thus still a question, and at the cost of the crudest sort of 
maneuvers, of displacing the accusation and the verdict by making the 
attack converge on thought, theory, "Deconstruction" today and now. 
This is a program whose utterance was given its first (and also its most 
obscene) form by the same author already almost a year ago: "The 
important question about de Man, however, is not what he thought about 
Jews; the question concerns the relationship between his secrecy about 
his past and his literary theory."12 
4. For another respondent, the stakes are even more precise. It is a 
question of nothing less, in conclusion and to conclude, than of handing 
down a verdict while pretending to deplore "the turn the deconstructive 
project, originally so liberating, is now taking" (p. 775). As if what happened 
to de Man in 1940-42 could constitute a "turn" or a "turning" of the 
"deconstructive project" in 1988! 
5. For another, finally, the actual accused in this comic-book trial is 
once again, in conclusion, deconstruction. "What is indeed striking in 
deconstruction is that it escapes confrontation with historical development. 
That does not imply that it is linked to rightist thought [ah, good, at 
least there's that: merci m'sieur] (its technique [I have explained a hundred 
times why deconstruction was not essentially a "technique"] can be used 
either for 'fascist' [some proof, please, some arguments, some examples, 
at least one example!] or 'liberal' purposes), but it implies that this method 
[I have explained a hundred times why deconstruction was not essentially 
a "method"; see also above, note 10] rarely confronts historicity [I have 
explained a hundred times why deconstructive reading and writing took 
into account, more than any other, both "history" and the history of the 
concept of history; as for "Paul de Man's War," its historical content and 
its reference to historical referents is richer than that of the five "critical 
responses" put together]. Because history reveals the 'decidable' [who 
ever said the contrary?], which sometimes means guilt" [did I not say 
just that, and precisely in the case of de Man? See above; I am not going 
to reproduce this reference on every line] (p. 766). 
12. "Letters," The Nation, 9 Apr. 1988, p. 502. Critical Inquiry 
828 Biodegradables Jacques Derrida 
What I find particularly tedious in this quintext is that, with very 
few exceptions, it is composed and thus decomposed by two motifs: 
1. There is, on the one hand, that which I already said myself and 
that they repeat in a more or less confused way while claiming nevertheless 
to counter me thanks to forgetfulness or to denegation (or to on ne pveut 
pas lire); for example (but I'll proliferate the examples and later make a 
list of them), everything in my text that is, in Jonathan Culler's words, 
"exceedingly severe" (p. 777) against de Man and that ought not to have 
passed unnoticed by the six authors. 
2. There is, on the other hand, the objections to which I had responded 
in advance, in an explicit fashion. I will redemonstrate this later, and, 
out of concern for clarity, thoroughness, and economy, I will propose 
two tables: a table of concordances or redundancies, of concorredundances (that 
which I already said and that it was useless-redundant-to repeat, es- 
pecially to use it against me with arrogant bad faith) and a table of 
discordances (what I had already contested and that, once again, they did 
not understand, read, try to read, or pretend to read). Point of information: 
the recourse to the category of theje ne pveux pas lire (I can/will not read), 
supposing that it can even be used in the first person, would not exclude 
the old notions of lie, bad faith, denegation, in short, the philosophy of 
consciousness or the unconscious, up to the point where both must also 
be exceeded. This would concern as well whatever one may be tempted 
to say about "responsibility" or the "biodegradable." [ ... ] 
Noon 
Composition, decomposition. Everything that is "biodegradable" lets 
itself be decomposed or returns to organic nature while losing there its 
artificial identity. But everything that is "biodegradable" does not have 
the same property or the same qualities (richness, fecundity, and so on). 
In classical terms: the organic is not the living; natural life is not the 
whole of life, and so on. If one still relies, provisionally, on this figure 
transposed into the field of culture, then one may say: all writings and 
all discourses, all forgotten works are not victims of an injustice and have 
not become, to an equal extent, the ferments of the coming culture. 
Moreover, today, our means of archiving are such that we keep almost 
all published documents, even if we do not keep them in what used to 
be called living memory and even if libraries are obliged more and more 
often to destroy a part of their wealth. This is only an appearance: the 
originals or microfilms are elsewhere, kept safe for a long time, barring 
nuclear war or "natural" catastrophe. But there is an essential limit to 
this cultural transposition of the natural figure (I mean of this "return 
to nature" of a biodegradable artefact). What would an ecosystem be for 
discourses? An institution is also an attempt to calculate and control 
Summer 1989 829 
symbolic ecosystems, which is obviously impossible in a rigorous fashion. 
Come back to this next week. 
These two tables may also be read as timetables or computer screens. 
Like those that are displayed in train stations or in airports, they announce 
delayed departures and arrivals: delay in relation to what I already said 
or in relation to what I already responded or said about my objection. 
But how to calculate such a delay? And once the delay is calculated, what 
would remain? That is a question I would have liked to treat, some 
Saturday when I had nothing to do. (Out of concern for space, I will 
limit myself to the points not directly addressed in the diary.) 
TABLE OF CONCOR(REDUN)DANCES 
(or, that which I already said and which, therefore, one should have 
avoided repeating, especially while claiming to oppose me with it) 
"CRITICAL RESPONSES" 
p. 766, 11. 1-11 
p. 769,1. 30ff. 
p. 770, 1. 4ff. 
p. 770,11. 20-21 
pp. 770-71 
p. 771,11. 32-45; p. 772, 
11. 1-11 
p. 772, 1. 16 
p. 775, 11. 6-10 "PAUL DE MAN'S WAR" 
pp. 601-2, 604, 607-10, 621-23 
p. 604 
p. 606 
pp. 604-6 
pp. 604-7 
p. 604 and passim 
p. 636, 11. 6-8 
pp. 604-5, 621-23, 631 and passim 
p. 777,11. 6-9 
p. 790, 11. 16-17 
p. 791,11. 19-28 
p. 793,11. 9-11 
p. 802, 1. 5ff. 
p. 805, 1. 15 
pp. 806, 1. 45; 807, 11. 1-8 p. 598,11. 18-40 
p. 604 and passim 
pp. 621-23 
passim 
pp. 599,11. 11, 29-30; 600, 1. 1 
pp. 590, 1. Iff.; 593, 11. 2-5 and passim 
pp. 604-10, 616-19, 621-23 Critical Inquiry 
830 Biodegradables 
TABLE OF DISCORDANCES 
(or, the objections to which I had already responded) 
"CRITICAL RESPONSES" 
pp. 765-811 
p. 766, 11. 1-11 
p. 766, 11. 18-19 
p. 773,11. 11-12 
p. 773, 11. 19-21 
p. 773, 1. 29 
p. 775, 1. 26ff. 
p. 784: title 
p. 785, 11. 23-25 
p. 786, 11. 3-5 
p. 786,1. 13ff. 
p. 787,11. 37-38 
p. 788, 11. 30-31 
p. 788, 11. 36-40 
p. 789,1. 37 
p. 789, 1. 38ff. 
p. 790, 11. 1-4 
p. 790,1. 5 
p. 790, 1. 29 
p. 791, 11. 19-28 
p. 792, 11. 12-22 
p. 793, 11. 5-8 
p. 793, 1. 24ff. 
p.794,1. 17 
p. 795, 11. 17-19 
p. 796, 11. 20-23 
p. 796, 11. 41-42 
p. 797: title 
p. 797, 11. 12-13 "PAUL DE MAN'S WAR" 
pp. 590,11. 1-3; 651, 11. 7-11 
pp. 599-652 
pp. 590-652 passim, especially 646-48 
p. 637, 1. 4ff. 
p. 637, 1. 4ff. 
p. 637, 1. 4ff. 
pp. 648-49 
pp. 590-652; in particular, 599, 600, 
601, 604, 605, 607, 610, 616-19, 621- 
23, 631, 639 
pp. 590, 1. Iff.; 639, 1. 38ff. 
pp. 593, 640, 646 and passim 
p. 602, 1. 32ff. 
pp. 599-600, 605, 607-10, 616-19, 
621-23, 631, 636 
pp. 599, 600, 604, 607-10, 616-19 
pp. 621-32 
pp. 621-32 
pp. 621-23 
pp. 621-23, 626, notably 11. 14-15 
pp. 621-23, 632 
pp. 631-32 
pp. 621-23 
pp. 606-32 
pp. 604-10, 616-19, 621-23, 631, 638 
pp. 636-37, notably 11. 8-16; 639, 1. 7 
p. 631,11. 17-18; 639 
p. 642 
p. 606 
pp. 648-49 
pp. 590, 592, 594, 595, 596, 597, 639 
and passim 
pp. 604, 11. 18-19; 638 and passim Jacques Derrida 
Critical Inquiry Summer 1989 
p. 798,11. 19-22 
p. 799,11. 3-4 
p. 799,11. 12-30 
p. 799, 11. 38-41 to p. 800, 
11. 1-2 
p. 800, 1. 1Off. 
p. 800, 1. 35ff. 
p. 801, 1. 34ff. 
p. 802,1. 5ff. 
p. 802, 11. 21-23 
p. 804-805 
p. 804, 11. 11-12 
p. 804,11. 14-15 
p. 805, 1. 15 (a somewhat 
special case; I had averted, 
set aside, or voided the 
objection by saying the 
same thing; yet, since this 
happens more than once, 
there would have to be 
another table to take 
account of this rhetorical 
situation. I trust the reader 
to make the distinctions.) 
p. 805,11. 28-31 
p. 806,11. 9-11 
p. 806, 11. 34-42 
p. 806, 1. 45 to p. 807, 11. 
1-12 
p. 807, 1. 14 
p. 807, 1. 40 to p. 808, 1. 15 
p. 808, 11. 29-30 
p. 809,11. 10-14 
p. 809, 11. 27-29 
p. 810,1. 29 
p. 811,11. 9-30 pp. 599, 604-5, 607-10, 616-19, 621- 
23, 631 
p. 647 
pp. 637, 639, 647 
p. 647 
pp. 637, notably 1. 8; 638-39 
pp. 635; 648, notably 1. 14 
p. 624, 1. 36ff. 
pp. 599, 1. 11, 11. 29-30; 600,1. 1 
p. 647, n. 50, notably, 1. 6ff. 
pp. 648-49 and passim 
pp. 635, 640, 648-49 
pp. 607-10, 616-19, 621-23 
pp. 591, 1. Iff.; 593, 11. 3-4; 596, 1. 
14ff.; 606ff. 
pp. 606-7ff. 
pp. 599-634 
pp. 604-5, 607-10, 616-19, 621-23 
pp. 604-21 
pp. 600, 605, 607, 623, 631, 635 
pp. 616-21 
pp. 624, 1. 45; 625, 1. 30 
pp. 623-31 and passim 
pp. 606-23 
p. 646 
pp. 635, 648-49 and passim 
Saturday, 14 January, 7 A.M. 
A text, a verse, an aphorism, a bonmot (the Germans, Kant for example, 
used to write this as a single word, like biodegradable) can survive a long 
time, thus resisting the "biodegrading" erosion of culture, for all sorts 
of reasons not all of which are to be credited to them or to their author. 831 
832 Biodegradables 
They resist time just as do what in French are called "pearls." Durable 
because hard [durs]-and hard to digest. 
The quintext numbers too many pearls for me to count. I bet that 
some of them will be passed on to posterity. If one day I respond, as I 
have the intention of doing, in Critical Inquiry, could I make a bet there? 
Can one make bets in such a serious journal? A liberal journal has to 
accept that bets are made in its pages. All the more so since, with its 
liberal, pluralist concern to maintain public discussion without privileging 
any side (an irreproachable policy, especially if its principle could be 
rigorously and sincerely applied), this excellent publication is managed 
by wise men and women and responsible intellectuals. Thus they also 
know-it's the logic of debates, bets, auction bids, and bidding wars- 
that this can serve the prosperity of the institution, I mean the promotion 
of the journal that is urging me to respond at a single blow to six articles 
at once! Six against one! The idea that an army has been mobilized 
against an article that was, moreover, also commissioned of me, does not 
displease me altogether, but all the same, what effrontery! What a number 
of fronts I must confront! I hope that all of this is proportional to the 
seriousness of the question, but I am not sure it is. 
So I will make a bet. What is it? I bet that the longest life will be 
granted to a parenthesis. This one, let's read it and reread it: "at Harvard 
and in the Boston area (where deconstruction and feminism were and 
continue to be a recurrent theme)" (p. 765). The article, fortunately very 
brief, a page and a half, begins in the mode of the autobiographical and 
autopromotional epos. Let's read, reread: "In 1982-83, I was preparing 
my volume on the Belgian cartoonist Herge"" (the footnote refers the 
reader to Les Metamorphoses de Tintin [Paris, 1984]) (p. 765). 
Let's imagine, in centuries to come, an enormous archive having 
been biodegraded or recycled, that a young reporter-journalist or an 
archeologist-tourist (metempsychosis of Tintin) comes across some remains, 
for example this glorious incipit ("In 1982-83, I was preparing my vol- 
ume. .. Les Metamorphoses de Tintin [Paris, 1984]"), and next this parenthesis 
miraculously saved from the disaster: "at Harvard and in the Boston 
area (where deconstruction and feminism were and continue to be a 
recurrent theme)." Let's suppose that this journalist-reporter-archeologist 
has in fact just found these debris of Critical Inquiry in very bad shape on a beach at Cape Cod or in the wreck of an old boat, a kind of "Unicorn." 
(Will American readers have read, in the Tintin series, The Secret of "The 
Unicorn" or Red Rackham's Treasure by the same Herge? I have just reread 
them, doing my homework; they are really devoid of interest, very overdone 
out of a certain snobism, one more difference between de Man and 
Herge, which I mention for those who may still be harboring the incon- 
gruous idea of comparing them. As for their politico-ideological histories, 
there is simply no common measure between them.) Tintin II would try 
to understand, to reconstitute the "context" and, as they will still be saying Jacques Derrida 
Summer 1989 833 
centuries from now, "the authorial intention." What is more, he had 
earlier got his hands on a fragment from an old debate in Critical Inquiry 
on the question of beaches and authorial intention. Here's how Tintin's 
distant descendent might imagine things for himself: "So this author 
meant that at this time there was a place, two places at most (one or two? 
he says Harvard and then Boston), in the United States I suppose, and 
nowhere else, where one could locate a center, a double center of 're- 
currence,' the recurrence not of a disease, but of a 'theme,' of a 'recurrent 
theme': 'deconstruction and feminism.' In this region of a state of the 
United States and nowhere else, in the United States and nowhere else. 
'Deconstruction and feminism' were thus a 'theme' at this time?" he asks 
himself. "What is that? One theme or two? Are deconstruction and feminism 
the same thing, or two symptoms of the same epidemic recurrence?" 
Our detective, who is getting more and more perplexed, may well continue 
to wonder: "Unless deconstruction is to feminism as the Boston area is 
to Harvard, if I am reading correctly ('at Harvard and in the Boston 
area [where deconstruction and feminism were and continue to be a 
recurrent theme]'). This double theme, these two things, at any rate, 
'were' already recurrent in the past, which is already a lot. But there is 
worse to come; it 'continues' to be, in those days, 'a recurrent theme.' 
To have been recurrent, that's already a lot, but to continue to be recurrent, 
is that not really too much? The trouble or problem or ill must have 
been very serious. Apparently indestructible. Insufficiently energetic 
medicine. Happily the pernicious theme seems to have been concentrated 
at that time in 'Harvard and the Boston area.' Verify that." 
Intrigued, more and more fascinated by the glimmers of this cryptic 
notation, our clever sleuth tries to reconstitute the whole sentence and 
the whole paragraph, first in order to understand, but also out of honest 
respect for the authorial intention of the departed author of Les Meta- 
morphoses de Tintin. From the first sentence of the paragraph, he believes 
he may conclude that between, on the one hand, this thing which is 
holding sway with such "recurrence" in "the Boston area," that is, de- 
construction (which the author oddly calls a "theme") and, on the other 
hand, a certain de Man, there must have been a relation, to be sure, but 
also that this de Man must have been a feminist. Whether he knew it or 
not! Otherwise, what would this allusion to feminism, this other "theme," 
be doing here? Unless it was never possible, at this time and in this region 
of the world, to dissociate deconstruction and feminism, wonders now 
our disconcerted tourist-archeologist (Tintin couldn't do better). And so, 
whether he knew it or not, this de Man must have been a feminist because 
those "in the Boston area" were interested in him no doubt for reasons 
of "deconstruction and feminism." As soon as one has contracted a recur- 
rent deconstructionism, one must have contracted a little feminism, at 
least by contagion, even if one doesn't know it. It's finally the same virus. 
Let's read: Critical Inquiry 
834 Biodegradables 
That is to say that, as far as I know, several people at Harvard and 
in the Boston area (where deconstruction and feminism were and 
continue to be a recurrent theme) were aware of de Man's former 
affiliation with rightist circles. One can ask why it took five more 
years for the "scandal" to appear: why this "sudden" revelation 
after several years of silence and dissimulation? Compared to the 
fact that Herge had constantly been confronted with his political 
past, one can wonder how strongly Paul de Man's "secret" was 
kept. [P. 765] 
Pulled up short, the little decrypter is plunged down a well of amazement 
since he must be amazed in his turn before this mark of amazement. He 
says to himself: "Here now is an author who is amazed. He is amazed 
that a 'secret' was kept for many years. He even seems to be accusing 
someone of it (who? he names no one), whereas for him and for 'several 
people' 'at Harvard and in the Boston area,' this 'secret' was not a secret. 
But then why did they not reveal it themselves? Whom is this author 
accusing exactly? By any chance would he be so bold as to accuse those 
who in fact made this 'secret' public, being in truth thefirst ones to do so? 
The first ones to do so: would it by any chance be these very ones whom 
the author seems to accuse? How strange, how strange." 
More and more intrigued, but also convinced that this author, instead 
of accusing heaven only knows who (since he names no one), would have 
done better to take right away the initiative that he reproaches others 
for having taken too late, whereas he acknowledges that he was in a 
position to take it four years earlier, our little archivist reconstitutes the 
first paragraph of the text. The latter thus begins (we have not forgotten 
and will never forget) with: "In 1982-83, I was preparing my volume 
on the Belgian cartoonist Herge .... Les Metamorphoses de Tintin," and 
so on. This paragraph indeed confirms that the author of the aforesaid 
Metamorphoses flatters himself for having been aware, already at this time, 
of the articles by de Man in Le Soir, and even for having talked about 
them one "afternoon with a colleague from Boston University whose 
specialty is the hunting of presumed French fascist intellectuals" (p. 765). 
Monologue of the future little journalist-reporter-archeologist who is 
acquiring a taste for philology (I remember Tintin in The Secret of "The 
Unicorn": "Look now! You'll see that the message of the parchments is 
right." Captain Haddock: "Thundering typhoons! The numbers and the 
letters are completed."): "Now who could this be, this professor at Boston 
University specialized in hunting? That won't be easy to discover, today, 
and I'm certainly not going to hunt down the hunters, especially in a 
university: 'a colleague from Boston University whose specialty is the 
hunting of presumed French fascist intellectuals.' I wonder who that 
could be. So there were intellectual hunters at this time, and intellectuals 
who made a profession of tracking other intellectuals? In sum, hunters Jacques Derrida 
Summer 1989 835 
specialized in the fanatical pursuit of a certain type of prey [gibier]? 
Intellectuals trained, equipped, motivated for the hunt (first of all fascinated 
by the said prey, as always, according to the well-known process of iden- 
tification), intellectuals who finally were interested in nothing else? In 
any case, the hunter and the author of Les Metamorphoses de Tintin knew 
it all, according to the latter, but they never said anything about it publicly. 
And yet here is someone who accuses heaven knows who, since he names 
no one, for not having published the thing until five years later. But who 
published it exactly? And for the first time? In the most public way? 
Perchance, might it not be within the population afflicted by the 'recurrent 
theme' ('deconstruction and feminism') that one finds someone who, with 
no previous knowledge, would have decided that everything had to be 
published from the first moment he became aware of the 'secret'? So he 
is the one who would be within his rights to accuse the silence, the 
cowardice, the thoughtlessness, or the bad faith of those who, saying 
they had the newspapers in their hands and drawing from that fact not 
the least public consequence, having proposed neither republication, nor 
analysis, nor the most open discussion, now have the nerve to lecture 
those who did do all that." 
Let's leave him there, our Tintin of centuries to come, with his 
hypotheses. If he had also found the last paragraph of the same author 
on the subject of "preferred ignorance," we can imagine his indignation. 
It would be necessary to invoke the energetic speech of Captain Haddock: 
"Mille tonnerres de sabord, Zigomars, Gargarisme, Empldtres;13 here's someone 
who claims he knew things that he did not talk about for years and still 
he dares to accuse those who, in the first place, made the thing absolutely 
public. He accuses them, says he with incredible cheek, of having 'preferred 
ignorance.' " In the case of Herge, whose work was banned in Belgium 
until 1947, he spent the rest of his life (he died in 1983 [that, along with 
his Belgian origins, is indeed the only thing he had in common with 
de Man]) rewriting the first adventures of Tintin in order to dissimulate 
his previous political mistakes [should de Man have done or could he 
have done the same? "Comparative" questions on the modes of circulation, 
duration, and degradability of the Tintin comic books and the different 
types of de Man's writings]. In the case of Paul de Man, who was still 
remembered in Belgium as a former rightist intellectual [a lie or a dishonest 
simplification; see on this subject the private and public attestations not 
13. The English translation of The Secret of "The Unicorn" renders one such out- 
burst of Captain Haddock's vivid epithets as follows: "Me, the culprit? You dare accuse 
me? ... Miserable earthworms! ... Sea-gherkins! ... Slave-traders! ... Sea-lice! . . . Black- 
beetles! ... Baboons! ... Artichokes! ... Vermicellis! ... Phylloxera! ... Pyrographers! 
... Crab-apples! ... Goosecaps! ... Gogglers! . . Jelly-fish!" At which point, Tintin interjects: 
"Captain! Captain! Calm yourself!" (Herge, The Secret of "The Unicorn," trans. Leslie Lons- 
dale-Cooper and Michael Turner [1946, 1959; Boston, 1924], p. 29). See p. 61 for the 
moment when Tintin solves the message of the parchments.-TRANS. Critical Inquiry 
836 Biodegradables 
only in "Paul de Man's War" but in Responses], ignorance was preferred 
in the American academic world-ignorance not only among his friends 
and disciples but also in theory" (p. 766). But who exactly preferred 
ignorance, I ask, if not the author of Les Metamorphoses de Tintin? It is 
difficult, moreover, to imagine what ignorance "in theory" of these articles 
could possibly mean. As far as I'm concerned, in any case, I took account 
of them and took my responsibilities as soon as I became aware of the 
said articles, that very week, something which the author of Les Meta- 
morphoses de Tintin confesses he never did, no more than did his hunter 
colleague (now who can that be exactly?). 
So I've made a bet: these pearls will be passed on to posterity, even 
if they are not destined to have the long life of nuclear wastes. But people 
will have understood very quickly that my interest in these pearls and 
this bet was only a pretext for advancing the following nontheorem on the 
subject of the figurative "biodegradability" of what are commonly called 
texts, or at least, let's put it more strictly, of publications. One cannot 
wager publicly on the survival of an archive without thereby giving it an 
extra chance. As if the wager on the survival itself contributed to the 
survival. Thus, the wager cannot take the form of a theoretical hypothesis 
on the subject of what will happen objectively in an autonomous field. 
That is why I spoke of a nontheorem. Like any discourse on the wager, a 
wager intervenes performatively in the field and partially determines it. 
It feigns "objective" and theoretical speculation while in fact it performs 
a practical transformation of its object. It is perhaps in part thanks to 
my wager, my public wager in the very place of its publication, that the 
phrase I have in effectjust celebrated will become celebrated ("at Harvard 
and in the Boston area (where deconstruction and feminism ... )"). I 
did nothing more than say it deserved it. But such an evaluation was 
already a chancy and violent intervention. Perhaps I exaggerated, on 
purpose or not on purpose. Perhaps none of this deserved so much 
attention. (Generalize again this nontheorem on the impossibility of any 
historical metatheorem, a fortiori of any foretelling. And recall as well, 
besides the original elaboration by de Man of the opposition performative/ 
constative, his text on Pascal's wager.)'4 By definition, and this is why 
there is wagering and performative intervention of the wager, no calculation 
will ever be able to master the "biodegradability" to come of a document. 
14. See de Man, "Pascal's Allegory of Persuasion," in Allegory and Representation, ed. 
Stephen Greenblatt (Baltimore, 1981), pp. 1-25. On de Man's reading of Pascal, allow 
me to recommend the admirable text by Geoffrey Bennington, "Aberrations: de Man (and) 
the Machine," in Reading de Man Reading, ed. Lindsay Waters and Wlad Godzich (Minneapolis, 
1989), pp. 209-22. This vigilant, questioning, and inventive reading is exemplary in many 
respects, in particular those we are discussing here. Jacques Derrida 
Summer 1989 837 
All evaluations, in truth all texts, are war itself on the subject of this 
survival. Paul de Man's war means also that. 
There is a moral question here, and even the example of one of 
those conflicts between obligations without which no decision and no 
responsibility would really have any meaning, I mean disquieting meaning, 
the only meaning that it ought to have. A calm and assured responsibility 
is never a responsibility; it's good conscience. The moral question is at 
least double: 
1. Is it necessary to respond to every interpellation, to everyone no 
matter who, to every question, and especially to every public attack? The 
answer is "yes," it seems, when time and energy permit, to the extent to 
which the response keeps open, in spite of everything, a space of discussion. 
Without such a space no democracy and no community deserving of the 
name would survive. But the answer is "no" if the said interpellations 
fail to respect certain elementary rules, if they so lack decency or interest 
that the response risks shoring them up with a guarantee, confirming 
in some way a perversion of the said democratic discussion. Yet, in that 
case, it would be necessary that the nonresponse be appropriately inter- 
preted as a sign of respect for certain principles and not as contempt for 
the questioner or, especially, for the third party-reader or listener- 
whom one presumes should be the principal addressee of such an exchange, 
however difficult or improbable that exchange remains. It is rare that all 
these conditions come together and are clearly assured. It happens that 
a response may be a nonresponse, and nonresponse is sometimes the 
best response. An immediate degradability then annuls the archive of 
this response without response, which is thereby submitted to a kind of 
originary amnesia. We therefore see the latter at work at the very heart 
of the event, whatever it may be. The "organic" figure of biodegradability 
thus appears, already, to be of doubtful relevance. At least in the presumed 
literality of its point of origin. 
2. Another question, another double bind. When the interpellation 
is disastrous (weak, ridiculous, violent, indecent, in bad faith, or whatever 
one wishes to imagine), does the most generous gesture consist in re- 
sponding or not responding? Is it better to abandon the interpellation 
to its spontaneous degradability, which destines a discourse to rapid 
oblivion? Or rather to save it from that fate by pretending, at least, to 
take it seriously, thinking always of the responsibility one has with regard 
to the third party? But in this case, to save it means also to send it to its 
ruin, to confer a certain duration on that which one judges to be inept. 
To make a text last, that is, to contribute to assuring the conditions of 
public exhibition, may thus be also a perverse gesture, a sign of aggressivity 
toward the authors. Do everything to avoid that, if it is possible. 
In their bottomless overdeterminability, these two questions are made 
still worse by the formidable ambiguity of the very concept of (bio)degrad- 
ability. To be (bio)degradable means at least two things: on the one hand, Critical Inquiry 
838 Biodegradables 
the annihilation of identity; on the other hand, the chance to pass into 
the general milieu of culture, into the "life" of "culture" while enriching 
it with anonymous but nourishing substances. It will thus be necessary 
to come back to this concept and this figure, their analysis remaining up 
until now insufficient. (Is not the question finally that of the proper name, 
of what is called the proper name or at least the singular mark of the 
event, of the date? Come back to this.) [ ... ] 
10 P.M. 
Feeling discouraged this evening. I will never manage to respond 
to this quintext. Since I have made the tally of the arguments and made 
clear, in the two tables, that there is nothing in these five diatribes which 
I have not already said (for example, as Culler points out, my "exceedingly 
severe statement" against the de Man of 1940-42), or to which I have 
not already responded in a detailed fashion, what remains? Very few 
rational arguments, the theater of petty passions, some of whose mech- 
anisms and old rhetorical tricks I really must try to describe. But, all the 
same, I am not going to go back over everything and repeat myself in 
detail. I am not going to request that people reread what I wrote or, one 
more time, that they reread de Man. While I'm on the subject of rereading 
de Man, any careful reader will have noticed to what extent the things 
I said about the duty to read or reread de Man irritated my "critical 
respondents," with the exception of Culler. Three out of the five of them 
even said so. This request for reading (isn't this rather normal? what less 
could one ask for?) seems extraordinary to them, even exorbitant. What 
is more, I never said that it was necessary at all costs to read de Man or 
anybody else, but, and this is quite a different thing, that if at least one 
claims to speak about all this, it is a good idea to read, even better to 
reread, preferably everything one can. As we shall see, three of the critics 
react in an analogous fashion-I do not say identical-to this requirement, 
one that is nevertheless elementary. An intense and recurrent reaction 
(a "recurrent theme"?): it comes back three times in conclusion like a 
groan of protest ("Ah, so one would have to read, read de Man, and 
from A to Z?" "Hey, do you see that, he asks us, on top of everything 
else, to read de Man! and even to reread him!"). This single protest 
shows to what degree, whether one's talking about de Man or "Decon- 
struction" in general, the question is also that of a fierce resistance to 
reading, with all the forms that can be taken by "pv," the category of on 
ne pveut pas lire. I will thus cite three examples: 
First example: "We must now reread de Man from A to Z: this is the 
recurrent theme [again! and in another "critical response"!] in the apol- 
ogetic literature that has been appearing since late 1987" (p. 796). After 
having been associated with "deconstruction and feminism," the "recurrent 
theme" finds itself here associated, in its literality and by another of my Jacques Derrida 
Summer 1989 839 
censors, with the duty to read. Might it be a question of the same thing, 
in the three cases, and of the same "theme"? The two authors who have 
recourse to the same expression seem to be as amazed by the recurrence 
as by the theme. Here is someone, for example (a professor I am told), 
who is amazed that anyone would ask him to read or reread that which 
he, nevertheless, wants to talk about, and that he wants to condemn. 
And he makes yet another accusation: all the writing that appeals to 
reading de Man is "apologetic"! Or, if you prefer, all this apologetic 
literature is characterized by a strange obsession with reading, by this 
compulsion to read! There are those who go so far in their insolence as 
to try to infect us with, even impose on us their recurrent perversion, 
and to give us orders: so read! But we'll not let ourselves be talked into 
it. And, in fact, they don't. 
These words ("apologetic," "apologia") almost always shock me. 
Sometimes they make me laugh. First of all because of their magical and 
visibly defensive repetition. They resonate from one end to the other of 
the same indictment, from its title ("Jacques Derrida's Apologia") to its 
final words ("Derrida's apologia for de Man"), as if it were enough to 
keep hammering away forcefully at the same nonsense in order to produce 
an effect of obvious fact. What I wrote was so far from an "apologia for 
Paul de Man" (it is enough to reread it or to consult the two tables to be 
convinced of this) that certain of my statements appeared "exceedingly 
severe." I repeated for tens of pages in a row, without the least indulgence, 
what I thought of certain "unpardonable" texts from Le Soir and of the 
collaboration with Le Soir as a whole. When I seem to "defend" de Man, 
and I never would have done it otherwise, it is always, as it is here once 
more, in the face of murderous caricatures, abusive simplifications, un- 
justified acts of violence by those (the most numerous, let's not forget, 
in truth the only ones during several months and while I was writing my 
article) who have spoken out loud their dream of destroying once and 
for all the memory of de Man, of his work, and of all that one can associate 
with him from near and from far. And later, when there appeared some 
letters or articles (still in response and largely in the minority, whenever, 
that is, newspapers consented to publish them!) that "defended" de Man 
against the iniquity and the dogmatism of these monolithic verdicts, there 
was, as far as I know, not one of them that did not pronounce a negative 
and "severe" judgment on certain articles from Le Soir, notably on one 
of them; we all know which one. I do not know of one of de Man's 
"friends," the so-called apologists, who has not publicly condemned what 
there was to condemn in these articles. I could stop there; that should 
suffice to disqualify all this uncontrolled agitation, this indecent and 
impatient trepidation. What exactly do they want, all these accusers? to 
condemn a priori, without even a trial? In a block and without opening 
the file? To condemn without listening to the accused or to those who 
claim to read and to listen? Would they also like to condemn the books Critical Inquiry 
840 Biodegradables Jacques Derrida 
of the accused? The friends of the accused? The readers of the accused? 
The readers of these readers? And why not their grandchildren? To 
condemn those who, without ever pleading Paul de Man's innocence and 
thus while pronouncing him guilty (within certain limits, of course, with 
restraint and precision, and this is the whole problem) still want to know 
what we are talking about? But what are people raging at? Where are 
we living? In which century? In which country? 
It is thus grossly wrong and dishonest to speak of "apologetic lit- 
erature." I am waiting for someone to show me a single text to have 
appeared up until now that does not recognize what I called-what I 
called, before my detractors did-"the most unbearable" (p. 621), "the un- 
pardonable violence and confusion" (p. 623; read the rest of the paragraph, 
and passim; I am certainly not now going to re-cite and select, while 
isolating them, all my negative evaluations in order to reassure or embarrass 
my adversaries). I therefore assert that there was no apology, on any 
side, especially not on mine, unless one supposes apology to begin with 
this simple reminder: if you want to speak of someone, and especially if 
you want to condemn him in totality, without qualification and without 
appeal, read, read as much and as thoroughly as possible, with vigilance 
and honesty. Apparently this demand seems inordinate and intolerably 
apologetic to those who decidedly do not want to read or at least not 
de Man. That must be recognized as their right, but on the condition 
that they do not then claim to speak about what they refuse to read or, 
a still more intolerable obligation in their view, reread. 
Second example. For another of my censors, the appeal to the duty 
of reading is not only the surprising "recurrent theme" of an "apologetic 
literature"; it is a "challenge." Reading, "a challenge"! Sigh of impatience: 
"a challenge we now hear regularly" (p. 775). Once again I will have to 
quote at length, a rule that should be more respected in every discussion 
and which I never fail to do.'5 For reasons of intellectual rigor and of 
ethics. Here, then: 
Derrida's own "exercice du silence" on such issues raises some 
hard questions, not only about this particular text but about the 
turn the deconstructive project, originally so liberating, is now 
taking. Is context always and only verbal: the judgment on the word 
by the word? "Those who, if they want still to accuse or take 
revenge," writes Derrida, "will finally have to read de Man, from 
A to Z" (p. 639). This is a challenge we now hear regularly, but its 
implication-that the issue is entirely textual (how do we read text 
X?) rather than practical (what choices did Paul de Man make?)- 
is deeply disturbing, suggesting as it does that Literature is All, 
15. See in partricular my responses in Limited Inc, and "But, beyond, ... (Open Letter 
to Anne McClintock and Rob Nixon)," trans. Peggy Kamuf, Critical Inquiry 13 (Autumn 
1986): 155-70. 
Critical Inquiry Summer 1989 
that if de Man praised, say, Franz Kafka, he was somehow on the 
right side of history. Again, why is it imperative to read de Man 
from A to Z and not to read de Man's articles in the context of 
the related writings of the period? How indeed can these articles 
be understood without a knowledge of the events to which they 
were responding? In drawing a linguistic circle around such writings, 
aren't we once again worshipping at the shrine of the Sacred Text, 
this time the Sacred Text of the poet-substitute called "theorist"? 
[Pp. 775-76] 
Faced with such a web of ignorance, confusion, and bad faith, it is 
my turn to sigh. Where to begin? Is it really necessary to waste all this 
time and so much paper, even if it is recyclable? 
Yes, let's go Aufklirer, one more effort. Let's try to make things 
progress a little. 
1. First of all, in order to attribute to the "deconstructive project" 
such a definition of context ("always and only verbal"), one would have 
to have never read (or in any case understood) a single line or the least 
letter of the texts that have defined this "project" (another inadequate 
word, but let's not bother). Since it is apparently a question of me in 
such a hallucination, I may be permitted to underscore that, for the last 
twenty-five years, I have not ceased to say and to recall exactly the contrary. 
No longer daring to ask that one read me, from A to Z, I ask only that 
one read-if, that is, one still wants to talk about me-at least between 
A, B, and C.16 There, one will discover that deconstruction begins by 
the deconstruction of the "verbal" limits set on the text and the context. 
This is, in particular, the meaning of a few of the words that this "critical 
respondent" may have overheard at a cocktail party: the deconstruction 
of phonocentrism, of logocentrism, and of phallogocentrism. Or again, 
"there is no outside-the-text" signifies that one never accedes to a text 
without some relation to its contextual opening and that a context is not 
made up of only what is so trivially called a text, that is, the words of a 
book or the more or less biodegradable paper document in a library. If 
one does not understand this initial transformation of the concepts of 
text, trace, writing, signature, event, context,17 one understands nothing 
about nothing of the aforesaid deconstruction-and that is indeed the 
case here, even if one ventures to qualify deconstruction as "originally 
16. See in particular Derrida, "Limited Inc, a b c," Limited Inc, pp. 29-110, and "But, 
beyond"; see also Derrida, "Living On: Border Lines," trans. James Hulbert, in Deconstruction 
and Criticism, ed. Harold Bloom et al. (New York, 1979), p. 81, where Derrida writes: "This 
is my starting point: no meaning can be determined out of context, but no context permits 
saturation. What I am referring to here is not richness of substance, semantic fertility, but 
rather structure: the structure of the remnant or of iteration."-TRANS. 
17. These last three words correspond in effect to the title of one of Derrida's texts, 
"Signature Event Context," Margins of Philosophy, pp. 307-30. See also "Signature Event 
Context," trans. Samuel Weber and Jeffrey Mehlman, Limited Inc, pp. 1-23.-TRANS. 841 
842 Biodegradables 
so liberating" (really???). One has to take the time to do a little more 
work. I would be insulting my other readers if I continued to recall such 
elementary things. 
2. For these same reasons, the opposition between "textual" and 
"practical" has no meaning for me, and especially not the one attributed 
to it here. This is why, moreover, deconstruction is much more "practical" 
and political than so many people believe or pretend to believe. And 
that is exactly what they cannot bear. I have often explained myself on 
this subject, even in this veryjournal when already responding to a couple 
of "critical respondents."18 I was already struggling, in vain apparently, 
against the most obstinate resistance to reading and to analysis. 
3. Who said "Literature is All"? Certainly not me, neither in "Paul 
de Man's War" nor anywhere else. I am sure Paul de Man never said it. 
And as for the way he had, which is, moreover, very interesting, of 
treating a certain irreducible specificity of literature (which does not come 
down to saying "Everything is Literature"), the disagreement between 
us was public and known to those who do us the honor of being interested 
in our publications and our debates of more than fifteen years (see notably 
18. See Derrida, "But, beyond." An opposition analogous to that of "textual/practical," 
but just as crude and in this case irrelevant, plays a caricatural, which is to say totally 
misleading, role in the second article that The Nation has just devoted to the "affair," an 
affair that has become, in effect, good business [une bonne affaire]. After "Deconstructing 
de Man," a year ago, now it's "Debating de Man" (13 Feb. 1989; one has to admire at least 
the progress made in the titles. There is room for hope). With the same hastiness, in a 
confusion that has not abated in the last year or more, the same author organizes his whole 
article, well before the deadline (see below; he still wants to be first), months before the 
publication of the 700-page book that he is claiming to review, around the well-known 
frontier that is supposed to separate "textualism" and "historicism" (! why doesn't this 
"historian" do any work? One has the urge to ask him a few very basic questions, such as: 
what is a "text" for you? And "history"? What have you read on this subject? Give us a 
few references). The result is sometimes outright laughable. By way of compensation, and 
since the author insists on having the right to the same "pardon" as others, I pardon this 
second series of errors and truncated quotations (of what I wrote on pp. 625, 637-39, for 
example), of obscene simplifications, of dishonest omissions, finally all these things that 
have now become familiar throughout the world, and still the same disdain for the most 
elementary forms of probity. This disdain now calmly authorizes itself, indeed ennobles 
itself with a quotation from Lindsay Waters (speaking of Paul de Man!) that the journalist 
from The Nation misuses by turning aside its destination. He seems to be saying that anything 
is allowed (to him) since, according to Waters, "for him [de Man in the 1960s who wrote 
for The New York Review of Books] it was part of the intellectual's job to try to convey complex 
ideas for as general an audience as would receive them, despite the risks of distortion [and] 
the need to make deadlines." In "Paul de Man's War," I indicated (for example, p. 591, 11. 
30-31) the respect due the functions of the press and thus to the journalists who have a 
sense of the immense and difficult responsibility that is theirs-which Waters also recalls. 
It is even in the name of this respect and this responsibility that the violent simplifications, 
the deformations ("distortions"), and everything that is sacrificed to the "deadline" must 
be evaluated. And that one does not have the right to say anything one pleases. It is because 
of my respect for what journalism should be, no less than what the university should be, 
that I am shocked by these two articles in The Nation. Jacques Derrida 
Summer 1989 843 
Memoires). I pointed this out several times in "Paul de Man's War" (at 
least on pp. 627, 649, and no doubt elsewhere as well). 
4. Who ever said it sufficed to praise Kafka in order to be "on the 
right side of history"? Certainly not me, and the analysis I did of the 
reference to Kafka was, I hope, less stupid than that. Since those who 
have read me know that this analysis was rather nuanced, complicated, 
and meticulous (excessively so if I believe the apparent reproach made 
elsewhere), I will do no more than refer back to it. 
5. I was the first to say, and to repeat with great insistence (see at 
least pp. 600, 635-37,640, and in a more or less explicit fashion through- 
out), in particular for the reasons of principle I have just recalled (1 and 
2), that it was necessary to read "de Man's articles in the context of the 
related writings of the period" and to have a "knowledge of the events 
to which they were responding." But I did not content myself with saying 
that this was necessary (although that is already a big step and one which 
I like to think was not without consequences); I did so, right away, as best 
I could, in the limits of a sixty-page article that, on the subject of the 
writings and the events of this period, contains more historical information, 
more references ("textual" and "practical" references, to take up this 
very primitive but convenient distinction) than in the harangues of all 
my censors put together. I leave it to them to count the references, if 
they can. Whoever read "Paul de Man's War" cannot say without bad 
faith that I traced a "linguistic circle" around a "Sacred Text," a ridiculous 
formula that has had a place for the last quarter century in the largely 
degraded dictionary of all the antideconstructionist stereotypes. (For the 
quickest summary-I am thinking of the time of those who ne pveulent 
pas lire-allow me to refer once again to "Signature Event Context," 
which is only twenty pages long.) 
Third example. Here the scene is a little different, first of all more 
disarming, no doubt, but also more crude. The author seems to accept 
the rule of "rereading de Man" but only if it is in order to recognize 
de Man's "errors." And the recognition of the right to error seems to 
him in effect "reasonable," but only if one consents to extend it first of 
all to the journalist-professors who have written whatever they wanted 
about de Man (pp. 802-3). I found this gesture rather sympathetic and, 
especially, amusing. Here at least is someone, I said to myself, who is 
profiting from the occasion (better late than never) in order to ask to be 
forgiven the "reading mistakes" he accumulated and, what is still more 
serious, indirectly propagated in the world press. Here is the final paragraph 
of a text that, right away, beginning with its title ("The Responsibilities 
of Friendship"), took a wrong turn by suggesting that everything I had 
written in this context, like the responsibilities I took or defined, were 
controlled by my friendship for de Man. That adds a "reading mistake" 
to an already impressive list (I will return to this). Let us reread this 
conclusion: Critical Inquiry 
844 Biodegradables 
Derrida suggests "rules" for "rereading de Man," the first of which 
is "respect for the right to error." That's a reasonable suggestion, 
but for Derrida it applies only to de Man, not to his critics. The 
conclusion one is left with is that what de Man did-collaborate 
with the Nazi occupiers of Belgium-should be understood and 
forgiven, but what de Man's critics have done-commit "reading 
mistakes"-should be condemned as unforgivable. Outside the 
circle of de Man's most committed defenders, few readers will find 
this argument persuasive. [Pp. 802-3] 
I do not know if I am part of the "circle" in question, but I do not 
find this argument "persuasive" for this initial reason: I have not come 
across it anywhere and thus never formulated it myself. I find it touching 
that a professor-journalist asks forgiveness for his "reading mistakes" as 
soon as, so he believes, other "errors" have been pardoned. But all of 
this is incongruous and beside the question, not to say out of the question. 
First of all, contrary to the assertion of the same professor-journalist, 
who decidedly still refuses to read, I never put myself in the situation of 
pardoning or of asking others to pardon de Man for anything whatsoever. 
I explain this at length in the vicinity of a passage that speaks of "the 
unpardonable violence and confusion of these sentences" (p. 623; the 
reference is to the article "Jews in Present-day Literature"). I even under- 
lined the word "unpardonable," and I could cite many other passages 
that go in the same direction (pp. 621-31 and passim). Is this clear 
enough? Did I not insist enough on the reasons for which I did not feel 
I had the right to pardon this or that writing, this or that act, no more 
than I had the right to condemn the whole discourse, the whole life, the 
whole work of de Man? And on the reasons for which such a totalization 
seemed to me unjust, summary, confused, and politically dangerous (see 
in particular p. 631, but also in numerous other places)? 
I not only signed and underlined the word "unpardonable" (is it 
pardonable to lie by acting as if one had not read that? Is it pardonable 
not to have read it? Is it pardonable to accuse me of not having written 
it?), I also explained why I did not feel I had the right to pardon. Not 
because I have set myself up in the position of judge, but because this 
would be to talk in the place of victims. I will ask the one who accuses 
others, even as he demands pardon for his numerous errors, to reread 
the whole page (and a little beyond) in my article that begins thus: 
"Through the indelible wound, one must still analyze and seek to un- 
derstand. Any concession would betray, besides a complacent indulgence 
and a lack of rigor, an infinitely culpable thoughtlessness with regard to 
past, present, or future victims of discourses that at least resembled this 
one" (p. 631). To finish on this point, I do not know whether the enormities 
published in The Nation (9 January 1988) were only "reading mistakes." 
For many reasons, I never sought to compare them with anything what- Jacques Derrida 
Summer 1989 845 
soever of Paul de Man's, really. I do not know if they are "unforgivable." 
I do not have the power to decide this in the face of the whole world. 
If I may be permitted a confidence, I would say this: While I continue 
to pay the greatest attention to the possibility and the significance of such 
violent journalistic acts, I had already begun to forget the fact and the 
literality of these particular ones. Their author would have done better not 
to recall them. Apparently, he prefers to expose himself to criticism 
rather than let himself be forgotten. [ . . ] 
On forgetting and forgiving, a huge question. To be added to the 
file of the "biodegradable." [ ... ] 
Why is the figure of the biodegradable so provocative? Both useful, 
from a heuristic point of view, but essentially limited in its relevance? In 
the most general and novel sense of this term, a text must be "(bio)degrad- 
able" in order to nourish the "living" culture, memory, tradition. To the 
extent to which it has some sense, makes sense, then its "content" irrigates 
the milieu of this tradition and its "formal" identity is dissolved. And by 
formal identity, one may understand here all the "signifiers," including 
the title and the name of one or more presumed signatories. And yet, 
to enrich the "organic" soil of the said culture, it must also resist it, 
contest it, question and criticize it enough (dare I say deconstruct it?) 
and thus it must not be assimilable ([bio]degradable, if you like). Or at 
least, it must be assimilated as inassimilable, kept in reserve, unforgettable 
because irreceivable, capable of inducing meaning without being exhausted 
by meaning, incomprehensibly elliptical, secret. What is it in a "great" 
work, let's say of Plato, Shakespeare, Hugo, Mallarme, James, Joyce, 
Kafka, Heidegger, Benjamin, Blanchot, Celan, that resists erosion? What 
is it that, far from being exhausted in amnesia, increases its reserve to 
the very extent to which one draws from it, as if expenditure augmented 
the capital? This very thing [cela meme], this singular event that, enrich- 
ing the meaning and accumulating memory, is nevertheless not to be 
reduced to a totality or that always exceeds interpretation. What resists 
immediate degradation is this very thing, the text or in the text, which 
is no longer on the order of meaning and which joins the universal wealth 
of the "message" to unintelligible singularity, finally unreadable (if reading 
means to understand and to learn to know), of a trace or a signature. 
The irreplaceable singularity, the event of signature, is not to be summed 
up in a patronymic name, because it is the work itself. The "proper 
name" in question-which has no meaning and is not a concept-is not 
to be reduced to the appellation of civil status. What is more, it is proper 
to nothing and to no one, reappropriable by nothing and by no one, not 
even by the presumed bearer. It is this singular impropriety that permits 
it to resist degradation-never forever, but for a long time. Enigmatic 
kinship between waste, for example nuclear waste, and the "masterpiece." 
Yet, one cannot say that the best way to escape cultural "(bio)degrad- 
ability" is to be irreceivable, inassimilable, to exceed meaning. For then Critical Inquiry 
846 Biodegradables 
one would have to say that absurdities, logical errors, bad readings, the 
worst ineptitudes, symptoms of confusion or of belatedness are, by that 
very fact, assured of survival. Even if there are those who hope this is 
true, we know that, most often, nothing of the sort is the case. That 
which has no meaning, purely and simply, is almost immediately 
"(bio)degradable." That which has little meaning does not last long. What 
is "bad" does not resist (this is at least what one would like to believe, 
the story I tell myself when I wake up tired, but in a good mood.) So, 
in order to "remain" a little while, the meaning has to link up in a certain 
way with that which exceeds it. Sign itself in a certain way. [ ... ] 
Here one would have to make a long detour (but I won't have time 
today) through music, the memory of the musical work, to explain what 
I mean here by proper name. Not that music does not have meaning, 
but I am interested here in what it is in music that surpasses discursive 
meaning, exceeds a certain kind of translatable intelligibility into "good 
sense" sentences. Music has nothing in common with what some call 
music when, understanding nothing of certain discourses that they ne 
pveulent pas [can/will not] read, they believe or want to make others believe 
that these latter have no meaning. Anyone who does not understand can 
always complain or accuse: All I am given to hear or understand is 
unintelligible sounds, I am not convinced, I am being subjected to the 
musical apparatus of seduction. [ ... ] 
What I tried to say about "responsibility" in "Paul de Man's War" is 
difficult, I realize. What I am trying to think about responsibility in 
general is obscure, even perilous; other texts could attest to this and I 
do not hide it. But the thing itself is obscure, and my discourse is always 
highly argued, even if it cannot be a question of reproducing this ar- 
gumentation here, for lack of time and space. All the more so since this 
argument claims to move beyond the usual stereotypes of the concept 
of responsibility. That is why, I grant you, this argument does not follow 
in my text (and I wanted it this way) that "clear-cut line" (p. 785) demanded 
by someone who seems to like to read the way one drives on the interstate, 
perhaps even while driving on the interstate. 
Can one speak of responsibility or assume a responsibility without 
difficulty and without anguish? I don't believe so. To speak of it calmly 
and as if there were some obvious, commonsense facts available on this 
subject, as if one knew what were and ought to be the "ethical categories," 
is irresponsibility itself-moral, political, philosophical, intellectual ir- 
responsibility in general. Here is someone who, certain that he knows 
what responsibility and "ethical categories" are, ironizes about my "tour 
de force" ("To write about responsibility with so little reference to ethical 
categories is something of a tour de force" [p. 785]). With or without 
the irony, the same author had just been amazed to see "responsibility" Jacques Derrida 
Critical Inquiry Summer 1989 
associated with "responding," with the categories of "rhetoric" and "psy- 
choanalysis." I suppose that for him, when one treats of responsibility 
or of "ethical categories," it is not necessary to speak of either "response," 
or language, or rhetoric, or transference, or the unconscious (I would 
really like to see him demonstrate this). These would be digressions 
toward the inessential, avoidances. What can you respond to that? 
And what is one doing when, understanding neither the sense nor 
the form of a discourse on responsibility (because one deems it to be 
"impenetrably elliptic" (p. 785; I will come back to this marvelous treatment 
of ellipsis), one compares it to a music that has no meaning, to some 
"variations on a theme"? I think I have already said that when one doesn't 
understand something, one can always resort to decreeing: This is not 
a discourse, these are only meaningless sonorities. I will not be so cruel 
as to illustrate this practice with examples that always amount to taking 
a discourse or a language (for example, a foreign language) for meaningless 
music. This is, in sum, the definition that certain people would give of 
analphabetism. Out of respect for nonalphabetic writings, I would say 
instead illiteracy in the broad sense. And in the case that concerns us, 
the diagnosis that may be summed up as "it is unintelligent or unintelligible 
like music" seeming still too generous, the diagnostician preferred to 
insinuate, wound, add a clever little wink: like Wagnerian music ("a 
Wagnerian leitmotiv"). By which I believe I understand, without being 
certain of this, pre-Nazi, as is only proper. "In fact these 'variations' are 
more musical than analytic: 'responsibility' comes close to being a Wagnerian 
leitmotiv" (p. 785). 
One can imagine the musical culture that dictates such sinister "bon- 
mots." It presents a hardly more cheering aspect than that which one 
perceives behind the "I-do-not-understand-therefore-it's-irrational-non- 
analytic-magical-illogical-perverse-seductive-diabolical" that has always 
signed the triumph of the old obscurantism. Some may think that the 
latter has disappeared, at least in the university; well, it hasn't. It resists, 
it survives, it lingers on, and, if you want to know my prognosis, it is 
almost indestructible. 
Saturday, 21 January, 5 A.M. 
Music can also, in certain situations, resist effacement to the extent 
to which, by its very form, it does not let itself be so easily dissolved in 
the common element of discursive sense. From this point of view, at any 
rate, music would be less "(bio)degradable" than discourse and even than 
the art of discourse. 
[When I rewrite these fragments in view of publication, I hope that 
the reader will pardon me for having constantly mixed up reflexions on 
the biodegradable with certain reading impressions with which I neither 847 
848 Biodegradables 
wanted to close myself up nor closet the reader for too long. Thus, for 
essential and fundamental reasons (because these questions are indis- 
sociable, as I hope to have demonstrated), but also in order not to die 
of boredom.] 
There are also verbal harassments that, without producing what was 
so unforgettably called a "clear-cut line of argument," procure for you 
no musical experience. In this category, I class a sort of rhetorical trance 
that consists in repeating often enough, in the most mechanical, automatic 
way possible, one or two words so as to produce after a while, in the 
other or in oneself, a kind of hallucination: If this word is proffered so 
often, there must indeed be a corresponding thing, the thing one is 
talking about. I sense this intoxication or this compulsion when the words 
"fascism," "fascist," and "Nazi" are hammered at with such frequency 
and such an imperturbable authority (pp. 804-11) that the hypnotized 
reader would end up consenting: Yes, since they say it so often, and 
moreover since there are two of them saying it at the same time, with 
such force and assurance; and I would even go further: since they believe 
it so firmly, both of them, and so unanimously, one has to believe them, 
the words must correspond to something, yes, there was indeed a "fascist 
ideology" (p. 804) of de Man, yes, there were indeed "de Man's fascist 
sympathies"; I will even go further: "a fascist de Man," yes, his "practices" 
were indeed those of a "fascist intellectual" (p. 805), and yes, in fact, 
there was indeed a "fascist intellectual's practice" (p. 805) in de Man, 
and even a "fascist project" (p. 811) by de Man, yes, there was indeed 
on his part a "commitment to fascism" (p. 806); and I will even say further 
(as Dupont or Dupond would say),19 an "ideological commitment to 
fascism" (p. 807), and even an "intellectual engagement with fascism" 
(p. 806); yes, in fact, we can now conclude that there indeed were "fascist 
tendencies" in de Man (p. 807). Worn down to the point of hypnosis, 
even knocked out, the reader may very well no longer wonder if, perchance, 
the two are not repeating these words so often, like a litany, in order to 
believe something they can't quite manage to believe, still less to dem- 
onstrate. And when they pronounce, in the form of an incantatory verdict, 
the words "the most obvious," it is in order to thrust forward the least 
obvious, to wit: "on the one hand, de Man was a Nazi collaborator; on 
19. Besides Tintin and Captain Haddock, the detectives Dupont and Dupond are 
inevitable and indiscernable characters in this series of comic books. In the English version 
they are called Thompson and Thomson. They resemble twins who are constantly lost, 
running to catch up, beside the question, always on the wrong trail. They are especially 
noted for the way in which each one repeats literally the discourse of the other, introducing 
the echo of this pure repetition by a phrase that ups the ante, such as "I will even say 
further," or "I would even add," expressions whose frequency may be noticed in the passage 
we are here translating. For example, in Red Rackham's Treasure, Dupont, unless it is Dupond, 
says: "A real gang of thugs!" and Dupond, unless it is Dupont, adds: "I would even say 
further: A real gang of thugs!"-TRANS. Jacques Derrida 
Summer 1989 849 
the other hand, he was a Belgian fascist" (p. 808). This is indeed what 
the two authors would like to inculcate in us rather than prove. 
Because all of this is false. So as to demonstrate it in an economical 
fashion and so as not to oblige anyone to reread "Paul de Man's War" 
from A to Z, without even citing the many attestations and analyses that 
are now available, I will recall only one point (that I had, moreover, 
already underscored [p. 604] when quoting from the article in Le Soir of 
3 December 1987; how much longer will it be necessary to repeat this?). 
These young men, who are giving everybody history lessons, seem as 
yet unaware that, after the war, there were judges in Belgium far more 
vigilant than they: better informed, more severe, and more seriously 
motivated. There was as well a still more ruthless law that was enforced 
without flinching in the cases of those suspected of the least collaboration. 
No charges were filed against de Man. There was not even the beginning 
of a trial. "Paul de Man was not the object of proceedings before the War Council 
for his attitude or his activity during the war [Paul De Man n'a pas fait l'objet 
de poursuites devant le Conseil de guerre pour son attitude ou son 
activite pendant la guerre]."20 
Here then are two young Americans, probably born after the war, 
who would like to reinstate the Purge, to purge, purge, purge. Decon- 
textualizing with a fury the whole dossier, they demand a new investigation; 
they are ready to begin a second prosecution and to call a new meeting 
of the War Council, indeed to reinstitute it themselves because the other 
one was undoubtedly too indulgent. And now, almost a half century 
later, they insist on a guilty verdict without appeal regarding that which 
the Belgian tribunals, who were on the spot and were, we should not 
forget, the most implacable in Europe, did not judge to be guilty and, 
truth to tell, did not even accuse! Since they obviously do not have the 
means to institute this New War Council, they reproach me for not having 
done it. They still have not understood that that goes counter to my 
principles as well as my tastes. On the other hand, if in view of establishing 
this NWC, they have to begin by acquiring the assistance of a new Academic 
Bureau of Investigation and of some professional detectives, why don't 
they get in contact with the other "critical respondents"? One of them 
offers an apology of the "detective" whose "task is to discover the truth" 
(p. 794), while another knows a colleague who is a connoisseur of intellectual 
prey [gibier] and "whose specialty is the hunting of presumed French 
fascist intellectuals" (p. 765; I really wonder who that could be). Will 
they be clever enough to disqualify the War Council, I mean the true 
one, the first, the real, the tough one, over there, in Belgium after the 
20. Representative of the Auditor General, letter to the Director of the Center for 
Research and Historical Study of the Second World War, 23 June 1988. This letter is cited 
in extenso in Thomas Keenan's remarkable compilation, "Documents: Public Criticisms," 
in Responses, p. 475.-TRANS. Critical Inquiry 
850 Biodegradables 
war, with all the documents and all the witnesses it examined? I still have 
a few doubts about that, but good luck anyway for this other bidding 
war. As for me, I am not going to lose any more time on such a comedy 
of justice nor waste any more paper, even if it is recyclable, in describing 
the spectacle created by this juvenile hysteria, nor the political judgment 
it calls up in me. 
No; nevertheless, just a word about the spectacle in order to indicate 
clearly that, once again, the actual stakes, the enemy to be destroyed in 
these simulacra of trial proceedings, is doubtless not only and not principally 
the de Man of 1940-42, but "the Deconstruction" of 1989. The two 
coauthors of this masquerade are not content to dismiss the Belgian 
purge of 1945 as too indulgent. They are not dreaming only of hunting 
and purging; they are not dreaming only of erecting a New War Council. 
They project the ridiculous scene of a struggle for "prestige" and a game 
of "double or nothing" in which "Deconstruction," no more no less, would 
risk its whole fortune on a single throw. We leave the scene of the New 
War Council. Now we are in an academic casino. Standing behind the 
gaming table, holding the card of deconstruction (there is only one card, 
obviously, "Paul de Man's War"), I alone represent "Deconstruction" all 
gathered into one for this last throw, this last chance. Oh yes, I almost 
forgot: it must be the last chance, at the last moment, at dawn. And if 
I lose, the croupiers will declare "Deconstruction" in ruins, bankrupt. 
Exit "Deconstruction." I am going to quote a hallucinating paragraph 
that first made me think of a mini-imitation-potlatch improvised during 
a morning panel at the MLA (the title of the session: "The Prestige of 
Deconstruction on the Line"). Then I said to myself that there is no 
potlatch without risk, gift, and countergift, destruction of goods on both 
sides. I look in vain for the other side. No, two umpire-croupiers presenting 
themselves as the representatives of society, two notary publics, in sum, 
or two court bailiffs, would like to decide in all equanimity whether the 
"coup" is won or lost; they would even be content just to register the 
results as impartial observers. Here is this Monte Carlo of political theory 
from the 1930s: "With these claims Derrida puts the prestige of decon- 
struction on the line: its political significance, its power to explain political 
and cultural conjunctures, and its capacity for self-understanding. If 
these remain staked on the procedures and outcomes of his account of 
'Paul de Man's War,' the wager will be lost" (p. 805). 
If there are any readers who still find this staging credible, I refer 
them not to the gaming table, but to the tables of concor(redun)dance 
and discordance. They will be able to observe that there is nothing around 
this just-quoted paragraph, before or after it, which I have not already 
said (in another mode, or so I like to believe) or to which I have not 
already responded. As for the "prestige of deconstruction" (!!! within 
this same atmosphere and this same mundanity, one might think of an 
advertisement for tax-free luxury perfumes), supposing that I understand Jacques Derrida 
Summer 1989 851 
what is being given such a clownish title, the two croupier-notaries cannot 
imagine to what extent I don't give a damn, nor everything that I am 
able-and even make it my duty, an ethical and political duty-to prefer 
to their "prestige." No, really, someone has to wake up these sleepyheads: 
Despite their naive desire that it be true, despite the mad hope that all 
of "deconstruction" be on the line in an article that they dream of making 
into a bad card, things, yes, things-real, resistant, historical, political 
things, in other words, referents-will not be reduced to this pathetic, 
ridiculous "agenda." I recall once again that "Paul de Man's War" presents 
itself also as a sort of first reflection on my part. Beginning modestly by 
"Unable to respond to the questions, to all the questions" (which once 
again distinguishes me from the six "critical respondents" who have an 
answer for everything in advance), I had merely proposed a narrative, 
some hypotheses, a call to responsibility (and first of all to reflect on 
responsibility), an invitation to work and to discussion, and not a card 
to be played, a "coup," certainly not a dogmatic apparatus, or a sum of 
settled conclusions. Even if, concesso non dato, my article was vulnerable 
to this or that criticism (a hypothesis I can easily accept but whose dem- 
onstration I am awaiting with interest), one would never be reasonably 
within one's rights to conclude that "Deconstruction" is in ruins or ruined, 
in the sense that could allow one to say, while rubbing one's hands 
together: that's it, it's over, whew! "the wager is lost." This ruin is all the 
more improbable in that deconstruction is neither a system nor an edi- 
fication, nor, like five of the "critical responses," an edifying discourse. 
It is a very differentiated movement that passes by way of so many other 
texts; it has many other places, many other resources than mine and 
than those that are put to work in an article written for Critical Inquiry 
in great haste and at its request. One more thing: the secret without 
secret of resistance, for deconstruction, is perhaps a certain connivance 
with ruin. But I am not going to begin here another discourse on ruin 
(perhaps on the basis of but also beyond what Benjamin says about it, 
for example). That is too difficult. Let's stay with the "(bio)degradable." 
[ ...] 
(Draft of a letter) 
Dear Jonathan Culler, 
I thank you for the courtesy with which you discussed my article andformulated 
firmly your disagreement. You addressed yourself to me, in any case to the one 
who wrote "Paul de Man's War," a difficult text to write for thousands of reasons 
that I hope are respectable, and a text that you began by troubling yourself to 
read. Taking into account the complexity of things, you avoided summary glob- 
alizations. You never confused objection with insult. That goes without saying, 
you will reply. To be sure, but I insist on thanking you all the same because such 
rules are neglected by the six other "critical respondents" to whom I am asked to Critical Inquiry 
852 Biodegradables 
respond (I will try to do it, but it is diffcult to address myself directly-and I 
think I ought not do so-to persons who are only seeking to inflict wounds and 
to hurl abuse, who, when they are not dreaming about a New War Council, 
confuse discussion with a manhunt [a man who is, more than ever, oh yes, 
"wanted"], a scalp dance, or with upping the ante in a casino. The six other 
"critical respondents" no more address me than they have read me). For the example 
that you set, allow me to thank you in the name of those who still have a sense of 
the gravity of all these stakes, whether it is a question of what happened a half- 
century ago or of the future of discussion, that is, of a certain number of other 
things inside and outside the university. No doubt, nothing authorizes me to speak 
otherwise than in my own name. But I like to imagine that others will share my 
gratitude. The clarifications, the information, the new historical sources with which 
you enrich the debate will be useful. Ifind them very valuablefrom two points of 
view: (1) You take into account the historical context much more rigorously than 
do, for example, the other "critical respondents" who often believe it suffices to 
parade around with the banner "historical context" leading the parade to authorize 
them then to say anything whatsoever about that context and to "decontextualize" 
with all their might [a tour de bras] or, as one says in French, "a bras raccourcis" 
[with brutal aggression]. I have rarely read more abstract and logocentered texts, 
more enclosed within the prison house of language, than these. The fact that they 
present themselves as historicist and concerned with the real referent has always 
been part of the logocentric picture. (2) I subscribe to the essential part of your 
analysis of the criticism of aesthetic ideology by de Man. I will not go back over 
the light this sheds on the debate. My agreement on this subject was predict- 
able. Like Memoires, my Critical Inquiry article was cleary oriented in this 
direction. 
So I will limit myself to the point of disagreement. I have read all the articles 
now available in Wartime Journalism. One must in fact acknowledge their 
diversity and, for a large majority of them, their less directly political character. 
I would nevertheless be tempted to uphold, in the main, the judgment that you 
found to be "exceedingly severe." I grant you that the assertion you cite can be 
seen as, precisely, too massive (I re-cite it in my turn since none of my detractors 
seems to have read it, no more than they read so many other sentences that go in 
the same direction: "the massive, immediate, and dominant effect of all these 
texts is that of a relatively coherent ideological ensemble which, most often and 
in a preponderant fashion, conforms to official rhetoric, that of the occupation 
forces"). Yes, despite the prudence of certain underlined words ("relatively," "most 
often," and so on), this assertion itself has something massive about it. But I 
deliberately designated the "effect" (which I distinguish here from intention) that, 
in certain situations, must also be analyzed in a global and macroscopic fashion. 
That does not prevent one, elsewhere and later, from looking at it more closely. 
Newspaper articles are most often read, alas, very quickly and are crudely con- 
textualized. They let themselves be dominated, up to a certain point, by their 
framing. Political responsibility consists in trying to take account of this framing, Jacques Derrida 
Summer 1989 853 
even if this is not always easy. That is what I tried to do. Yes, the measure of "up 
to a certain point" is very dfficult to evaluate, just as it is difficult to control. 
There will always be a margin of the uncontrollable. Decisive things can be 
produced in that margin, according to more or less long, more or less conscious 
trajectories. But how can one deny that the simple fact of publishing so many 
articles, whatever they were and whatever they said, in those newspapers, at 
that moment, the simple fact of writing acceptable things, was to run the risk 
of alliance with that which I several times called "the worst" (p. 623 and passim)? 
This is what I massively called the massive. In traditional language, let's say that 
it is here the structure of the thing that is first of all massive and not the judgment 
that relates to it. Massively, the least one can say is that the de Man of this period 
was not a resistant and his articles in Le Soir tended to go rather towards the 
other side. It seems to me that you yourself acknowledge this when you speak of a 
"global effect" (p. 778). 
This massive thing was admitted from the beginning of my text, and I did 
not stop recalling it. But, of course, one must next take a rigorous and minute 
account of all the complications. And then, without even speaking of the majority 
of the articles, there remains the one that you judge, as I do, to be "unpardonable" 
(p. 779); yet another word that the six authors in search of a character did not 
read or pretended not to have read) and of which, without the least equivocation, 
you judge de Man "guilty" (p. 780). Whatever may be the complexity of this 
terrible article, whatever we are compelled by honesty to read there, as I tried to 
do, one cannot deny, as I said, that it also, in its own way, made a contribution 
that was at the very least equivocal to the massively anti-Semitic operation undertaken 
by this newspaper and to the politics that it was then supporting. You knew I 
would agree that to acknowledge this obviously does not authorize one to reduce 
all the other articles (almost 200) to this one, even less to extend the condemnation 
to the work of a whole life, especially if this work, as you have demonstrated well, 
permits one to criticize, dare I say to deconstruct, the very axiomatics offascist or 
Nazi ideology. 
That said, I grant you that one of the words in the sentence you quote lends 
itself to ambiguity. It would no doubt deserve to be corrected or clarified in a later 
edition. I should not have said "all" of these texts because I had not read them 
all at the time. I was only referring then to those that were politically the most 
significant. In my mind, "all" concerned all the texts that were then available to 
me, the most "political" among them, and I should have emphasized this clearly. 
Or, rather, more clearly since I did also indicate it (p. 598). Without thinking 
that my conclusion about the "massive" or the "dominant" is thereby effected, I 
concede that, having read the 200 texts, I now see the landscape as even more 
differentiated and politically even more complicated than I thought at the time. 
Your analysis thus allows one to make some progress toward understanding 
and toward an honest reading of de Man's texts. Numerous signs let one think 
that other work of the same type will be coming along to enrich and clarify this 
debate stillfurther. That is precisely what we hoped would happen by publishing Critical Inquiry 
854 Biodegradables 
very quickly this whole archive and by immediately taking the initiativefor a large 
and open discussion. Once again, thank you, and so on. Sincerely [ ... ] 
Ellipses. There are several ways not to name. Or to silence proper 
names. Of these, one may be dictated by respect for people. To avoid 
hurting them by the harshness of a criticism, a necessary harshness (ethical 
and political duty: we are not in a duel; there are third parties and stakes 
that surpass us). The name may be silenced in order to save the name. 
There is a long tradition of this, isn't there? [ ... ] 
The biodegradable: don't speak of it lightly, without "fear and trem- 
bling." How not to think of the death camps, the mass graves, the recycling 
of corpses, the fabrication of "soap," for example, from animal fat, every- 
thing that was endured, as I said (p. 631 and passim) by the "victims of 
discourses that at least resembled" the discourse of "Jews in Present-day 
Literature"?21 How not to think of ashes in general, the ashes of Auschwitz 
in particular? Of what I several times called "the worst" in "Paul de Man's 
War"? Of trace and ashes.22 All that managed to survive, survival itself, 
are some names, in the large black archives or on the somber wall plaques 
in a museum in Jerusalem. Even so they are not all there. Even names 
can be incinerated. Not repressed or censured, held in reserve in another 
place, but forever incinerated. [ ... ] 
The "non(bio)degradable" is always finite. But since this can be said 
of the worst and of the best, one must either give up this figure or 
overlook nothing in order to make the fine blade of discernment pass 
between the worst and the best. It is so risky. What is a proper name? 
What is meant by "survival" here, now? How to translate survival (living 
21. "Through the indelible wound, we must still analyze and seek to understand. Any 
concession would betray, besides a complacent indulgence and a lack of rigor, an infinitely 
culpable thoughtlessness with regard to past, present, or future victims of discourses that 
at least resembled this one" (p. 631). 
22. On the conjoined motifs of the singular event, the date, the proper name, and 
ashes [cendres], as well as on that which, in general, links the problems of trace, remains, 
and ashes, see notably Derrida, Schibboleth, pour Paul Celan (Paris, 1986); a partial translation 
by Joshua Wilner appears under the title "Shibboleth" in Midrash and Literature, ed. Geoffrey 
H. Hartman and Sanford Budick (New Haven, Conn., 1986), pp. 307-47; see also Derrida, 
Feu la cendre (Paris, 1987). This latter book, in the form of a polylogue, reconstitutes 
everything that, in the problematics of the trace which Derrida has been elaborating since 
1965, calls for and names the figure without figure of ashes, notably in Dissemination, Glas, 
and The Post Card. The reference to the "burn-everything" [brule-tout] and to the Holocaust 
directs, of course, all these meditations ("You were saying a moment ago that there could 
be no phrase of 'today' for the word of ash. Yes there is, there is perhaps only one whose 
publication is worthy; it would say the burn-everything, in other words the Holocaust and 
the cremation oven, in German in all the Jewish tongues of the world" [Feu la cendre, p. 
41]). -TRANS. Jacques Derrida 
Critical Inquiry Summer 1989 855 
on, Fortleben, or Uberleben; see Benjamin on translation, the [after]life of 
the spirit, and organic life, and so on).23 [ ... ] 
9 P.M. 
Will I have been right to respond? Would it not have been better to 
put my trust in honest and intelligent readers? One will never know; the 
calculation will be, by definition, impossible. Ought I to respond briefly? 
At length? In the one case, I will be accused of being too "elliptic" (p. 
785) (forgetting that I myself began by excusing myself for this ellipsis 
on the fiftieth page of my article: "Permit me an ellipsis here since I do 
not have much more time or space. Transference and prosopopeia ..." 
[p. 639]). In the other case, I will be accused of giving in to "verbosity" 
(p. 785). What choice does he leave me, the one who associates these 
two accusations in a constant and indissoluble fashion? He manifestly 
does not want to leave me any chance: I will always say too much and 
too little. 
A few remarks on this subject. Apparently, someone is suffering. 
1. He suffers first of all by my writing too much, always too much, 
"as usual," he says. (Why does he suffer from it? Who obliges him, what 
obliges him to read me? Who obliges anyone to read me and even to 
publish me?) "Derrida's lack of haste [so one should make haste?] expresses 
itself, as usual [my emphasis], in the form of impressive dimensions (sixty- 
two pages!), so that manageability requires a subdivision into sections" 
(p. 785). 
I wonder if the author of these lines has ever read articles and books, 
if the distinction between parts, which seems to bother him so much, is 
something he has so rarely encountered or practiced in his life. And 
since he is apparently a professor, I wonder if he takes the responsibility 
to advise his students not to subdivide their texts into parts or into 
moments that are distinct and articulated among themselves. I said to 
myself that, at the first chance, I will try to read what this lesson-giver 
has himself published. Everything leads me to hope that his publications 
do not have "impressive dimensions"-I am sure at least that that is not 
what he suffers from, because he is in favor of brevity-and I especially 
hope that he has ordered things a little by distinguishing among sections, 
chapters, paragraphs, sentences, and so on. This man suffers so much 
from seeing me write and speak-and no doubt also publish-too much, 
that his complaint becomes inexhaustible. He repeats over and over again 
the same protest for pages on end and takes up as much space as possible 
denouncing the space that I usurp and that I will usurp here yet again 
(will one ever know whether he wished for or dreaded my response?). 
23. See Derrida, "Des Tours de Babel" [on Walter Benjamin], trans.Joseph F. Graham, 
in Difference in Translation, ed. Graham (Ithaca, N.Y., 1985).-TRANS. 
856 Biodegradables 
In effect: after the first paragraph that I have just quoted abundantly 
("as usual"), the second paragraph repeats the same diagnostic, hammering 
away at it: "the dimensions of verbality are distinctly Derridean." Really? 
So I am the only one? There would thus be "dimensions of verbality" 
that are proper to me? What is this exactly, how does one measure this 
thing? I have the vague impression that this man who suffers would like 
to wound me in turn or at least hurt me, but I do not know exactly 
where. And in case the poor reader's intelligence and memory might be 
totally lacking, this man who suffers and who is decidedly not economical 
with his words adds, in a third paragraph, what he hopes is a really deadly 
sentence about my "extreme verbosity." The fourth paragraph is still 
hounding my "rhetorical ratiocinations," and so on (pp. 784, 785). 
2. The snarling grimace of this suffering is not a rare or unintelligible 
phenomenon. I have read or heard the same complaint more than once. 
In substance, it goes like this: "these people [the 'deconstructionists,' of 
course, not only me] talk, write, and especially publish too much." Not 
that they "work, analyze, research, and find too much" but "they chatter 
too much," meaning: "they occupy too much space in our ecosystem. 
There should be a good housecleaning." 
3. This man who suffers does not relent because, after having ironized 
elegantly about the "distinctly Derridean" "dimensions of verbality," he 
mocks, just as subtly, my "art": "Derrida possesses the unique art of 
combining extreme ellipsis with extreme verbosity" (p. 785). I am blushing, 
it's true, but I don't know if it is with shame or with pleasure. In any 
case, here is someone who knows what's what, who knows the measure 
of the too-much and the too-little. I suppose, then, that this man, who 
is not laughing and who, I am told, is interested in literature as well as 
interpretation, only reads, teaches, and recommends to his students works 
to his taste: without "ellipsis" and without verb: without "verbality" or 
"verbosity." While wishing him good luck, I would be curious to know 
what his canonical bibliography is, the titles of the works without ellipsis 
or verbality that he recommends to his students, on which, I suppose, 
he works or teaches. I only ask for one or two titles, no more, in two 
lines, via the next "Letters to the Editor" section of Critical Inquiry. 
If such a remark were not indecent or immodest on my part, after 
the reproaches made against me in this way, I would dare to say that, 
in my view, the works that best resist time are those which are simultaneously 
eloquent and enigmatic, generously abundant and inexhaustibly elliptical. 
It is on this condition that they are the least-or if you prefer, the 
most-"(bio)degradable." Having already said too much about this, I 
will not be so impudent as to cite a few examples. But what would 
exegesis, hermeneutics, poetics, or just simply teaching of literature or 
philosophy be without this double condition? Not even to mention art and 
masterpieces. Has there ever been a single sentence in the world that 
escapes from this double "excess," ellipsis and overabundance? The fas- Jacques Derrida 
Critical Inquiry Summer 1989 
cinating rarification that hollows out the economy of what the old rhetoric 
praised under the name of copia verborum? 
4. This man suffers not only from my elliptical verbosity; he suffers 
from the "centrifugal impetus" that, it seems, I never resist. I leave the 
reader to judge the restraint with which, for his part, he ironizes about 
my "repetitive, often coquettishly long-winded rhetorical disquisition, 
complete with puns and digressions, marked at times by a centrifugal 
impetus that seems hard to resist" (p. 784). What is one supposed to 
understand here by "puns"? I have no memory of any pun in my article. 
Once again I would need an example and a demonstration. Like a certain 
number of others, the concept of pun remains here, let us put it eu- 
phemistically, rather hospitable.24 Fortunately, on the other hand, there 
are two examples of what is meant by "digressions" and "centrifugal 
impetus," and thus I am going to be able to proceed with the required 
"elucidation" or "analysis." 
The first example of centrifugal digression on my part, it seems, is 
the interest shown in "'the significance of the press in the modernity of 
a history like this one'" (p. 784). I will not respond at length. To judge 
this interest to be "centrifugal" today, in any context whatsoever and in 
particular in this one, is eccentricity itself. To put it in the most neutral 
way possible: I see here a striking manifestation of intellectual and political 
distraction. Thoughtless and dizzying [etourdie et etourdissante] decontex- 
tualization. Ought I then to have spoken about de Man's writings in 
1940-42 and of the "de Man case" in 1987 without attending to the 
"significance of the press"? Without even posing the problem? Now that 
is what I would call a digression, and even a stupid avoidance, ahistorical 
abstraction, and irresponsibility itself. The fact is, if I had not spoken 
about the press in this context, then there would have been nothing left 
for me to do but be silent (this is no doubt the demand that is being 
addressed to me and I get the message). What I regret is, on the contrary, 
having had to, for lack of time and space, "renounce the temptation" 
(this is acknowledged to be to my credit with a wry condescendence) to 
treat such a problem as fully as it deserves. 
The second example is still more odd. It concerns anti-Semitism at 
Yale. With the same condescendence, I am given credit for having elected 
to "postpone" such a history, but apparently I ought not even to have 
mentioned it. Why? Let's listen once again; it is a question of suffering. 
He does manage to remind us of the relatively recent numerus 
clausus practices in Ivy League schools. Although I am myself a 
Yale alumnus who might once upon a time conceivably have suffered 
from such procedures, I fail to understand their relationship to 
24. See the excellent collection On Puns: The Foundation of Letters, ed. Culler (Oxford, 
1988). 857 
858 Biodegradables 
de Man's institutional affiliation, or to see how the atmosphere in 
the New Haven of 1930, or even 1940, can be compared, even at 
its worst (if indeed such a farfetched comparison was intended) 
with the situation in the Brussels of 1942. [P. 785] 
Responses: 
1. Of course, I never dreamed of or left the least room for such a 
"comparison." I deem it to be so "farfetched" that I find even its hypothesis 
incongruous and indecent. Yet the fact remains that anti-Semitism is 
anti-Semitism, a numerus clausus is a numerus clausus, wherever they occur 
in the world. I will never denounce them here without doing the same 
there, under the pretext that the conditions are not exactly the same or, 
worse still, that although some suffered from it here, I myself might only 
have suffered from it there ("might have suffered" but fortunately he 
seems not to have suffered from it, even though he knew that he could 
have suffered from it). With such an opportunistic caution, I might never 
have been able, personally, to condemn anti-Semitism in general, not 
even French anti-Semitism, only the numerus clausus in force during the 
Occupation in Algeria, and from which I, along with a few others, did 
effectively suffer. 
If one wants to know what I meant to say with this allusion to Yale, 
one can reread the half-paragraph and the note I devote to it (p. 592). 
It is very clear. Two questions are asked. They are distinct from each 
other. On the one hand: What is the link between the stir created by the 
case of de Man, a Yale professor, and what Yale is "for example, in 
American culture"? On the other hand: Why are so many American 
intellectuals (but, fortunately, not all of them) so quick to investigate, 
denounce, condemn what is going on far away, to dream of New War 
Councils and Academic Bureaus of Investigation while their vigilance is 
lulled to sleep easily in good conscience when it is a question of more 
domestic things, things closer to home in time and space? On the more 
general subject of, let's call it, segregation, I could have chosen graver 
examples of this bad-good-conscience. 
2. Someone declares "I am myself a Yale alumnus" and reproaches 
me for not letting all these ancient histories "(bio)degrade" by themselves. 
Ancient histories? So ancient as all that? The research in one of the books 
I cite goes up to 1970. But this "Yale alumnus" seems to have been aware 
of these practices of numerus clausus. Has he spoken about them before? 
Publicly? If so, please forgive me and show me the references. If he did 
nothing, is it only because he did not suffer from them? But what is it 
finally he is suffering from today? Visibly he is not happy that I permitted 
myself a digression, even if it was "postponed," on Yale, whether the 
question is that of the numerus clausus or of what he calls "de Man's 
institutional affiliation." He does not see the relation. But there isn't any, 
of course; I never said there was! Moreover, he himself did not suffer Jacques Derrida 
Summer 1989 859 
from the numerus clausus at Yale (is he really sure of that?), neither he 
himself, nor for others (there are those who suffer for others; I have 
met such people), and the periods are quite distinct, right? De Man 
arrived at Yale after 1972, if I am not mistaken. No relation, therefore. 
The author of "Jacques Derrida's Apologia" knows the whole story quite 
well. He was in a position to know it since he was, as I learn from another 
of my critical respondents in "The Responsibilities of Friendship," heavy 
responsibilities, "de Man's successor at Cornell" (p. 802). But he is going 
to find that I am once again too "verbal" and "elliptic" at the same time. 
That never happens to him? He is going to think that I am too interested 
in rhetoric and psychoanalysis. I think he is too little interested in them. 
And that is not good for ethics. 
This "Yale alumnus," who was also, I quote again, "de Man's successor" 
(at Cornell, it should be added; I hope he did not suffer too much from 
this but he "might ... conceivably have suffered"), thus seems certain 
that he knows what responsibility is. More certain than I am in any case, 
I easily grant him that. He is just as sure he knows what "ethical categories" 
ought to be. He reproaches me for not knowing this and for mixing in 
psychoanalytic categories. He also regrets, because it would not be relevant 
and would not even have any relation to the serious things we are talking 
about, that I mention the numerus clausus and the anti-Semitism at Yale 
(at least before 1970). And why you ask? Well, because this "Yale alumnus," 
it seems, did not suffer from it, personally. He recognizes that he "might 
... conceivably have suffered from such procedures," but fortunately he 
did not. He does not say that he even suffered for others (and yet, without 
understanding a whole lot about ethical categories and responsibility, as 
everyone knows, I believe there are people who suffer for others. I know 
people like that, I've met them, very close to me. There is even one of 
them who sees in this experience the beginning, indeed the condition, 
of ethics). 
For the rest of my response to this article, no doubt the most pained 
and painful as well as the most venomous of them all, I refer to the two 
tables (will he say of these tables of figures that they are elliptical or 
verbose?). Naturally I will not respond to the usual ineptitudes on the 
subject of a presumed "usual Derridean practice": "And indeed the sequel 
of Derrida's essay will be radically at odds with usual Derridean practice, 
as a straightforward piece of exposition that could almost make us believe 
for a moment that meanings are possibly determinable. Further, it will 
lean on biographical and historical contexts that one would expect to be 
foreign to the author and anathema to the one for whom he speaks" (p. 
786), which, let it be said in passing, contradicts once more the reproach 
of decontextualization that is later made against me. 
Here once again, if one relies on this ignorant and aberrant reading 
of "Deconstruction" or of my "practice," I have no way out. Whenever 
such a reader cannot deny my attention to context, to history, to biography, Critical Inquiry 
860 Biodegradables 
and so on, then he reproaches me for not being faithful to what he 
believes to be my "practice" or my "theory" (anticontextualist, right, 
everyone knows that, see above!). When he believes that I am faithful 
to what he believes or wants others to believe deconstruction means to 
say or to do, then I am reproached for decontextualizing, making meaning 
indeterminate and neglecting history. I will not respond on these points; 
I have done so a thousand times over the last twenty-five years, and once 
again here just a few pages ago. Faced with those who do not want or 
do not know how to read, I confess I am powerless. Powerless before 
the obtuse petty-mindedness that consists in counting the presumed pages 
"for" and the presumed pages "against" de Man, as if rhetoric were an 
arithmetic, as if the meaning of a discourse could be measured chron- 
ometrically, as if the brevity of plain and clear utterances were not enough 
to recall the things that are massively evident when that is what they are 
(which I never failed to do), while the complexity of other texts requires 
more attention and more time. I feel just as powerless before the fury 
that impels someone to want to suppress even a rhetorical question mark 
in a sentence as simple and as clear as this one: 
"How can one deny," Derrida closes his account, "that the effect 
of these conclusions went in the sense and the direction of the 
worst? In the dominant context in which they were read in 1941, 
did not their dominant effect go unquestionably in the direction of 
the worst? Of what we now know to have been the worst?" (p. 
623). It is important to note the built-in attenuations; the interrog- 
ative mode; the emphasis on the dominant (and not the whole) 
effect; the stress on the context of 1941 (suggesting that it may be 
unduly limited). [P. 788] 
But what would this man want? That there not even be a rhetorical 
question mark? I emphasize that the interrogation does not bear on the 
content but, on the contrary, on the possibility of scandalously "denying" 
this content, to wit, an effect regarding which the same sentence says 
clearly and in the most affirmative way in the world that it goes "un- 
questionably in the direction of the worst." What more would he like? 
That instead of "How can one deny" I write "One cannot deny"? That 
would have really reassured, satisfied, fully convinced him that de Man 
was not going to get out of it thanks to a question mark. Since there is 
no difference, I confirm for him that in my view "How can one deny?" 
was perfectly equivalent to "One cannot deny." What would this man 
want? That instead of "dominant," underlined twice, I say "whole" and 
that in the total confusion I leave no more room for the least fold, the 
least nuance, the least differentiation? What these people want is not 
only that one say "unpardonable," which I clearly did, but that one stop 
there, without even completing the sentence, that one repeat this word Jacques Derrida 
Summer 1989 861 
indefinitely like an exorcism or rather an insult, and that one condemn 
the dead man to death, with immediate execution (firing squad or electric 
chair, instantaneous reincineration), without even sifting among the ashes, 
without stopping to read and to analyze the remains, without even keeping 
anything in memory, because to remember is already to analyze, thus to 
complicate things. [ ... ] 
Yes, to condemn the dead man to death: they would like him not to 
be dead yet so they could put him to death (preferably along with a few 
of the most intolerable among the living). To put him to death this time 
without remainder. Since that is difficult, they would want him to be 
already dead without remainder, so that they can put him to death without 
remainder. Well, the fact is he is dead (they will no longer be able to do 
anything in order to kill him), and there are remains, something surviving 
that bears his name. Difficult to decipher, translate, assimilate. Not only 
can they do nothing against that which survives, but they cannot keep 
themselves from taking the noisiest part in that survival. Plus there are 
other survivors, aren't there, who are interested in survival, who talk, 
respond, discuss, analyze endlessly. We'll never have done with it. It's as 
if something nonbiodegradable had been submerged at the bottom of 
the sea. It irradiates. [ . ] 
Another word about analysis. We are abruptly going to change the 
scene and go back, and now we are shown into a kind of butcher shop. 
Each time I try to analyze and progress by minute stages and distinctions, 
I am accused of resorting to "the age-old salami technique, which consists 
in cutting off slice after slice until the sausage has totally disappeared" 
(p. 789). I persist in thinking, on the contrary, that a text is not exactly 
a sausage. In any case, I do not share such a phantasm on this subject. 
I wonder what would happen if this reproach were extended to all those 
who try to analyze anything. I do not know what texts this professor 
explicates in class, but I can imagine the look on the faces of his students 
if he said to them, in all seriousness, each time he encountered an analytic 
procedure: "Aha! The age-old salami technique!" I won't be so cruel or 
so presumptuous as to give some great examples and to describe the 
scene: "Aha, look at this text (I let you choose the example-there are 
plenty of them-of an author who has a taste for analysis); Aha, the 
age-old salami technique!" Let's be serious. I remark first of all that this 
is the same author who elsewhere reproaches me for being too and too 
little elliptical, for contextualizing and decontextualizing, here for analyzing 
too much and elsewhere (p. 785) of not being "analytic" enough. What is 
one to respond to such contradictory accusations? Perhaps simply this: 
By trying to analyze honestly and to differentiate as best as I could, 
without erasing the folds and complications, I never sought to skirt the 
global, massive, or dominant effects of the texts I was interrogating in this Critical Inquiry 
862 Biodegradables 
way in their context. On the contrary, I underscored them, as I did the 
words "massive," "dominant," and so on (which is precisely what Culler 
reproaches me for), in order to distinguish again between analysis, in the 
good sense, and the effect of the "salami technique." So I myself indeed 
discerned the two. The same professor should have acknowledged it, all 
the more so since I make this distinction in the sentences he himself quoted 
above ("How can one deny that the effect of these conclusions went in 
the sense and the direction of the worst? In the dominant context in which 
they were read in 1941, did not their dominant effect go unquestionably 
in the direction of the worst?"). There were analogous ones on nearly 
every page of my article. 
If I had to choose the most enlightening phrase for elucidating the 
text titled "Jacques Derrida's Apologia," it would perhaps be this one, a 
veritable lighthouse in the silence of the night: "de Man's tone as the 
expression of a powerful urge for cultural authority, which makes the 
young man already speak like the oracular gray eminence he would 
succeed in becoming forty years later" (p. 787). What does "succeed" 
mean here? To what is allusion being made here? "De Man's successor" 
(at Cornell) seems to know what he is talking about, but doesn't breathe 
a word of it. Too bad. How many silences, how much suffering! Could 
he name anyone who does not seek to attain for himself some "cultural 
authority"? It is true that some succeed in doing so. But just as every 
eminence is not gray, not all grayness [grisaille; colorlessness, dullness] 
is eminent. [ ... ] 
Someone-the same one-finds the "discretion" between de Man 
and myself "rather odd" (p. 793). Not me. He does not say why he finds 
"this discretion rather odd," so I can't answer him, at least not with 
anything new. I explained myself on this subject. Likewise, when he writes 
two pages later in all tranquillity: "The fact that others, with different 
backgrounds, may have made statements similar to de Man's is totally 
beside the point" (p. 795), he does not give the least reason. So I cannot 
answer. Why would it be "beside the point"? As for me, I tried at least 
to explain why it was not. [ ... ] 
I noted last Saturday, I think, that one can only extend the use of 
this figure, the "(bio)degradable," by taking into account the logic of the 
unconscious. But that is not enough. It is also necessary to go beyond 
economy and topical relations, censorship and repression, condensation 
(ellipsis) and displacement. These keep what they cause to disappear. 
They simply cause it to change places. Now, there is also the possibility 
of a radical destruction without displacement, of a forgetting without 
remainder. I have called this ashes [cendres]. No trace as such without 
this possibility, which also lies in wait for the (bio)degradable and the 
non(bio)degradable, at least in their figure. But in what is called the Jacques Derrida 
Summer 1989 863 
literal or strict sense, is there some absolute non(bio)degradable? For 
example, the nuclear waste that is deeply immerged so as to neutralize 
its physical effects, if not the accumulated anguish that will always resonate 
deep within our unconscious? If there were a limit here between the 
(bio)degradable and the non(bio)degradable, as between the literal and 
the figurative meaning, this is where it would lie. But I am not sure it 
does in all strictness. Take up everything again: physis, earth, world, man, 
life, survival, spirit, OK, OK....[...] 
One of the very many things my six judges did not read (not even 
"de Man's successor," who is amazed to hear talk of the "psychoanalytic" 
category or of "transference" [p. 785] with regard to response and re- 
sponsibility) is the way a logic or a time of the unconscious in this whole 
history is taken into account: (1) in the "personal" history of de Man, 
which is never totally and rigorously separated from that of his work 
and writings; (2) in the history of the relation his readers, students, 
friends, and enemies have maintained with him and with his work, includ- 
ing the relation to his silences, which one sees more than ever now in 
the compulsive outbursts of certain of his former disciples who today 
are publicly repudiating a debt that was publicly declared but no doubt 
always intolerable to them; (3) in the history (memory, disappearance, 
reapparition, survival, and so on) of the whole archive-oral and written, 
journalistic and epistolary. In all of this, the problematic of biodegradability 
is at stake, and this example of it remains fascinating whatever else one 
may think of it. As regards all these events, I venture to recall that I 
warned against the "language of consciousness" which I had to adopt at 
points. Then I referred, and very carefully, to "some experience of the 
unconscious," while adding and underscoring the following: "If the word 
'unconscious' has any meaning, then it stems from this necessity. With 
or without a recognition of the unconscious, ... ," and so on (p. 593). A 
double necessity advised caution: to take seriously the unconscious in all 
these "histories" but not to rely dogmatically on the ordinary axioms of 
psychoanalysis, neither from the ethico-political point of view nor as 
regards their determinism, economism, topologism (according to which 
nothing is lost, everything is held in reserve under the watch of repression 
simply by changing places). It is as if everything were at once integrally 
(bio)degradable (by conserving itself in other forms in an organic compost 
that would draw nourishment from everything, including transformed, 
unrecognizable, and recycled wastes) and non(bio)degradable, that is, 
indestructible, leaving no resource other than metamorphosis or dis- 
placement. 
I will go so far as to claim that, from the title to the last word of my 
article, everything was set in motion by this question: What remains? 
What is "survivre" (living on, surviving, Fortleben, Uberleben)? How did Critical Inquiry 
864 Biodegradables 
these newspaper articles and everything they record resist time? From 
what distance and by means of what detours? Why are they reappearing 
and how do we hear and understand what perhaps we have never stopped 
hearing, from afar, telephonically, through so many layers of apparent 
amnesia-this transoceanic rumor and rumbling "deep within a shell"? 
By quoting de Man quoting what is, in sum, Montherlant's wager 
("'"To the writers who have given too much to current affairs for the 
last few months, I predict, for that part of their work, the most complete 
oblivion. When I open the newspapers and journals of today, I hear the 
indifference of the future rolling over them, just as one hears the sound 
of the sea when one holds certain seashells up to the ear"'"), I called 
attention to the paradoxical and cruel survival of an error or a lost wager 
(p. 612). What interested me most consistently in this article was the 
transmission at a distance, the teleprogrammatrix, the delays, detours, 
halts, the play of mediation, of the media, and of the immediacy in the 
storing and routing of a still readable or audible archive (whence my 
"telephonic" title and the recurrence, which was real moreover, of tele- 
phone calls: that transatlantic cabling [cablure] that was both literal and 
figurative and that my judges paid no attention to or understood not at 
all).25 
What interested me above all was the structure of this event in the 
enormous mass of that which it conditions or in which it participates: 
first an error of appraisal (Montherlant's then de Man's quoting Mon- 
therlant on the subject of the disappearance of the newspapers and the 
indifferent amnesia that awaits them). This error sees itself cruelly belied 
by history, which takes charge of its own survival, the archived survival 
of this very error, of this utterance and of this quotation that I again 
quoted and havejust requoted once more here. In a newspaper, someone 
quotes an error while making in his turn an error on the subject of the 
nonsurvival of newspapers and assures in that very way, in determined 
conditions, the survival of the newspaper article, of the quotation, and of 
the requotation of these very errors. As such! It is as if I were assuring 
25. See, for example, p. 774. I am crazy about sentences that begin with "Which is 
to say, of course." You can bet, five to one, that a lie or a stupidity will quickly follow 
therefrom, in any case a countertruth, or at least, in the best-case scenario, something that 
is not self-evident ("of course"). Otherwise, why say "in other words" or "which is to say, 
of course"? When one teaches, which is to say, of course, when one's job is reading, can 
one, without laughing or wincing, begin a sentence with "Which is to say, of course"? Here 
is the example. Reread the paragraph in which this occurs: " 'Lambrichs repeats: "Exercice 
du silence."' Which is to say, of course (and Derrida's essay ends on this note), that it is 
time for us to exercise silence, to put an end to the pernicious journalistic 'war' on Paul 
de Man." Of course not. But I cannot explain it, of course; one would have to reread 
everything, begin everything again. See below: "Close, subtle reading" required. Thus, 
exercise of silence. Jacques Derrida 
Summer 1989 865 
the survival of a text by mistakenly saying of it: "I bet this will not survive." 
I said (temporary) "survival," thinking of proper names, of the literality 
of the formula, which is in itselfjust about insignificant, of the singularity 
of textual events, but I could have said the contrary ("[bio]degradability") 
while referring to the meaning and to everything that lets itself be anon- 
ymously assimilated into the tradition of a more or less common memory, 
into what is confusedly called "culture." [ ... ] 
When one speaks of the destruction of an archive, do not limit 
oneself to the meaning, to the theme, or to consciousness. To be sure, 
take into account an economy of the unconscious, even if only to exceed 
it once again. But it is also necessary to take into consideration the 
"supports," the subjectiles26 of the signifier-the paper, for example, 
but this example is more and more insufficient. There is this diskette, 
and so on. Differences here among newspapers,journals, books, perhaps, 
the modes of storage, of reproduction and of circulation, the "ecosystems" 
(libraries, bookstores, photocopies, computers, and so on). I am also 
thinking of everything that is happening today to libraries. Official in- 
stitutions are calculating the choices to be made in the destruction of 
nonstorable copies or the salvaging of works whose paper is deteriorating: 
displacement, restructuring of the archive, and so on. What would have 
happened if people had been able-yesterday or ten years ago-to consult 
on a screen the whole "de Man" archive in a minute, from one library 
to another? In short, telematically? Difference between the war articles 
and certain of his last seminars whose "voice" we still have, the audio 
archive that students pass among themselves from one university to 
another, even in Europe, and certain of which are already published on 
the basis of this recording. I risk annoying any number of people, for 
example "de Man's successor," if I say once more that I must "post- 
pone" two short treatises that are indispensable here. Possible titles: (1) 
On the support and the insupportable (keep the ellipsis and the pun in 
French); (2) On the impossible distinction between public and private, 
in general and in particular, in a modern problematic of the archive. 
[ .. . ] 
Repetition, wear [usure], and biodegradability: In certain cases, quo- 
tation, the rhythmic return of the same wears down the mark; it is boring, 
provokes disgust, pushes toward oblivion. In other cases, it is the contrary. 
Intellectual modes are born and die from this repetition. What is the 
26. See Derrida, "Forcener le subjectile," in Derrida and Paule Th6venin, Antonin 
Artaud: Dessins et portraits (Paris, 1986), pp. 55-108.-TRANS. Critical Inquiry 
866 Biodegradables 
rule? The determination of the rule is part of the process; it does not 
dominate that process. [ ... ] 
People will wonder: Since he doesn't believe in the pertinence of 
this figure, the "biodegradable," when it is applied to discourses, to dis- 
cursive texts, to culture in general, why, then, does he devote so much 
space to it? Why is he writing so publicly and at such length on this 
subject, and so on? Response: Well, for no reason, just to see, to reflect 
and see what remains of it, perhaps to take the measure of the 
"(bio)degradability" of this text here, precisely, beyond its meaning, to 
test its conditions of translation, publication, and conservation. To see 
what passes and what happens beyond its content, its theme, or the 
interest of the debate in which it must take part, no doubt a very minor 
interest. Since this text here (private and public) does not come down to 
the content of its meaning, I abandon it more or less like an empty form, 
a mere container, one of those plastic packages that float (for how long?) 
on one of our beautiful rivers (why do I say "our"?). A minuscule sim- 
ulacrum of nucleo-literary waste. And then I am also thinking somewhat 
about diverting certain readers who, concerned about the essential gravity 
of these questions, might be a little tired of the vain polemics that are 
turning around it. [ ... ] 
Brief exchange Thursday night with I. and D. They had just read 
the "critical responses": 
I.-What relentless fury! [Quel acharnement! from a verb that formerly 
had the sense to give the pack the scent of the prey's flesh, chair]. Yet 
one wonders where is the flesh. They don't go into detail, the six of 
them. Real executioners! I don't know what they do love, but you, well, 
you're not held in any fondness in their thoughts. 
D. -Don't be so sure. As for me, I think deep down they love you. 
I mean, they don't want to let you go. This is a good opportunity; they 
want to stay with you [rester avec toi]. As long as possible. At all costs. 
I.-What does that mean, "to stay" [rester] and "at all costs"? Who 
fixes the prices and the deadlines? [After a burst of laughter and while 
patting me on the shoulder:] At any rate, if they love you, they don't 
seem to suspect it, they don't have the foggiest idea that they do.... 
Me-On the contrary, I think two of them suspect it (all it would 
take is a bit of analysis or attention to rhetoric). Guess which ones. [I 
then spent a certain amount of time pointing out to them the signs of 
this. It was necessary to reread, from A to Z.] What is less clear for me, 
more complicated, is the case of Jonathan Culler. Jacques Derrida 
Summer 1989 867 
Saturday, 28 January, 8 A.M. 
For the last two minutes, I have been observing attentively the little 
word "most" in a declaration such as "Derrida ignores most of this history" 
(p. 771). The point is to produce an effect; guess which one. What does 
"most" mean? I have not read certain books that, since my article appeared, 
the author of this verdict has had the conscientiousness to read. I noted 
the references, thank you. There are still many books, particularly dealing 
with this history, that neither one nor the other of us has read, and that 
is regrettable. I have read some others. But that is not the question. In 
the reference thus made to sources unknown to me, Ifound not a single 
fact, even a factual detail27 that completes or contradicts in a pertinent 
fashion the description of the historical context that I proposed (I point 
this out, as well as a certain number of other things, in the two "tables"). 
So I knew "most of this history." I took account of it. I was even the first, 
in this academic debate around de Man, to put it forward-and in a 
more precise and more abundant fashion than anyone since. I would 
have liked it if someone had at least had the honesty to acknowledge 
this. I was the first to demand with some insistence that this work of the 
historian be pursued. 
To write next in the same paragraph, with just as much bad faith, 
"Derrida pays little attention to this disclaimer," is to make a use of "little" 
27. Mea culpa. Here I must confess an error, the only one, even though, as you will 
see, it is not a detail. I formally acknowledge to my "critical respondent" who, tending 
more toward "'hard information'" than toward "close, subtle reading," reproaches me for 
not having specified the first name of Mr. Goriely ("whose first name is not provided"; pp. 
768, 767, 774). In effect, I should not have silenced this first name. I will mention it in 
the next edition: Georges. Thus, since there might be another Goriely, and since this 
homonym might also be Jewish, a "former Belgian resistant," a "university professor," 
quoted by Le Soir, and since, one never knows, he might not agree with his double, I mean 
Georges, about de Man (Paul), all confusion would be avoided and this "hard information" 
would run no risk of being compromised. We would leave the "textual" in order finally to 
enter into the "practical" (p. 775). There is undoubtedly much I still have to learn from 
these historians and their exemplary demands. So, mea culpa. But for the moment I see 
nothing else to confess to in the way of "hard information." And I maintain that there is 
more of that in my article than in the whole set of those that are set up against me. As 
for what is said about my lack of interest in "hard information," this is but one more 
confusion. I leave here in the state of ellipsis a long discourse on history and what is "hard," 
on reading what is "hard" and what resists reading, on what is "hard" to read, on the 
distinction between "hard" and a certain sort of unreadability (only a certain sort), and on 
the relations between "hard," "soft," and "non(bio)degradable." On the subject of mea culpa, 
an excellent article by J. Hillis Miller (" 'Reading' Part of a Paragraph in Allegories of Reading," 
in Reading de Man Reading, pp. 155-70) reminds me of a sentence of de Man's. It warns 
in advance all those who demanded that he do his mea culpa before dying: "We never lie 
as much as when we want to do full justice to ourselves, especially in self-accusation" (de 
Man, Allegories of Reading: Figural Language in Rousseau, Nietzsche, Rilke, and Proust [New 
Haven, Conn., 1979], pp. 269-70). Critical Inquiry 
868 Biodegradables 
that is as abusive as the use of "most" (p. 771). What is the measure here 
for "most" and for "little"? The accusation is all the more arrogant in 
that it is a question of the attention paid to a text that I myself cite on the 
subject of the "Soir vole"! What would they have said if I had not quoted 
it? By calling the reader's attention to the, finally, decisive role that, by 
means of crude and childish rhetorical strategies, one wants to assign to 
words as big or as petty as "most" and "little," am I abusing what the 
same author calls "close, subtle, . . . reading" (specifying right away that 
such "reading" is "quintessentially Derridean") (p. 767)? One will have 
quickly figured out that the compliment was meant to be poisoned. But 
I wonder on the basis of what norms of reading one can ironize in this 
way. Such "close, subtle reading" is not a good thing then? Should one 
avoid teaching, inculcating, or propagating this vice? Must one recognize 
it as the property, the originality, or the eccentricity of this or that individual 
("close, subtle, indeed quintessentially Derridean reading")? I underlined 
"teaching" because I am thinking first of all of the students who read 
this sort of thing, of the undergraduates who are perhaps more vulnerable 
than we are (I hope not, all the same, not all of them, not all of them 
more vulnerable than all of us) to the consequences of "jokes" as sinister 
as this one. If they were vulnerable to it, the risk is that they might say 
to themselves: "Oh, I get it, 'close, subtle reading' is not good therefore; 
it's perhaps a style, a perversion, maybe even a European fashion; would 
that by any chance be what people call deconstruction? Yecch!" and so 
on. So the real question becomes: What is happening in a university 
(let's leave aside the personal case of the professor who indulges in this 
operation and takes such a responsibility) when one of its members can 
permit herself or himself to be sarcastic on the subject of what she or 
he calls "close, subtle reading"? When she or he expects to derive a benefit 
from these sarcasms and be given credit for them by the community? 
What is the politics of this sarcasm? And since we are talking about history, 
doesn't this accusation launched against the refinement of reading, against 
the taste for analysis remind you of anything? You would have a short 
memory. 
But this warning by a professor against "close, subtle reading" sets 
up even more troubling acts of violence. I refer to the manner of treating 
witnesses' testimony. First of all, one means to discredit living witnesses 
on the pretext that their names are not in some book or other recently 
consulted in the United States. So what? I quote: "Goriely and Dosogne 
(neither of whose names I have been able to find in any of the books on 
the Belgian Resistance I have consulted) provide de Man with little more 
["little" once again; how much more, exactly?] than the 'some of my best 
friends are Jews' alibi" (pp. 774-75). Illusionism, confusion, or manip- 
ulation? I will not decide among them, but I will first remark that such 
"alibis" are generally alleged by non-Jews who want to clear themselves 
of the accusation of anti-Semitism. In the present case, this argument Jacques Derrida 
Summer 1989 869 
might perhaps have "a little" worth, just a little, if de Man himself had 
said "some of my best friends are Jews." Well, he is dead and never said 
such a thing. And the suspicion of an alibi becomes ridiculous when it 
is the friends themselves who take the initiative of the testimony. What 
is more, to my knowledge, only Goriely (Georges) is Jewish and presents 
himself as such. The testimonies that I quoted have, moreover, been 
confirmed, developed, enriched by many others in the same vein. They 
will have been published by the time this appears. 
But there is something still worse and more confused. With ajubilating 
snicker that doesn't even try to disguise itself anymore, the author of 
this "response" reports (Georges) Goriely's attacks against de Man. I cite 
them in turn for more clarity: "Goriely informed the audience that 
de Man was 'completely, almost pathologically, dishonest,' a man to whom 
'swindling, forging, lying were, at least at the time, second nature'" (p. 
774 n.8). A cause for exultation. This time renouncing any suspicion, 
the author puts the two parts of the testimony on the same level. Since 
this respondent has little patience, as was clearly stated from the first 
lines, for "close, subtle reading," there is no more time wasted looking 
at things more closely or asking a single question. One doesn't wonder 
whether the very form and the logic of the judgments thus reported 
might not correspond better to some evening of a score or to some 
resentment that would have nothing to do with politics or racism. Well, 
it seems to me on the contrary that, all political matters once again set 
aside, "portraits" of this type disqualify themselves. What is more, they 
appear extravagant to those who knew de Man well or from a distance, 
for several decades, in Belgium before and during the war, and in the 
United States. On the other hand, I can attest that all those who have 
met Mr. (Georges) Goriely these last months and have spoken to me of 
him charged this violence to the account of personal rancor that has 
nothing to do with what we are discussing here. Because for what we 
are discussing here, here is what counts: a man, Mr. (Georges) Goriely, 
so brimming over with hatred as regards de Man (almost as much as 
those who quote him with gratitude and delight), declares loudly and 
clearly that the accusations of pro-Nazism and anti-Semitism against the 
same de Man are absurd and ridiculous. He is only therefore all the more 
credible on this point. In the testimony of such a violent and relentless 
"prosecutor," the part favorable to the accused, the public concession 
seems more convincing than ever. Everything leads one to suppose that 
if he had been able to condemn de Man on yet another count, Mr. 
(Georges) Goriely would not have let the chance slip away. Here is someone 
who had no desire to let de Man off lightly. At any rate, finally, as 
important as it may be, the recourse to testimony, in particular to this 
one, was far from being the only argument determining my analysis. 
By spewing such venomous insults, did Mr. (Georges) Goriely ever 
suspect that they were going to turn up intact (still "nonbiodegraded") Critical Inquiry 
870 Biodegradables 
in the mouths of all those who would like to savor them in their turn, 
chew them over again, or spit them out like so much chewing gum? Of 
all those who are ready to pass the precious poison from mouth to mouth 
without wondering whether the motivations and ruminations of this man 
don't justify some caution? And in fact, I find the same substance again, 
cited, countersigned, I should say spread out in the conclusion of another 
one of the six authors. Manifestly, for these people, it is imperative to 
cite it as often as possible so that its archive does not get lost. But don't 
count on it; the laws of conservation and wear are more paradoxical than 
one thinks. Once again, therefore, I cite this quotation in my turn, per- 
suaded on the contrary that the frequent and careful rereading of these 
words will better allow one to evaluate their credibility, supposing things 
were not clear at first reading: 
Defending de Man's character, Derrida quotes Georges Goriely, a 
"former Belgian resistant" who "knew de Man well," as saying that 
de Man was not "'ideologically ... antisemitic.'" Goriely, who today 
is professor emeritus of sociology at the Free University of Brussels, 
subsequently described de Man as "completely, almost pathologically, 
dishonest," declaring that "swindling, forging, lying were, at least 
at the time, second nature to him." [P. 802] 
I note without further comment that this latter phrase is thus calmly 
cited and accredited by an expert, an expert specialized in the de Man 
affair, the now-famous author of "Deconstructing de Man" (The Nation, 
9 January 1988). 
My intention was no more (may I spell this out once more in passing?) 
to "defend de Man's character" than to "fulfill the responsibilities of 
friendship." The author of "The Responsibilities of Friendship," formerly 
the author of "Deconstructing de Man," believes or affects to believe that 
my article was essentially inspired by friendship. For him, de Man is only 
and before all else my friend ("his friend") (p. 801). And here he has 
the audacity, I can't believe my eyes, to give me a lesson in an "honorable 
way to fulfill the responsibilities of friendship" (p. 797). If I needed 
someone to teach me honor, and how to distinguish the honorable from 
the dishonoring, really, I would look for another teacher in the future. 
Second, concerning friendship and the responsibility for what I write, 
especially on such subjects, my idea is a little more complicated. Finally, 
my friendship for Paul de Man did not for a moment forbid me to judge 
"unpardonable" what seemed to me to be so (it is true that, as I said 
above, the same preacher had forgotten, as is his wont, to read or to 
mention this judgment, and the same could be said for so many other 
analogous remarks). In conditions where it was rather difficult, where it 
would have been so easy, on the contrary, to join the pack or to be silent, 
I did indeed reaffirm my friendship (that's the way I am). But that never Jacques Derrida 
Summer 1989 871 
prevented me, I will say on the contrary, from proposing each time that 
it seemed just and honest, and almost on every page, conclusions that 
have also been found to be "exceedingly severe." What idea do these 
people have of friendship? The most suspect one, in my view, the one 
that implies blind approbation, projection, or identification. 
If one wants to authorize oneself to give advice on what is "honorable" 
or not, it would be better to begin by recognizing publicly one's own 
errors or falsifications, especially when they are as numerous and serious 
as those published under the title "Deconstructing de Man" (The Nation 
9 January 1988). I was surprised (really? was I so surprised?) to see the 
author of this article claim to direct criticisms at me without thinking for 
a moment about first responding to those that I, like so many others, 
formulated indignantly in note 50 of "Paul de Man's War." He turns 
aside the questions and the focus in the direction of a New York Times 
article. He accuses me of having attacked the "messenger" of "bad news" 
or those who "reported the news" (p. 801). No, the messenger was first 
of all me, long before any journalist. And those who "reported the news," 
months earlier, on my proposal, he forgets this as well, were some colleagues 
and myself. The journalists mentioned by this journalist came after, long 
after; they have not "reported"; they have simplified and deformed "the 
news." And they would have done nothing, known nothing, seen nothing 
for a long time if we, on my proposal, had not organized the meeting in 
Tuscaloosa and taken the decisions that are now public knowledge and 
that I recalled in my article.28 
I cannot enumerate all the signs of such a lack of probity; it would 
take us too long. I'll just mention one more. How can a professional 
"historian" write this: "Le Soir in those years was thus a Nazi publication, 
and the official postwar tribunal-the Conseil de Guerre-considered those 
who published in its pages to be collaborators" (p. 798) while holding it 
against de Man even as he must specify in a note that, as Jonathan Culler 
appropriately reminds him, de Man was never condemned, was not even tried 
by such a War Council (see what I say about this above, p. 849)? His note 
says that "de Man was questioned by the Auditeur General in 1945 but 
not formally charged" (p. 798 n.1), thereby insinuating once again that 
he could have been informally charged, which is dishonest and gratuitous. 
When one acts like this, how can one inscribe the word "responsibility" 
in a title ("The Responsibilities of Friendship")? How can one dare to 
give advice about what is or is not "honorable" (p. 797)? 
28. See Derrida, "Paul de Man's War," pp. 633-37. I will take advantage of the present 
opportunity to make clear that the planning for this colloquium, titled "Our Academic 
Contract: The Conflict of the Faculties in America," had begun two years earlier. The 
three-day program in no way concerned the "de Man affair" about which, with the exception 
of the colloquium organizer, Richard Rand, and myself, the participants knew nothing 
until then. It was only at the end of the last session that the discussion took place which 
I recounted in "Paul de Man's War." Critical Inquiry 
872 Biodegradables 
The only lesson the author of "Deconstructing de Man" draws from 
his past "errors," but it is the least he can do, is to release in advance a 
colleague from any responsibility for the errors that he, the author, did 
not fail to make, yet again, right here and to which he seems willing to get 
accustomed more quickly than his readers: "Mark Poster provided valuable 
comments on an earlier draft of this paper; the errors that are present 
are the responsibility of the author" (p. 797). The only concession one 
can make to him is that the courageous use of this indicative is a responsible, 
honest, and prudent signature. 
I am going to stop. I have once again been too verbose and too 
elliptical. Someone, guess who, is perhaps going to reproach Critical 
Inquiry for publishing me too often and at too great a length. I will point 
out that I myself never asked for anything and would have gladly done 
without all this extra work whose usefulness is doubtful. I like to think 
that I have better things to do at the moment. If only to read, for example, 
much better and newer responses in the volume of that name, or Reading 
de Man Reading, or those texts of de Man recently assembled in Critical 
Writings (1953-1978), not all of which I knew, far from it.29 As to the 
length (completely relative) of my responses, is it not justified by the fact 
that six texts and seven authors were mobilized against my single article? 
The last time, in Critical Inquiry, on the subject of my text against apartheid, 
only two authors were set up against me. At the progressive rhythm of 
this capitalization, is the present response going to lead Critical Inquiry 
to call on thirty-six or forty-nine "critical respondents"? I give notice 
right now that I am tired of this scene and that I will not get back into 
the ring, at least not this ring, even if others still want to be seen there 
or have their photographs taken there. I have never in my life taken the 
initiative of a polemic. Three or four times, and always in response, and 
always because I was invited to do so, I have simply tried to confront some 
manipulations that were too serious to ignore. I have always limited 
myself in these cases to stakes that are not personal, but philosophical, 
moral, and political. [... ] 
Of those who might regret the harshness or the high-handedness 
of certain of my remarks, right here, I ask-isn't it only fair?-to reread 
one more time the critical responses. Then they will have a better measure 
of the aggression-its violence and its mediocrity-that has me as its 
victim, in five of the six cases. It is not possible for me to respond on 
that level. And it is my duty not to accept it. One does not always decide 
by oneself on a high-handed tone. 
29. See de Man, Critical Writings (1953-1978), ed. Waters (Minneapolis, 1989). Jacques Derrida 
Summer 1989 873 
Saturday, 4 February, 10 P.M. 
This paper is "biodegradable." Note the very extended use of "paper" 
in English, even in the university (every speech is a "paper"). The word 
"paper" recalls the name of "journal," in the sense of newspaper and 
not of diary. [ ... ] Only in English? And the French word journal-in 
a certain way the homonym of the English word, but the latter is what 
we call a revue-works equally well as a translation of newspaper and of 
diary. This is naturally only a pretext for asking two questions: (1) Is what 
resists translation more or less (bio)degradable (see above on the proper 
name)? (2) Isn't it striking that, according to some extraordinary destiny, 
Paul de Man's articles ("Wartime Journalism") have been reproduced in 
facsimile, the book thereby preserving the appearance of the paper- 
journal? (I am reminded that those who can/will not read [ne pveulent 
pas lire] had the audacity to accuse us of publishing in the original so as 
to prevent them from reading it. Alas, they do not need our strategies 
for that. I am dreaming of other strategies: to make them read instead!) 
How to translate the valuable and economical French expression papier- 
journal? It designates the least noble species of paper-newsprint. It is 
thought that, since it lends itself to all uses, it is better suited than any 
other to biodegradation. 
Here, now, the word "biodegradable" is waste matter [un dechet]. 
Already partly biodegraded. Will I have used it up enough? [ ... ] 
An "internal" reading will always be insufficient. And moreover im- 
possible. Question of context, as everyone knows, there is nothing but 
context, and therefore: there is no outside-the-text [il n'y a pas de hors- 
texte] (used-up formula, yet unusable out of context, a formula that, at 
once used up and unusable, might appear to be impossible to wear out 
[inusable]. I don't believe that in the least, but the time involved is difficult 
to calculate). [ ... ] 
For example, what can be the future destiny of a document that 
would now give one to read, like right here, this sole phrase: "Forget it, 
drop it, all of this is biodegradable"? Critical Inquiry 
