Novas
Haroldo de Campos
COPYRIGHT © BY JUAN ESTEVES
Novas
Selected Writings
Haroldo de Campos
edited and with an introduction
by antonio sergio bessa and odile cisneros
foreword by roland greene
Northwestern 
University PressEvanstonIllinois
Northwestern University Press
www.nupress.northwestern.edu
English translation copyright © 2007 by Northwestern University
Press. Published 2007. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America1 0987654321isbn-13: 978-0-8101-2029-7 (cloth)
isbn-10: 0-8101-2029-1 (cloth)
isbn-13: 978-0-8101-2030-3 (paper)
isbn-10: 0-8101-2030-5 (paper)
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Campos, Haroldo de.
[Selections. English. 2007]
Novas : selected writings of Haroldo de Campos / edited and 
with an introduction by A. S. Bessa and Odile Cisneros ; foreword 
by Roland Greene.
p. cm. —  (Avant-garde and modernism collection)
Includes bibliographical references.isbn 978-0-8101-2030-3 (pbk. : alk. paper) — isbn 978-0-
8101-2029-7 (cloth : alk. paper)
1. Campos, Haroldo de—T ranslations into English. 2. Campos, 
Haroldo de—Criticism and interpretation. I. Bessa, A. S. II. Cisneros, Odile. III. Title. pq9697 .c2448a2 2007
869.8'4209 —dc22
2006102081
The paper used in this publication meets the minimum 
requirements of the American National Standard for InformationSciences—Permanence of Paper for Printed Library Materials, ansi z39.48-1992 .
Contents
Foreword Interessantíssimo , vii
Acknowledgments, ix
A Note on This Edition, xiIntroduction, xiii
I: Poetry
From Xadrez de estrelas [Star Chess ](1949–1974 ), 5
From Invenção [Invention ], year 6,n o .  5(1967 ), 65
From Signantia: quasi coelum (Signância: quase céu )
[Paradisiacal Signifiers ](1979), 69
From A educação dos cinco sentidos [The Education of the Five
Senses]( 1985), 93
From Galáxias [Galaxies ](1963–1976, 1984 ), 121
From Finismundo: A última viagem [Finismundo: The Last 
Voyage ](1990), 131
From Crisantempo: no espaço curvo nasce um [Chrysantempo: 
In Curved Space Is Born A ](1998), 139
II: Essays
Reinventing T radition, 155
Anthropophagous Reason: Dialogue and Difference in Brazilian 
Culture, 157
Disappearance of the Baroque in Brazilian Literature: 
The Case of Gregório de Matos, 178
The T rans-American Pilgrimage of Sousândrade’s Guesa, 194
An Oswald de Andrade T riptych, 201
The Concrete Moment, 215
Pilot Plan for Concrete Poetry, 217
The Open Work of Art, 220
The Informational Temperature of the Text, 223
Concrete Poetry–Language–Communication, 235
A Laboratory of Texts, 247
Brazilian and German Avant-Garde Poetry, 249
The Ghost in the Text (Saussure and the Anagrams), 276
Poetic Function and Ideogram/The Sinological Argument, 287
T ranslation as Creation and Criticism, 312
Hölderlin’s Red Word, 327
Eucalypse: The Beautiful Occultation, 334
Light: Paradisiacal Writing, 349
Notes, 359
Bibliography of Works by Haroldo de Campos, 391
Index of Poem Titles, 395
Foreword Interessantíssimo
Haroldo de Campos’s collection of poems entitled Excrituras, published in
the retrospective volume of the mid- 1970sXadrez de estrelas, contains a
suite of lyrics—atoms of wordplay, really—that include several variations
on the following terms:
o poema
nada
faz-
ou quase
se
pouco
[a poem-
nothing
self
if
made
much]
The elements of these micropoems rehearse the issues that run across deCampos’s work, both his poetry and his criticism, from the start of hiscareer in the 1950s to his death in 2003. And true to the spirit of both his
inventive poetry and his wide-ranging criticism, they can be rearrangedinto alternative statements and made to undermine or ironize their ownassertions. Should a poem be built on a principle of copiousness or scarcity?Is the poem about its world or about itself? Where is the border betweensense and nonsense? De Campos addressed each of these questions in mul-tiple ways, often with different answers. And the essential de Campos is afigure as constructivist as these poems: a poet, critic, translator, archivalscholar—in all, a protagonist of the first importance in Brazilian and inter-national avant-garde letters. This volume, called Novas, reintroduces
Haroldo de Campos by giving readers of English a generous overview of hisintellectual and aesthetic program.
That program, we see here, is formidable. With his brother Augusto de
Campos and their collaborator Décio Pignatari, Haroldo de Campos in the1950s introduced a renovative program for concreteness or materiality into
vii
Brazilian poetry. This group, which called itself Noigandres after a nonce
word in one of Ezra Pound’s Cantos, became a force in Latin American and
world poetry in the 1960s and after, their poetry and manifestos serving as
demonstrations of each other. While they were enormously controversial in
Brazil during their heyday, the Noigandres group has become an
inescapable fact of the poetic scene in more recent times, so that certaincontemporary poets think of themselves as “postconcrete,” and every poetin Brazil with a claim to self-awareness must have a position about theNoigandres legacy. When the group was discovered by North American
vanguardists (including the language poets) in the early 1990s, their cur-
rency throughout the Americas was ensured. De Campos himself accumu-lated a body of achievements that drove but also transcended theNoigandres movement: with his brother, he rediscovered the fascinating
Brazilian Romantic poet Joaquim de Sousa Andrade (or Sousândrade); hewrote a number of influential theoretical and critical essays; and he wasresponsible for some of the most influential postconcrete poetry, includingthe masterpiece Galáxias. To sketch his significance, one would have to say
that his essays represent a link between international formalism, structural-ism as well as poststructuralism, and the postcolonial, all of which are vis-ible in his thought, while his poems are contemporaneous and cognatewith the Beats on the one hand and the language poets on the other.
As a figure who provoked an intense critical conversation—and partic-
ipated in it himself, attempting perhaps too strenuously to define the termson which his own achievement would be understood—de Campos is duefor a reassessment based in the work itself, which can now be seen in his-torical and theoretical perspective. Novas makes that project not only pos-
sible but probable.
Roland Greene
viii Foreword Interessantíssimo
Acknowledgments
We wish to express our gratitude to those whose contribution and support
made this book possible. Richard Sieburth, from the Department of Com-parative Literature at New York University, first envisioned the possibilityof this book and generously gave us his time and expertise, not to mentionencouragement throughout this entire process. Without his friendship andguidance, this volume would not have been possible. Eliot Weinberger, apersonal friend of Haroldo de Campos since the 1970s, kindly opened his
library to provide us with many of the original texts. His focused criticismand suggestions on the content and structure of this book were immenselyappreciated. Marjorie Perloff, director of the Avant-Garde and Modernismseries at Northwestern University Press, embraced the project with passionand stood firmly behind it at all points. Without her commitment and dili-gence, this book would exist only as an idea. We were humbled by thewarmth and enthusiasm with which two distinguished scholars read ourmanuscript for Northwestern University Press, and we profited a great dealfrom their suggestions and advice. Many friends and scholars who have fol-lowed and supported Haroldo de Campos’s career throughout the yearsalso offered their hand and facilitated our task by putting us in contactwith each other: Thanks to Roland Greene, Pierre Joris, K. David Jackson,and Kenneth Goldsmith. We are immensely grateful to Susan Betz andRachel Delaney, former editors at Northwestern University Press, whopatiently guided us through the intricacies of editing and copyright. Wewere fortunate to count on a number of exceptionally gifted scholars will-ing to double as translators. Their names are listed individually in connec-tion with their translated pieces. Above all, we would like to thank Haroldode Campos himself, who generously endorsed this venture, guiding us,providing materials, and responding with patience and care to all queriesthat came up in the process of editing this volume. We regret that he didnot live to see it in print; he passed away in the summer of 2003 while the
book was in production. We also offer our gratitude to his widow, Carmende Arruda Campos. And finally, we want to thank our families and friendsfor their love and support.
ix
A Note on This Edition
The selection and translation process for this book proved difficult and
lengthy, as Haroldo de Campos’s oeuvre is immensely varied. In the poetrysection, we mostly selected poems that could be rendered in English andwould resonate with readers at large. The endnotes to the poems are theauthor’s own, and although not essential, they often illuminate each poem’sintertextualities and context.
As for the critical essays, we chose pieces that would speak to contem-
porary debates on poetics, translation, and cultural politics in Latin Amer-ica. In the process of editing, we were obliged to abridge certain pieces that,for reasons of space, could not be reproduced in full. Such is the case of“Disappearance of the Baroque in Brazilian Literature: The Case ofGregório de Matos,” “An Oswald de Andrade T riptych,” and “Poetic Func-tion and Ideogram/The Sinological Argument,” which are presented asexcerpts from longer essays. Spaced ellipsis points in square brackets indi-cate material we omitted. The author’s omissions in citations are indicatedby spaced ellipsis points with no brackets. Existing translations were revisedand checked against the originals for accuracy and consistency.
Another important part of the editorial process was standardizing and
expanding the bibliographic references, providing the most complete cita-tion possible as well as references to English translations where appropriate.We did our best to locate all sources of the quotations in the essays. In thecases of journals or books not readily available, we provided the author’sreference and any other details we could ascertain. In order to distinguishbetween the author’s and the editors’ material, we kept the author’s notesas endnotes and the editors’ and translators’ notes as footnotes. Where anote by the author merited an editorial intervention, it is indicated in thenote by square brackets and/or “ translator” or “editors .”
xi
Introduction
Haroldo de Campos was one of the key literary figures to emerge from
Brazil in the second half of the twentieth century and a unique personal-ity within the international avant-garde. His stature has been acknowl-edged by diverse intellectuals the world over. In the course of astructuralist analysis of the poems of the medieval Galician troubadourMartin Codax, the Russian critic Roman Jakobson declared himself anadmirer of de Campos’s “supreme flair for the innermost ties betweensound and meaning, a flair which underlies and sustains . . . [his] mostdaring poetic experiments and thrilling discoveries . . . and which inspireshis extraordinary transpositions of seemingly untranslatable poems fromquite divergent languages.”
*The Italian writer and semiotician Umberto
Eco, in the preface to the Brazilian edition of his world-renowned bookOpera aperta [The Open Work]( 1962), noted the visionary reach of de Cam-
pos’s aesthetic proposals: “It is indeed curious that a few years before Iwrote Opera aperta Haroldo de Campos, in one of his articles, anticipates
its themes in a surprising way, as if he had reviewed the book I had not yetwritten and later wrote without reading his article.”
†In1996, the French
philosopher Jacques Derrida, the Mexican poet Octavio Paz, the Brazilianpoet João Cabral de Melo Neto, and the Cuban novelist Guillermo Cabr-era Infante contributed to a public homage to de Campos at the PontifíciaUniversidade Católica in São Paulo. Derrida praised de Campos’s“absolute, atemporal, definitive, inalterable, indubitable knowledge” andhis “adventurous and audaciously urgent” approach to poetry.
‡Cabral de
Melo Neto, in turn, described him as “that wonderful thing: / a poet anda translator who came to literature armed with an enviable / knowledge ofthe literary phenomenon.”
§And in Paz’s poetic tribute, in a series of “snap-
shots,” the essence of de Campos’s writing and personality is thus captured:
xiii* Roman Jakobson, “Martin Codax’s Poetic Texture,” in Selected Writings, ed. Stephen Rudy (New York:
Mouton, 1981), 3:169–75. —editors
† Umberto Eco, Obra aberta (São Paulo: Editora Perspectiva, 1968), 17.Eco is speaking of de Campos’s
1955essay “The Open Work of Art,” included in this volume. — editors
‡ Jacques Derrida, “Chaque fois, c’est à dire, et pourtant, Haroldo…” in Homenagem a Haroldo de
Campos (São Paulo: Pontifícia Universidade Católica, 1996), 9-11. —editors
§ João Cabral de Melo Neto, “Depoimento,” in Homenagem, 19.—editors
Reflections swarming on the page, confusion
of yesterday and today, the seenentangled with the half-seen, inventionsof memory, lacunae of reason;
Hellos, good-byes, ghosts of the eye, 
incarnations of touch, unsummoned presences, seeds of time,time out of joint.
*
As for Cabrera Infante, he knew no better “promoter of culture in Brazil”and the Americas, the “new continent for literature.”
†Despite these interna-
tional accolades, de Campos is still relatively unknown to the larger English-speaking public. It is the purpose of this volume to provide English-speakingreaders with a comprehensive understanding of Haroldo de Campos’s work.
Commenting on the “cosmopoetics” of his last book of poetry, A máquina
do mundo repensada [The World’s Machinery Reconsidered ](2000 ), Haroldo
de Campos argued that “the understanding of cosmic order as an ingeniously
articulated machine goes back to the beginnings of poetic and philosophicalthought.”
‡For de Campos, all poetry is a speculation on the inner workings
of this cosmic apparatus—from Dante Alighieri to Stéphane Mallarmé. Thiscosmological model applies to de Campos as a poet, critic, essayist, andtranslator whose vast interests encompassed East and West, antiquity andmodernity, and it is reflected in the titles of some of his books: Xadrez de
estrelas [Star Chess ], Signantia: quasi coelum/Signância: quase céu [Paradisiacal
Signifiers ], Galáxias [Galaxies ]. The title we chose for this volume seeks to
highlight this quality of de Campos’s work and its articulation of a new poet-ics (nova poética ), where East meets West and Latin America cannibalizes its
European Other in a provocative synthesis for world consumption. 
Haroldo Eurico Browne de Campos was born in São Paulo on August 19,
1929.
§A lifelong resident of that city, he lived in the same house in the
xiv   Introduction* Octavio Paz, “Instantáneas,” in Homenagem, 15–16. —editors
† Guillermo Cabrera Infante, “Haroldo siempre trae regalos,” in Homenagem, 20–21.— editors
‡ Haroldo de Campos, “De uma cosmopoesia,” in Depoimento de oficina (São Paulo: Unimarco Edito-
ria, 2002), 59–70. —editors
§ These details of Haroldo de Campos’s life are mostly based on his autobiographical note included in
A educação dos cinco sentidos (São Paulo: Brasiliense, 1985), 113–15. —editors
Perdizes neighborhood until his death on August 16, 2003, not far from
where his brother Augusto de Campos still lives. In the 1950s, inspired by
the modernization and democratic changes introduced by President
Juscelino Kubitschek, the two brothers, in collaboration with Décio Pig-natari, launched the concrete poetry movement in Brazil. This movementwas an energetic and visionary attempt to appropriate an entire tradition ofavant-garde writing and single-handedly change the course of Brazilianpoetry. In 1952, the three young poets began to publish the avant-garde
poetry magazine Noigandres, named after a philological riddle involving
this Provençal word mentioned in one of Ezra Pound’s Cantos.
*
Like many writers in Brazil and elsewhere, de Campos was trained as an
attorney and received a law degree from the University of São Paulo in1952. Not without a note of smug humor, de Campos counted among hisprofessional legal colleagues figures such as the Brazilian baroque poetGregório de Matos (a judge and magistrate), the Brazilian modernistOswald de Andrade (who never actually practiced law), and Franz Kafka(who often did in Prague, in the twilight of the Austro-HungarianEmpire).
“A lawyer like everyone,” de Campos was not seduced by the profession.
He came to realize that besides the city of São Paulo—hyperpolluted andthe place he loved best on earth—what really mattered to him was travel-ing. Starting with his first trip to Europe in 1959 with his lifelong partner
Carmen, when they traveled second class aboard a Portuguese ship, he con-stantly found himself—literally and literarily—crossing oceans, bound-aries, languages, cultures, and genres, which, he noted, resulted inepiphanies and antiepiphanies.
Major epiphanies on his first trip issued from encounters with the con-
crete poet and philosopher Max Bense and the composer Karlheinz Stock-hausen in Germany, and with the Bolivian-Swiss poet Eugen Gomringer inSwitzerland. All of these artists and intellectuals were developing experi-mental work that the Noigandres poets found very much in line with their
own artistic activities in Brazil. A mutually beneficial exchange ensued,projecting concrete-poetry endeavors beyond their national boundaries.On that trip, de Campos followed the itinerary of Ezra Pound’s Cantos
through the north of Italy all the way to Rapallo, where he met with an
Introduction xv* See Ezra Pound, “Canto XX,” in The Cantos of Ezra Pound (1970; reprint, New York: New Directions,
1995), 89–90; and Hugh Kenner, The Pound Era (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California
Press, 1971), 114–17.— editors
aging Pound. An acknowledged forefather of the concrete poetry move-
ment, Pound, with his paideuma, his theories on translation, and his inter-
est in the Chinese ideogram and Oriental poetry, was to leave a lastingimprint on de Campos’s literary pursuits. 
Upon his return, a journey through northeastern Brazil (Paraíba, Recife,
and Bahia) triggered other epiphanies—this time the rediscovery of hisnative land, particularly its baroque heritage. What de Campos calledBrazil’s “multidevouring baroque-ism” marked his intellectual and literaryproduction after the early, heroic phase of concrete poetry that ended inthe early 1960s. This hybrid and ecumenical phase of his work displays de
Campos’s passion for writing in all its manifestations: the grapheme, theideocalligraphy of the East, and linguistic transactions and transfers thatcould be termed “Babelian” or Pentecostal. His iconoclastic translations (or“transcreations,” as he preferred to call them) range from Homer to Danteand from Ecclesiastes and Japanese poetry to Octavio Paz. 
Alongside his diverse literary activities, de Campos taught at the univer-
sity level after earning his doctorate in literature from the University of SãoPaulo in 1972, with a provocative structuralist analysis of the Brazilian
modernist novel Macunaíma by Mário de Andrade. A professor at the Pon-
tifícia Universidade Católica in São Paulo from 1971 to 1989, de Campos
also held teaching appointments at the Technische Hochschule inStuttgart, the University of Texas–Austin, and Yale University. He receivednumerous international prizes and honors, including a Guggenheim fel-lowship (U.S., 1972), a Fulbright fellowship (U.S., 1978), the Chevalier
dans L ’Ordre des Palmes Académiques (France, 1995), the Octavio Paz prize
(Mexico, 1999), the Roger Caillois prize (France, 1999), and the prestigious
Jabuti prize four times (Brazil, 1991, 1992, 1993, and 1998).
Although his poetic oeuvre in itself is extremely condensed, de Campos
was a prodigiously prolific author—he produced more than ten books ofpoetry and over a dozen volumes of theory and criticism. Both alone andin collaboration with his brother Augusto de Campos, Décio Pignatari,and Boris Schnaiderman, he authored book-length translations of Pound,James Joyce, Vladimir Mayakovsky and other Russian poets, Octavio Paz,Mallarmé, Dante, Provençal troubadours, the books of Genesis and Eccle-siastes, Japanese poetry and Noh theater, and the Iliad. He also contributed
countless essays and articles to books and periodicals.
xviIntroduction
Poetry
While Haroldo de Campos initially earned a reputation as part of the
concrete poetry movement, it is important to note that the first poems he
published were already heavily influenced by a baroque aesthetic. Follow-ing the end of the concretist period, his poetics underwent dramatic trans-formations, with lines of continuity and rupture. In our choice of poems,we have attempted to trace these transformations by representative selec-tions from key periods, from his first baroque and concrete phases to hiseclectic 1998 collection Crisantempo [Chrysantempo ].
Published in 1976, Xadrez de estrelas [Star Chess ] gathers twenty-five
years of poetry, featuring poems that, with the exception of Auto do pos-
sesso[Act of the Possessed ] and Servidão de passagem [Transient Servitude ] had
been published mostly in magazines. The subtitle, “Percurso textual”[“Textual Itinerary”], hints at a perception of writing as a “voyage” throughlanguage. The circular trajectory of the book begins under the influence ofthe neobaroque and traverses the avant-garde phase of concretism to arrivefinally at the ultrabaroque of the Galáxias . We should note that de Cam-
pos’s first incursion into the baroque was of an intuitive nature. The poemsfrom this phase are more influenced by the tradition of Jesuit drama, intro-duced in Brazil in the second half of the sixteenth century by Father Joséde Anchieta as a device to catechize the natives, than by Walter Benjamin’stheses on German baroque drama—a text that was central to de Campos’sreassessment of the baroque in the 1970s. These are highly allegorical works
with biblical, political, historical, and linguistic references woven into adense texture. They convey the sense of a mostly Catholic Brazilian culturethat is perhaps now lost, the world of passion plays during Easter week,legends and folklore connected to the country’s Portuguese origins, and afascination with a monarchical past, which in the late 1940s was still within
living memory. The long poem Act of the Possessed is emblematic of this
phase. With its structure and title clearly alluding to the Jesuitical “auto”—the sacramental educational plays in Brazil’s colonial tradition—the poemunfolds a highly symbolic plot with characters such as “the Chess Player”and “the Exorcist,” harking back to Baudelaire’s Bénédiction.
For the reader to appreciate fully the presence of baroque elements in
these early poems, it is important to bear in mind how integral they are tothe Brazilian culture of the time. For instance, Glauber Rocha’s first shortfilm, — O pátio [The Patio ], 1959— in which two characters move around
Introduction xvii
a chess-patterned patio—bears a striking resemblance to de Campos’s Auto
do possesso. Rocha, one of the founders of the experimental film trend cin-
ema novo in the 1960s—a movement that, like concrete poetry and bossa
nova, helped revolutionize Brazilian culture—also began his career by pay-
ing homage to this baroque legacy.
Although it did not vanish, the influence of the baroque progressively
subsided in the years preceding the concretist phase. In T eoria e prática do
poema [The Poem: Theory and Practice], we first encounter an example of de
Campos’s metalinguistic concerns: here his metaphorical impulse, latermore restrained, is put to use to investigate, in specular fashion, the verynature of writing poetry. The ghost of the baroque also returns in a daringway in Claustrofobia [Claustrophobia ], a challenging text that already
announces formalist experiments with prose such as Galaxies as well as the
thematic concern with the epic versus the worldly in Finismundo: A última
viagem [Finismundo: The Last Voyage ].
De Campos initiated his concrete phase in 1955–56 with O âmago do
ômega [The Essence of Omega], a collection of poems with a unique balance
of constructive rigor and deconstructive content that is rendered with diffi-culty in English. Like those of his companions in the Noigandres group, de
Campos’s concrete poems zoom in on the page to magnify the formal andsyntactic qualities of the poetic text, but despite this shared interest in struc-ture and concision, his texts are sui generis in the openness of their struc-
ture. The Essence of Omega stands quite comfortably between poetry and
prose, and the pulverization and reassembling of words carry residues of deCampos’s earlier incursion into the baroque. Strictly speaking, the only trulyconcrete poems—in the visual sense—which have been emphasized by crit-ics and literary scholars are the series entitled Fome de forma [Hunger for
Form ]. But the high modernism of their formal achievement—their ran-
dom arrangements resemble the mosaic patterns that the visual artist AthosBulcão designed for Oscar Niemeyer’s main buildings in Brasilia at aboutthe same time—is somehow neutralized by the ensuing collection Forma de
Fome [Form of Hunger ]. Complementary and symmetrical poetic gestures,
these two selections are in many ways a tribute to the work of Cabral deMelo Neto, a poet whose technical skill and acute social awareness were par-adigmatic for de Campos. The punning equation of “form” ( forma) and
“hunger” ( fome) in these titles is also reminiscent of Marx’s inversion of
Proudhon’s The Philosophy of Poverty into The Poverty of Philosophy.
De Campos’s exposure to Marxist theory is evident throughout Form of
Hunger—a canto for the dispossessed in which even the role of poetry is
xviii Introduction
questioned (“poesia em tempo de fome / fome em tempo de poesia / . . .
eu nomeio a fome” [“poetry in time of hunger / hunger in time of poetry/...I name hunger”]). This aspect of de Campos’s work has been widely
ignored by critics who have insisted on seeing Brazilian concretism as anutterly formalist movement devoid of any political content. These criticsoverlook the fact that, in the context of 1950s Brazil, form waspolitical,
and that Lucio Costa and Oscar Niemeyer (also Marxists) designed Brasiliawith a utopian-socialist agenda which was later co-opted by the militaryjunta that took over the country in 1964.
In the early 1970s, de Campos’s poetry became extremely rarefied. The
series Excrituras [Excriptures ], for instance, despite its highly calibrated
rigor and the significant use of the blank space of the page, lacks the visualflair of the concrete phase. Text becomes more telegraphic, with longpauses and, in T atibitexto [stuttertext ], the title already signals the tentative
nature of writing. The atmosphere of ruin and/or fragmentation that deCampos created in these texts evokes the stultifying political climate ofBrazil at that time, when censorship was at its peak and many intellectualswere in exile, while those who managed to stay in the country chose totalsilence or developed a highly elliptical style. From the very outset, the issueof “silence” in concrete poetry had been criticized as the “emasculation” oflanguage and was equated with repression, an issue approached by de Cam-pos in his essay “The Informational Temperature of the Text.” Significantlyenough, a similar kind of criticism was also directed at the supposedlyutopian architecture of Brasilia, where wide boulevard-style avenuesallowed for immediate control of the city by the army. The Brazilian cul-tural effervescence of the 1950s thus proved to be extremely ambiguous in
nature; the very strategies promoted to renew language—be they poetic orarchitectural—could as easily be co-opted and transformed into mecha-nisms of repression.
Published in 1979, the volume of poetry Paradisiacal Signifiers reverses
the tripartite scheme of Dante’s Commedia, beginning with Paradisiacal
Signifiers, a poem in four parts, and then proceeding via a purgatorial inter-
regnum ( Status viatoris ) to a funereal descent into Hades ( Esboços para uma
nékuia [Sketches for a nekuia] ). In this volume we include the first poem,
which captures, in Craig Dworkin’s felicitous translation, the essence of“writing” paradise. Paradisiacal Signifiers shares certain formal concerns
with Star Chess, but the focus on ahistorical invention is now linked to tra-
dition. It is not without interest that at the time this volume was published,de Campos was also translating several cantos of Dante’s Paradiso. Beyond
Introduction xix
the influence of Dante, particularly on the structural design of the book,
the tutelary presence of Novalis is evident in the epigraph and, in onepoem, as the object of an exemplary reading; there is also the resonance ofPound’s inclination toward the fragmentary at the close of his Cantos. In
addition, these adamantine texts also conjure up the realm of what the Te l
Quel group called “écriture” or “writing,” as well as the work of Francis
Ponge. Words spatialized across a blank page become sonic atoms, theinscriptions and encryptions of which enact a “theophany of signs” thatapproximates in its incisive crystalline purity the domain of the numinous.
A educação dos cinco sentidos [The Education of the Five Senses ](1985)
constitutes, as Andrés Sánchez Robayna has noted, an opening toward the“expressive” and “poetic idioms in history.”
*Indeed, as a migration from
the extreme emphasis on the material aspects of language, this collectionevidences more concern with the search for a lyrical identity, overcomingthe ban on the poetic “I” issued in the Noigandres poets’ manifesto “Pilot
Plan for Concrete Poetry” ( 1958). The spatialization of language is curbed,
and linear—or lineated—writing makes a return, while still maintainingthe principle of economy of expression. References to Provençal troubadourpoetics ( T enzone, Provença: Motz e. l. Son ) as well as to Chinese philosophers
(Mencius: Theorem of White ) echo the paideuma of Pound. Nevertheless, the
lessons of concretism are still perceptible, refined into a superb techniqueof sampling in Ode (Explicit) in Defense of Poetry on St. Lukács’s Day, a poem
composed entirely of quotes and inspired by a conversation between Ben-jamin and Bertolt Brecht in Svendborg in 1938. The “recovery” of history
in these poems was also paralleled at the time by de Campos’s rediscoveryof a tradition exemplifying a “concrete” attitude: while composing The
Education of the Five Senses, he was also translating and writing critical
essays on Goethe, Mallarmé, and Pound. All these influences converge ina number of poems, such as Goethean Opuscule (I & II) and Le don du
poème (Mallarmé), while other poems pay tribute to his contemporaries
(his brother Augusto de Campos, in the Rimbaldian Je Est Un Autre: Ad
Augustum, and the artist Hélio Oiticica, in Paraphernalia for Hélio Oiti-
cica). These are the poems of a more mature phase, in which flashy avant-
garde accoutrements are exchanged for a more ironic, meditative attitude(as in the Adornian Minima moralia ). They also include reflections on the
principles of poetry ( As It Is ) and metalinguistic concerns stemming from
xxIntroduction* Andrés Sánchez Robayna, prologue to La educación de los cinco sentidos, by Haroldo de Campos, trans.
Andrés Sánchez Robayna (Barcelona: Àmbit Serveis Editorials, 1990), 13.— editors
a Marxist conception of language as the essence of humanity ( The Educa-
tion of the Five Senses ).
The minimalist style of de Campos’s concrete phase gradually developed
into its opposite with the appearance of the first individual texts that com-pose the collection Galaxies, in which the excesses of the baroque reappear
with unexpected vigor. The first of the Galaxies appeared in 1963, and the
last in 1976. Star Chess features a partial selection that goes up to 1973, and
the entire collection was published in one volume in 1984. The posthu-
mous “definitive” edition came out in 2005. Galaxies is best approached as
a travelogue documenting de Campos’s journeys through countries andbooks. In these voyages, he seems to have taken to heart Mallarmé’s con-tention that everything exists in order to end up in a book. A collection offifty texts written in stream-of-consciousness style, Galaxies is a long,
unpunctuated meditation on writing, world literature, and the elusivenature of the book. In terms of form, the texts of Galaxies mark a departure
from Gomringer’s model of the poem as constellation, moving toward a
new perception of the text as nebula. They also blur the distinction
between poetry and prose. Marjorie Perloff opens her essay on de Campos’sGalaxies by quoting David Antin’s observation on Gertrude Stein: “[Her
texts] are concrete poetry with justified margins.”
*Like the Brazilian
baroque, these texts are formidable not because of their originality per se,
but rather owing to the way they imbricate foreign influences (Stein, Joyce,Pound, Mallarmé) with references to the “macaronic” translations of thenineteenth-century Brazilian poet Odorico Mendes and to popular culture.As in Joyce and Mallarmé, literature assumes an almost sacral character inthese texts; hence their performative, liturgical tone, beginning with thevery first, E começo aqui [And Here I Begin ], which addresses the question
of origin. The ensuing texts are permutations of this original big bang, likean ever-expanding galaxy.
It is not without irony that de Campos, who in the 1950s advocated a
concrete, objective writing, came to pursue a luminous kind of writinglater in his life. This luminosity—we might also call it lucidity—emergedfrom what de Campos described as the “radiant” practice of translation.With the passage of time, his view of translation became nearly metaphys-
Introduction xxi* Marjorie Perloff, “‘Concrete Prose’ in the Nineties: Haroldo de Campos’s Galáxias and After,” Con-
temporary Literature 42,n o .2 (Summer 2001): 270–93.— editors
ical, as if a text’s true meaning could only be glimpsed through prismatic
refraction. The practices of writing and translating gradually began tointertwine and illuminate each other, culminating in a dazzling way in Fin-
ismundo: The Last Voyage. This poem is not only the sum of forty years of
poetry—de Campos had already coined and used the word “finismundo”[world’s end] in Claustrophobia (1952)—but also of his work as a transla-
tor. The poem’s epigraph (“per voler veder trapassò il segno” [for wantingto see, he trespassed the sign]), a reference to Ulysses’ fate in Dante’s Com-
media , alerts us to the doubling of writing and translating, which de Cam-
pos ultimately sees as the “transgression of the sign.”
Finismundo: The Last Voyage constructs an entire fiction out of translation.
Its central theme was fished from Homer’s fragment “thánatos eks halós,” theambiguity of which—“dying in the sea,” or “dying far from the sea”—haskept many translators in a perpetual quandary. The work resonates at manylevels, as the poem also “translates” the action of Joyce’s Ulysses to the poet’s
contemporary São Paulo. Among the many references encoded in the poem,the reader will find traces of Odorico Mendes’s translations of the Odyssey
and Fernando Pessoa’s “myth” of the creation of Lisbon, as well as GuidoCavalcanti’s, Dante’s, and Hölderlin’s fascination with light.
The paronomastic title of de Campos’s 1998 Crisantempo: no espaço
curvo nasce um (Chrysantempo: In Curved Space Is Born A ) appropriately
captures the essence of this work’s eclectic 350-plus pages. A word thatfuses florality and temporality, Crisantempo is a chrestomathy, a bouquet
that gathers new and old works from a variety of periods, original poems,and transcreations (now entitled “transilluminations”). The book includesa reprint of Finismundo; Japanese poems; a handful of poems about cats;
ekphrastic texts; homages to writers and artists, both living and dead;iconoclastic translations from the ancient and modern Greek (from Sap-pho to Cavafy) as well as from Latin; and versions of Nahuatl poetry,among other things. Excerpting from such an eclectic volume proved dif-ficult, and we opted for the poems that could best be rendered in English.These include short lyric poems that evoke the world of haiku in theirimagistic qualities ( As in Ovid: Metamorphosis, Minimal Landscape ); med-
itations on the transience of life in the temper of Ecclesiastes ( Poems for
Qohelet I & II); homages to de Campos’s lifelong mentors and obsessions
(The Poet Ezra Pound Descends to Hell, Gongorine Tribute to Sá de
Miranda ); and, in honor of de Campos’s Marxist convictions, his own
English translation of a poem originally written in Portuguese in supportof the Landless Peasants Movement in Brazil ( The Left-Winged Angel of History ).
xxii Introduction
Essays
In the constant interplay between his poetry and his essays, Haroldo de
Campos embodies the Mallarméan ideal of the poet as critic. His fifty-year
production ranges from early theoretical writings on concrete poetry torevisions of literary figures of the past, and from erudite explications of hisunconventional translation praxis to the formulation of a “postutopian de-logocentrifying cannibalist poetics.” To place the vastness and variety ofthese pieces in context, a few words of introduction are in order.
De Campos began his career as an essayist in the 1950s, a period of bur-
geoning optimism about the modernization of Brazil, epitomized in thepolitical slogan “O Brasil é o país do futuro” (“Brazil is the country of thefuture”) and reflected in the cutting-edge aesthetic adopted by the Noigan-
drespoets. The latter’s immediate goal was to provide a theoretical founda-
tion for concrete poetry not only by engaging with the internationalavant-garde but also by integrating the advances of technology into theirwork. This explains the influence of certain figures, now seldom men-tioned, who had great relevance for de Campos and the Noigandres group
in their early period—the linguist Alfred Korzybski and the creator ofcybernetics Norbert Weiner, for example, whose theories inform “ConcretePoetry–Language–Communication” (1957). A second important didacticaim was the education of the public: the Noigandres group assumed the task
of translating and/or making known in Brazil such key theoretical texts asErnest Fenollosa’s Chinese Written Character as a Medium for Poetry, presented
by de Campos in his volume Ideograma: Lógica, poesia, linguagem [Ideogram:
Logic, Poetry, Language ](1975), translated by Heloysa de Lima Dantas.
In addition to positioning concrete poetry strategically within the inter-
national avant-garde, de Campos devoted his subsequent critical writingto the exploration of a global tradition of poets and texts that, according tohim, exhibit a “concrete” attitude through practices of linguistic economy,fragmentation, invention, and materiality. De Campos’s revisionist task ledhim, in Horácio Costa’s view, to “refute an officialized and reductive visionof Brazilian culture”
*while at the same time dislocating logocentric atti-
tudes in his Derridean essay “Anthropophagous Reason: Dialogue and Dif-ference in Brazilian Culture.”
Some of these essays were initially published in mass-circulation news-
papers and subsequently revised or expanded when published in bookform. Their scholarship is occasionally sketchy in its rigor and consistency:
Introduction xxiii* Horácio Costa, “Dinámica de Haroldo de Campos en la cultura brasileña,” Cuadernos hispanoamer-
icanos 509(November 1992): 67.— editors
it appears that de Campos, a magpie reader, relied on whatever sources
served his critical bricolage. What he himself once said about Pound’s essayon Cavalcanti’s Donna mi prega [A Lady Asks Me ]—“that [it] should be read
in the manner of a Borgesian visionary fiction rather than as a cautiouspiece of philological erudition”—could equally apply to his own criticalwritings. But like many fine essays, de Campos’s pieces function asexploratory experiments rather than as authoritative statements; and whilesome of his references may now seem dated, the fact remains that in theireclecticism, de Campos and the Noigandres poets were polemically in-
volved in the debates of the day.
Many of de Campos’s critical writings have been of undeniable importance
in the reevaluation of Brazil’s literary legacy. These revisionary plumbings ofthe past brought back into discussion the work of authors that for years hadbeen relegated to a historical limbo. In the section entitled “ReinventingT radition,” we have selected essays that focus mainly on three of these keyliterary figures: Gregório de Matos, Joaquim de Sousândrade, and Oswaldde Andrade. These authors formed a kind of triumvirate upon which deCampos launched his “re-vision” of Brazilian literary tradition.
In “Anthropophagous Reason: Dialogue and Difference in Brazilian
Culture” ( 1980), de Campos sums up the main arguments he had devel-
oped more extensively in other works. The essay traces de Campos’s devel-opment from his early espousal of structuralism, Russian formalism, andconcrete poetry’s utopia to his arrival at an “anthropophagous reason,” apoststructuralist approach informed by Jacques Derrida’s deconstructivenotions of differential hybridity. From this new critical stance, de Camposseeks to highlight Brazil’s specificity and provide a political angle fromwhich to rethink and counter notions of cultural dependency. “Anthro-pophagy,” a concept that de Campos developed from Oswald de Andrade’sinfluential “Manifesto Antropofágico” [“Cannibalist Manifesto”] ( 1928),
has spawned an entire critical literature; its recent assimilation by the fieldof postcolonial translation studies is of particular interest.
*
In “Anthropophagous Reason,” de Campos appropriates Oswald de
Andrade’s manifesto, which fed on documented instances of T upi-Guaraniritual cannibalism, to posit the cannibal as a model for the dilemma of
xxiv Introduction* See, for instance, Else Ribeiro Pires Vieira, “Liberating Calibans: Readings of Antropofagia and
Haroldo de Campos’ Poetics of T ranscreation,” in Post-colonial Translation, ed. Susan Bassnett and Har-
ish T rivedi (London: Routledge, 1999), 95–113 .—editors
Brazilian culture. Far from Rousseau’s exemplary “noble savage,” de Cam-
pos’s “bad savage” devours his cultural Other in order to draw “marrow andprotein to fortify and renew his own natural energies.” With this powerfulmetaphor, de Campos subverts imputations of cultural colonialism in thecase of Latin American modernists, such as Oswald de Andrade andVicente Huidobro, when they critically assimilate the work of their Euro-pean colleagues (Blaise Cendrars and Pierre Reverdy) in order to submit itto a differential digestion.
Anthropophagism, a transfusion of energies from donor to receiver
(where the donor is acknowledged but indistinguishably resynthesized),also questions the plenitude of origin in favor of difference. According tode Campos, this differential deglutition characterizes the cultural produc-tion of the Americas—from the baroque poets Gregório de Matos, SorJuana Inés de la Cruz, and Juan Caviedes to modern New World cannibalslike Sousândrade, Oswald de Andrade, and Cabral de Melo Neto. As aresult of repeated mastication, concrete poetry arrived on the scene withan equally whetted appetite, appropriated an entire code of post-Mallarméan avant-garde literature, and in a unique synthesis theorized,supported, and opened a dialogue with popular culture.
Although “Anthropophagous Reason” was clearly meant to dismantle
colonialist discourses circulating at the time, it retains its currency becauseit anticipates contemporary notions of hybridity and global multicultural-ism. The “Alexandrian barbarians” (figures like Octavio Paz, Jorge LuisBorges, Alfonso Reyes, Mário de Andrade, Lezama Lima, and, tacitly, deCampos himself) prefigure these concepts by chewing up and “ruining”universal cultural heritages in order to produce a global literature that isludic, combinatory, multilingual, and hybrid. These are indeed the “left-overs of a diluvial digestion,” whose “hidden” process culminated in theLatin American “boom.” Finally, in a move that provocatively reverses thepattern of Western colonialism, de Campos challenges logocentric writersto brace themselves for the urgent task of devouring the differential mar-row of these polytopic and polyphonic “new barbarians,” because, heargues, “alterity is, above all, a necessary exercise in self-criticism.”
“Disappearance of the Baroque in Brazilian Literature: The Case of
Gregório de Matos” ( 1984) is a passionate attempt to rescue the work of the
baroque poet Gregório de Matos, one of Brazil’s most controversialauthors. De Campos’s main interlocutor in this essay is the literary criticAntonio Candido, author of the influential Formação da literatura
brasileira [Formation of Brazilian Literature ](1964), an account that locates
Introduction xxv
the “true” inception of Brazilian letters in the romantic Indianist period of
the nineteenth century. Candido, de Campos argues, follows a metaphys-ical, linear concept of history that culminates in what Derrida terms an“unveiling of presence.” For de Campos, this problematic “historical” per-spective is ideologically biased, as it strives to privilege the “communica-tive” aspect and “national spirit” of certain literary incarnations at theexpense of arbitrarily ignoring the “weak” or “unsystematic” literature ofthe baroque. For this reason, Gregório de Matos’s baroque, self-reflexivepoetics, devoid of a nationalist sense of mission, excluded him from Can-dido’s literary system. De Campos counters Candido’s argument by expos-ing as a fallacy the assumptions of this linear model, which turn intonegative value judgments, and points out that a similar questioning of lin-earity had already led Benjamin, Federico García Lorca, and T. S. Eliot torehabilitate the baroque some fifty years before the appearance of Can-dido’s book. In this way, de Campos lays the groundwork for recoveringnot only the work of de Matos but also the entire baroque legacy.
In 1964 Haroldo and Augusto de Campos similarly took on the task of
recovering the work of the poet Joaquim de Sousândrade ( 1833–1902 ). In
their anthology Re/Visão de Sousândrade (Re/Vision of Sousândrade ), the two
brothers presented critical interpretations and transcriptions of Sousân-drade’s poetry, which had been out of print since its original publication inthe nineteenth century. Sousândrade belonged to the second generation ofromantics in Brazil, but his work, particularly the “Wall Street Inferno”episode in his long epic poem Guesa errante [Wandering Guesa ], was con-
sidered extravagant even at the time and quickly fell into oblivion.Intended both as a revision of Brazilian literary historiography and as a wayof reclaiming Sousândrade as a precursor of concrete poetry, the anthologypraised the visual and verbal experimentalism of the montage techniquesused in “The Wall Street Inferno.” In “The T rans-American Pilgrimage ofSousândrade’s Guesa, ” however, de Campos turned to another aspect of the
poem, namely, the way in which its Americanist poetics deploys an inno-vative mixture of genres, unified by the leitmotif of a journey across theAmericas, drawing inspiration from both Alexander von Humboldt’s trav-els and Goethe’s “Walpurgisnacht” in Faust. This trans-American itinerary
was to generate fellow travelers in the twentieth century, as de Camposshows, in Pablo Neruda’s great New World epic Canto general.
Oswald de Andrade ( 1890–1954 ) is perhaps the single most important
writer of the Brazilian modernist tradition to whom de Campos devoted
xxvi Introduction
his attention. Claiming Andrade as a forerunner, the concrete poets vig-
orously promoted his innovative work, tacitly challenging the figure ofMário de Andrade as the official leader of Brazilian modernism. Thanks totheir efforts, Oswald’s work now enjoys the status of a modern classic ofBrazilian literature, although he has not by any means attained the sameprestige as other Latin American writers such as Huidobro and CésarVallejo, with whom he shares a similar avant-garde impetus. The subsec-tion we entitled “An Oswald de Andrade T riptych” features selectionsfrom three important essays on this modernist author, written between1964 and 1972—“A Poetics of the Radical,” “ Miramar on the Mark,” and
“Seraphim: A Great Un-Book.” As these essays make clear, de Campos
particularly valued Oswald’s incorporation of the colloquial into poetry,his innovative use of collage techniques at the micro- and macrolevels, andhis penchant for social satire. “A Poetics of the Radical” discusses the rev-olution that Oswald de Andrade’s 1924 poetry collection Pau Brasil
[Brazilwood ] effected in Brazilian letters. Emerging from a status quo of
“tribune rhetoric” in which “fluffy and rustling eloquence” reignedsupreme, Brazilwood stripped the poem of needless ornamentation in
order to produce a “simple and naked expression of sensation,” “minutesof poetry” that captured the “restlessness of the new Brazilian.” “ Miramar
on the Mark” is devoted to Oswald de Andrade’s first experimentalnovella, Memórias sentimentais de João Miramar [Sentimental Memoirs of
John Seaborne]. In his essay, de Campos notes the watershed importanceof this text and compares its parodic workings to those of Joyce’s Ulysses.
Among the affinities he underscores are a common telegraphic style, a col-lage structure—half sentimental diary, half fait divers —as well as the motif
of the redemptive voyage. In “ Seraphim: A Great Un-Book,” de Campos
examines Serafim Ponte Grande [Seraphim Grosse Pointe ], the continuation
of Oswald’s experimental fiction, where the collage structure moves fromthe microlevel to the “great syntagmatics of narrative.” If Seaborne ’s mon-
tage techniques challenged the boundaries between poetry and prose,Seraphim goes on to question the very concept of the book as a finite
object, following a great tradition of innovators that includes the LaurenceSterne of Tristram Shandy. Oswald’s disassembly of the novelistic form
functions through what the Russian formalist critics called “ostranenie,”or the “alienation effect”: by pointing to its own structure in an ongoingmise en abyme, the narrative renders the familiar strange and in the process
constructs a book improvised out of fragments of books—a great “un-book.” 
Introduction xxvii
The “tradition of rupture”—inherited from the baroque and reinforced by
the equally disruptive experimentalism of authors like Sousândrade andOswald de Andrade—was taken to its limits during the concretist phase ofthe mid-1950s and 1960s. As we have already noted, this movement’s highly
formalistic program mirrored Brazil’s fast-paced postwar refashioning intoa modern, industrialized nation, as reflected in the texts gathered in thesection we have entitled “The Concrete Moment.” Thus, “Pilot Plan forConcrete Poetry” (1958), the manifesto issued by the Noigandres group,
borrows its title from the urban planner Lucio Costa’s pioneering airplane-shaped design for Brasilia. This extremely concise text, originally printedentirely in lowercase, contrasts sharply with de Campos’s expansive style inother essays. Both the concision and the impersonal tone aid in creating atabula rasa from which a new poetics might emerge. In this context, onlytwo Brazilian authors are cited as precursors—Oswald de Andrade andJoab Cabral de Melo Neto—and current topics in science and the arts arelisted in quasi–bullet-point style. 
In hindsight, the Noigandres manifesto’s greatest feat is its ability to sum
up ideas that had already been developing in Europe since the turn of thecentury, in movements such as the Neue Sachlichkeit [New Objectivity],and in Brazil since 1922, promoted by Oswald de Andrade through the
Week of Modern Art in São Paulo. Jean Arp, for instance, had alreadyadopted the title “concretions” for his poems as early as 1922, and Oswald
de Andrade, in his “Cannibalist Manifesto,” also claimed to be a “con-cretist.” More importantly, Pierre Schaeffer had already begun his experi-ments in what he termed “concrete music” as early as 1948. Although “ThePilot Plan” strategically downplays Schaeffer’s role in the development ofconcretism with a vague reference to “concrete and electronic music,” itnevertheless does mention the names of two of his pupils, Pierre Boulezand Stockhausen—but as followers of Anton Webern. The erasure of Sha-effer’s name from the pantheon of precursors has never been sufficientlyaddressed, nor has the fact that another pro-concrete manifesto had alreadysurfaced in Sweden in 1953, written by the Brazilian-born poet and visual
artist Öyvind Fahlström.
The new poetry envisioned in the Noigandres manifesto is proposed as
a political stance—poetry as the vehicle for building a new national iden-tity in an “objective” language that can be extended to other areas such asadvertising, journalism, and cinema. In order to emphasize this point, in1961a postscript was appended to the manifesto: Mayakovsky’s dictum that
“there is no revolutionary art without revolutionary form.”
xxviii Introduction
Despite its undeniably Brazilian modernist flavor, concrete poetry, like
the International Style in architecture, is essentially a utopian and interna-
tionalist program. In “The Open Work of Art” ( 1955), de Campos proposes
a “radial axis,” composed of works by Mallarmé, Joyce, Pound, and E. E.Cummings, that would provide a blueprint for contemporary poetry atlarge. These authors, de Campos suggests, present the reader with “porousworks,” the structures of which are accessible from any perspective onechooses to embrace. He compares these open structures to a mobile byCalder or a composition by Webern. This emphasis on structure and itsconcomitant restriction and specialization of poetic vocabulary, causedmany critics to accuse concretism of impoverishing language. This claim isrefuted by de Campos in “The Informational Temperature of the Text”(1960 ), which argues that constraint is of the essence in any creative
process, as borne out by Dante’s deployment of terza rima or ArnautDaniel’s use of sestina.
Mayakovsky’s revolutionary impetus was a constant source of in-
spiration for the Noigandres group. In “Concrete Poetry–Language–
Communication” ( 1957), for instance, de Campos’s view of the poem as a
self-regulating machine tuned to transmit signs is ultimately equated withMayakovsky’s call for a kind of propaganda that would also be poetry of thehighest quality. Like those of his Noigandres peers, de Campos’s concretist
essays convey the movement’s emphasis on structure and communication.“Concrete Poetry–Language–Communication” is perhaps most representa-tive of the propaideutic message of concrete poetry. In a veritable tour deforce, de Campos invokes Weiner’s theories of cybernetics, Korzybski’s“general semantics,” W. Sluckin’s psychology of mechanical feedback, thePavlovian experiments with mazes conducted by Shannon, Howard, andDeutsch, and the research on verbal and nonverbal communications con-ducted by Jürgen Ruesch and Waldo Kees, in order to provide a reading ofDécio Pignatari’s iconic poem “terra.” Pignatari’s text, de Campos concludes,is a self-regulating machine whose “structure-content” deciphers itself.
The third and final section, “A Laboratory of Texts,” features an eclectic
collection of essays on questions of avant-garde poetics and translation the-ory in a global tradition. Most of these pieces were originally gathered fromthe books that helped consolidate de Campos’s position as a leading liter-ary voice in Brazil: Metalinguagem [Metalanguage ](1967),A arte no hori-
zonte do provável [Art in the Horizon of the Probable ](1969), A Operação do
texto [T extual Operations ](1976), and Ideograma [Ideogram ](1977). The
Introduction xxix
wide variety of themes—German and Brazilian avant-garde poetry, Ferdi-
nand de Saussure’s anagrams, the Chinese ideogram, Hölderlin as transla-tor, and a defense of translation as creative act—provide de Campos withthe raw material for his proposed “laboratory of texts,” in which the con-tributions, “that of a linguist and that of the artist, will complement eachother” and bear witness to his relentless engagement with the practice oftranslation, which intermingled with his poetic production, often blur-ring the boundaries between creator and translator, original and transla-tion, in a provocative way.
De Campos’s 1969 essay “Brazilian and German Avant-Garde Poetry”
seeks to create an alternate genealogy for concrete poetry in Brazil by estab-lishing links with avant-garde German-language writers and artists. Thecatalyst was perhaps the temporal and aesthetic coincidence between theBrazilian concrete experiments and those of Gomringer, whose Mallarmé-inspired Konstellationen [Constellations ] echoed Augusto de Campos’s ideo-
graphic montages in the Poetamenos [Minuspoet ] series. As before, de
Campos endeavors to argue for Brazil’s exceptionalism, claiming that itsconcrete poetry was “more complex” and exhibited a “visual baroqueness”absent in Gomringer’s “concise” and “rigorous” orthogonal constructions. 
Another common trait of both movements was an attempt to “demar-
ginalize the avant-garde, integrating it into a living tradition.” De Camposconvincingly parallels the daring verbal polydoms of Arno Holz’s monu-mental poem Phantasus (1916–26) with the vertiginous semantic innova-
tions of Sousândrade’s narrative epic Wandering Guesa. Closer to his own
time, de Campos also juxtaposes Oswald de Andrade, as a precursor to theBrazilian avant-garde, with Kurt Schwitters, the Dada forefather of suchGerman innovators as Stockhausen. De Campos also discusses texts byChristian Morgenstern, August Stramm, Vassily Kandinsky, Paul Klee,Helmut Heissenbüttel, Bertolt Brecht, Hans Magnus Enzensberger, andMax Bense.
In a similar revisionist and exploratory gesture, the 1976 essay “The
Ghost in the Text (Saussure and the Anagrams)” approaches Ferdinand deSaussure’s investigations into the anagrams of Latin Saturnian verse. DeCampos notes that the seminal work of Jakobson in allying linguistics topoetics was anticipated by Saussure’s work on the anagram—research thatonly came to light in 1964 thanks to Jean Starobinski’s book Les mots sous les
mots [Words upon Words ]. Up until that point, Saussurian theory had been
criticized for its excessive reliance on the horizontal and syntagmatic linear-ity principle, which does not do justice to the vertical polyphonies of poetry.
xxx Introduction
Examining Latin Saturnian poetry, Saussure came to identify a pattern of
anagrams, or “acoustic images,” whose permutations imitated a given themeword, the ghostly presence of which could be detected in a nonlinear fash-ion. Saussure came to name his discovery “paragram,” a wider generalizedphenomenon of phonetic and graphemic mimetism that “recognizes andreassembles its leading syllables, as Isis reassembled the dismembered bodyof Osiris.” The relevance of de Campos’s essay is that it points to an impor-tant and not very well-known aspect of Saussure’s work, revolutionary inthat its esoteric “second linguistics” (as Starobinski calls it) undoes many ofthe exoteric assumptions of his authoritative Cours de linguistique générale
[Course on General Linguistics ]. More importantly, de Campos wants to
recover the Saussure of the anagrams as a phonic confrere of Mallarmé’s spa-tial “prismatic subdivisions of the Idea,” as well as a predecessor of futur-ism’s simultaneism, Velimir Khlebnikov’s “simultaneous semiotic units,”and, not surprisingly, Brazilian concrete poetry. In de Campos’s hands, Saus-sure becomes a “theoretician of the avant-garde” avant la lettre.
We noted earlier the lasting influence of Ezra Pound’s paideuma and
translation practices on concrete poetry. Pound’s fascination with the FarEast, and particularly with the Chinese ideogram, also left their mark on deCampos’s work. In 1977 de Campos compiled a volume entitled Ideo-
grama: Lógica, poesia, linguagem [Ideogram: Logic, Poetry, Language ], featur-
ing a translation of Fenollosa’s polemical essay “The Chinese Character asa Medium for Poetry,” which was first edited and published by Ezra Poundin1920, after Fenollosa’s death. This volume also contained a translation of
another seminal essay, Sergei Eisenstein’s 1929 “The Cinematographic Prin-
ciple and the Ideogram”; a handful of technical pieces by lesser-knownSinologists; and de Campos’s own introduction to the volume, “Ideogra-ma, anagrama, diagrama” [“Ideogram, Anagram, Diagram”], from whichthe two excerpts included in this volume (“Poetic Function and Ideogram”and “The Sinological Argument”) have been taken. 
“Poetic Function and Ideogram” argues for the affinity between Fenol-
losa’s interest in the ideogram and his search for “universal elements of form”that would constitute a “poetics.” This “formalist” aspect of Fenollosa’s essaymakes it, in de Campos’s view, a forerunner of Jakobson’s seminal “ClosingStatement on Linguistics and Poetics.” Fenollosa, as de Campos shows, wasone in a line of philosophers and poets—from René Descartes and Got-tfried Leibniz to Ralph Waldo Emerson and Pound—who searched for afunctional poetic framework based on universal signs like the ideogram.This fascination with the ideogram as an iconic or indexical sign, however,
Introduction xxxi
earned Fenollosa, and later Pound, the disapproval of professional Sinolo-
gists, who decried their erroneous interpretation of the ideogram asgrounded in purely visual rather than phonetic elements. In “The Sinolog-ical Argument,” however, de Campos defends both Fenollosa and Poundfrom the scholars’ attacks, arguing that even when Pound incorrectly deci-phered ideograms in his translations, his “eye for errata” was counterbal-anced by his empathetic perception of the whole. De Campos appliesPound’s method to his own translations into Portuguese of Wang Wei andLi-tai Po, where the visual rhymes of letters are stressed to compensate forthe lack of pictorialism in alphabetic languages. De Campos points out thatthis is not a question of imitative representation but rather of semioticiconicity: what matters is not the pictographic but the relational argument(the ideogram as a metaphor of structure rather than as a painting of ideasvia things). Thus Fenollosa’s view is rescued from an oversimplification thatwould reduce the mechanics of the ideogram to a servile imitation of real-ity. Instead, Fenollosa’s insistence that “relations are more real and moreimportant than the things which they relate”
*is revealed by de Campos to
be a genuine structuralist poetics ante litteram.
T ranslation was central to de Campos’s poetic practice. He not only
made available in Portuguese some key texts of world poetry but also com-posed some of his most significant works based on a history of translations.Over time, translation became an increasingly transgressive exercise for deCampos, one that allowed him access to new languages and historical peri-ods. This practice also called for a more complex mode of reading—nolonger of isolated texts but of their many translations. According to deCampos, a text’s meaning is revealed, or light is thrown on it, through thehistory of its various translations. The power of the text to convey imagesis what de Campos ultimately pursues, and in this regard he is in agree-ment with Eliot, who believed that a tradition of visionary poetry had beenlost since Dante. T ranslation, for de Campos—echoing Richard Sieburth’sobservation that translatio in Latin “also refers to the transfer of the relics of
saints or pieces of the true cross”
†—became a literary crusade, the goal of
which was to transport images (sacred relics) for subsequent retransmission. 
In “T ranslation as Creation and Criticism” ( 1967), de Campos begins
with a quote by Albrecht Fabri commenting on the untranslatable nature of
xxxii Introduction* Ernest Fenollosa, The Chinese Written Character as a Medium for Poetry, ed. Ezra Pound ( 1936; reprint,
San Francisco: City Lights Books, 1968), 22.— editors
† Richard Sieburth, “Ms Fr 270: Prelude to a T ranslation,” Esprit créateur 40,n o .3 (Fall 2000): 102.
—editors
poetry: “(poems) do not mean but are.” De Campos then proceeds to decon-
struct Fabri’s argument and proposes that since poetic texts cannot be trans-
lated, they must be “re-created,” making the case for an active collaborationbetween linguists and poets. Throughout the essay, de Campos invokes aseries of writers and translators who have informed his idiosyncratic view oftranslation, beginning with Paulo Rónai, a Brazilian author for whom trans-lation was an art in its own right, and Odorico Mendes, the nineteenth-century poet and translator from Maranhão whose translations of theOdyssey, seen as problematic and even “monstrous” when originally pub-
lished, have since become an important contribution to Brazilian literature.
For de Campos, however, the paragon of the translator as re-creator is
Ezra Pound, whose reworkings of Chinese poems succeeded in translatingthe ideogram’s “image,” not merely its verbal equivalent. Based both onPound’s motto “Make it new” and the Brazilian modernist tradition of“anthropophagy,” de Campos’s translation work sometimes approachesiconoclasm. His translation of an ode by Horace ( Persicos odi, puer, appara-
tus), for instance, opens with a reference to a popular samba by Noel Rosa:
Garçom, faça o favor 
nada de luxos persas.
Boy, please—
no Persian luxury.
Rosa was a composer from Rio who wrote some of Carmen Miranda’sgreatest hits in the 1940s. The phrase “Garçom, faça o favor” (literally
“Waiter, please—”) is the beginning of a classic samba titled “Conversa deBotequim” [“Bar Talk”], the lyrics of which exalt the quintessential bon-vivant carioca. By sampling Rosa in his translation of Horace, de Camposcreated a fold of powerful resonance, one that encapsulates different eras,cultures, and idioms, while still keeping the spirit of the original poem.
This example is emblematic of the way in which de Campos’s approach
to translation has become an important element in contemporary Brazilianculture; it can be seen as bridging the gap between high and popular cul-ture and between the literary and the oral. It was embraced by many of hiscontemporaries, including his brother Augusto, whose deft translation ofthe second part of John Donne’s Elegie 19—To His Mistress Going to Bed, set
to music by Péricles Cavalcante, a composer who has worked closely withthe de Campos brothers, became an unexpected hit in Brazil in the mid-
Introduction xxxiii
1980s, in a recording by Caetano Veloso. It also influenced younger gener-
ations of poets such as Paulo Leminski, who in the 1980s proposed a trans-lation of Eliot’s The Waste Land as Devastolândia, a wordplay fusing
“devastation” with “Disneyland.”
In view of all this, it is not surprising that Hölderlin’s controversial
translations from the Greek captured de Campos’s attention in “Hölderlin’sRed Word” ( 1967), an essay originally written as an introduction to his
exceptional translation into Portuguese of Hölderlin’s Antigone (act 1, scene
1). The vilification of Hölderlin’s versions of Sophocles and Pindar by hiscontemporaries and their ultimate redemption by twentieth-century criticsand poets spoke directly to de Campos. On one level, he could identifyHölderlin’s fate with that of Odorico Mendes, whose translations from theGreek were also ridiculed by his contemporaries as more difficult to readthan the originals. For de Campos, Hölderlin represents genius overcom-ing the limitations of language through the “keen understanding of itsbeauty and character” whose seemingly awkward solutions were simply“creative errors.” 
In “Eucalypse: The Beautiful Occultation” ( 1990), de Campos’s powers as
a close reader are put to the test as he performs a line-by-line exegesis ofOctavio Paz’s poem La guerra de la dríade o vuelve a ser eucalipto [The Dryad
War or Return to Being Eucalyptus]. The characters in Paz’s poem undergovarious mutations, and, de Campos points out, the action unfolds in a seriesof conflicts between archetypal antagonists, as in Vladimir Propp’s proto-structuralist model, Morphology of the Folktale. In the same way that a trans-
formational grammar of narrative structures folktales, the poem employsparonomasia as a metamorphic device: The apocalypse, “revelation” or
“unveiling,” of the dryad—a character disguised in the story as an obscureand merciless object of desire—is inversely paralleled by her lover’s “occul-tation,” or metamorphosis, into a eucalyptus tree. According to de Campos,
this episode (which echoes Ovid’s tale of the nymph Daphne) inscribes thepoem in a tradition of visionary or oneiric literature going back to the bookof Revelation and also includes Dante and William Blake.
In “Light: Paradisiacal Writing” ( 1975), the metaphor of light as applied
to translation acquires still another dimension through references to Cav-alcanti’s A Lady Asks Me and Dante’s Paradiso. Here, de Campos is con-
cerned with the very definition of light in both texts. He begins withPound’s claim that Cavalcanti’s canzone is ultimately a “metaphor on thegeneration of light,” then goes a step further and applies Pound’s metaphorto the entirety of Dante’s Commedia, tracing its trajectory from the Inferno
xxxiv Introduction
and through the Purgatorio to the luminous verses of the Paradiso. The
essay also addresses the genealogy of the metaphor, which de Campos
traces back to Averroës and Robert Grosseteste and connects to twentieth-century artists and writers such as Kasimir Malevich and Georges Van-tongerloo, Joyce, and Norman Brown. The “generation of light” throughtranslation is finally exemplified by de Campos’s own translation of a frag-ment by Cavalcanti in which he superimposes Pound’s translation onto aversion of Dante. De Campos’s masterly solution, which he calls “hyper-translation” (“Cavalcanti via Pound via Dante”), is an operation involvingseveral strata that allow the text’s meaning to shine through. “T ranscre-ation,” “hypertranslation,” “translight,” “transluciferation”—these aresome of the names that Haroldo de Campos coined throughout his careerin an attempt to define the practice of writing. Mephistophelean writing,one might add. 
De Campos died of diabetes-related complications on August 16, 2003 ,
in his beloved São Paulo, shortly after the release of the second volume ofhis translation of The Iliad. The concrete poetry scholar and Yale professor
K. David Jackson, a close friend for many years, reported that in his lasthours, de Campos called his brother Augusto, his “ Siamême twin,” and
proposed that they translate the Commedia by telephone—a lifelong dream
that was only fragmentarily realized.
Introduction xxxv
Novas
I:Poetry
From Xadrez de estrelas [Star Chess]
(1949–1974)
Act of the Possessed
O sage, Dichter, was du tunst?——Ich rühme.
Tell me, Poet, what you do.—I celebrate.
—Rilke
SCENE I
A Giant sucks in the night through the eucalyptus trees
the lover
Allow me, Beloved with translucent eyes,to celebrate you in the hanging gardenswhere delirium opens petals of alcohol!
the beloved
Listen:Now, by the sea,a chess player plays.
the lover
In autumn, by the sea . . .Dear friend, unseal the capsule of the Sabbath,and see to it that the wind dervishes dance in the air.
7
the beloved
O hateful sea.O hateful roar of the sea. The wind.Watch the insistence of black horsesin your neighbor who played chess!
the chess player [to the Lover ]
What to do with the rebellious pawns
and with the old, captive king?What to do with the white queenappalled amid the rooks?
the beloved
Throw her in the sea.I said, throw her in the sea.
the lover
Dear friend, allow me to singby the light of a raw star;where your body lay, teeming with warm roses;where suicidal faces now devour one another;where an aquiline lily is born, by the light of a raw star.
SCENE II
A mirror facing the sea
the possessed
The one who is to die in the watersWas wearing insomnia and tulle.She wove her green hairwith the wheel of the southern wind.She who is to die in the waterswalks amid torchesescaping from the ace of spades.She is the insane one coming from the south.
8
the exorcist
On the sixth day you werethe voice that cried to the sky.You were the sorcerer and satdiagonally across Capricorn.
the beloved
. . . Throw her in the sea.
the exorcist
You have picked the briny lotusamid the turbulent stream of feverthat flows down a bald summitthrough seven mouths of darkness.
the possessed
What will the face of the moondo against your tepid,ill-aged moon face?What can liquid eyes doagainst your eyes that beckonlighthouses and foam to the water?
the beloved and the exorcist [together ]
I said, throw her in the sea!
the chess player
Ease, O nocturnal bishopthe chores on my chessboardand hark: a poet is bornin the bulbs of the month of August.
9
SCENE III
The mountain and the valley
the chess player
Your son is born from the wombof a virgin in Tibet,whose flower I pollinatedin the hothouses of languor.He will be the priest of Radja Gomba,and his voice hurls meat-eating turtledoveswhen the many-faced YAMAdances in a circle made of hands.
the exorcist
Therefore,surrender!
the chess player
He will offer libations on the Sabbaths of Septemberwhere naked hexes ravage the quadranttied to the manes of wild boars.
the exorcist
Therefore,surrender!
the beloved
Brutal and bloody, O Love!My bosom will give him moderation and communion.I weaken with water the wine of my lips,and my flesh tastes of unleavened bread or clover.
the exorcist
Surrender,surrender!
10
the possessed
I could indeed warm your pubismined with poppies!Allow me, O gentle ox, to celebrateand lift your body in my songas a trophy atop crystals!
the chess player
Woman,behold thy son!
Translated by Odile Cisneros
11
The Disciplines
The Poem: Theory and Practice
I
Silver birds, the Poem
draws theory from its own flight.Philomel of metamorphosed blue,measured geometricianthe Poem thinks itselfas a circle thinks its centeras the radii think the circlecrystalline fulcrum of the movement.
II
A bird imitates itself at each flightzenith of ivory where a ruffledanxiety is arbiterover the vectorial lines of the movement.A bird becomes itself in its flightmirror of the self, matureorbittiming over Time.
III
Even-tempered, the Poem ignores itself.Leopard pondering itself in a leap,what becomes of the prey, plume of sound,evasivegazelle of the senses?The Poem proposes itself: systemof rancorous premisesevolution of figures against the windstar chess. Salamander of arsonsthat provokes, unhurt endures,Sun set in its center.
13
IV
And how is it done? What theory
rules the spaces of its flight?What last retains it? What loadcurves the tension of its breath?Sitar of the tongue, how does one hear?Cut out of gold, as such we see it,proportioned to it—the Thought.
V
See: broken in halfthe airy fuse of the movementthe ballerina rests. Acrobat,being of easy flight,plenilunium princess of a kingdom
of aeolian veils: Air.Wherefrom the impulse that propels her,proud, to the fleeting commitment?Unlike the birdaccording to naturebut as a godcontra naturam flies.
VI
Such is the poem. In the fields of aeolianequilibrium that it aspires tosustained by its dexterity.Winged agile athleteaims at the trapeze of venture.Birds do not imagine themselves.The Poem premeditates.They run the cusp of infiniteastronomy of which they are plumed Orions.It, arbiter and vindicator of itself,Luzbel leaps over the abyss,liberated,in front of a greater kinga king lesser great.
Translated by A. S. Bessa
14
Claustrophobia
Dominicum nostrum, Ariadne, the misadventures of a Sunday.
The day masturbulates, undiaphanous, ungolor. Ivory brawls, your thighs,
mouthless rivers, gigantic rounds, the skin nubile-pink, tiger lilies titillat-ing in nylonhypnosis.
The thinness of Sunday, you save. The manuscribe counts your hours with
fleshless bones gnawing at the nails of his idleness.
To love: sucking the silks. Saccharin. A fire of crystals facing us. Belnarcis-
sus closing watery eyes. Viciouscactus.A labyrinth of lilacs: your eyes. Glaukopis. Blue-green panther in flexible
heat. Sulphurnocturne.
Imprisoned in roses. Sunday’s claustrophobia. Rain, the first coming,
prima verrà. Don’t believe in cages for beasts. Claustrophobic. To say:
caged—in iron or roses—the same. Warden, and I am?
Words are a cage with seven keys. The heart is a word under seven locks.
Auriculoventricular. Clavic(h)ordial.
Seven moats away the prisoner sleeps. Morfeu noumenon. Sleep, auriferous
torpor, frozen mammoths hibernate, nymphosis in crystalsnow, siesta of
chrysalis. Sleep. Schlafen. Soft ss lips cirrus. Träumendzimmern: sleep cham-
bers. Dormosis.
Asphyxia. Blue circles around the nose. Fossoyeurs. Cave inhabitants.
Cephalolamped miners. A lit head, a glow, lampires. Darkavern, vermats
curl around the substance of gloom. Purplenightprowling vampires. Wak-ing up: a flight of albino bats.
Schlafwandler —sleepwalkers hate grates. They want the sun. Vitriol suns.
T urnsoles. Topaz at high noon. Chrysophorus. The sun.Wormvenomous dungeon where the bloodletting of corals stagnates. Adi-
aphanous. Tourniquet on the jugular. My blood, a voiceless river.
15
Le Poète maudit bénit. Le vocable l’accable. Et lente lente currite equi noctis.
Night, beyond. Darkgloomy, tangibleblack, dense.
He forges, vulcanamorously, the venussyllable for verbogenesis. Margaritas
ante porcos. Sea.
The prisoner under seven cages, septuorpainful. Breathing: metronome of
equal oxygens. To eat: to fecaldigest. To love: morosmosis. Claustrophobia:blood in stagnant chambers, a kiss in cryptomucous ludilingus. W. C.—
womb closed. Night: a belly. The heart: a ventricle. Aporous.
—Ariadne, the thread. The filoformula. The web. A thread. Funicular.
Funis coronat opus. Funny. A hand an arm ( leukolenos) fingers ( amanda dig-
italis) the body color—an ubiamourous gesture—of a filiflower. The Pore
In finismundothe fenixbard awaits the finisnight.
Translated by Odile Cisneros
16
The Invincible Armada
Invincible
armada
Poetry
A connivingbreezesuffices or acollusion of
winds
and your brigsof warprowsof proudscarlet
discommand theseatawny with foam
Divisible armadavanquished arrogance
anchored
where?
Submarinetroys of cobalt
Escorial
ship
wreck
But the flagshipon quick-sands
par-alyzed by blue
ship on its occiput
to a pontus
euxinus of abyssal
beauty
17
the heraldic prow
extinguishedeelinstead of ori-flammemarinelymotionedship
spainsof war (dupe of aerialangers) not waged
the glassy
bosom of the bottom depthsemasculates
blue-greenarcanum of mercurysubvertinga squadron worsted bywind
pyrrhic
victory
The sea
immune
keeps the indigosecretand enshrines—shipwreck—an invinciblearmada of minutiae
Seashells
18
thalassa thalamium
the act
pure
vengeance
violetair andwateragainst the punicbeakof the shipthe keelsrepealedthe sailswhiteness of conceitcapsizedand seagulls
nuptials
or obituary
gala
fulfilled
thanatos
a cohesivesilence
arbiter
of eleganceencloses thesalvage from thewreck
and discloses
a gesture
intact on the horizon
seaman riding the prestigeof the wave
crusoe of a solar
clamorof islands
or the mere
fioritura of a murex
19
land
of castaways
poem
whatof your punished arrogance?
mausoleum of cuttlefish
ocherexile
a slender
canoemidterraneankeel of impudence
pierces
the blue
the surviving
hand
waves the paddle
riot
of constrained waters
and on high
clouds
that invincible
fictitious purple
joy of armadas
Translated by Jean R. Longland
20 NOVAS
T
THE ESSENCE OF O M E G A
EM
E
G
A
SI
marsupialamour nip
ple of oily lampreys can
ine clutched         amourtower of talismangut (LEN t)tural loveer in burst ingdark feversof february femoral nup tial deathbed auriferousdepth : arivermouthpeacecoitus
CE
Translated by Mary Ellen Solt and Jon Tolman
the ear’s pavilion borders 
the eager pavilionaureoleaura
a cornu copyear        snailmilks a teatof aira turgid windytower
made   mazea sound    a    linesoundfrom    tapsfrom    nowhere    nipples
Translated by Haroldo de Campos
in the
es sence of the O mega
eye
goldbone
under
that pe(  vine  of  vacuum  )nsilep e t a l blinking lashes
eyelid
almond of  emptiness  petiole:  the  thingof   the   thingof   the   thing
a hardnessso   emptya boneso   center
a body
crystalline to body
closed   in   its   whiteness
ero
to the 
enith
splendoring
ex-nihilo
Translated by Charles A. Perronez
IN
be twi(ee)n
h
e
parentheses
e
an object she (a) er 
peel
reading of the real
misreading ca
rca
ss
a
ss
i
n
nux (g)nomicavox vomicasc inal tem
p(o) (du)st
mort
em
grad
ual grind (ing) ex
magusIN
wall ed
oo
r
walls ri Rsp Iid Xro Asears :orso Rre Osi Sdue A
Translated by A. S. Bessa
a peri
scope
or       peri
CARDIUM
scrutinizes
the
coral
ar
id
oh
alla
l
id
o
mio cid
campeador
mio
CARDIUM
al cácer al
când ora
fombra àfimbria ofthe end
beyondtheendo’
cardium
pallium
of so
me
pl ume pl
us
so me  wh e
RES
Translated by A. S. Bessa
Hunger of Form
speech
silver
silencegold
headssilver
tailsgold
speechsilence
stop
silver golden
silence speech
clarity
Translated by Mary Ellen Solt
28
blank blank blank blank
vermilion
clotted vermilion
speculum vermilion
clotted blank
Translated by A. S. Bessa
29
more more
less more and less
more or less no more
nor less nor more
nor less less
Translated by A. S. Bessa
30
crystal
crystal
hunger
crystal
crystal
hunger   for   form
crystal
crystal
form of   hunger
crystal
crystal
form
Translated by A. S. Bessa
31
32is
born
over born
over born over
re-born re-over re-born
re-over re-born
re-over
re re
de-born
de-over de-born
de-over de-born de-over
bornoverbornoverbornis
Translated by A. S. Bessa
sea       ship
sun      ship
saw     ship
see ship
see   not   see
saw   not   saw
sun   not   sun
sea   not   sea
see   ships
Translated by A. S. Bessa
33
Anamorphosis
doubt
shadow
no doubt
in shadow
in doubt
no shadow
without doubt
hour of shadow
hour of doubt
without shadow
no shadow of doubt
shadow
doubt
no shadow
in doubt
in shadow
no doubt
hour of shadow
without doubt
without shadow
hour of doubt
no doubt of shadows
no doubt
shadow
in shadow doubt
in doubt
no shadow
hour of doubt
without shadow
without doubt
hour of shadow
of shadow no doubt
Translated by Jean R. Longland
34
Form of Hunger
Transient Servitude
proem
gold fly?
dry fly.
silver fly?
cinder fly.
iris fly?
worthless fly.
indigo fly?
inferior fly.
blue fly?
fly.
white fly?
scant poetry.
blue’s pure?
blue’s pus
on empty bellygreen’s alive?
green’s a virus
on empty bellyyellow’s beauty?
yellow’s bile
on empty bellyred’s fuchsia?
red’s fury
on empty belly
36
poetry’s pure?
poetry’s for
on empty belly
poetry in time of hunger
hunger in time of poetry
poetry instead of man
pronoun instead of noun
man instead of poetry
noun instead of pronoun
poetry of giving namenaming is giving nameI name the noun
I name the manIn name is hunger
I name hunger
37
poem
from sun to sun
soldered
from salt to saltsaltedfrom smash to smashsmashedfrom sap to sapsuckedfrom sleep to sleepslumbered
bled
from blood to blood
where this grind does its grinding
where this gearing is put in gear
grinder mankind grinding
grinding mankind grinder
gearing
gangrening
from profit to profit
defraudedfrom fraud to fraudprovidedfrom flank to flankinflictedfrom flood to floodforgotten
sun to salt
salt to smashsmash to sapsap to sleepsleep to blood
38
where mankind
this grind
where flesh
this flaying
where bone
this gearing
mankind stuffed
mankind stiffed
mankind plunder
mankind plummet
mankind flog
mankind flogged
mankind hollow
mankind coffer
mankind sir
mankind serf
mankind over
mankind under
mankind sated
mankind sacked
mankind served
mankind slurped
39
mankind feasts
mankind fasts
mankind mutter
mankind mute
mankind punch
mankind pouch
mankind grindstone
mankind dust
who strings
who serf
who horse
who rides
who explores
who despoils
who rascal
who carcass
who usurps
who usury
who pillaged
who pillage
who whisky
who urinates
who vacationswho vacuumswho voluptuouswho verminates
flesh fleshly flesheringbleeding bloodshed bloodmankindgrindermankindgrinding
40
sugar
in this husk?
in this armpit
musk?
petunia
in syrup?
indigo in this holeocher
acreogreacrid
cog crossbar cold-feet
collapse cachaça cogcarcass crest craving
from dearth to dearth
from dread to dreadfrom doom to doomfrom death to death
lone grindingbonegrinding
scant of miragevisionless wilderness
servitude of passage
Translated by Micaela Kramer
41
lacunae
lucide contour, lacune
—Mallarmé
poemandala
palaphites
suspendfasting
theseminimummines
some
the sum
central eye of story
rosaceae the crescent
roseopen quartz
roofbirdfiresunsthe purplehummingbird
uguisu
a neatrisk
openscarrosaceaeeyecenter
down south its
a blue plumage
consul (I) only
sang ponder
Translated by A. S. Bessa
45
excriptures
47needles
and these cusps
iceberg
sea monster concealed
of which
phosphor snowpeaks
excripture in its way under-
liesjocund!
shipwrecked
and abovedrip thedots ofii
comas of
comets
minute
commentaries
akin
to St. Elmo’s
site inscribed per
se
48
a
leopardaleopearlacactus-lioneating
pearl
49
sky
fixa textradiatesits
(nude eye
fontana)rusticscars(il)legibletext
blues
50
pearl and
madrepore
51
)scorpions
turvethewatermark
52
a
text
diamond dust
overmiddenhypheninterskeletonsfiguresoflanguagecalci-
illegible
-nada
53
pearl and
madrepore
54
where a
saturnineleaden skybreathesgentianviolets
this one
textand its un-reading
55
spaces vanishing point
tropo-
or
nothing
filigree
watermark
this
étincellestarof in-versedblank
tropo-
andnothing
57
text
(sic)ruins
red ink
rubricsscarletfeverovervellum(paper)body
the airand in the airthe airfold(just now)of un-ruined form
sinkablethinkable
la tua
cosciadistaccadi sull’altra
1
58
a poem-
nothing
self
if
made
much
59
nothing a poem-
if self
much made
60
nothing
ifmuch
a poem-
selfmade
Translated by A. S. Bessa
61
stuttertext
63TO LIVE this  entire  world is to di
yes! scintillations!
scover that      the  obv us    that    all the
phi
that life this entire world is but
los so ad
!jacent!
and discover that when comes the na
palm 
oars ( à derive) rame
hemo
sditto
that life life is the obv
to live
final sail
curtains now
is to dis
that death is at least the cover
LESS
Translated by A. S. Bessa
From Invenção [Invention], year 6, no. 5 (1967)
Alea I—Semantic Variations (A Mock-Pocket-Epic)
THE UNSURPASSABLE the laudable the notable the adorable
the grandiose the fabulous the phenomenal the colossalthe formidable the astonishing the miraculous the marvelousthe generous the excelse the portentous the stunningthe spectacular the sumptuous the faerifying the faeriethe supereminent the venerable the supersacred the supercelestial
THE UNSHITPASTABLE the lowbabble the nauseable the malodorable
the ganglious the flatulous the fetoranimal the cutarsadicalthe fornicable the astinking the iratulous the matrocitousthe degenerous the insext the pustiferous the stomachfuchingthe tentacular the suppurous the faecifying the feverythe supermuckent the veneravid the suprasacral the supersyphilablethe pollust the upcorpsed the violoose the tumorped
FEWERDOLR
FOWLREDERDREERFLOWLOWFEEDRRFROWLEERDREERFOWLDFLEDWERORFREDERLOWWEEDFLORR
program do it yourself
FERROWELD the reader (operator)
REDFLOWER may go on at pleasure
FLEERWORD doing new semantic variations
FREEWORLD within the given parameter
Translated by Edwin Morgan
67
From Signantia: quasi coelum (Signância: 
quase céu)[ Paradisiacal Signifiers] (1979)
Das Paradies ist gleichsam über die ganze Erde verstreut—und daher 
so unkenntlich geworden
Paradise is scattered all over the earth and has therefore become 
unrecognizable
—Novalis
1
1
Crystal gland
revealsbranching of signs
sounds
the universal accord
stimulated bell
brilliant
last
comes together radiant cupola
yes a bell
71
2
enamel tonsils
striking thetinged silence
phanos phanopea theophany
the instant of things a sun
fills itself with light in the sun
like the light in the lensgleamed the glass nerves
the nucleusred
72
733
sentences
on paper
graphite
angles
subtending
the umbrellapanting
and sounding
theophany of signs vibrated shards of crystal
4
sementics
dust of light
graph
starry
but: words
unalloyedas thisnowhoweverhere
soundparticlesdigits oftimedoubtplacead
versatile
74
755
alveoli
of the diamantine globe
segments
of the large glass of sound: withgust
of total breathI sign myself
thus
2
*
Magma
the shadow fossil of a fishexcavates        the stonehere
chisel of how many
thousandyears?
Dendron:tree this stone
seeding itself on the inside
is
written: read itout of itself
76
77**
the moment
is a feather
its hologram
shimmers stable
as one who looks after the crystal
of time
fixed beamof light
(one no longer sees oneself if the eye abandons its embrasure)
angled prism perspective
the sunrainsfrom a zenithalceiling
ellipsis: a stylus of blinds
***
paradise: pistils
tongues of flameunder diamond chisel point
writing in
visible sentences
of glass
on glass
78
****
a sleeping tiger
the locust: hismandibles
the flower
claws
a pendant
weight
blood bone meat musclelike a
calligraphy brushon the page
this
artor the
character
79
*****
a dance
of swords
this delirious
writing
cursive bladesa moon
between twodragons
like a bamboo
shootpassing through vineswithout untangling them
80
******
is indigo an instance of blue?
81
3
the eye of Ra
before him
things
the scintillatedlookof them
draw by hand this cloudblue cataractof suchwhite
and he sees to:
his pollen
flamesthe no of
things
82

83you await
spreadlegsburnished basaltlioness
the stingdragonflies
electrifythe citrineair
the wings
of the archangelsevenwink:
stipulationsin the rutile
sphereof antsthe antlionreigns
veins
of laminae
the insect’s
agateshield
the pencil co-
letters everything
exfoliating letters
on paper
erection of signs
natura naturans
here the
green ofthe pupilis tinged
84
dragonflies
in the sky of dragonflies
the flight of them
over under
dragonfliespoint
where the eyeglimmerstensile wing
place of
the volatilediamond
bull’s-eye
white
85
4
chrysanthemums
solar writing
in the room
in)the crystal blockex)vase
roselionanimalthe coloredbody
ex/im/plodes
in curvedhooksreditalics
ruffled / manes
deaf-muteilluminated manu-
script
86
reading of novalis / 1977
white paint
overwhite paperto write is a form of
to see
alles ist samenkorn
everything is seed
slumberflamed
87
vision of paradise
deepblue
agate stripesclearer blueray of radiant ruby
green pastures
in slateopaque leads / shadows
another border: lacquer alight
(from the cabin — robin
redbreast —an ogivewindow thesetting sky)
rubieslacquer firesred spears
(from that — iris inthe iris — the paradiso
is made)
(in the cabinminor fires — icecubes inwhiskey — trivia& paraselene)
the phosphorous eye of Dante
(clouded over in fortified neon light
88
approximations of topaz
Tierische Natur der Flamme
—Novalis
a microcephalic
lionexplodes:
the word
topaz
89
or: rising from leopards
miniature flames of fury
each spark shoots anuminous mouth
90
the topaz
cannibalizes its yellowslens in the torrid eyeof the solar furnacelight
fiery coalsare consumed here
(ashes, grated fires, truncated 
cusps: glowing coal / wing)
the sunflower thinks:
leopazes!
91
forms that
are fleshed outbetween air and fire
forms of fire
and airthat flesh themselves out
where to discern
in the bird’s twittering throatthe air that speaksin the bird’s twittering throat?
where to discern
in the blaze of the topazthe voice of firein the blaze of the topaz?
Translated by Craig D. Dworkin
92
From A educação dos cinco sentidos
[The Education of the Five Senses] (1985)
Die Bildung der fünf Sinne ist eine Arbeit der ganzen bisherigen Welt-
geschichte.
The education of the five senses is a task for all of world history until this
day.
—Karl Marx, 1844
The Education of the Five Senses
1. chatoboys (oswald)
itching
like fleas
peirce (proust?) considering
a color—violetor an odor—cabbagerotten
rot—consider
this word: wines,horace, odes(principle of apoem—ogre)
2. the purgatory is this:
enter / inter-considerthe journey from the word stellato the word styx
3. (marx: the education of the five
senses
the tactile the mobile
the difficultto read / readablevisibilia / invisibiliathe audible / the unheardthe handthe eyethe hearingthe footthe nervethe tendon)
95
4. the air
lapidated: see
how connects, this word,to this otherlanguage: myconsciousness (a parallelogramof forces not a simpleequation of onesingleunknown factor): thislanguage is made of airand vocal cordthe hand that instills the thread of thetrellis / the breaththat unites this to thatvoice: the pointof torsiondiaphanous work but thatis made (throughout) with the fivesenses
with the color the odor the cabbage the fleas
5. rare labor such as
to spin a top on one’s
nail
but that leaves its trace
minimal (nonprescinded)in the common division (incision)of labor
pulsating trace / pulse
of the senses that are (pre)formed:unprescinded (if minimal)
the flicker of sunlight in the eye
—claritas: flash of epiphany!a few registers modulations
96
rough paper or smooth a fold
secure a cuta sure shoton the bull’s-eye
in a flash the tiger trail the deer
(sousândrade)
the tigerlike assault
6. that which accrues
rests
(in the senses)
even though minimal
(hubris of the minimalthat rests)
Translated by A. S. Bessa
97
Ode (Explicit) in Defense of Poetry on St. Lukács’s Day
the apparatchiks hate you
poetrypoor cousin(vide benjamin /talking lukács gabor kurellawith brecht one julyafternoon in svendborg)
poetry
contradictory femalethey hatemultifariousyou moreputifarianthan potiphar’swifemore ophelianthan hymenof some maidenin the antechamberof hamlet’s madness
poetry
you deviate from the normyou don’t embody historydivisionary rebellionary visionaryveiled / unveiledin a striptease for your (duchamp)bachelors, evenorganized violence against humdrummanquélanguage
98
the apparatchiks hate you
poetrybecause your property is form(as marx would say)and because you don’ttell the dancer from the danceor render unto caesar what is caesar’s/ not even the minimum (catullus):he asks for a hymnand out you comewith a porno poem
so are you the
emerald hetaera in thomas mannthe agonic snapdragonwith syphilis wings?threadsun in celan’s eye of selenite?
anna akhmatova saw you
strolling in the gardenand threw you across her shouldersa renard in mortuary silver
walter benjamin
who awaited the messiahleafing away through oneminute arc of historyany minute nowcertainly met youannunciated by his angelus novusinscribed millimetrically on a grain of wheatin the musée de cluny
adorno demanded you be
negative and dialectichermetic previdic emeticrecalcitrant
99
they say you’re on the right
but marx ( le jeune )
reader of homer dante goethein love with faust’s gretchenknew that your place is on the leftthat mad alienatedcity of the heart
and even lenin
who had a face like verlaine’sbut who ( pauvre lelian )
berated lunacharskyfor printing more than a thousand copiesof mayakovsky’s poem “ 150,000,000”
— too much paper for a futurist poem! —even lenin knewthat intelligent idealismis closer to materialismthan the materialismof unintelligentmaterialism
poetry
they hate youmiss materidealist thingthey’ll deny you bread and water(for the enemy: the boot!)— you are the enemypoetry
if only because dervish ornithologue khlebnikov
president of the terrestrial globedied of hunger in santalovover a pillow of manuscriptsbewitched by thefakirizing smilein your eyes
100
and jakobson roman
(amor /roma )
octogenarian plusquesexappealgenarianwith what delight strokesyour metaphors and metonymieswhile pleasured you openyour paronomasia’s chrysophrase wingsand he laughs in the austere bashfulness of savants
and right now right here on this
joyous mount of partridges
*
we siamêê me twins and cloud-cloamer pignatari
(who today signs signatari)love you furiouslyin the noigandres garçonnierefor more than thirty years have loved youand the result is thispoetryyou already know itlittle she-fox loosein, countercultural welterand the whole world wanting to tricapitatefor more than thirty yearswe free kings/ what’s the big idea plantingideograss in our backyard(without any orange grove oswald)?and (mário) takingcandy from our babies?
poetry’s plain
old poetry
101*The line “joyous mount of partridges” (in the original “monte alegre das perdizes”) is a reference to
de Campos’s lifelong address—Rua Monte Alegre, in the Perdizes neighborhood. — editors
102they hate you
you lumpenproletarianvoluptuarianvicariouselitist trash piranhabecause you have no messageand your content is your formand because you’re made of wordsand don’t know how to tell any storyand so you’re poetryas cage said
or as
just a bit agoaugustothe august:
flowers do flowerhummingbirds do humand poetry does poetry
Translated by Chris Daniels
T ristia
minithermal chambers
for disactivating the virus ofsadnessin citricbubbles
Translated by Odile Cisneros
103
As It Is
acupuncture with cosmic rays
realism: poetry as it ispetro-inscriptions at the tip of the tonguenear breathlessness: in lung’s last alveolisuch as it is (poetry)fire (is)fire(poetry)fire
Translated by A. S. Bessa
104
Portrait of the Artist as an Old Man
the word lumbago
attacks with bow and arrow
neurons: procession of piercing ants
on saber points
the cobra of vertebrae dances
to say that a bodhisattvaatop a columnbreathes in lotus powder
Translated by Odile Cisneros
105
Je est un autre: Ad Augustum
brother
in re / verse of egoI see youmore plus than myselfplusquamfuture minuspoetplusand in the trobar clus
of this hour (ours)poetryincestuous sisterprima pura impurain which
ourselves (Siamese-same)uni-sonoro-usother
Translated by A. S. Bessa
106
Minima Moralia
I already did all kinds of things with words
now I want to do all kinds of nothings
Translated by Odile Cisneros
107
Mencius: Theorem of White
the innate is called nature
to be called nature of the innateis the same as to be called white of white
is the white of the white feather
the same as the white of white snow?the same as the white of white jade?
how many whites is white made of?
Translated by Odile Cisneros
108
Goethean Opuscule
. . . die Nature kann die Entelechie nicht entbehren. . . .
. . . Nature cannot dispense with the entelechy . . .
—Goethe
to maintain the entelechy
activeI meanlike the match(white)lit inside waterwith fire in porphyry(inside)the gold setting
*the entelechy:
what forms veinsand uprootswhat centersand decenterswhat magnetand demagnetizes
what in the body
disembodiesand is body: aureateauralaura
*
109109
maintain it alive
in the voltaic arch of the fifty yearsthe twenties’ lyre harmonizesand vibratesis the same fire as in the sign of lionfor the combustion of this virginpagethe same punch in the solar plexusthe samequestion (combustion)of origins
*the entelechy
to maintain italive
*between larva and lemur
alivebetween dark and dullalivebetween void and dirgealive
*the entelechy
this fabrication that fabricates its fabrication
*
110
perhaps dust
after the wing fallsand unwings(unsays)an iris a luminousspeck
a last rustling of the chatty
neurons a uranium nudeilluminatingsensorial: gold setting
or the flame that quivers
in the porphyry’s core
*to maintain it alive the entelechy*rose window of black veins
gold vaporwhere blue and purple filter through
see to its beyond trans-see itrain of roses unglooming
inhale this aroma
alive to maintain it alive
the entelechy
*a form of transcendence in the descent*
111
radiant dust
iridescent quartznature hatches the metaphorof formand transnurtures: morphingforms
*active:
the active entelechy:music of the spheres
*there are no angels in this cherubic orbit
there is radiant powder (poetry)cocoons resolved in wings
an agitation of aeolian harp
a laughter where the dissolved entelechy(knot unraveled in the afterdust)spring
Translated by Micaela Kramer
112
Goethean Opuscule II
Jede Entelechie nämlich ist ein Stück Ewigkeit.
Every entelechy is, namely, a fragment of eternity.
—Goethe
The white
rain
bow: asecondpuberty: goethesaw iton the road to frankfurt(before seeing marianne)
pound (anacreon): senesco
sed amo
the rose
petrifies inliquid nitrogenand shatters only(williams: saxifrage rose?)with hammer blows
to see it
after the thermicshockafter thethawing:petals(almost stone)shattered:still silk
*of my hair
(the auburn)aging (rain)temple (bow)will turn white:
my heart won’t
Translated by Micaela Kramer
113
1984, Anno Orwelli I
while mortals
activate uranium
the butterfly
through an immortal day
perfects its cyclamen flight
Translated by Jean R. Longland
114
Tenzone
a gold of provence
(now you’ll say) an illnessof sun a burnt sunof this (mistral) wind (that goldens and makes dense)provider of words sun-provencea diamond’s point rhyme in -enceas one who looks        counter to the sunto counterwind sense
Cogolin, Provence
Translated by Micaela Kramer
115
Provença: Motz E. L. Son
against the
unflinching light
the eye
turns emerald
the eye(against theunflinching light)crumbles
the emerald eyeagainst the light:
crumb
(that crushes)
and binds together
light
sound of cicadas
Translated by A. S. Bessa
116
Le don du poème
a poem begins
where it ends:the margin of doubt
a sudden incision of geraniumscommands its destiny
and yet it begins
(where it ends) and the headashen (white top or albinocucurbit laboring signs) curves it-self under lucifer’s gift —
dome of signs: and the poem begins
quiet cancerous madnessthat demands these lines from the white(where it ends)
Translated by A. S. Bessa
117
Heraclitus Revisited ( 1973)
Ho Ánax
the oracle
at Delphiisn’t eloquentor silent
it assigns
*
Pánta Rhei
all riverrun
Translated by Odile Cisneros
118
Paraphernalia for Hélio Oiticica
1.
reticlesnets unnetsreticulairs airs areassnares resnares netsareasreticulairsreticularianecklaces of small squaresbeads cubiclesareas airssnares resnaresdisarticulariaof real areasthe face implodeskaleidoscopichameleon
2.
yellowthe bellows of yellowredthe reflections of redgreenthe resonance of greenbluethe nudes of bluethe meadows of yellowthe roads of redthe schemes of greenthe nude zulus of bluethe white elephants of white
119
3.
helios, the sun, does not exceed
4.
(cinetheater noh / psicoset-designed by sousândrade
with ideogramic script by eisenstein):
where you read hagoromo, read instead parangolé
where you see mount fuji, see instead hillside of mangueira
the parangorome
pluriplumes
heliexcelshelliphantcellucinaryuntildissolskying itselfin the skyof skies
5.helio mounts the zeppelin of colorspowered by parangol’heliumand dissolves in the sky’s sun
Translated by Micaela Kramer
120
From Galáxias [Galaxies] (1963–1976, 1984)
and here I begin I spin here the beguine I respin and begin
to release and realize life begins not arrives at the end of a tripwhich is why I begin to respin to write-in thousand pages write thousandone pagesto end write begin write beginend with writing and so I begin to respinto retrace to rewrite write on writing the future of writing’s the tracingthe slaving a thousandone nights in a thousandone pagesor a page in one night the same nights the same pagessame resemblance resemblance reassemblance where the end is beginwhere to write about writing’s not writing about not writingand so I begin to unspin the unknown unbegun and trace me a bookwhere all’s chance and perchance all a book maybe maybe not a travelnavelof-the-world book a travel navelof-the-book world where tripping’s the bookand its being’s the trip and so I begin since the trip is beguine and I turnand return since the turning’s respinning beginning realizinga book is its sense every page is its sense every line of a page every wordof a line is the sense of the line of the page of the books which essaysany book an essay of essays of the book which is why the begin endsbegins and end spins and re-ends and refines and retunes the fine funnel ofthe begunend spun into de runend in the end of the beginend refinesthe refined of the final where it finished beginnish reruns and returnsand the finger retraces a thousandone stories an incey wince-story and so countof no account I don’t recount the nonstory uncounts me discounts me the reverse
122
of the story is snot can be rot maybe story depends on the moment
the glory depends on the now and the never on although and no-goand nowhere and noplace and nihil and nixit and zero and zilch-itand never can nothing be all can be all can be total sumtotal surprising summation of sumptuous assumptionand here I respin I begin to project my echo the wreck o recurrentecho of the echoing blow the hollows of moreaus the marrow that’s beyonderthe over the thisaway thataway everywhere neverwhere overhere overthereforward more backward less there in reverse vice verse prosa converseI begin I respin verse begin vice respin so that summated story won’t consume consummatesaltimbocca bestride me barebackboneberide mebegin the beguine of the trip where the travel’s the marvel the scrabble’s themarble the vigil’s the travel the trifle the sparkle the embers of fable discountinto nothing account for the story since spinning beginning i’m speaking
Translated by Suzanne Jill Levine from a basic version by Jon Tolman
123
’rounded by flowers under god’s under devil’s mercy god shall guide you for I myself
can’t guide godbless those who give ’rounded by flowers and those who are stillto give sounding like a samisen made of a tensed wire a stickand an old tin can at the end of the partyfair at highnoonhigh but formany that music did not exist it could not because it could not popplayif not sung that music is not popular if not in tune it does not atone nortarantina and yet struck in the gut of misery in the tensed gut of the meagerestphysical misery aching aching like a nail in the handpalm arusty blind nail in the palm clasping palm of the handheart exposed as a tensed nerveretensed a renigrated blind nail everlasting in the palmpulp of the hand in the sunwhile selling for meager cruzeiros gourds in which the good form isfine meagerness of matter morphing famineform of halfbaked clay in the rottenrootof distress until others vomit their plastic plates of embroideredborders empirestyle for mistress misery for this is popular forthe patrons of the people but people create and people engender and people wonderpeople are the languageinventor in the malice of the mastery in the smartness of marvelingin the vein to improvise stutterttrying to traverse oiling the sun’s axisfor people know no servitude pure or quasi metaphor people il miglior fabbroin the hammering gait aiming the impossible in view of the nonviablein the crux of the incredible oiled hammergait and the sunaxisbut the wire that wire that bladewire painpained toothaching likea demented plangent wire hammering its widowed dischord in blazing brasses of howlinghunger ’rounded by flowers ’rounded by flowers ’rounded by flooowers
124
for I myself cant guide check this book this object of consumption this undergod
underthedevilsmercybook which I arrange and disarrange which I unite and disunite voyagesof a vagamonde in the vagaries of vague moons god shall guide the devil shall guide you then for Ican’t don’t dare or care don’t trick nor touch or trade but only for mychange my pennies my pains my rings my ten fingers my minuses mynadas my penuries in the antennas in the waves in these niñas most minutecalled bagatelles as we’ll verify in the verbenas powder-sugary lilies orminor circumstances I know all this don’t count all this disappoints I’m notsure but listen how it sings value how it tells savor how it dances and don’t propose thatI guide don’t pose dispose that I guide unguided that I pray for promisethat I trust you leave me forget me let me go untie me so that at the end Istand erect at the end I revert at the end I concert and for the end I reserve myselfas it will be seen that I am correct it will be seen that there is a way it will be seen that it’s been doneand that through wrongs I made it right that from a scent I made a cent and if I do not guideI do not lament for the master who taught me does not teach any longer baggage ofmirrormoon in the mirage of the second that through inversion I was dexterous being invertedbeing gauche I do not guide because I do not guide because I can not guide and don’t ask me formementos just dwell on this moment and demand my commandment and do not fly just defydo not confide defile for between yes and no I for one prefer the noin the knowing of yes place the no in the ee of me place the no the no will be yours to know
Translated by A. S. Bessa
125
passtimes and killtimes i wendaway darkling for mindamends through
this minimeandering instant of minutes instancing somebody andinstanced beyond to telltale a scheherazade thistory my fairy how manyfates are there in each nullitywee thread discard nines leaving noughtscheherazade scheherazade a nightstory a thousandtimes overtold thenthe sonnyboy soulumbering into this nightdark florest came and a dragosevensnouted dragoned his swellhand into a fernavid and cavernishgrottohollow my boy wants knowhow to unpick this threadform howto sideslip this cavern only the dragon all dragoning knows the key tothis festival and now the dragon at his siesta is asnoozing then whenmyboy began his ringawinnow round a rosaromanorum gesta in thebosk he stumbled on the sleepy beauty bellabella tell me a life thistorybut sleepy beauty in the silence sleepeyed on and nobody told him ifthere was any forthgoes myboy to a kingdom interlunar where the deadking was up and the upwas king is dead but nobody told him thesideslip thistory myboy is only so posed now to suffer the firetrial toford the bosk and florrage through the river for the headbone that isthere in the well’s depth in the depth of pickatomb and catafalque inthis well is a caput mortuum myboy doth to godbye suffer a seachangein the caboose but the head does not tell the thistory of its well if therewas or if there was not if it was girl or boy a swan of anothertimeappears to him in a dream and to the swan country takes him swirlingin a bird flock myboy asks the swan about thistory he sings his swansong and swanenchants himself and now is Mrs Sun in the One-Who-Waits and her golden rain illuminates myboy she is in her danaë towerincubus princess crowned by a shower tell me your pluvial tale how it
126
was the gold in a torrent of dust made spawn your treasure but auri-
confused the princess of gold clammed up and for to find the taletalemyboy wend on his way from post to pillar from muse to medusa alldot in white and white in dot scheherazade my fairy this is all goingnowhere princess my princess what a thistory of maze-understandinghow many more veins and volutes and volutions find a verysimilthat will make of speech the verity and transform in fate a fairythis sybilline simil of destiny’s mercurianimal serpentine malefemale and inspeech transforms the fate find me this wickedworking blindworm fish-word where the song sings the tale of the song where the why does nottell how where the egg searches in the egg for its retribrilliant ovalitywhere the fire became water the water a body of vapor where thenude unmakes its not and the nut snows itself with nothing a fairy tellsa tale that is her deathsong but nobody not even a tiny one can knowof this fairy her tale where it begins indeed where it finishes there is nosoul to face for to be told it she is all enchanted water go boy mytinyboy to unimagine this fatamorgana is fatiguising a malefelonioussentence you dig miles downunder and come out in the well where youdig you work three hundred for three cent you change diamondsmyriads for a crude coal who knows if this coal might be the diamon-diferous dust the mother-of-diamonds morgana of the charmstonesand the boy went and the legend does not tell of his ongoing if he cameback or did not if from his going one does not come back the legendpokerface does not say only unsays only keeps going around andaround and around
Translated by Norman Potter and Christopher Middleton
127
on the jagged crown of the headlines sharp edges of letters like broken
thorns and polishmooths its will as would a diamond that-yes despite theweary lungs old bellows burned by asthma or flesh-colored sponges onthe lam but polishmooths and the country folk with suspicious impenetrableeyes idols olive until the old lady in las higueras with her messengergoats from the inferno one league away from higueras and two from a ladlehighroads halfways disroads the polished will is a diamond andsparkles with its virile crest open-eyed barely-bearded and the scrap of asmile half-exposed on its lips the whole scene foreseen among the possibleones probed and pondered among the probable ones by a logical calculation evenwhere the will took root to be lapicide to this crystal here the book stops over shifttriptych now the scene is clearing marilyn marilynda amaryllis of marilynin vermillion and black and blonde and rosey pink and pubicrinoline nowpen armsbatdove with vampire wings in a hairnet of gold so boldly blond that from thev of its breasts she hangs a goblet of dark and nylon stockings hands clasped lateron a knee that in-compasses another knee and the red rounds apruderude fear beneath the blondphote hair eardrumdome of agrinning grimace or could already be rictus rather its still a laugh in the venus-drummed foam of the armchair this third marilyn is biteful but says bettermost bitter her hardcut profile beneath the yellow hairdo helmetshe sits naked and half open post ludium vel post coitum halfopen maybe manhandled or publiseen multitouched open fornicatedin a multicoitus that flows like a glutailine of corrosive sperm she
128
sits leaning on a forearm stump her breasts are mammary
glands and heavy like wax oranges on the other arm a handleplucks the shroudress could be straddling a funereal bidetforked thighs and the emblazoned womb crinolined but whollyand more than totally weary weary weary and a fury of frust-rated spit and saliva wound into the book the triptych and triumphof venus wounds the womb scarlet cherry and necrosey overshift well to polish the will and shine it like an artist and havingthe new stone under the emery wheel see it become vertexand radiate from an obstinate rigor day after day after day when a changeof clothes will do and a little moreto eat and drink to get to the higuerasan old-lady goat herder and taken too all the way there by wornoutlungs an old lady two ladle leagues away closed olive mysteryall this was written in an agenda tagebuch a travelog thethird marilyn is dead naked dead saddle-straddling the funereal bidetpsychodelicolors shocking-pink and magneto-blue drop dead for the sightof a dallas rifle on the jagged crown of the headlines like awaxen christ an hombre of andalusian shapes between the handsof the clock all the entire afternoon the shots needling so hot that you neededa hanky some cloth a rag to protect your hands the first and thesecond the vampiresque and the dodging prude the tigering and the pigeondovereturn but the third hour of the smelinfant sexyfulvous fury prevails and is dead
Translated by Charles A. Perrone
129
From Finismundo: A última viagem [Finismundo:
The Last Voyage] (1990)
. . . per voler veder trapassò il segno
. . . because he wished to see, he trespassed the sign
I.
Ultimate
Odysseus multi-artful —in the extremeAvernotense limit —re-proposes a voyage.
Where, from Hercules,
vigilant columns the wavecastigate: veering off one more
step — where to go a-
head means to trans-gress the measure the si-
lent sigils of Fate.
Where
the unbound hubris-prone ad-vises: Not!to the Naut —Odysseus (pale erecting the captaininghead to the goal addressed ) pre-meditates: trans-pass the pass-age: the impasse-to-be: enigmasolved (if at last) inthin hulls of(in)sapphire(d) airs —defy.Defy most:the beyond-return the post : un-foreseen thread in Penelope’s web.
133
Defy
(un)memory(able) man of Ithaca —that
beyond-memory —the re-verse: Ithaca reversed:nonpacifiedvigil of the warrior in place of
the venture the adventurous(dis)place il folle volo .
T ry the untriedyou expatriate —damned to the gods-lares.
To re-
iterate in leaving. Defy —hubris-propelled —seaafter sea. The impervious-obscurePelasgian chaosup to where is hidden the forbiddengeography of Eden— Paradisoon Earth: the interdicted portal:the lucerne: over thereisthmus extreme isleopen access to terrestrialheaven: to transfinite.
134
Odysseus senescent
rejects the pervasive —headstrong
torso of Penelope —
consolation of peace. The keel in the waves
plows once again (such as never before)
the irate
mirror of Poseidon: the wine-tingedheart of the oceansea.
Destiny: astray
unchartedFinismundo: therewhere begins the outlawedfrontier of extraheaven.
Thus:
break the forbidden seal: de-virginate the veil. Coupof all coups. Unremittingvortical mission.
He went       —
Odysseus.
(The ancient legend does not tell
of the Polumetis the onerous fate.
Or if it does
deceives in variety: unends an end.)
Odysseus went. Lost his comrades.
By the border-viewof the desired isle —already seeingthe unattainable Eden at the quasitouch of the hand: the Gods had conspired.The sky sums the scourges of the Arcanum.The ship repelled/Abyss/ blown by fate.
135
Odysseus at sea.
Ephemeral signs in the vortex
reveal the wreckage —
push and pullcaught in the moment.
Water. Erasure.
And Fate raging famine. Ultimate
thánatos eks halós
death arising from salty sea
hubris.
Odysseus senescent
refused from Glory the funereal pomp.A sole scaradorns Poseidon’s chest.Cloistered is the point. The roundOcean resonates taciturn.Serenades now the convulsive chantdolceamaro plaint of Sirens
(ultrasound uncaptured by human ears).
136
137. . . ma l’un de voi dica
dove per lui perduto a morir gisse
2.Urban Ulyssesto myth survived(I and You my hypo-
chondriac critic[al]reader) civilfactotum (Polumetis?)of computerized chance. Yourepitaph?Margin of error: minimumdigitized traceand in a hurry canceledin the fluidgreen liquid crystal.
Circumnavigation?
No more. Vigilant semaphores.
Your Promethean fire resumedto the spark of a match phosphor-Lucifer
portableand/orflammable bagatelle.
Capitulate
(coldheaded)your hubris. No signs
of Sirens.Penultimate —all you aspire to
is your penury of ultimateThule. A postcard from Eden
will content you.
Strident sirens
scar your quotidian heart.
Translated by A. S. Bessa
From Crisantempo: no espaço curvo nasce um
[Chrysantempo: In Curved Space Is Born A](1998)
As in Ovid: Metamorphosis
it was)
a dryad
makes agesture
winter)
in the recessof the trunk sheinhabitsa spring daylights up
Translated by Micaela Kramer
141
Minimal Landscape
A hunchbacked
gardenerwatering vegetables—rising from the green—in the solaryard
Translated by Micaela Kramer
142
Poem for Qohelet 1: New Year, Day One
life went by like a
blindlike a deadbatthat slows downdelays this dailywakingwithout memorydaily dismemoryshipwreckedbetween the way out and the outcomenaughtabout knowing nothing:no jet nor projectpoetrythought as a point ( punctum )
blind spot in the retinaunder a savage sunpoetrythe end of that string burstingmade fragile by the siegeof reality’s daily task:CEOs riding on horsebackovernight nights
where the throb of sleepless lemursrates zerozero and rats—factsthis new year’s Sundayforty years of poetry are a uselessblock of shavingsgarbage lixotrash
I heard the fountainonceand the murmur of the fountain:
the hand burnt
the writing was deformedthe burnt disfigured the face
the horizon closed on me
Translated by Odile Cisneros
143
Poem for Qohelet 2: In Praise of the Termite
termites have taken over the library
I hear their muted noisethe zero-chant of the termiteshumans deserted the librarywords transformed into papertermites occupy the place of humansgreedy for paper cellulose expertshuman pride is humbled worm-eaten wood
all is vain
a leprosy of termites gnaws on paper booksbeetles beat prideand thus we shall remain corpses full of worms
I write this in praise of the termite
Translated by Odile Cisneros
144
The Revolt of Objects
objects revolt
they assault the air gapsthey leap from the confines ofhabitual (solid) substance
they confront us
furiouslyirate of so much obab/jectionof so much ad-jectival passivityof such much thinging dis-connected (dyslexic) of things in-animatethingified and kept:
now they earn claws
objectsfree from the enclavesanchored with mooringsrebellious thingsannoyedlike porcupinessuicidally prickingthe warm ventral regions:
irate
uselessre-voltthe hand of chance(or is it the not of theinefficient cause?)decapitating things:decapitated      beheadedobjectswithout headings (rebels without a cause)they capitulate
they return to their un-case
to their (insistent) un-being:they regress to their stubborn condition of things
Translated by Odile Cisneros
145
Links for a Renga
the semaphore’s red
eye – polyphemic light –scrutinizes the jet-black light
urine-
yellow sun-spotin the chamber-pot
azure
out ofgarbage
crows in the deep-
darklearning versesby heart
Translated by Haroldo de Campos
146
The Left-Winged Angel of History
the landless men at last
are now settled down on landlandingfull-landed landwards:from landless they change tolandlords: look at themlandlockedin their shallow gravesexiled from their life-breathterrorizedfrom earthuneartheddust that to dust returnsplenipossessorsglebe-patroonsof a commonsharedpotter (butcher’s meat) field:
downwards finally
embeddedinto the latiwombof the latifundium(which far from im-productive re-veals itself as most fe-cund: it generates a pin-guid rubiginouscrop ofbloody clots—plowmenwithout plowland—look at themfinally converted into larvaeinto mortuaryspoilscoffins carved on thethin timber of
147
themselves: the killer’s bullet
ambushed themdeathscareddreadseateddecumbentdriven pre-destinatarian of agrar-ian re(hungry)(dis)formation: lookat them – gre-garious communityof nothingness’ pards
a-
shamedshamefaced –abashabasedagonizing frominmostabrasive re-morse –fatherland(how to be proud of?)fatherlesslandmourns their de-possessed pariah–parricide fatherland
that perhaps only when
the flaming swordof the gauche-archangel ofhistory counterwind flashingand inflamingthe agromortician associatesof the funereal sodalitywhere commander-in-chief deathgives orders to a darkgendarmerie of janizary-jagunzos:perhaps only the angel(arch) of counter-hair brushed historywith hisvortex-whirling sword
148
would one day
(one dazzling day) per-haps summon fromthe misty mesh ofdays to comethe one(finally super-venient) day of thejustadjustmentof accounts
Translated by Haroldo de Campos
149
Gongorine T ribute to Sá de Miranda
deafening song of nightingales
the sun    so large      it blinds   góngora’s sun(“salamandra del sol”)    and the chessboardof stars receding glittersfrom facing the sun       yellow-sulfur jet   crucible     saffron     light radiates
stars await their turn—
to day dimrotation gives way:that’s when I write      recollectionof solar light     nostalgic      I spellwith diamond nib on tarnishedcard syllables—star-syllables—I pour sunsap on the darkpage
Translated by Odile Cisneros
150
The Poet Ezra Pound Descends to Hell
not to the limbo
of those never alivenot evento the purgatory of those who awaitbut to the hellof those who persevere in errordespite any belated contritionand the mute old age—straight with integritythe old ezalready a ghost of himself
and in such damnation
such splendor of paradise
Translated by Micaela Kramer
151
II :Essays
Reinventing Tradition
Anthropophagous Reason: Dialogue and 
Difference in Brazilian Culture
Echte Polemik nimmt ein Buch sich so liebevoll vor, wie ein Kannibale sich
einen Säugling zurüstet.
Genuine polemics approach a book as lovingly as a cannibal spices a baby.
—Walter Benjamin*
Avant-Garde and/or Underdevel opment
The question of the national and the universal (notably, of the 
European) in Latin American culture, a question involving other more spe-
cific ones, such as that of the relationship between a universal cultural her-itage and local specificities or, even more precisely, the possibility of anavant-garde, experimental literature in an underdeveloped country, is oneI addressed in an article from 1962.
1In that paper, I relied on Engels’s
reflections on the problem of the division of labor in philosophy containedin a famous letter to Conrad Schmidt ( 27October 1890): “But in every
This article was originally published as “Da razão antropofágica: A Europa sob o signo da devoração,”
Colóquio/Letras 62(July 1981): 10–26. This is a new translation of this seminal essay; a different English
version appeared as “The Rule of Anthropophagy: Europe under the Sign of Devoration,” trans. MariaTai Wolff, Latin American Literary Review 14,n o .  27(January–June 1986): 42–60.— translator
* Walter Benjamin, “Die Technik des Kritikers in dreizehn Thesen,” in Gesammelte Werke, vol. 4, part
1, ed. Tillman Rexroth (Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 1972), 108. In English: “The Technique of the Critic in
Thirteen Theses,” in One-Way Street and Other Writings, trans. Edmund Jephcott and Kingsley Shorter
(New York:Verso, 1997), 67.— translator
157
epoch philosophy, as a definite sphere of the division of labor, presupposes
a definite fund of ideas inherited from its predecessors and from which ittakes its departure. And that is why economically backward countries cannevertheless play first fiddle where philosophy is concerned. . . .”
*For
Engels the supremacy of economics is not registered directly but in the“terms laid down by each individual field” ( 62), that is, indirectly, mediated
by the intellectual material transmitted. Engels criticized those who wereincapable of taking into account the complexity of this movement, cultur-ally speaking: “What all these gentlemen lack is dialectics” ( 63). Engels also
coined the image of the “infinite group of parallelograms of forces”
†lead-
ing to the historical event and which, despite the postulated economicsupremacy, ultimately cannot be the object of a simplistic, mechanicalstudy, as if it were the case of solving a “simple equation of the first degree”(letter to Joseph Bloch, 21September 1890, 35).
It always seemed to me that, in terms of literary labor, this complex law
of the transmission of a cultural legacy also holds; a law from which poeticproduction cannot escape and one that could allow us to identify the emer-gence of the new, even within the conditions of an underdeveloped econ-omy.
2This is particularly true today, as we witness the real confirmation of
what Marx and Engels foresaw: “In place of the old local and nationalseclusion and self-sufficiency, we have intercourse in every direction, uni-versal interdependence of nations. And as in material, so also in intellectualproduction. National one-sidedness and narrow-mindedness become moreand more untenable, and from the numerous national and local literaturesthere arises a world literature.”
3Goethe’s idea of a Weltliteratur, in the con-
text of that passage, can be reread as intersemiotic praxis: it is the realm ofcommunications, the dialogic pressure of generalized intersubjective com-munication, which orders and configures the universal literary sign as an“ideological sign” (in Voloshinov’s—and/or Bakhtin’s—sense, as he tried toformulate his Marxist-based “sociological semiotics” in the 1920s);
4a meet-
ing point of discourses, a necessary dialogue and not a monologic xeno-phobia, a parallelogram of forces in dialectical tension and not theequivalent of a mimetic-Pavlovian unknown. Thus, any mechanistic reduc-tion, any self-punishing fatalism—according to which, to an economicallyunderdeveloped country must correspond an underdeveloped literature, as
158 NOVAS* In Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Engels: 1890–92 ,vol. 49of Collected Works (New York: International Pub-
lishers, 2001), 62. All references to Engels’s letters in this essay are quoted from this source. — translator
†In the source quoted, the passage reads “unending multitude of fortuities” ( 35). I've preserved the
author’s original geometric allusion. — translator
if by conditioned reflex—always seemed to me the fallacy of a naive soci-
ologism.
Later, I found in Octavio Paz’s “Invention, Underdevelopment, Moder-
nity” ( Alternating Current, 1967) enlightening observations which, by an
intellectual coming from another Latin American country, confirmed myown reflections on the problem of the Brazilian poet’s situation vis-à-visthe universal:
A number of Mexican critics use the word “underdevelopment” todescribe the present situation in Hispano-American arts and letters: ourculture is “underdeveloped,” the work of X or Y represents a breakingaway from the “underdevelopment of the novel in our country,” and soon and so forth. As I see it, the word refers to certain currents that arenot to these critics’ liking (or to mine): chauvinistic nationalism, acad-emicism, traditionalism, and the like. But the word “underdevelop-ment” is a United Nations euphemism for backward nations. Thenotion of “underdevelopment” is an offshoot of the idea of social andeconomic progress. Aside from the fact that I am very much averse toreducing the plurality of cultures and the very destiny of man to a sin-gle model, industrial society, I have serious doubts as to whether therelationship between economic prosperity and artistic experience is oneof cause and effect. Cavafy, Borges, Unamuno, and Reyes cannot belabeled “underdeveloped” writers, despite the marginal economic statusof Greece, Spain, and Latin America. Moreover, the rush to “develop”reminds me of nothing so much as a frantic race to arrive at the gates ofHell ahead of everyone else.
*
I believe that in Brazil, with Oswald de Andrade’s “Anthropophagy” in
the 1920s (revisited in the 1950s as a philosophical-existential cosmic vision
in his thesis A crise da filosofia messiânica [The Crisis of Messianic Philoso-
phy]), we experienced the strong urge to rethink the national in a dialogicand dialectical relationship with the universal. Oswald’s “Anthro-pophagy”—as I have written elsewhere
5—is a theory proposing the critical
devouring of universal cultural heritage, formulated not from the submis-sive and reconciled perspective of the “noble savage” (idealized followingthe model of European virtues in the “nativist” vein of Brazilian romanti-cism by authors such as Gonçalves Dias and José de Alencar, for example),but from the disabused point of view of the “bad savage,” devourer of
Reinventing Tradition 159*Octavio Paz, Alternating Current, trans. Helen R. Lane (New York: Viking Press, 1973), 19.— translator
whites, the cannibal. This last view does not involve submission (conver-
sion) but, rather, transculturation, or, even better, “transvalorization”: acritical view of history as a negative function (in Nietzsche’s sense), capa-ble of appropriation and of expropriation, of dehierarchization, of decon-struction. Any past which is an “other” for us deserves to be negated. Wecould even say, it deserves to be eaten, devoured, with the following clari-fying pro viso: The cannibal was a “polemicist” (from the Greek polemos,
meaning “struggle, combat”), but he was also an “anthologist”—hedevoured only the enemies he considered courageous, taking their mar-row and protein to fortify and renew his own natural energies. Forinstance, Oswald de Andrade was inspired, to a certain extent, by BlaiseCendrars’s nomadic poetic cubism (whom he also, in turn, influenced,during the so-called heroic phase of “Poesia pau-brasil” [“Brazilwoodpoetry”] in 1923–24). Yet, in lieu of the traveling “pirate of Lac Léman’s”
Kodak, busy recording the picturesque and exotic elements it came across
during Cendrars’s wanderings in Brazilian lands, we find the camera-eye
of Oswald’s minute-poem shooting a critical element, capturing a satiricnote in Brazil’s fossilized national life. He detonates a grenade of irrever-ent humor not found in Cendrars’s touristy Brazilian poems collected inFeuilles de route. With Oswald, in the 1920s, we are already closer, by
anticipation, to the anti-illusionism of Brecht’s laconic poetry of the late1930s (the poems written in “basic German” and sharpened with criticalbarbs) than to Cendrars’s unengagé color slides. The Swiss poet thoughthe had rediscovered Brazil and poached his Brazilian friend in a cos-mopolitan fondue pot.
*Oswald borrowed his camera and returned the
favor by eating him. Here are the subtleties of the great Indian chief Cun-hambebe: “Here comes our dinner, hopping along,” as the T upinambasaid at the sight of the European Hans Staden.
†The case to some extent
parallels that of Huidobro and Reverdy. Bracketing out the idle polemics
160 NOVAS* The author refers to the trip that Blaise Cendrars took to Brazil with Oswald de Andrade and Tarsila
do Amaral. For a full account, see A aventura brasileira de Blaise Cendrars: ensaio, cronologia, filme, depoi-
mentos, antologia, ed. Alexandre Eulalio; rev. Carlos Calil (São Paulo: EDUSP/FAPESP/Imprensa Ofi-
cial 2001). —translator
† Reference to a sixteenth-century German traveler in Brazil who lived for some time among theT upinamba Indians, practitioners of cannibalist rites. His 1557autobiographical account of captivity is
entitled Warhaftige Historia und Beschreibung eyner Landtschafft der wilden, nacketen, grimmigen Men-
schfresser Leuthen in der Newenwelt America gelegen; available in English as Hans Staden, the True History
of His Captivity, 1557,trans. and ed. by Malcolm Letts (London: G. Routledge & Sons, 1928). 
—translator
over who came first, which of Reverdy’s poems could match the force and
originality of Altazor ’s aeroepic synthesis?
Modal Nationalism vs. Ontological Nationalism
I believe that an ontological nationalism, modeled after the organic/bio-
logical pattern of a plant’s development (a model that secretly inspires anyform of literary historiography seeking to identify a “national classicism,”a moment of perfection of gradual blossoming, nourished by the “objec-tivist claim” or by the “immanent teleology” of nineteenth-century histori-cism),
6can be contrasted (or, at least, for the sake of “ventilation” of this
domain, counterpoised, in the musical sense of the word “counterpoint”)with a modal, differential nationalism. In the former case, one seeks theorigin and the parousia-like itinerary of a specific national Logos. This is anepisode of the Western metaphysics of presence, transferred to our tropicallatitudes, one that doesn’t quite realize the final meaning of this transfer; achapter to be added to the Platonizing logocentrism which Derrida, in Of
Grammatology, subjected to a lucid and revealing analysis, not accidentally
at the instigation of two “ex-centrics,” Fenollosa, the anti-Sinologist, andNietzsche, the shatterer of certainties. This first ontological case seeks tolocate the moment of incarnation of the national spirit (of the Logos),obscuring difference (the disruptions and infractions, the margins, the“monstrous”) to better define a certain privileged course: the straight pathof that logophany across history. Its apex (comparable to the organic thrust
of the tree) coincides with the parousia of this Logos, in full bloom in thedomestic backyard. Yet, when it comes to describing this entified sub-stance—the national “character”—one falls into a watered-down and con-ventional “half-portrait,” where nothing is characteristic and theconciliatory patriocentrism must resort to hypostases to sustain itself.Machado de Assis, for example. The great and unclassifiable Machado,swallower of Sterne and of countless others. (He coined the metaphor ofthe head as a “ruminator’s stomach,” where, as Augusto Meyer recalls in asubtle study of sources, “all suggestions, after being chopped up and mixed,are prepared for a new remastication, a complicated chemistry where onecan no longer tell the assimilating organism from the assimilated matter.”)
*
So Machado—our nineteenth-century Borges—whose works mark the
Reinventing Tradition 161* Quoted from Augusto Meyer, Machado de Assis, 3d ed. (Rio de Janeiro: Presença, 1975), 110.— translator
zenith of that parousia in the summa of these logophanic readings, is
national because he is not national. Like Fernando Pessoa’s mythologicalUlysses, who “foi por não ser existindo” [was by way of not being] and “noscreou” [made us].
*
Hence the necessity of thinking the difference, nationalism as a dialogic
movement of difference (and not as the Platonic anointing of origin and aconveniently homogenizing strickle). The need to think the uncharacter,instead of the character; the rupture instead of the linear course; historiog-raphy as the seismic graph of subversive fragmentation rather than the tau-tological homologation of the homogeneous. A rejection of the substantialistmetaphor of natural, gradual, and harmonious evolution. A new idea oftradition (antitradition) funtioning as a counterevolution, as a countercur-rent opposed to the glorious, prestigious canon. A thesis of Adorno’s,recalled by Jauss: “There we find the actual theme of the meaning of tradi-tion: that which is relegated to the side of the road, scorned and sup-pressed; that which is collected under the name of old junk: it is there, andnot in the set of works which supposedly challenge time, where what istruly alive in tradition takes its refuge.”
7
Mário de Andrade, creating Macunaíma, the national antihero “with-
out a character,”†denounced, perhaps subliminally (or, we could say here,
Oswaldianly), the logocentric fallacy which lurks in any ontologicalnationalism. The Macunaimic search, seen from this radical perspective,differs from/defers (in the Derridean double meaning of divergence anddelay) the talismanic moment of monologic plenitude. It suspends the dog-matic investiture of a single, unique character to be ultimately found.(From this stems the danger of reevangelizing the savage-cannibalesquenature of the Macunaimic project, crowning it with the religious halo ofthe grail: the danger of putting the “son-of-Mary,” candle-bearing Indian,the knightly Guarani ridiculed in Oswald’s “Cannibalist manifesto,” in theplace of the Brazilian anthropophagous trickster. A mistake—or an attemptat exorcism—made by the European missionaries who translated the nameof Macunaíma [the “Great Evil” of the Roraima Indians]—as the holyname of the Christian God . . .) After this incessantly deferred and frus-trated (deamplified) search remains the difference, the disconcerting, “car-nivalized,” never thoroughly resolved dialogic movement of the same and
162 NOVAS* English translation of the poem “Ulysses” in Fernando Pessoa, Message, trans. Jonathan Griffin (Lon-
don: Menard Press/King’s College London, 1992), 17.— translator
†Reference to Mário de Andrade’s 1928novel Macunaíma; in English, trans. E. A. Goodland (New York:
Random House, 1984). —editors
alterity, of the aboriginal and the alien (the European). A paradoxical crit-
ical space, as opposed to the doxa: the ever-renewed, instigating interroga-
tion, in lieu of the soothing precepts of the Boy Scout Manual.
In this logophanic substantialism, there is little distinction between the
two main models for reading tradition put forth by contemporary Brazil-ian literary historiography: the dysphoric and the euphoric: Antonio Can-dido’s (Formação da literatura brasileira [The Formation of Brazilian
Literature ], 1959) and Afrânio Coutinho’s ( Introdução à literatura no Brasil
[An Introduction to Literature in Brazil ], 1959;
*Conceito de literatura
brasileira [The Concept of Brazilian Literature ], 1960; A tradição afortunada
[The Fortunate Tradition ]1968). Candido economically omits the baroque
on the basis of a sociological argument (the absence of printed works andof a reading public) and locates the inaugural “formative moment” in pre-romantic Arcadianism. Assembling his theory with the elegance and inter-nal coherence of a mathematical construct based on the scheme oftransmission of referential (thematic-nativist) messages, Candido privi-leges, in the process, the communicative and emotional functions of lan-guage (expressing its “profound inconstancies”) and, by extension, those ofliterature. On the other hand, he also fuels a certain ironic skepticism withregard to the arbitrariness involved in the critical gesture of objective inter-pretation and vis-à-vis the aesthetic profitability of the model thus con-structed (in this sense, a dysphoric model). Coutinho is capable of
recuperating the Brazilian baroque without major restrictions or question-able methodological inhibitions through the stylistic-journalistic criteriawhich mold the work, latu sensu. (This important recovery constitutes its
principal merit.) He turns to the reconstruction of a supposedly “fortu-nate” tradition: an ascending evolutionary ladder (not without traces ofufanismo [boastfulness])
†in which the baroque is naturally integrated as an
early blossoming. This approach is less concerned with the rigorous defin-ition of its semiological reading model, which seems to depend on the for-
tune itself—axiomatically declared as such—of such a tradition. (Thus, I
call it a euphoric model.)
Reinventing Tradition 163*Available in English as An Introduction to Literature in Brazil, trans. Gregory Rabassa (New York: Colum-
bia University Press, 1969). —translator
† The term ufanista (from ufanar-se, "to boast"), came to describe a category of Brazilian literature pro-
duced in the second half of the sixteenth century and which tended to glorify the land and its riches.
Closer to our times, Por que me ufano do meu país (1901) by Count Afonso Celso (1860–1938 ), fostered
similar naive and sentimental thought by praising the potential of Brazil, its natural beauty, wealth,and youth. — translator
Both models, however, are bound in the same parousia-like struggle
(even if with different, and even antagonistic, ideological overtones): the
constitution of the national spirit (or conscience), positing Machado deAssis as the terminus ad quem of this ontological course, as the culmina-tion. In both cases, too, a more rigorous analysis reveals the historiograph-ical culmination of the fundamental project of Brazilian romanticism (withthe expected theoretical refinements and the attempt to “normalize” thedisturbing interference of Machado de Assis). This project is understood byAntonio Candido as a “process of genealogical construction,” a “linearprocess of Brazilianization,” whose naive phase—with Machado, romanti-cism would become adult and critical—is picturesquely illustrated thus bythis critic: “The result would be a kind of spectrogram in which the samecolor would go from the faintest shades to the most densely tinted, endingin the triumphant nationalism of the romantic Indianist school.”
*
The Baroque: The Noninfancy
Any logocentric question of origins in Brazilian literature (and this
could apply to other Latin American literatures, excluding the problem ofthe great pre-Columbian cultures, which should be studied as a specialcase) runs up against a historiographical hurdle: the baroque.
8The baroque
for us is the nonorigin, because it is a noninfancy. Our literatures, emerg-ing with the baroque, had no infancy ( infans: one who does not speak).
They were never aphasic. They were adults at birth (like certain mytholog-ical heroes), speaking an extremely elaborate universal code: the baroquerhetorical code (with late medieval and Renaissance traces, already distilled,in the case of Brazil, by Camonian mannerism—which, in turn, stylisti-cally influenced Góngora). To articulate oneself as difference in relation tothis panoply of universalia, this is our “birth” as a literature: a sort of
parthenogenesis without the ontological egg (we could say—difference asorigin or the egg of Columbus . . .).
Mário Faustino, a memorable colleague of my generation, wrote, at the
end of the 1950s:
164 NOVAS* “Indianismo,” or Indianism, was a literary movement founded during the romantic period and finan-
cially supported by the emperor D. Pedro II. Its program centered on the image of the native Brazilianas a way to “valorize our national origins.” Its main authors were Gonçalves de Magalhães, José de Alen-car, Joaquim Manuel de Macedo, and Gonçalves Dias. — editors .
The Italian or Spanish baroque of the seicento is, truly, the first great
organized drive in Western poetry toward an “organic poetry,” that is,
one which grows from the lines of force of the very materials fromwhich it is made; a poetry where the poem reflects a detailed vision ofthe world as it composes another world, microscopic and reified. Thetrue poetry of the seventeenth-century baroque is evidently, above all, anerudite poetry. [And, with regard especially to the Brazilian case:] We
emphasize, yet again, that the sophisticated technical level at whichpoetry began in all its forms in Brazil is surprising. In Brazil, poetrybegan as an art, as something that could be taught by the skilled andlearned and practiced by those possessing a basic level of talent for thegoals at hand. In Portugal as in Brazil, in the seventeenth century, onelearned to produce verse from manuals like the celebrated El arte de tro-bar[The Art of Verse-Making ]. Older poets taught the less experienced,
and the academies began to flourish. It is, therefore, not at all surprising(considering that they either came from Europe already skilled in the artor would go there to study it) that one finds in our first poets, majorand minor, a high degree of technical skill. . . .
9
To speak the baroque code, in the literature of colonial Brazil, meant to
try to extract the difference from the morphing of the same. To the extentthat the allegorical style of the baroque was an alternate speech, a style inwhich, at the limit, anything could symbolize anything else (as Walter Ben-jamin explained in his study on the German Trauerspiel ), the “alternating
current” of the Brazilian baroque was a double speech of the other as dif-ference: to speak a code of alterities and to speak it in an altered state.Gregório de Matos, a Brazilian educated at Coimbra, a white man amongmulattoes and mestizos, antagonized by the nobles of the land and by thoseborn in the kingdom of Portugal. In turn, an unredeemable spiritualhybrid, unable to be either one thing or the other, neither a judge in thekingdom nor a lawyer in the overseas colony, torn, like Brazil, in a situationof dependency, he bursts out cursing as the “Voice of Hell.” The same per-mutation mechanism of the baroque courtly rhetoric lends itself to the dis-abused virulence of the critic; the ingenious style of praise and courteousworship is the same one that fuels the aggressive mental play of satire andthe unrestrained physical play of eroticism. Gregório is already our firstcannibal, as Augusto de Campos noted (“the first experimental cannibal inour poetry”) in an instigating poem-study from 1974.
10Our first transcul-
Reinventing Tradition 165
turator, Gregório translated, with a highly personal, differential feature
revealed in his ironic handling of the combination of literary topoi, twosonnets by Góngora (“Mientras por competir con tu cabello” [“While toCompete with Your Hair”] and “Ilustre y hermosísima María” [“Illustriousand Most Lovely Maria”] to produce a third (“Discreta e formosíssimaMaria” [“Refined and Most Lovely Maria”]), which took apart and madeexplicit the secrets of the baroque sonnet-making machine. In addition,this sonnet, being Góngora’s twice, was also Garcilaso de la Vega’s,Camões’s, and, more remotely, Ausonius’s. (All these poets, in turn, pro-vided Góngora with his paradigmatic sonnets, which Gregório, the Bahian,resonnetized in a tertius so mystifying and congenial in its unexpected
dialectical synthesis, that even today academic commentators are unable toapproach that monstrous product without sanctimoniously mumbling the
protective charm of the word “plagiarism.”. . .) Sor Juana, in Mexico, isanother example. About her differential baroque, I will only say—follow-ing Octavio Paz’s Las peras del olmo ([Pears from an Elm ], 1957)—that at her
best, in the “Primero sueño,” she does not respond to Góngora but, rather,in a single gesture anticipates German romanticism and the surrealistdreamworld.
*She did so from the confinement of her convent, which
served her, for the flights of her creative imagination, as a free territorywithin the colonial space, a space seen as repressive in that it was an exilefrom the greater cultural centers, and a masculine framework of isolationfor a woman poet and scholar.
Speaking the difference in the gaps of a universal code, the Latin Amer-
ican writers of the baroque carried out among themselves a dialogue thatonly now is being taken up again. A dialogue that could be at timesexplicit: Sor Juana discusses the theological constructions of Father Vieira,the great prose writer of the Brazilian baroque, in her 1690 polemical piece,
“Crisis sobre un sermón” [“Crisis over a Sermon”]
†(written while Vieira
was still alive). And she discussed them in order to devour them and theirauthor; to impose her feminine wit on Vieira’s sacred eloquence and clev-erness; to seek revenge for his arrogant and masculine grandiloquence bythe artful path of this castrating strategy (in Ludwig Pfandl’s spicy psycho-analytic interpretation).
11Today, we are surprised to find in Borges a refer-
ence to Euclides da Cunha’s Os sertões [Rebellion in the Backlands ], nothing
166 NOVAS* Cf. “Sor Juana Inés de la Cruz,” Las peras del olmo (México: Seix Barral, 1974), 45–46.— translator
† This text is also known as “Carta atenagórica.” Cf. Sor Juana Inés de la Cruz, Obras completas, 2d ed.
(México: Editorial Porrúa, 1972), 811–27.— translator
more than the distant memory of a reading. It so happens that we have
become more removed, in terms of spiritual geography, than Sor Juana andVieira, who operated differentially within a common code. And there was,in addition, an implicit dialogue: Gregório, the Bahian, Sor Juana, theMexican, Caviedes, the Peruvian—all participated in a discourse tropolog-ically interwoven, even if they were not exact contemporaries nor madedirect allusions to one another. This discourse extended itself also as a sym-posium that went back in time: in attendance were Góngora, Quevedo,Lope de Vega, Garcilaso, Camões, Sá de Miranda, Petrarch. . . . Literature,in the colonies as in the metropolis, was fashioned from other literature.Except that, being eccentric in the colonies, literature could articulate itselfas a double difference: a difference of the different. Sor Juana dreaming herpyramidal, presurrealist dream. Gregório de Matos strumming his Goliardicviola, precursor of the electric guitar of the “tropicalist” Bahian CaetanoVeloso (as James Amado, the most recent editor of Gregório’s poetic man-uscripts, sees it). Caviedes biting into the composure of the erudite style, inthe disabused Rabelaisian satires of his Diente del Parnaso. ...
*
The Baroque and Anthropophagous Reason
Already in the baroque a possible “anthropophagous reason” develops,
deconstructing the logocentrism we inherited from the West. Differentialwithin the universal—there began the twists and turns of a discourse whichcould disentangle us from the same. It is an antitradition, which passesthrough the gaps of traditional historiography, which filters through itscracks, which goes astray through its fissures. It’s not merely an antitradi-tion based on direct derivation—for that would be the substitution of onelinearity for another—but rather on the acknowledgment of certain mar-ginal paths or patterns alongside the preferential script of normative histo-riography. In prose, at a certain point in this meandering process, within aspecific configuration, it would produce the vein of the romance malandro
[novel of the rogue], baptized thus by Antonio Candido in “Dialética damalandragem” [“The Dialectics of Roguery,” 1970]. This essay, in my view,
represents in a certain way the critic’s deliberate “unreading” of the privi-leged road topographed in his Formação da literatura brasileira [Formation
of Brazilian Literature ]. It is a second mode of thought, skillfully projected
Reinventing Tradition 167* Juan del Valle y Caviedes ( 1652–1695 ?), Spanish-born Peruvian poet. His Diente del Parnaso is a long
satirical poem. — translator
over his first straight, chronographic trace, unaligning it, in order to mean-
ingfully carve out the same space, now reorganized as a different constella-tion. Here, history becomes the product of a construction, of a reconfiguring, a“monadologic” appropriation in Benjamin’s sense. Distinguishing the “novelof the rogue” from the European picaresque, Candido acknowledges in theformer, archetypal elements from a folk source and the live ferment of pop-ular realism. Remote and ultramodern, the genre is first represented inBrazil by Manuel António de Almeida’s Memórias de um sargento de milí-
cias[Memoirs of a Militia Sergeant ](1852–53 ),
*a text out of place, almost a
relic, in the preferential series of novels of our canonical romanticism(which runs from Joaquim Manuel de Macedo to José de Alencar). It is notby accident that this new possibility of reading the tradition coincided withthe reassessment of Oswald de Andrade’s novels-inventions, especially Ser-
afim Ponte Grande [Seraphim Grosse Pointe ](1933; an experiment in the
semiological transgression of order, in the questioning of the establishedlegality and legibility, via perennial disorder and anarchic versatility).
12
To the extent that the “rogue tradition” would be another name for “car-
nivalization,” it acts retroactively on the baroque, on the baroque viewedby Severo Sarduy as the Bakhtinian phenomenon par excellence: the ludicspace of polyphony and of language in convulsion.
13Let us not forget that
Quevedo, the Quevedo of the conceptist sonnets, is also the author of The
Swindler (1626). Our first roguish “hero” (antihero) is the cannibal Gregório
de Matos (as Antonio Candido himself admits, from this new perspective,in a near postscript to his Formação, a work where Gregório, barred by the
lock of sociological argument, has no chance or way of entry). The “Cre-ole Muse,” the “Cursing Muse.” The first cannibal-rogue. I’m not speakingabout his biography; I’m speaking of biographical material preserved in theoral tradition and dispersed in apocryphal manuscripts. Of a personabehind which a text resonates. A text of texts. Universal and differential.Parodic. Parallelographic. The “parallel song” of a translator-devourer:decentered, eccentric.
Concr ete P oetry: Another Constellation
In contemporary Brazilian poetry, concrete poetry can also claim this
“antinormative” tradition due to another specific redistribution of the
168 NOVAS* Manuel António de Almeida, Memoirs of a Militia Sergeant: A Novel, trans. from the Portuguese by
Ronald W. Sousa, with a foreword by Thomas H. Holloway and an afterword by Flora Süssekind (New
York: Oxford University Press, 1999). 
available configuring elements. This redistribution must be equally recon-
stituted through castings and recastings. From Gregório to Sousândrade,from the “Voice of Hell” of baroque Bahia to the romantic maudit of
Maranhão, singer of “O Inferno de Wall Street” [“The Wall StreetInferno”] ( 1870). From Gregório to Sousândrade and from the latter to
Oswald, from the mocker of “armadillo-blood” nobility to the high priestof the “Tatuturema” (the black mass of the Amazon Indians), to the Brazil-
wood reteller of the discovery chronicles.
14From Oswald to Drummond
and Murilo. From all of them to João Cabral de Melo Neto, engineer of“Mondrianesque” structures. A different pattern. Another constellation.An antidiscourse geometrizing baroque proliferation. Father Vieira andMallarmé, both chess players of language, both syntaxiers. The sonorist
T upi poetry and the praise of conciseness (the vocation of Japanese haiku)in Oswald’s manifestos:
Catiti CatitiImara NotiáNotiá ImaraIpeju . . .
New Moon, oh New Moon!
whisper in his earmemories ofme . . .
*
or:
Somos concretistas
We are concretists15
Concrete poetry represents Brazilian literature’s moment of absolute
synchrony. Not only can it speak the difference in a universal code (like
Gregório de Matos and Father Vieira in the baroque; like Sousândraderecombining the Greek and Latin heritage, Dante, Camões, Milton,Goethe, and Byron in his Guesa Errante [Wandering Guesa ]; like Oswald de
Reinventing Tradition 169*Based on an approximate Portuguese translation by Conto Magalhães in O selvagem, 3d ed. (São
Paulo, 1935). —translator
Andrade “Brazilwood-izing” Italian futurism and French cubism). Metalin-
guistically, concrete poetry rethought its own code, the poetic functionitself (or the workings of this code). With concrete poetry, the difference(the national) became the place of operation of this universal code’s newsynthesis. More than a legacy of poets, it became a question of assuming,critiquing, and “chewing up” a poetics. In a way, Max Bense is right when,speaking of Brazilian concrete poetry, he distinguishes first between a tra-ditional (classic) and a progressive (nonclassic) concept of literature.According to Bense, to the former would correspond a work like Curtius’sEuropean Literature and the Latin Middle Ages, in which past and present
converge into a “unity of meaning.” To the second corresponds the Noigan-
dresgroup’s “Plano piloto para poesia concreta” [“Pilot Plan for Concrete
Poetry”] ( 1958), which announces the end of the “historic cycle of verse.”
16
In reality, what was taking place there was a radical change in the dialogicregister. Instead of the old question of influences, in terms of authors andworks, a new process opened up. Authors belonging to a supposedlyperipheral literature suddenly appropriated the entire code, reclaimed it astheir patrimony, like an empty shoe waiting for a new historical subject torethink its function in terms of a generalized and radical poetics. TheBrazilian case of this poetics became the differentiating optics and the con-dition of possibility. The difference could now be thought of as foundational.Below the linearity of conventional history, this gesture, constellationally—by means of an almost subliminal solidarity—“quoted” another gesture:that of the German romantics of Jena, with their dialectical conception ofa “universal progressive poetry,” which led up to Mallarmé and produced,in the West, the spiritual limit of “Un coup de dés” [“A Throw of theDice”] (where the East already begins to break through with its synthetic-analogical model of ideogrammatic writing, to disturb the logical-Aristotelic monologism of Western discursive verse).
It was a matter of recannibalizing a poetics. The moment (the decade of
the 1950s) was, furthermore, intersemiotic. In Europe, new post-Webernian
music was being composed (Boulez, Stockhausen). In the United States,there was Cage and the beginnings of chance indeterminacy on the preparedpiano. In Brazil, in popular music, the conditions leading up to the bossanova of João Gilberto—our pointillist “one note samba” Webern—wereblossoming. In architecture, Niemeyer, and in urbanism, Lucio Costaresponded to Le Corbusier and to the Bauhaus for our domestic use. Inpainting: the Bienal Exhibitions of São Paulo. And our generation rediscov-
ered and rejuvenated Volpi, our “fourteenth-century Mondrian” (Décio
170 NOVAS
Pignatari), with his little flags, his striped masts, and his serialized facades
with his structural “color-light,” who seemed to us more of a painter thanthe Swiss Max Bill.
Concrete poetry, Brazilianly, thought up a new poetics, national and
universal. A planetarium of “signs in rotation,” whose point-events werecalled (like topographic indexes) Mallarmé, Joyce, Apollinaire, Pound, andCummings, or Oswald de Andrade, João Cabral de Melo Neto, and, fur-ther back, retrospectively, Sousândrade—the rediscovered and reassessedSousândrade of the dizzying ideogrammatic New York Stock Exchange“Inferno” . . . (a Pound avant la lettre, with his financial Hades ruled by asinister Mammon).
Significantly, this new poetics was accompanied soon afterwards by new
reflections on the baroque. My 1955article (several years before Umberto
Eco’s book) was entitled “A obra de arte aberta” [“The Open Work of Art”]
*
and defended a neobaroque rather than the finished, “diamondlike”work.
17
In 1955, in Ulm, by chance, Décio Pignatari met Eugen Gomringer, at
the time Max Bill’s secretary in the Hochschule für Gestaltung. From thischance encounter came a mutual discovery. There were many points incommon in the poetic program of the Brazilian Noigandres group and that
of the Swiss poet, author of the Konstellationen [Constellations ]. At that
moment, an international movement was outlined, after Gomringeraccepted, in 1956, the general title proposed by the Brazilians, “concrete
poetry,” and which from then on began to circulate widely. (In 1956, São
Paulo’s Museum of Modern Art hosted the first world exhibition of con-crete poetry, an event in which only Brazilian artists—poets and painters—participated. Countless international shows followed this pioneering event.)
Another fact to be noted: Despite its dispossession and voluntary limi-
tation of means (the poem as a collective, anonymous project, Mallarmé’s“disparition élocutoire du je,” Oswald’s and Webern’s basic structures),Brazilian concrete poetry, for its critics and observers (and also, clearly, forits opponents) seemed irrevocably baroque, pluralist, multifaceted, in com-parison with the austere orthogonality of Gomringer’s Konstellationen, pure
and clear, like a composition by Max Bill.
*Our “difference” produced a
varying result in the chemistry of the poem, even if the global content ofthe new poetic program had common points. Aside from the poems open
Reinventing Tradition 171* This essay is included in the section “The Concrete Moment” in this volume. — editors
to multiple readings (the poems in colors-voices of Poetamenos [Minuspoet ]
by Augusto de Campos: Boulez saw them in São Paulo, 1954, at a gather-
ing in the home of the painter Valdemar Cordeiro, where we all enthusias-
tically discussed Webern and Mallarmé; in his Troisième Sonate [Third
Sonata ] from 1957, Boulez uses different colors to distinguish certain alter-
native routes in the score . . .). Aside from the peculiarities of a more ludicsyntax, the semantic dimension: the contextual, even political satire pre-sent since the beginning (“coca-cola” by Décio Pignatari, written as early as1957). Eroticism in the bodily path of our ancestral baroque. Nothing
could be more distant from the neutrality or the asepsis of the Zurichschool (which is not to deny the merit of the latter, in its own setting—orcould it be the case, with new players, of a new “round” of confrontationbetween the Brazilian Oswald and the Swiss Cendrars?). Contact with thenew music was essential, as well as with the young São Paulo composers(Cozzella, Duprat, Medaglia; later Willy Corrêa de Oliveira and GilbertoMendes). I remember, toward the middle of 1959, in Cologne, Stock-
hausen’s surprise and interest upon seeing copies of the magazine Noigan-
dres. At that time, despite his encouragement of Hans G. Helms’s
experiments, he preferred to compose himself, in the style of montage, thetexts he needed. (See, for example, Gesang der Jünglinge [Song of Youth ],
with lines taken from the book of Daniel.) In Brazil, some poets wereworking on texts that intersemiotically incorporated into the syntax of thepoem parameters drawn from the theory and practice of the budding newmusic. (Shortly afterward, speaking on “Musik und Graphik” at theFerienkurse für Neue Musik in Darmstadt, Stockhausen would leave awritten record of that contact: cf. Darmstädter Beiträge zur neuen Musik
[Darmstadt’s Contributions to the New Music ], Schott, 1960.)
Later, this path of avant-garde (serious) poetry/music would produce a
situation unique to Brazil: Augusto de Campos would become the maintheorist and supporter of Caetano Veloso’s and Gilberto Gil’s new popularmusic. (In instrumental arrangements, at crucial moments, the experimen-tal inventiveness of Rogério Duprat and Júlio Medaglia would converge.)“Prodsumption” ( prodossumo ), as Décio Pignatari put it: the poetry of
invention in mass consumption, surpassing Adornian skepticism . . . Let usimagine, by way of comparison and proof this ideal convergence: the Bea-tles composing in the presence of John Cage on texts by e. e. cummings . . .(It is true that there was Yoko—oh! Yoko!—the Orient . . . ) Once again,however, the difference within the universal. Listen to Araçá azul [Blue
Guava] by Caetano . . .
172 NOVAS
The Alexandrian Barbarians: Pla netary Redevouring
Desarraigada y cosmopolita, la literatura hispanoamericana es
regreso y búsqueda de una tradición. Al buscarla, la inventa.
Uprooted and cosmopolitan, Spanish American literature is a return and
the search for a tradition. In this quest, literature invents its tradition.
—Octavio Paz (1961, Puertas al campo [Doors to the Countryside])*
Es ist ein Versuch, sich gleichsam a posteriori eine Vergangenheit zu geben,
aus der man stammen möchte im Gegensatz zu der, aus der man stammt.
It is an attempt to give oneself, as it were a posteriori, a past in which one
would like to originate in opposition to that in which one did originate.
—Nietzsche†
I believe that Oswald de Andrade’s “Coup de Dents” [“A Throw of the
Bite”] in its Marxillary (Marxist + maxillary) dialectic,18in the way it con-
fronts the legacy of European civilization—the first date of his anthro-
pophagous revolution in the history of Brazil would be the year of thedevouring of Bishop Sardinha, a Portuguese missionary official, in 1556—
points to a new fact in the relationship between Europe and Latin Amer-ica. Already from this point on, Europeans must learn to live together withthe new barbarians who, for some time, in an alternative and different con-text, have been devouring them and making them flesh of their flesh andbone of their bone. They have long been resynthesizing them chemically,through an impulsive and uncontrollable metabolism of difference. (Andthey have not only devoured Europeans: Eastern, Hindu, Chinese, andJapanese ingredients have entered into the “sympoetic” cauldron of theseneoalchemists: in Tablada and Octavio Paz; in the “forking paths” ofBorges and in the rites of passage of Elizondo’s Farabeuf ; in Lezama and
Severo Sarduy; in Oswald and in Brazilian concrete poetry, for instance.)
These are Alexandrian barbarians, equipped with chaotic libraries and
labyrinthine card catalogs. The library of Babel could be called the Bib-
Reinventing Tradition 173* “Literatura de fundación,” Puertas al campo (México: Seix Barral, 1972), 21.— translator
†“Von Nutzen und Nachteil der Historie für das Leben,” Unzeitgemässe Betrachtungen, Werke in Drei
Banden, vol. 1, ed. Karl Schlechta (Munich: Carl Hanser Verlag, 1966), 230. In English: “On the Uses
and Disadvantages of History for Life,” Untimely Meditations, trans. R. J. Hollingdale (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1983), 76.— translator
lioteca Municipal Miguel Cané and be temporarily located on a modest
block of Buenos Aires (“a sad and dingy place, to the southeast of the city”),where Borges worked as an obscure bureaucrat and in whose basement hewould escape from the pettiness of the everyday, abandoning himselffurtively to infinite readings. . . . Or this library could be lodged, fully, inAlfonso Reyes’s vaulted capilla in Mexico City, a library-house where he
cloistered himself away for nearly twenty years, surrounded by copiousbookshelves, a well-traveled, insatiable reader. . . . Or perhaps in São Paulo,on the Rua Lopes Chaves, in the neighborhood of Barra Funda, whereMário de Andrade would fill up note cards and crowd annotations into themargins of the books he perused, between scores of Schoenberg andStravinsky, catalogs of German expressionists and Italian futurists, volumesof Freud and folklore treatises. Or, finally, the library could proliferate in ahouse in Old Havana, where Lezama Lima, the “Etruscan,” after a ritualimmersion into the attics of the Cuban used-book dealers, would spin hisimmense ringed sphere of readings—decentered, changing, fabulous like ahieroglyphic globe hatched by the mythic “Roc” bird.
For some time, the devouring jaws of these new barbarians have been
chewing up and “ruining” a cultural heritage that is ever more planetary. Inrelationship to this heritage, the barbarians’ eccentrifying and deconstruct-ing attack acts with the marginal impetus of the carnivalesque desacraliz-ing, profaning antitradition evoked by Bakhtin in counterpoint to themain road of Lukácsian epic positivism, to monologic literature, to theclosed, univocal work. In contrast, the combinatory and ludic polycultur-alism, the parodic transmutation of meanings and values, the open, multi-lingual hybridization are the devices responsible for the constant feedingand refeeding of this “baroquizing” almagest: the carnivalized transency-clopedia of the new barbarians, where everything can coexist with every-thing. They are the machinery that crushes the material of tradition, likethe teeth of a tropical sugarmill, transforming stalks and husks into bagasseand juicy syrup.
Lezama “creolizes” Proust and interconnects Mallarmé with Góngora:
his quotations are truncated and approximate, like the leftovers of a dilu-vial digestion. Leopoldo Marechal’s Adán Buenosayres (with its “Viaje a la
oscura ciudad de Cacodelphia” [“Voyage to the Dark City of Cacodel-phia”]) and Julio Cortázar’s Hopscotch enter into dialogue, at different times
and levels, with Joyce’s Ulysses without losing the distinctive mark of the
Argentine condition (even if, in Cortázar’s case, we find it has transmi-
174 NOVAS
grated with traces of porteño nostalgia to Paris’s Rive Gauche). Bustrófedon
in Cabrera Infante’s Three Trapped Tigers passes through Lewis Carroll’s
mirror to shake hands with the “semanticist” Humpty Dumpty and with
Shem, the Penman. Dionélio Machado, in Os ratos (The Rats ), re-creates
Leopold Bloom’s day in the scant, debt-ridden day of an urban BrazilianJohn Doe of the 1930s (Naziazeno, a no-luck Nazarene struggling for “our
daily milk”. . . ). Guimarães Rosa riddles the backlands of Minas Geraiswith metaphysical paths: his jagunço
*is a Mephistaphilologic Faust,
trapped in the weft of language like a caboclo†Heidegger. Of Carpentier,
Carlos Fuentes, and Vargas Llosa, we could say just as much: other con-coctions, other amalgams, various and remarkable agglutinations.
The “nightmare of history,” for the major writers of Latin America, with
all its implications in terms of participation and struggle for the most mil-itant spirits, has been a baroque and obsessive nightmare of writing (anightmare taken to oxymoronic paroxysm, aware as it is, of being forcedinto painful cohabitation with the letterless world of the large illiterate seg-ments of the population). “The masses will still eat the ritzy biscuits Ibake,” prophesied Oswald de Andrade, in a pun
‡inspired by the “Prinzip
Hoffnung” like one who prepares the nutritious marrow, the amniotic mealfor the cannibalist banquet of an unalienated and communal utopian soci-ety of the future.
Octavio Paz, going back to the first decades of this [the twentieth] cen-
tury, glimpsed an unsuspected and fascinating coincidence: While Poundand Eliot “discovered” Laforgue’s French and fed on it, on his ironic“logopoeia,” to renew poetry in English, Lugones, in Buenos Aires, andLópez Velarde, in Zacatecas, Mexico, through different paths which crossideally in space-time, also turned to the same marginal symbolist. All ofthem rewrote, differently—independently—the same unfinished universalpoem. . . . In Brazil, Pedro Kilkerry, an obscure Bahian daydreamer with anIrish last name, a poor, polyglot mulatto, dead at thirty-two in 1917from a
tracheotomy, contributed to, albeit unacknowledged, the spinning orbit of
Reinventing Tradition 175*Jagunços were, historically, the group of fanatical revolutionaries that launched the Canudos rebellion
described in Euclides da Cunha, Os sertões [Rebellion in the Backlands ]. More generally, the term
describes lawless men of Northeast Brazil, or gangsters, bullies, or hired killers. — translator
†Caboclo, literally, “copper-colored,” is a term that refers in general to racially mixed people in Brazil,
particularly Indian and white or Indian and black. It is also used to describe frontierspeople or people
from the backlands. — translator
‡This difficult-to-translate pun hinges on the double meaning of the word massa in Portuguse, both
“dough” and “crowd, mass.” — translator
these ecumenical signs. He translated and metabolized T ristan Corbière (a
follower of Laforgue’s “coloquial-ironic” line), developing with it a mostdistinct diction which approximates him as a forgotten pioneer in his beau-tiful poem “É o silêncio” [“It is the silence”] to the subtle elocution of aFernando Pessoa.
19
In sum: All these digestive rumbles, all this hodgepodge, ancestral rumi-
nation, already lost in the mysteries of time, could not remain indefinitelyignored in Europe. The “boom,” a recent and skin-deep phenomenon, asfar as the media is concerned, came as a somewhat unexpected and belatedcry of warning to Europeans. (And also to Americans, whose omnivorouspragmatism, when it comes to cultural mastication, was probably bestexemplified in the twentieth century by Ezra Pound’s vis paideumica and in
the past by Whitman’s universality.) It was a frantic alert to reckless navi-gators, of the festering and explosive turbulence of a new dialogic relation-ship, developing undercover, obscured by the monolingual self-sufficiencyof the users of “imperial” languages (such as French, decreasingly, and Eng-lish, increasingly), a relationship that was undermining and eating away atthe foundations of the literary koine, predefined in terms of “older” and“greater” literatures, of “trunks,” “main branches,” and “secondary twigs.”
At a certain point, at least with Borges, Europeans discovered they could
no longer write their world prose without the increasingly overwhelmingcontribution made by the voracious Alexandrian barbarians. The booksthey read could never be the same after being chewed up and digested bythe blind Homerian of Buenos Aires, who even dared to rewrite Don
Quixote under the pseudonym of Pierre Menard. . . . What would be new,
without Borges, in Robbe-Grillet’s nouveau roman ? Who could read Proust
now without acknowledging Lezama Lima? Could one read Mallarmé,today disregarding the intertextual hypotheses of Vallejo’s Trilce and Paz’s
Blanco ? Or contribute to the “universal continuous poem” without redi-
gesting the Brazilian concrete poetry of the Noigandres group? At a meet-
ing in the mid- 1960s (in which I remember that Ungaretti, the old
Ungaretti full of Brazilian memories also participated during a visit to SãoPaulo), Nathalie Sarraute told me in conversation that French writing didnot include a Joycean experiment. I asked her, in turn (alive in my mem-ory, parallel and equal—joined by common Latin origins—the examples ofMário de Andrade’s Macunaíma and Guimarães Rosa’s The Devil to Pay in
the Backlands ), whether she did not consider Rabelais a French writer.
Since 1963, I had begun to write and publish Galáxias [Galaxies ], a “bar-
raucous ibericane mortalepic,” intoned in counterpoint to the “eldolorous
176 NOVAS
galldorado latinamacrid.” Since the late 1960s (“Sur Góngora,” 1966),
Severo Sarduy had begun to “baroquize,” through his presence, the Carte-
sian-Valéry-an space of T el Quel. Fragments of Galáxias appeared in Ger-
man ( Versuchbuch/Galaxien ,rot 25[1966], edited by Max Bense and E.
Walther). Also in 1966:Compact by Maurice Roche, a writer-musician who
never had any doubts about the renewed viability of the Rabelaisian her-itage in his language. Fragments of Galáxias, translated into French,
appeared in Change in September 1970 (“La poétique de la mémoire” [“The
Poetics of Memory”]). A remark by Octavio Paz: “I would like to choose theend of the last fragment as a motto: ‘el vocablo es mi fábula’ (‘le vocable estma fable’) [‘speech is my story’].” One might now look at Philippe Sollers’sJoycean and galactic Paradis. I have told this story and traced this itinerary
in more detail in “Sanscreed Latinized: The Wake in Brazil and Hispanic
America,” ( Triquarterly 38,In the Wake of the ‘Wake’ ), 1977.
To write, today, in both Europe and Latin America will mean, more and
more, to rewrite, to rechew. Oi barbaroi. The Vandals, long ago, crossed
the borders and are crowding the senate and the agora, as in Cavafy’s poem.Logocentric writers who imagined themselves the privileged beneficiariesof a proud one-way koine may now prepare themselves for the increasinglyurgent task of acknowledging and redevouring the differential marrow ofthe new barbarians of the polytopic and polyphonic planetary civilization.After all, we might as well recall old Goethe’s very timely warning: “Einejede Literatur ennuyiert sich zuletzt in sich selbst, wenn sie nicht durchfremde Teilnahme wieder aufgefrischt wird” [“Left to itself, every literaturewill exhaust its vitality if it is not refreshed by the interest and contributionof a foreign one”].
*Alterity is, above all, a necessary exercise in self-criticism.
Translated by Odile Cisneros
Reinventing Tradition 177* Quoted by René Wellek in The Later Eighteenth Century, vol. 1of A History of Modern Criticism:
1750–1950 (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1955), 221. Original in Johann Wolfgang von Goethe,
Stuttgart 1902–1907 ,vol. 38of Sämtliche Werke. Jubilaeumsausgabe, ed. Eduard von der Hellen, 137.
—translator
Disappearance of the Baroque in Brazilian 
Literature: The Case of Gregório 
de Matos
Alle Achtung vor euren Meinungen! Aber kleine abweichende Handlungen
sind mehr wert!
Well done in your opinions! But deviating a little in your actions is worth
more!
—Nietzsche
The “question of origins” has been a persistent problem in the historiogra-
phy of Brazilian literature. In this context we could say that Brazilian cul-ture is faced—as I have noted in “Anthropophagous Reason”—with “an
178The work of Gregório de Matos e Guerra ( 1636–1695 ) constitutes a puzzling chapter in Brazilian liter-
ature. Born in Bahia and educated in Portugal, de Matos became an important magistrate in Lisbon and
later in colonial Salvador, was prosecuted by the Inquisition, and toward the end of his life was deportedto Angola due to political problems. His satirical verses, which he never formally acknowledged, wereanonymously pasted on the walls of public buildings and were collected by copyists only in the eigh-teenth century. Haroldo de Campos’s essay is an important study on the “segregation” of de Matos’swork from the canon of Brazilian literatur e and a key text to understanding his commitment to the
baroque. It took him ten years to fully develop his argument, which began in 1978 as notes for a class
that he taught at Yale and was published as a book in 1989: Haroldo de Campos, O seqüestro do barroco
na formação da literatura brasileira: O caso Gregório de Matos (Salvador: Fundação Casa de Jorge Amado,
1989). In the context of the present book it was necessary to shorten de Campos’s essay for concision as
well as to make it more accessible to the English-speaking reader. The missing sections concern basicconsiderations on reception theory that, although important to the Brazilian audience at the time itwas published, do not particularly illuminate de Campos’s overall argument. For reason of space, I havealso opted, with regret, to exclude a number of lengthy and informative footnotes. — translator
episode of the Western metaphysics of presence, transferred to our tropical
latitudes, one that doesn’t quite realize the final meaning of this transfer; achapter to be added to the Platonizing logocentrism which Derrida, in Of
Grammatology, subjected to a lucid and revealing analysis, not accidentally
at the instigation of two ‘ex-centrics,’ Fenollosa, the anti-Sinologist, andNietzsche, the shatterer of certainties.”
In the Brazilian case, this metaphysical plot is complicated by a peculiar
element of “suspense”: the name of the father ( le nom du père) is made pre-
sent (or absent) through erasure and for reasons of “historical perspective.”Wilson Martins wrote in Gregório, o pituresco [Gregório, the Picturesque ]
(1970):
Did a great Brazilian poet named Gregório de Matos really exist in theeighteenth century? Surely not, at least not in terms of literary history.As Antonio Candido writes in Formação da literatura brasileira, 2vols.
[The Formation of Brazilian Literature ] (São Paulo: Editora Martins,
1959) (although his reputation survived in the context of Bahia’s local
tradition, he did not exist literally in historical perspective untilromanticism when he was rediscovered, thanks to Varnhagen;
*and
only after the 1882Vale Cabral edition could his work be properly con-
sidered. Before that, he did not influence nor contribute to the forma-tion of our literary system, and his manuscripts became so obscure thatBarbosa Machado, the rigorous scholar of Biblioteca Lusitana
(1741–1758 ),
†ignored him completely, although he recorded the
achievements of João de Brito e Lima)‡(1:18). Much later, in the nine-
teenth century, after the declaration of independence, Ferdinand Denisdoes not mention him either in his Resumo da história literária de Por-
tugal e do Brasil [Concise History of Literature in Portugal and Brazil ];
his inclusion in seventeenth-century literary chronology is thus one ofthe most abstruse examples of involuntary historical mystification wecan provide.
Reinventing Tradition 179* Francisco Adolpho Varnhagen ( 1816–1878 ), diplomat, engineer, and author of Historia geral do Brasil
[General History of Brazil ](1854), considered the first attempt at Brazilian historiography. De Campos
is referring here to another of Varnhagen’s books, Florilégio da poesia brasileira [Anthology of Brazilian
Poetry ](1850), where de Matos’s work is mentioned for the first time. — translator
†Bibliotheca Lusitana was complied by the Abade de Sever Diogo Barbosa Machado and published in
Lisbon in four volumes between 1741and 1759. It is the first catalog of authors and works published in
Portuguese. — translator
‡ João de Brito Lima (1671–1747 ). Also born in Bahia, de Brito Lima received his education from pri-
vate tutors and entered a monastery early in life. He became known as one of the best poets writing in
Portuguese at the time. — translator
Oswald de Andrade, in “A sátira na literatura brasileira” [“Satire in
Brazilian Literature”] (1945), voices a diametrically opposite opinion:
“Gregório de Matos was undoubtedly one of the greatest figures in Brazil-ian literature. Technique, verbal richness, imagination and independence,curiosity and strength in all genres, that is what characterizes his work andhas since set the path of our national literature.”
1
Borges’s Paradox and Pessoa’s
We are faced, thus, with a truly Borgesian paradox, since we must add
to the “question of origins” that of the identity or pseudoidentity of a“patronymic” author. One of the greatest Brazilian poets of the premodernera, one whose existence is fundamental in order for us to coexist with andfeel connected to a living tradition, seems not to have existed literally “inhistorical perspective.” Like Ulysses, the mythical founder of Lisbon,who—in a poem by Fernando Pessoa—“foi por não ser existindo” [was byway of not being]. Grégorio de Matos, too, this “ulterior immemorialdemon” (Mallarmé), seems to have founded Brazilian literature preciselyby virtue of his nonexistence or by having survived aesthetically at the priceof historical death. “O mito é o nada que é tudo” [Myth—nothing, every-thing], adds Fernando Pessoa in the same poem.
*
In this apparent contradiction between poetic presence and historical
absence, which makes Grégorio de Matos a kind of retrospective demi-urge—abolished in the past for the sake of activating the future—is at stakenot only the question of “existence” (in terms of influence on the factualdevelopment of Brazilian literature) but, above all, the very notion of “his-tory” according to which existence is denied or given as nonexistence(while retaining “developmental” value in literary terms).
Histor ical Per spective a nd Substantialist Ideology
In fact, this “historical perspective” stems from the perspective of a sub-
stantialist view of literary evolution grounded in a metaphysical ideal ofnational identity. If we perform a deconstructive reading of some of thebasic assumptions in Antonio Candido’s Formação da literatura brasileira
[Formation of Brazilian Literature ], the most lucid and elegant attempt at a
historical reconstruction of Brazilian literary evolution, we will see that the
180 NOVAS* These lines are from “Ulysses,” in Mensagem, trans. Jonathan Griffin (London: Menard Press / King’s
College London, 1992), 17.— translator
substantialist theme pervades the entire text. Candido’s goal, stated in the
preface to the first edition, is to follow “the adventures of the spirit,”through a “discerning” reading that would cause literary works “to comealive again in our experience,” to follow “the adventures of the spirit”: “Inthis case, the spirit of Western tradition, searching for a new home in thispart of the world” ( 1:10). Through the spirit (Logos, Being)’s adventurous
path exploration in search of a new dwelling in America, two metaphori-cal series are introduced, one “animist,” the other “organicist.” The first isdecisively ontological, while the latter is connected to the evolutionist-biological assumption inherent in traditional historiography that seesreproduced in literature a process of gradual blossoming, of organicgrowth, informed either by a “naturalist teleology” or by the “driving idea”of “individuality” or “national spirit” that regulates, always with teleologi-cal dynamism, a closed sequence of events. (This process necessarily culmi-nates in a “national classicism” that corresponds, in political terms, toanother “moment of plenitude,” the conquest of the “national unity.”)
Both metaphoric series converge in the substantialism that colors them.
Accordingly one reads in the Formation: “Ours is a secondary branch of
Portuguese literature, which in itself is but a second-rate shrub in theMuses’ garden.” The reading of this “poor and weak literature” must behandled with “care and judgment” (maintaining one’s “discerning” facultywhich is so dear to the “critical spirit”), since “In the absence of love, it willnot reveal its message.” To read “discerningly,” that is, amorously, is what“animates” the literary works. It’s worth saying: such type of reading endowsthem with an anima, a soul, makes them express the voice of Logos, thatmigrated from the West and transplanted itself in the not so paradisiacalAmerican garden, where its “acclimatization” will be “painful” and willrequire, to be well understood, that we listen with care (amorous reading):“No one, apart from us, can give life to these works, often fragile, some-times strong, and always poignant, in which men from the past, from thedepths of an uncultivated land, amid the painful acclimatization of Euro-pean culture, tried to stylize for us, their descendants, the feelings theyexperienced, the observations they gathered—from which our literature hasbeen formed.” This double series of metaphors sounds rather antinational-istic, dysphoric: the transplanted sapling is “secondary” and the shrubberythat it comes from is “second-rate”; on the other hand, transplanting theemigrated Logos and cultivating it in the new setting will be far from par-adisiacal (a word that etymologically means “garden”): the land is “unculti-vated” and the “acclimatization” (acculturation) will be “painful.”
Reinventing Tradition 181
The Literary Incarnation of the National Spirit
The impasse can be overcome through the adoption of a “historical per-
spective.” Since the spirit of Western literature became incarnate in the new
lands of Portuguese America, it is up to the critic-historian to retrace theroute of parousia of this Logos that, like a shrub, had to be replanted, ger-minate, and blossom, so that one day, perhaps, it could branch out as a vig-orous, fully formed tree: the national literature. The metaphysical conceptof history, according Derrida, involves the idea of linearity and continuity:a linear schema of the unveiling of presence, subservient to the “epic”model. It is clear, thus, why it is necessary for this “historical perspective”to determine “when and how the continuity of works and authors wasdefined, being conscious, as often as possible, of integrating the process ofliterary formation” ( 1:25). It is because this “historical perspective” aims at
singling out “a continuous tradition” of “styles, themes, forms or con-cerns.” In short, because it requires a “beginning”: “Since a beginning isnecessary, I took as point of departure the Academia dos Seletos and theAcademia dos Renascidos
*and the first works of Cláudio Manuel da Costa,
and, for simplicity’s sake, I rounded the date to 1750, which, in reality, is amere convention” ( 1:25).
The “historical perspective” is, thus, an ideological perspective. This
becomes apparent when the ruling criteria are made explicit: “The readerwill notice that I have deliberately adopted the view of our first romanticsand of the foreign critics preceding them. These two groups located thebeginnings of Brazil’s true literature in the Arcadian phase, by virtue of thethemes, notably Indianism,
†that would dominate the production of the
1800s.” To review “in the present perspective” the opinion of those criticswho understood “Brazilian literature as the expression of a local reality and,at the same time, a positive element in the construction of a national iden-tity”—such is the task that the Formation sets out to accomplish. This dou-
ble “effort” (or articulation) of “construction” and “expression” is seen as a“disposition of the spirit, historically proven,” that “expresses certain liter-
ary incarnations of the national spirit. ” On the other hand, Candido
182 NOVAS*The Academia dos Seletos and the Academia dos Renascidos were two of several institutions opened
in Bahia and Rio de Janeiro in the eighteenth century to promote higher education. — translator
† Indianism was a literary program elaborated during the romantic period and financially supported
by the emperor D. Pedro II. Its program was centered on the image of the native Brazilian as a way to“valorize our national origins.” Its main authors were Gonçalves de Magalhães, José de Alencar,Joaquim Manuel de Macedo, and Gonçalves Dias. —translator
stresses that this very profitable attitude can often be at the expense of the
authors’ “aesthetic loss and disorientation” which would ultimately lead tothe exclusion of some of their production from the “specific field of thebelles lettres.”
[. . .]
The Semiological Ef fect
The exclusion—the “disappearance”—of the baroque in the Formation
of Brazilian Literature is not merely the result of the adoption of a “histori-
cal orientation” that aims to separate literature, as “system,” from “literary
manifestations” deemed weak and unsystematic. The “perspective” that optsfor the nonexistence of Gregório de Matos as necessary to the formation ofBrazil’s “literary system” ( 1:24) is also not “historical,” in an unequivocal and
objective sense. From the point of view of deconstruction, this exclusion,this literary nonexistence, presented to us as “historical,” is the latent effectof the very “semiological model” articulated by Candido. This model investsliterature as such with the ontological-nationalist characteristics proper toromanticism’s literary program. It also emphasizes the “communicative” and“integrative” aspects of literary activity, as they manifest themselves in thepeculiar Brazilian synthesis of classicism and romanticism (the “mixture ofthe neoclassical artisan with the romantic bard,” 1:28). From this model
emerged “a literature invested” with “a sense of mission,” one that repressed,in many instances, the “exercise of the imagination” but that was also capa-ble of conveying a “historical sense and the exceptional power of communi-cation” and thus of becoming the “general language of a society in search ofself-knowledge.” The baroque evidently does not fit this model, because itsaesthetic emphasizes the poetic and the metalinguistic functions, the text’sself-reflexivity and the inter- and intratextual self-thematization of the code(metasonnets that dismantle and expose the sonnet’s structure, for instance;citation, paraphrase, and translation as plagiotropic tools and so forth). Thebaroque does not fit in. The aesthetic of “superabundance and waste,” asSevero Sarduy has defined it: “Contrary to the language of communication,economical, austere, reduced to functionality—a vehicle of information—the baroque language thrives in supplement, excess, and in the partial lossof its goal.” The baroque, the poetic of the “vertigo of the ludic,” of the“absolute playfulness of its forms,” as Affonso Ávila has noted. The baroquethat—according to Octavio Paz, who wrote in regard to Sor Juana Inés de
Reinventing Tradition 183
la Cruz, a contemporary of Gregório de Matos—produced, in the American
context, “Primero sueño” [“First Dream”] (ca. 1685), a critical, reflexive and
metalinguistic poem, a “poem of the adventure of knowledge,” that antici-pates Mallarmé’s Un coup de dés [A Throw of the Dice], the limit-poem of
modernity.
It follows that in Presença da literatura brasileira
2[Presence of Brazilian
Literature ](1964), the semiological effect implicit in the model’s structure
is converted explicitly into value judgment (doubt, restriction). In thiswork, published almost half a century after the rehabilitation of thebaroque by Benjamin, Lorca, Eliot, and Anchesi, among others, both the“authenticity” and “permanence of communication” are called into ques-tion, given baroque’s “excesses.” Here “authenticity” and “permanence” arequoted for their “auratic,” noncritical, ahistorical values, in the sense thatthese values are conferred by an axiological absolute canon, raised to thecondition of timeless truth: that of romanticism, with its aspirations toclassicism, where a realist vein already pulsates. A romanticism that ispurged of its lack of discipline and of its local fixations (on the “pic-turesque” and on the “raw material of experience”) thanks to the “rigor”and the “emotional restraint” of the neoclassic Arcadianism
*that served as
its native vestibule. In this same anthology, in the part reserved to Gregóriode Matos, his contribution is judged severely: “As we know it now, his workis irregular, worth but for only a few lines.”
The Linear Model a nd the Continuous Tradition
The Formation of Brazilian Literature favors a certain kind of history: the
evolutionary-linear-integrative kind, keen on demarcating, in a coherentand progressive way, the route of the “incarnation of the national literaryspirit.” It also favors a certain kind of tradition: that which, “born in the
domains of natural evolution,” was “transposed to that of the spirit,” orga-nizing its productions in a harmonious, “substantial continuity,” exclud-ing any disturbances that do not fit in this progression. It favors, in theend, a vehicular concept of literature: the “emotive-communicational” kind
184 NOVAS* Arcadianism was introduced in Brazil around 1768. The poets in this group—Tomás Antonio Gon-
zaga, Alvarenga Peix oto, Silva Alvarenga, and Cláudio Manoel da Costa—are also well known for their
tragic participation in the “Inconfidência Mineira” (Minas Gerais uprising), a pro-independence move-
ment. The main leaders of this group were arrested by the Portuguese authorities and executed in pub-lic. Manoel da Costa was arrested and found dead in his cell. Tomás Antonio Gonzaga was also arrestedand was deported to Mozambique. — translator
that presides at the onset of Brazilian romanticism. Based on these presup-
positions, this evolutionary-linear-integrative kind of history elaborates itsdescriptive and explicative model. This model is necessarily reductive:What does not fit is set aside, labeled “literary manifestations” as opposedto “literature” itself or literature as “system.” In order to establish themodel’s efficacy, its internal logic is reinforced through a “quantitative”argument. Since we cannot ignore the systematic character of these worksand their triadic interaction, it becomes necessary to demonstrate, from aquantitative angle, how relative its public is. Only then can the ontologi-cal metaphor of the simplicity of the “origin,” conventionally dated ( 1750),
and the genealogical metaphor of a coherent sequence of events, ruled bythe tropism of a telos or common zenith, hold and pass for a “historicalperspective.”
An Integrated Liter ature
The problem of the audience (“reception,” “effect”) in the Formation
ends up being tackled by using a harmonizing principle that emphasizesthe integrative aspect of the reception process.
[...]In the Formation, audience is a “group of receptors” organically con-
nected to a “group of producers” by a “mechanism” that ensures the “trans-mission” of a “system of works” interconnected by “common denominators.”The audience is seen as the component of a homogeneous system, recon-ciled and defined in relation to a literature described from the perspectiveof a closed series and that aspires to become pure classicism. The progres-sive constitution of a preferential canon of works and authors correspondsto this audience of “aggregation.” Such constitution entails a historiogra-phy that aims to “represent, through the history of literary products, theessence of a national entity in search of itself.”
Within a more flexible perspective, not confined to this “metaphysical
cluster,” the Gregório de Matos case could be seen in a different light. DeMatos is a poet who had an audience in effect (it does not matter, given thecircumstances of the time, how limited this audience was) and whose effectis sufficiently documented. And, more importantly, his production isemblematic of the baroque, a style that in turn transcends it and survivesin its effects, far beyond in the literary realm, even after the author and hiswork have undergone a process of occultation, which transformed themfrom ostensive to recessive in the horizon of reception.
Reinventing Tradition 185
An “objective-reductionist” approach, on the other hand, would have dif-
ficulty in dealing with the problem of the reception of ancient literature,
when one has to consider “works by unknown authors, obscure authorialintents, relations with sources and models only indirectly discernible.”When the virtual readers are inscribed in the very text, in the form of the“context of works that the author deemed, explicitly or implicitly, known tohis contemporary public.” In the case of Gregório de Matos and Brazil’scolonial baroque, these questions are less complex, for although there is notrue critical edition of our great poet from Bahia, the oral tradition and theapocryphal writings remain. There is also the testimony of the audience andits reaction to the vicious tongue of the “Boca do Inferno”
*[Inferno’s
Mouth]. There is, above all, the baroque itself that, as a great universal codeof the literature of the time, rules over Brazil’s literary scene since Camões.The baroque that projected itself in the poetry of the Arcadian poets, in the“monstrosities written in macaronic Portuguese” by Odorico Mendes,
†and
in the subversive implosion of Sousândrade, who ruined the harmoniousconstruction of our official romanticism. A solution to such questions at thelevel of reception cannot consist merely of declaring that where there is no“systemic” audience, there is no literature worth recording. That history informative terms will not be available but rather only “literary manifesta-tions,” a “thin” and “sparse” scene, a silent limbo (“without resonance”)where the voice of Being has still not gained bodily form, a shapeless prehis-
tory which is nonexistent from a “historical perspective.” What would hap-pen, for instance, if we had to evaluate through similar “systemic” criteriathe literary life of works as remote in time as Provençal poetry?
But in the case of Gregório de Matos, there is yet another paradoxical
circumstance to be taken into account: how can an author who is thesource of this literary history not “exist” in terms of “historical perspec-tive”? It is through these authors that we can faithfully reconstruct a pictureof Brazilian society in the seventeenth century, affirms S. Spina in writingabout de Matos and Vieira. “Perhaps the best source of contemporary
186 NOVAS* Gregório de Matos was often referred to as the “Boca do Inferno” due to the profane nature of his
verses against the clergy. — translator
† Known primarily for his translations of Homer and Virgil, Manuel Odorico Mendes ( 1799–1864 ) is a
highly controversial name in Brazilian literature. For some critics, Antonio Candido among them, his nameis synonymous with bad taste and excess. For Haroldo de Campos, however, Mendes is a pioneer of greattechnical skill and artistic competence and one whose translations will profoundly affect him. —translator
opinion of the desembargadores [magistrates] and the Relação*is found not
in traditional historical material but in the poetry of the Bahian satirist
Gregório de Matos e Guerra,” adds Stuart B. Schwartz.3How could this
historical void be declared without calling into question the very notion ofhistory that gives shape to this exclusive perspective?
Candido necessarily had to tend toward integration, disregarding differ-
entiation, so that he could configure his work in a preestablished design
and execute his program with harmony: “to describe the process throughwhich the Brazilian people became aware of their spiritual and social exis-tence through literature, combining in different ways the universal valueswith the local reality and, this way, earning the right to express their dream,their pain, their joy, their modest vision of things and their fellow citizen.”
Questionable Bar oque
This task, as anyone can imagine, was facilitated by the reservations that
Candido manifests toward the self-reflexive and ludic aspect of the literarywork. He reminds us, as often as possible, of the noncommunicative effectthat art, as “mere experimentation of the technical resources,” has towardthe audience. He also alerts us against “formalism’s excessive pretensions,”which would end up, “in extreme cases, reducing the literary work to lin-guistic problems, be it in the broader sense of symbolic communication orin the restricted sense of the language.”
This attitude of suspicion will later inspire, in Presence of Brazilian Liter-
ature by Candido and J. Aderaldo Castello, the reluctance, the judicious
hesitation in approaching the Brazilian baroque. At first, the production ofthat period will be implicitly devalued as hardly original as far as “literarycreation” is concerned. Later on, the authors of Presence feel compelled to
highlight the “nativist sentiment” or the “slow definition of a critical aware-ness,” in other words, romantic-nationalistic characteristics that Brazilianbaroque already anticipated. This kind of value judgment, marked by cau-tion and diffidence, in which an argument for “plagiarism” is vaguely insin-uated, gains momentum when addressing a poet of considerably lessimportance than de Matos, but of undeniable gifts: Botelho de Oliveira.
†
Reinventing Tradition 187* The Relação da Bahia was the Brazilian equivalent, in the seventeenth century, of the High Court of
Appeals. — translator
† Botelho de Oliveira is the author of Música do Parnaso, the first book published by a Brazilian author.
—translator
Rejection is then clearly expressed: “We are faced with a baroque that is
empty and acrobatic, against which the Arcadian poets will rebel, and thatwent down in history as a pejorative index of that era.” A rejection that doesnot hesitate to comfortably accept, without criticism, a questionable cliché:Gongorism, synonym of bad taste, ornate and hollow style.
Can we recognize, in these passages, the critic that made the defense of
“willfulness”? The “willfulness that gives wings to works of art” and whichBrazilian authors lack, overburdened instead by a “fidelity to documentingor to sentimentalizing that is connected to raw experience.” And he adds,“the courage or spontaneity of willfulness is proof of maturity in the authorand civilization as well; to young cultures and authors it comes across asbetrayal and weakness.”
But it is this same author who, in a gesture contrary to this defense of
“willfulness” as creative factor, denies the existence in Brazilian literature,“until modernism,” of a “writer truly difficult, except for the pseudodiffi-culty of verbal ornamentation.” What does this formula mean exactly? IsVieira, with his “ingenious discourse,” a facile writer? Are Sousândrade andEuclides da Cunha facile writers? Are they “pseudosophisticates” as were,mutatis mutandis, for hostile critics of their time, Góngora, the “angel ofdarkness,” the “monstrous” Hölderlin of the Sophocles translations, Mal-larmé, the “obscure”? Does the communicative success of da Cunha’s diffi-cult text make him a “pseudosophisticate” in the pejorative sense of emptyverbalism? Wouldn’t this argument be enough to elucidate Candido’s sus-picion of the ornate style of baroque, which coincides with its Hispanicand Ibero-American rehabilitation?
[...]It might not have been a simple decision for Candido to erase the
baroque’s difference in his model for the development of Brazilian litera-ture. Even more so if we consider that the baroque was, in its own way, anart of ludic communication, of persuasive rapport, as well as of erotic affectand satiric disaffect. Not for nothing did Gregório de Matos provoke theanger of many and get “dispatched” to Angola. The quantitative notion ofa rarefied audience, at the time of the production of the work, does notseem to carry sufficient weight, especially when, beyond the colonialperiod, the relation between writer and audience in Brazil ends up beingdefined also in terms of absence. We then ask: What has essentiallychanged in Brazil’s “literary system,” since the “shallow and sparse manifes-tations without resonance” of our unsystematic preliterature? The fact thatGregório de Matos was not discovered until the romantic period is not an
188 NOVAS
indisputable argument for those who do not entertain a linear and end-
oriented concept of literary history; for those who do not see it from a per-spective of a finished cycle but rather as an ever-shifting movement of dif-ference; for those who are more interested in the moments of rupture andtransformation than in the “decisive moments” that are linked together ina progression toward an instant of apogee or conclusive moment. From theperspective of this nonrestrictive temporality, the case of Gregório deMatos is not fundamentally different from the case of Góngora in Spain,the case of the Portuguese baroque, or the cases of Caviedes and HernandoDomínguez Camargo in Spanish America.
[. . .]Góngora was excluded from literary history for more than two cen-
turies. Between Grégorio de Matos’s death ( 1695) and the publication of
the second volume of Januário da Cunha Barbosa’s Parnaso brasileiro
[Brazilian Parnassus ](1831), in which a few of his poems appear, 136years
passed; 155years between his death and Varnhagen’s Anthology (1850); and
187years until Vale Cabral’s edition of Obras poéticas [Poetic Works ](1882).
In this interlude, aside from his fame in Bahia’s oral tradition, the “manu-script collection” of his poems was compiled from apocrypha. “Thus, themanuscript tradition could survive throughout the eighteenth century,when Gregório de Matos was no longer alive. . . . The apocrypha writerswanted to preserve Gregório de Matos, apocrypha that, sporadically read,guaranteed the survival of his work.”
4
It is indeed a matter of survival, or Fortleben, as Benjamin says when
speaking of the survival of literary works beyond the era that fostered them.
History as Constellation
Literary history, renewed by the theory of reception, must, according to
Hans Robert Jauss, contain a productive function of the understanding ofprogress. It must examine both the process of inclusion (the constitution of“tradition”) as well as that of exclusion (the critique of “forgetfulness”).
Literary history cannot simply accept the feeling of the past as “common-
place,” as Candido seems to indicate in the Formation. “When we approach
a text,” Candido writes, “we feel like our immediate forerunners, whoformed us, and our contemporaries that the cultural community connectsus with; we end up arriving at similar conclusions, the individual characterdifferentiated only by a little timbre in the way of presenting them.” Nietzsche has already alerted us to the resigned acceptance of tradition as if
Reinventing Tradition 189
it were second nature. In Daybreak, we read that “behind feelings there
stand judgments and evaluations which we inherit in the form of feelings
(inclinations, aversions). The inspiration born of a feeling is the grandchildof judgment—and often of a false judgment!—and in any event not a childof our own! To trust one’s feelings—means to give more obedience to one’sgrandfather and grandmother and their grandparents than to the gods,which are in us: our own reason and our experience.”
*In this order of
things, according to Jauss (and Jean Starobinski), it is necessary for criticalinterpretation not to annul the “differential function” of the work, its “trans-gressive function.” Criticism should not exclude the exception and assimi-late the pariah in order to constitute an immutable canon of works, makingit acceptable and turning it into common heritage. Rather, it should “keepor maintain the difference of the works as difference,” stressing thus the“discontinuity of literature in relation to the history of society.”
“It is well known that tradition—understood as living past—never pre-
sents itself as a given: it is a creation,” wrote Octavio Paz in “Homenaje aSor Juana Inés de la Cruz en su tercer centenario” [“Homage to Sor JuanaInés de la Cruz in Her Third Centennial”] ( 1951).
In fact, if we think, like Walter Benjamin,
†that “history is the subject of
a structure whose site is not homogenous, empty time, but time filled bythe presence of the now [ Jetztzeit ]”; if we understand that “every image of
the past that is not recognized by the present as one of its own concernsthreatens to disappear irretrievably”; if we ponder that “to articulate thepast historically does not mean to recognize it ‘the way it really was’(Ranke),” we will have conjured, both the “objectivist” and the “positivist”illusions of the causal chain of facts as the proof of its historicity.
We then understand that the objectively quantifiable determination of
the work’s first audience is different from the history of its reception. Weunderstand that it involves phases of opacity and prestige, of occultationand renaissance. That it does not feed on a substantialist sense of plenitudedepicted as the culmination of a “simple” origin, given once and for all asa precise “date.” We can thus imagine, as an alternative, a kind of literaryhistory less as “formation” than as “transformation.” Less as a conclusiveprocess than as an open process. A history that stresses its moments of rup-ture and transgression and that does not understand tradition from an
190 NOVAS* Friedrich Nietzsche, D aybreak: Thoughts on the Prejudices of Morality, trans. R. J. Hollingdale (Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997). —translator
† De Campos quotes from theses XIV, V, and VI of Benjamin’s “Theses on the Concept of History,”
in Illuminations, trans. Harry Zohn (New York: Schocken Books, 1988), 255–61 .—translator
“essentialist” perspective but rather as a “dialectics of question and answer,”
a constant and renewed questioning of diachrony by synchrony.
The Ver tiginous Or igin
Brazilian literature did not have an infancy ( in-fans, who does not
speak). It did not have a “simple” origin. It was never formless. It was bornalready mature, fully formed, in the plan of aesthetic values, speaking themost elaborate code of the time. In this literature, in the movement of its“rotating signs,” the baroque was inscribed since the beginning as “differ-ence.” The “movement of difference,” according to Derrida, is constantlyproducing itself; it does not depend on the “incarnation” of a dawningLogos to decide the question of origin like the sun in a heliocentric system.Likewise, the formal (and critical) maturity of de Matos’s contribution toBrazilian literature is not dependent on the seasonal cycle proposed byCandido. Preceding and following this cycle, de Matos’s work questionsthe very idea of gradation that informs Candido’s sense of history. Brazil’sliterary “origin” was not punctual or “simple” (in the organic, genetic,
embryonic sense). It was “vertiginous,” like Benjamin’s use of the wordUrsprung in the etymological sense of “leap,” of “transformation.”
Góngora and Quevedo, and before them Camões, do not abolish the
differential contribution—the “differences” called Grégorio de Matos,Caviedes, Domínguez Camargo, Sor Juana Inés de la Cruz. In this sense,there are no “minor literatures,” turned passive by a radiant canon, by the“transcendental meaning” of “major” literatures. Since canons are not “eter-nal” and beauty is historically relative, there is no need to speak of one-wayinfluences that are not reprocessed and differentiated by their new envi-ronment. In this differential conception, the American baroque is an art of“counterconquest,” as Lezama Lima defined it. We call this process, sincethe days of Oswald de Andrade, “cannibalist gluttony.”
From the perspective of a nonlinear historiography, relevant to the present
of creation, that takes into account the “shifting horizons” of reception andthe “plagiotropic” machinery of oblique paths and discontinuous deriva-tions; the plurality of tempi; the transtemporal constellations. From thisother “historic perspective,” Gregório de Matos existed and exists, even moreso than, for instance, a writer such as Casimiro de Abreu, whose work is nowconsidered kitsch. It is with the work of Gregório de Matos that a poet suchas João Cabral de Melo Neto is in dialogue and in sync. It is de Matos’s legacy
Reinventing Tradition 191
that writers such as Oswald de Andrade and Mário Faustino claim back.
[. . .]
Even though Gregório de Matos was temporarily confined to local mem-
ory and to the “manuscript tradition,” and his work was rescued in bookform only some 150years after his death; even though the accusation of “pla-
giarism” weighed over his reputation, his absence was merely virtual, or amasquerade. Gregório de Matos has always been present, as a watermarkinscription, at the center of the very baroque code in which he so exception-ally operated. A “collective” or “architectonic style” (Gerardo Diego) thatpersisted in clear traces even in the work of those who opposed it.
This insidious, rambling style, which migrates to the center of roman-
ticism and later becomes a transepochal repertoire of expressive resources,would explain the apparently dislocated in time, regressive, and progres-sive insurrection of Sousândrade’s O Guesa errante [Wandering Guesa ], an
insurrection against the dominant “communicative” code of the period.
[. . .]
The Open Paradigm
. . . l’impossible “tâche du traducteur” (Benjamin), voilà ce que veut dire
aussi “déconstruction.”
. . . the impossible “task of the translator” (Benjamin). This too is meant
by “deconstruction.”
—J. Derrida*
It is necessary to stress, however, that it is precisely Candido who will
open the possibility of rethinking his former “historical perspective.” In“Dialética da malandragem” [“Dialectics of the Rogue”], his notable essayfrom 1970, Candido retraces in a different pattern the linear evolution that
his 1959 book had established. He deconstructs and reconstructs this evo-
lution in a fractured and transtemporal way and recovers a new perspectivethrough its marginal paths rather than the main road. In this newmosaiclike design, not lines but constellations, the former nonexistent“Boca do Inferno” is given a voice. He is now one of the precursors of the“roguish” comedic spirit in Brazilian literature, valued not as lyrical poetry,
192 NOVAS*Derrida and Difference, ed. David Wood and Robert Bernasconi (Warwick, RI: Parousia Press, 1985), 1–5.
—translator
but for his freewheeling satire. In this autodeconstruction of the Forma-
tion’s semiological model of reading, through which de Matos’s “cursing
muse” is finally rescued from its former sociological segregation, the “epic”scheme in search of the logocentric moment is no longer valid. Mário deAndrade was never more right when, in searching for the ontological “char-acter” of the Brazilian man, he arrived not at a conclusive, total identity,but at its difference: the unresolved and questioning “noncharacter” of hisantihero Macunaíma.
In “Dialética,” Candido is no longer interested in stressing literature’s
integrative function, which would correspond to the “incorporation” of a
continuous tradition, until the moment in which the national Logos (the“spirit”) would become flesh, mature, and transubstantiate into a conclusivesocial identity. His aim now is to stress the anticipatory function, to devise a
subversive, fragmented antitradition, capable of proposing nonmonologicmodels of behavior, not subject to the laws of identity and homogeneity.And it is precisely in the openness of this nondefined character that weglimpse the antinormative contradictions that, as Candido writes in“Dialectics of the Rogue,” “will facilitate our insertion in an open world.”“For the character of the comic figure is not the scarecrow of the determin-ist; it is the beacon in whose beams the freedom of his action becomes vis-ible,” writes Benjamin in an essay
5in which the impossibility of elaborating
a noncontradictory concept with character as the center is also stressed.Bakhtin, in considering the crisis of the “epic integrity,” also speaks of thejoyous excess, the nonrenewable residue of humanity’s nonrealized expen-diture, which corresponds to a dynamics of discord and that would comeacross in the carnivalized world of laughter.
Translated by A. S. Bessa
Reinventing Tradition 193
The Trans-American Pilgrimage of
Sousândrade’s Guesa
Brazil in the early 1960s witnessed the most tumultuous revision of its lit-
erary past, one involving a poet from the state of Maranhão, Joaquim de
Sousa Andrade ( 1832–1902 ), better known by his nom de guerre Sousân-
drade. By merging his two last names, the poet sought to achieve a Greeksonority and the same number of letters as in Shakespeare’s name, anauthor he much admired.
Sousândrade, who belonged to the second generation of Brazilian
romanticism— Harpas Selvagens [Wild Harps ], his first book, is dated
1857—was marginal during his time, and he remained so until my brother,Augusto de Campos, and I published the anthology Re/Visão de Sousân-
drade (Re/Vision of Sousândrade ) in 1964. Sílvio Romero ( 1851–1914 ), the
nineteenth-century patriarch of our literary historiography, saw him as apoet who dared, and whose boldness projected him “far beyond what wasordinary in his time,” albeit irregular and hardly understandable ( História
da literatura brasileira [The History of Brazilian Literature ], 1888). Antonio
Candido, Romero’s current successor, places the bard from Maranhãoamong the “minor romantic poets.” Although stressing his “originality,” hesees the form of his poetry as improper and affected by “a certain degree ofpreciosity, as a whole to the worst effect, bound to the use of unusual
194This essay was first published in Portuguese as “A peregrinação transamericana do Guesa de Sousân-
drade,” Revista USP 50(June–August 2001), 221–31.— editors
terms, nearly bordering on bad taste” ( Formação da literatura brasileira [The
Formation of Brazilian Literature], vol. 2 [São Paulo: Martins, 1959], 204).
Such accusation of preciosity undoubtedly corresponds to Candido’s own
hesitant attitude toward the baroque phenomenon. On the one hand, Can-dido places the development of romanticism (preceded by Arcadianism
*
and by Brazil’s political autonomy) as the royal road to evaluating the evo-lutionary line of our letters; on the other hand, he selects the “commonissues” of canonical romantic style: sensitivity and referential transparencyas a homogeneous and integrative “general language” capable of working asa manifestation of the “national spirit.”
Whether the language of a poet of exceptional originality such as
Sousândrade could be impregnated with baroque tints, albeit concurrentlyexhibiting romantic traits, is something Candido’s descriptive scheme doesnot take into account. After the publication of Re/Visão, subsequent histo-
riography began to recognize this landmark poet, and attitudes changed.Alfredo Bosi records the “highly original spirit” of the “astounding intu-ition of modern times,” the “novelty” in regard to “nineteenth-centuryBrazilian poetry as a whole” of Sousândradian “processes of composition”(História concisa da literatura brasileira [A Brief History of Brazilian Litera-
ture], [São Paulo: Cultrix, 1970]). Massaud Moisés, in turn, states:
It would not be at all far-fetched to say that we are facing the most pow-erful voice in romantic poetry, as well as one of the highest and mostvibrant in Brazilian literature: A literary history marked by lyricism, nottoo rarely by overwhelming sentimentality, finds now the epic world out-look that it was missing, thus acquiring a longed-for universalist dimen-sion ( História da literatura brasileira [The History of Brazilian Literature ],
vol. 2, Romantismo, Realismo [São Paulo: Cultrix, 1984], 258).
A trans-American poem, unified by the topic of the journey (the
“mobility in space,” as noted by Antonio Candido, being one of its positiveaspects), O Guesa errante (1868–1888 ?) brings together, in an epic-narrative
setting, dramatic elements (the “Tatuturema” and “Wall Street Inferno”
Reinventing Tradition 195* Arcadianism was introduced in Brazil around 1768. The poets of this group—Tomás Antonio Gon-
zaga, Alvarenga Peixoto, Silva Alvarenga, and Cláudio Manoel da Costa—are also well known for their
tragic participation in the “Inconfidência Mineira” (Minas Gerais uprising), a pro-independence move-ment. The main leaders of this group were arrested by the Portuguese authorities and executed in pub-lic. Manoel da Costa was arrested and found dead in his cell. Tomás Antonio Gonzaga was also arrestedand was deported to Mozambique. — editors
episodes inspired by Goethe’s Faust ’s “Walpurgis Nights”), nature’s land-
scape paintings, and frequent biographical and lyric digressions. Sousân-
drade found inspiration for the pilgrim–hero figure (Guesa, the homeless,the exiled) in Alexander von Humboldt’s Vues des cordillères et monuments
des peuples indigènes de l’Amérique ,2volumes, 1810–1813 , and volumes 15
and 16of Humboldt’s Voyage (1799–1804 ) to the equinoctial regions of the
New World accompanied by French botanist Aimé Bonpland. The Brazil-ian poet transcribes as an epigraph on the cover of the final version of hispoem a long quotation from Humboldt, where the Berlin naturalist com-ments on the mythology of the Muisca Indians from Nueva Granada,Colombia. In the religious rites of those Indians, who worshipped a sundivinity called Bochica, the Guesa was a boy who had been taken awayfrom his parents’ home and raised until the age of ten in the sun temple inSogomozo. At age fifteen, after a pilgrimage to all sites visited by Bochica,the young man was taken to his final destination: the suna. There, he was
tied to a column and sacrificed by the arrows of priests ( xeques or zaques ),
who then had his heart taken out and his blood collected in sacred vessels.
The homage paid by Sousândrade, a poet from the equinoctial regions,
to Humboldt, in his capacity as a “scientific” narrator of those pre-Columbian legends, reminds me of the tribute of admiration Goethe paidto the great naturalist in his Elective Affinities (Die Wahlverwandschaften,
1809, part 2, chapter 7). In this work, one of the characters, Ottilie, writes:
“We admire only the naturalist who knows how to describe and depict forus the strangest and [most] unusual objects in their proper locality andenvironment. How I should like to hear only once Humboldt talk.”
*
Humboldt is named in different ways at different moments of the
Guesa. In canto 2(line 62), he is called “father Humboldt,” and the poet
recalls the naturalist’s and Bonpland’s experiments with curare. In canto 10
(“Wall Street Inferno,” stanza 77), Humboldt enjoys the eminent company
of Goethe, Dante, Byron, and others, among the amautas (sages or coun-
selors in the Inca Empire). Against this Andean backdrop—and that is themost beautiful evocation of the naturalist-traveler in the whole poem—Sousândrade imagines the projection of the brilliant man of science andcompares Humboldt’s gray hair to the Andean snow:
196 NOVAS* English translation from Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Elective Affinities, trans. Elizabeth Mayer and
Louise Bogan (Chicago: Henry Regnery Co., 1963), 213.— editors
Let us climb farther up, much farther:
up to the horizon the immortal spirit attains,when sunset is made by roses richerwith so much ice, infinite mountains!
...............................
Lonesome is glory on the stern attitude,
Humboldt’s gray hair: beautiful ethereal light!His soul in the air, magnificent solitude,as if in a crystal ball, and quite bright,feelings were echoed. And oh!on the snows of Andean solitude contemptas in man’s heights: how could you there go?it is either death, or divine light attempt.
.................................
May the man who has climbed up
join calm nature at the topthey are one, and are magnificent.
That dioramic vision of an aged Humboldt, invoked as an Andeanguardian spirit, becomes even more relevant when we consider that theBrazilian poet, who had a rigorous training in the Greek classics, does notopen his magnificent poem with the traditional (Homeric) exhortation tothe Muse but rather with the retrospective view of the grandiose Andean“spectacle,” the true source of his “divine inspiration”:
Come, divine imagination!Bare-topped, the volcanic Andes rise,surrounded by ice, mute, tacit,clouds floating - what grand spectacle!
—(O Guesa, canto 1, 1858)
Those verses flash upon me as a sort of recollection of a unique homage byGoethe to Humboldt: the copper engraving of an “ideal landscape” ( 1813)
that depicts the naturalist-traveler in the Chimborazo heights sending NewWorld greetings to Horace-Bénedict de Saussure, the famous mountainresearcher who had climbed Mont Blanc in Switzerland, some 4,900 feet
lower than the Andean summit.
1
Reinventing Tradition 197
Humboldt’s influence on the romantics is well known: Chateaubriand
attests to it in the prologue to his Voyage en Amérique [Travels in America ]
(1828). Ferdinand Denis ( 1798–1890 ), a literary scholar who lived in Brazil
from 1816 to 1820, is another witness. In his Scènes de la nature sous les
tropiques et leur influence sur la poésie [Scenes of Nature in the Tropics and
Their Influence on Poetry ](1824), Denis adopts Humboldt’s thesis regarding
the influence of the natural environment on progress and on the artistic
style. These ideas inspired the young Brazilians who founded the journalNiteroy in Paris (1836 ) under the mentorship of poet Domingos José
Gonçalves de Magalhães ( 1811–1882), whose mediocre Suspiros poéticos e
saudades [Poetical Sighs and Nostalgia , Paris, 1836] is seen as the starting
point of Brazilian romanticism, and whose “Ensaio sobre a história da lit-eratura no Brasil” [“Essay on Brazilian Literary History,” Niteroy 1,1836]i s
the expression of the nativist school ideology.
*
Inversely to our apologetic and artificial “Indianism,” based on the con-
cept of the noble and heroic bon sauvage, following the medieval knight-
hood paradigm, the Indian theme carries a demystifying imprint whenaddressed by Sousândrade. In his case, the form of the long poem is notaffected by obsolescence as is Confederação dos tamoios (Confederation of the
T amoio Indians, 1856)o rOs timbiras (The Timbira Saga ,1857), the epic
attempts by Gonçalves de Magalhães and Gonçalves Dias, respectively. Itis, rather, an innovative mixture of genres held together by the journey leit-motif (through the Amazon region, the Gulf of Mexico, and the Antilles allthe way up to New York—where the poet lived from 1871 through 1885;
along the Pacific Ocean, with stops in Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, Chile,and Argentina—as far down as Patagonia). Except for the southernmostregions, Humboldt had visited many of those places before, during histravels through the Americas ( 1799–1804).
Only in the twentieth century the Chilean poet Pablo Neruda carried
out a project for a trans-American epos of similar reach in his Canto gen-
eral(written between 1937 and 1950). Driven by the travel theme, Sousân-
drade, probably under the influence of his readings of Humboldt—whocould see the clear relationship between the civilizing heroes Bochica
198 NOVAS*Nativism is a tendency without clear boundaries, but generally it involves a sentiment of pride in the
nativ e soil, particularly the beauties and marvels of Brazil, with varying emphases as evidenced in
“ufanismo,” “Arcadianism,” and “Indianism.” Ufanismo (from ufanar-se, “to boast”) refers to a category
of Brazilian literature produced in the mid- to late 1500s and which tended to glorify the land and its
riches. Arcadianism, described in an earlier footnote, dates to the late 1700s. Indianism, a literary pro-
gram of the romantic period, valued Brazil’s national origins by using the image of the native. —editors
(Muisca), Quetzalcóatl (Aztec), and Manco-Cápac (Inca)—includes, in his
Guesa, elements of the chronicles of the Inca Empire, of its splendor, its
conquests. As Neruda did later, Sousândrade chastises the cruelty of theconquerors and celebrates the revolutionary leaders of the Americas (Bolí-var, O’Higgins, Páez, Lincoln, etc.). In addition, the “Inca-Greek” modelis idealized as a sort of socialist-utopian republic with Platonic or primitiveChristian traits (despite Humboldt’s opposition to such a concept whentalking about the Inca Empire as “a great monastic entity,” a less oppressive“theocracy” that still resembled the Aztec kings’ rule). Both Sousândrade inthe mid-nineteenth century and Neruda by the mid-twentieth centuryconverge and concur in the epicedial celebration of Incan tragedy. TheBrazilian’s republican socialist-Christian view as well as the Chilean’s Marxist-nationalistic utopia with libertarian ends bring to the fore the social rescueof the conquered peoples. One could compare, for instance, the descrip-tion of Atahualpa’s death, inflicted by Pizarro’s perverse maneuvers andincited by Valverde, a fanatical priest ( Canto general , canto 14):
In Cajamarca the agony began.
..........................
Pizarro, the swine from Extremadura,has the Inca’s delicate armsbound. Night fallsover Peru like a black ember.
*
with canto 11 of Guesa: “Atahualpa fasted, in silence.” The scene to which
the magnificent decasyllable “O sol, ao pôr-do-sol, (triste soslaio!)” [“Thesun at sunset (sadly slanting)!”] belongs concludes:
Obfuscated, the Sun disappeared.Atahualpa, by the skies unprotectedfinding himself in a crater, shattered:as in astonishment he petrified!
2
Sousândrade indeed had a utopian-idealizing view of the Inca Empire.Regarding the Brazilian indigenous people, his attitude was one of ferventcriticism against the corruptive effect of the whites and of catechizers. (The
Reinventing Tradition 199* English translation from Pablo Neruda, Canto General, trans. Jack Schmitt (Berkeley and Los Ange-
les: University of California Press, 1991), 55.— editors
“Inferno” in canto 2, the Amazonian “Tatuturema,” a word from the merg-
ing of the Portuguese and T upi languages, is an orgiastic pandemonium
under the sign of Jurupari, the indigenous devil according missionaries.)The republican-representative model inspired by the “avant-garde youngpeople” (the United States and its founders), a form of government admiredby Sousândrade and by Humboldt (a democrat, heir to the French Revolu-tion, Jefferson’s friend and correspondent), is also not safe from corruption:
Oh! How sad; in the Republic ultimatemoral lies fraud, in its bosom!In its pure bosom—as it were—Christ’s body in decomposition!
3
Sousândrade, in his multilingual “Wall Street Inferno” (canto 10), captures
and harshly satirizes speculation through the figure of the New York StockExchange god Mammon (the Greek Mammonas ), the usura deity, during
the so-called Gilded Age ( 1870–1884) of American capitalism.
Another aspect that stands out in O Guesa is the descriptions of nature,
full of graphic beauty and visual images. Sousândrade’s pictorial power is akinto (here, I do not mean influenced by) Humboldt’s style in his “nature paint-ings” (Ansichten der Natur ), which the erudite traveler intermingles with his
scientific reports, developing, as it were, his “poetic prose” ( dichterische Prosa ).
The description of the Tequendama Falls is a good example, since bothHumboldt ( Vues des cordillères ) and Neruda ( Canto general , section “Los ríos
acuden” [“The Rivers Come Forth”]) were impressed by the magnificentview of the Colombian falls. Atop the Andes, nature is sublimated in the eyesof Guesa, the wandering poet. He ends up catching a glance of the “EternalSpirit,” the “One-Infinite” in the “Andes that rise up high, enlarged / into theskies like transparent clouds.” He glimpses in a “white light / diamond,” in“tellurian crystal,” the “natural moral process, / colorless principles, existence/ absolute in its beauty—here and beyond.” A visionary of light, Sousândradeenvisages the “One-God” in the glittering telluric mineral: “Oh! the Dia-mond, so pure / a burning flame / and also Eternal! Should I contemplate /it, How can I tell the gleam from what glows?”
4
Would this, again, rather than influence, be somewhere close (by sensi-
tive kinship) to the “holistic” concept of the cosmos—that Synthese von
physischer und moralischer Natur [synthesis of physical and moral nature]
which so deeply fascinated the great naturalist-philosopher from Berlin?
Translated by Diana Gibson, edited by Odile Cisneros
200 NOVAS
An Oswald de Andrade Triptych
A Poetics of the R adical (Selection)
Being Radical
If we wanted to characterize in a meaningful way the poetry of Oswald
de Andrade in the panorama of Brazilian modernism, we could say that his
poetry articulates a poetics of the radical. It’s a radical poetry. What does“being radical” mean? In a famous text, Marx wrote: “To be radical is tograsp things by the root. But for man the root is man himself.”
*How can
we understand, in that sense, the radical quality of Andrade’s poetry? Onceagain, Marx provides us with a clue: “Language is as old as consciousness,language ispractical consciousness that exists also for other men, and for
that reason alone it really exists for me personally as well; language, likeconsciousness, only arises from the need, the necessity, of intercourse withother men. Where there exists a relationship, it exists for me: the animal
201This section comprises excerpts from three essays originally published as introductions to works by
Oswald de Andrade: “Uma poética da radicalidade,” in Poesias r eunidas, vol. 7,Obras completas (1966 ;
reprint, Rio de Janeiro: Civilização Brasileira, 1972), republished in Pau Brasil (São Paulo: Editora
Globo, 2000), 7–53;“ Miramar na mira,” in Memórias sentimentais de João Miramar (1964; reprint, Rio
de Janeiro: Civilização Brasileira, 1972), xiii–xlv, and (São Paulo: Editora Globo, 1997), 5–33;“ Serafim:
Um grande não livro,” in Memórias sentimentais de João Miramar/Serafim Ponte Grande, vol. 4,Obras
completas, 4th ed. (Rio de Janeiro: Civilização Brasileira, 1972), 101–27 , republished in Serafim Ponte
Grande (São Paulo: Editora Globo, 1996), 5–34.— editors
*Karl Marx, “Critique of Hegel’s Philosophy of Right,” trans. T. B. Bottomore, in The Marx-Engels Reader,
ed. Robert C. T ucker (New York: W. W. Norton, 1972), 19.— translator
does not enter into ‘ relations ’ with anything, it does not enter into any rela-
tion at all. . . . Consciousness is, therefore, from the very beginning a social
product, and it remains so as long as men exist at all.”*The radical nature
of Andrade’s poetry can be gauged, thus, insofar as this poetry affects, at theroot, that practical, real consciousness which is language. Since language,like consciousness, is a social product, a product of man as a being in a rela-tionship, it is worthwhile to locate Andrade’s project in its historical frame-work. What was the state of literary language at the time when theOswaldian poetic revolution was fermenting and broke out?
Intellectually, the Brazil of the first decades of this [the twentieth] cen-
tury, around the Modern Art Week of 1922, was still a Brazil under the spell
of the “myths of the mot juste” (Mário da Silva Brito
†), where an “ornamen-
tal patriotism” reigned (Antonio Candido‡), full of tribune rhetoric, the
counterpart of a oligarcho-patriarchal regime that lasted until well into therepublic.
§Rui Barbosa, the Eagle of the Hague, Coelho Neto, the Last of
the Greeks, and Olavo Bilac, the Prince of Poets,**were the uncontested
gods of an official Olympus, in which the Parnassian Pegasus dragged itsheavy metrifying armor, and word wealth (understood merely in a cumu-lative sense) was a sort of thermometer for an “enlightened” consciousness.Evidently, literary language in that context functioned as a jargon of castes,a diploma of intellectual “nobiliarchy.”
Between the language full of pointillist correction written by the atten-
dees of the literary banquets and the language carelessly spoken by the peo-ple (mostly of São Paulo, where the migratory currents led, accompaniedby their peculiar oral deformations) an apparently unbridgeable gapopened. Oswald de Andrade’s Poesia Pau-brasil [Brazilwood Poetry ] repre-
sented, as we can easily imagine, a 180-degree shift in that status quo,
202 NOVAS* Karl Marx, “The German Ideology,” in The Marx-Engels Reader, 122.—translator
† Critic (b. 1916), author of the important História do modernismo brasileiro [History of Brazilian Mod-
ernism ] (Saraiva: São Paulo, 1958). —translator
‡ Critic and university professor (b. 1918), author of Formação da literatura brasileira [Formation of
Brazilian Literature ](1959). —translator
§ The Brazilian Republic was proclaimed on November 15, 1889 , by Marshall Deodoro da Fonseca. 
—transla tor
** Barbosa, a writer and liberal politician and thinker ( 1849–1923 ), was considered a Parnassian stylist
of the language in his writings and oratory. Neto, a novelist and short-story writer ( 1864–1934 ), was the
prolific author of more than 120works. Bilac, a Parnassian poet ( 1865–1918 ), attained extreme popular-
ity in his day; his Poesias was an uncontested best seller for years. Because of extreme attention to per-
fection in style, Bilac came under attack by the modernists of 1922. Mário de Andrade called him “the
most brilliant juggler of the Portuguese verse.” — translator/editors
where—to use Oswald’s*own expression—“the stable values of the most
backward literature of the world prevented any kind of renovation.” He
called everything into question in terms of poetry. Being radical language-wise, he found, while drilling into the fossilized strata of convention, therestlessness of the new Brazilian man. This modern subject was beingforged speaking a language stirred by the “wealthy contribution of all themistakes,” in a country that had begun—precisely in São Paulo—a processof industrialization with deep structural repercussions. “If we look for theexplanation of why the modernist phenomenon emerged in São Paulo andnot elsewhere in Brazil, we’ll see that it was the result of our industrial con-sciousness. São Paulo had long been swept by all the cultural winds. Notonly did the coffee trade produce the resources, but also industry, with itszeal for the new, its stimulation of progress, made competition enter allfields of activity.” That was Oswald’s hindsight in 1954.
1
The Evils of Eloquence
When Paulo Prado,†in May of 1924, writing the preface to Oswald’s first
book of poems ( 1925), defined “Brazilwood poetry” as “the egg of Colum-
bus” and hailed it as the “first systematic attempt to liberate Brazilianpoetry,” he touched on the nerve of the problem. Not only because Pradosaw in this poetry the “rehabilitation of our everyday speech, sermo ple-beius, which pedantic grammarians wanted to eliminate from written lan-guage.” But, beyond this, because he foresaw in it something morefundamentally far-reaching:
Let us hope that “Brazilwood” poetry may also eliminate once and for allone of the greatest evils of our race—the evil of eloquence, fluffy andrustling. In this era hastened by fast activity, everything tends to the simpleand naked expression of sensation and feeling, in complete and syntheticsincerity. “Le poète japonais / Essuie son couteau: / Cette fois l’éloquenceest morte,” says the Japanese haiku in its stony conciseness. That will be aglorious day for Brazilian poetry. To obtain, in capsules, minutes of poetry.
Reinventing Tradition 203*Brazilian literary history is rich in writers bearing the last name “Andrade.” For this reason, and partic-
ularly when referring to the two contemporaneous main players of Brazilian modernism, Oswald de
Andrade and Mário de Andrade (who were not related by blood), authors often refer to them by their firstname. For reasons of clarity, this peculiarity has been preserved as it occurs in the original. — transl ator
† Prominent member of the São Paulo bourgeoisie ( 1869–1943 ). He was a lover and patron of the arts
who actively supported the 1922 Modern Art Week. Published Retrato do Brasil (1928), an essay that
attempts to define the Brazilian national ethos. — translator
It is true that before Brazilwood, Mário de Andrade,*another great name of
Brazilian modernism, had already published two books of poetry: Há uma
gota de sangue en cada poema [There’s a Drop of Blood in Each Poem ](1917)
and Paulicéia desvairada [Hallucinated City ]†(1922), books of undoubtedly
great historical import and which would go on to powerfully instigate
Oswald. (On May 27,1921, in an article that provoked scandal and contro-
versy even with Mário himself, Oswald introduced the author of the thenunpublished Paulicéia as “My Futurist Poet.”)
2In none of those books,
however, do we find the radical attitude vis-à-vis language which emergesfrom Oswald’s first collection and which is already present in the novel-invention Memórias Sentimentais de João Miramar [Sentimental Memoirs of
John Seaborne ],
‡begun between 1914and 1916, written and rewritten suc-
cessively until 1923, and published in 1924. Many of its sections are literally
made up of poems that could have been included in Brazilwood:
Mont-Cenis
The alpinistfrom alpenstockdescendeduponthe Alps
In reality, the language of Mário’s first book (published under the pseu-
donym Mário Sobral and later gathered in a volume of Obra imatura [Juve-
nilia] of his Complete Works ) is still quite traditional, exclamatory, and
dotted with rhetorical sentimentality. In it, there are only a few scatteredmoments of nonconformity, such as “Somente o vento / continua com seuoou . . .” [Only the wind / goes on with its oou . . . ], which Oswald enthu-siastically admired when the two Andrades first met.
3On the other hand,
Hallucinated City is already an aesthetically representative book, comprising
poems such as “Ode to the Bourgeois Gentleman” and the profane oratorio“The Moral Fibrature of the Ipiranga,” examples of the best Marioandra-dian diction. In spite of this, there is nothing in it that points to the strip-
204 NOVAS* Poet, critic, novelist, short-story writer, and musicologist ( 1893–1935 ). He was one of the pivotal fig-
ures of the Brazilian modernist movement. — translator
† In English: Hallucinated C ity,trans. Jack E. Tomlins (Kingsport, TN: Vanderbilt University Press,
1968). —translator
‡ In English: Sentimental Memoirs of John Seaborne, trans. Albert G. Bork and Ralph W. Niebuhr, T exas
Quarterly 15,n o .  4(Winter 1972): 112–60 .—translator
ping, the reduction, the synthesis that distinguishes Oswald’s “Brazilwood”
poetry. That is because Mário did not question the foundations of rhetoric;he tried instead to lead it into a new bed, to disturb it with the introductionof unusual semantic conglomerates, but he allowed the verse to flow liber-ally, only here and there interrupted by the broken “harmonic verse” (“Rap-tures . . . Struggles . . . Arrows . . . Chants . . . Populate!” in the body of apoem such as “Tietê”). Also, the thematics and rhyme schemes (frequentlytheir force, their unexpectedness, and dissonance) were affected by anunconquerable symbolist component of the urban kind à la Verhaeren. [. . .]So thus, Hallucinated City, for all its novelty, still was not the revolution; it
was a reform, carrying its sandbags of conciliation and wordiness. The rev-olution—the Copernican revolution—came with “Brazilwood” poetry.From there emerged an entire line of substantive poetics, of containedpoetry, condensed to its essential process of signs, which passes throughDrummond in the 1930s, informs the poetic engineering of João Cabral de
Melo Neto, and projects itself into today’s concrete poetry.
4An industrial-
grade poetry, we could say, as opposed to the old discursive craft, institu-tionalized in rhetorical models by Parnassianism, or already thawed,revitalized in new lyric-interjective streams by the poet of Paulicéia. [. . .]
Like Paulo Prado, João Ribeiro
*understood with perspicacity the pio-
neering and radical meaning of Oswald’s poetics. His subsequently much-quoted verdict—“Mr. Oswald de Andrade with Brazilwood marked a
definitive era of national poetry”—is formulated in an article from 1927,
dedicated to the author’s second poetry collection.
5In that article, written
looking back two years to Oswald’s poetic début, João Ribeiro managed toevaluate with accuracy the impact of that landmark work:
He attacked with decisive energy, the lines, arabesques, planes, perspec-tive, colors, and light. He had the childlike intuition of wrecking toys tosee what was inside. And he saw nothing. He began to devise, withouthelp from the Muses, a new art, an unconscious one capable of the max-imum of triviality vis-à-vis the rigid style and grandiloquence of themasters. He geometrized reality, achieving that primeval, Assyrian orEgyptian quality of African sculpture; he created frightful fetishes; andopposed to the Greek vase the rhomboid beauty of earthen pots [ . . . ]That’s how a national poetry was born, one that lifting the import tar-iffs, created a Brazilian industry. [ . . . ] For me, he was the best critic ofnational emphasis, the one who reduced the complexity of rhetorical
Reinventing Tradition 205* Symbolist critic ( 1860–1934 ). —translator
garb to the simple and proverbial fig leaf, which was already uncomfort-
able enough. He arrived at the childlike and decimal conception thatone must have of man: an 8 perched on two legs equals 10.
In another article from 1928,
6João Ribeiro speaks again of “Brazilwood”
poetry: “He [Oswald] was, like all of us, sick of the usual imitations, andhe proceeded a bit like Descartes, eliminating one by one all preconcep-tions, until he arrived at Brazil, still pre-historic, revealed by the conquista-
dores. With that reduction, poetry earned a new and original meaning. And
here the simultaneous influx of his colleague Mário de Andrade must notbe forgotten.”
Miramar on the Mark  (Selections)
The First Crucible
In 1922—the year that in Brazil would be marked by the blast of the
“Modern Art Week”—Shakespeare and Co. (the now legendary publishinghouse owned by Sylvia Beach) published in Paris the first edition of a bookthat was to change the course of modern fiction: James Joyce’s Ulysses. In1923
the Irish novelist began to write Finnegans Wake,
7which from then on would
be published in installments under the title Work in Progress in the interna-
tional avant-garde magazine Transition, edited by the poet Eugène Jolas.
In1923, Mário de Andrade wrote to Manuel Bandeira:*“Osvaldo[ sic]
and Sérgio†are arriving in December. Sérgio is bringing his newly pub-
lished Oeil de bœuf [Eye of the Ox ]. Osvaldo is bringing a novel, Memórias
de João Miramar, which, from what I hear, is unbelievably interesting,
unbelievably modern, exaggeratedly unruly. I’m dying to see it.”8Memórias
Sentimentais de João Miramar [Sentimental Memoirs of John Seaborne ]—car-
rying the inscription “Sestri Levante/Hotel Miramare, 1923”—was pub-
lished in 1924, dedicated to Paulo Prado and Tarsila do Amaral,‡with a
cover by Amaral (Livraria Editora Independência, São Paulo). This is thenovel that Oswald de Andrade, with due justice, called “the first crucible of
206 NOVAS* Poet and critic, ( 1886–1968), important and influential in the Brazilian modernist movement. A selec-
tion of his works is published in English in the volume This Earth, That Sky, trans. and with notes and
introduction by Candace Slater (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1989). 
—translator
† Sérgio Milliet, poet and critic ( 1898–1966 ), also affiliated with the modernist movement. — translator
‡ Tarsila do Amaral ( 1886–1973 ), an artist influenced by cubism, studied painting in Paris with Albert
Gleizes and Ferdinand Léger. She was an important figure in the Brazilian modernist movement and
was married to Oswald from 1926 to 1930.— translator
our new prose” in an article from 1943(“Antes do Marco Zero ” [“Before the
Ground Zero ”]) republished in his collection Ponta de lança [Spearhead ].9
This fundamental book, now a rare item and practically unknown to the
new generations, is—finally!—being republished and put again into circu-lation, forty years after its launch and ten years after the author’s death. Inreality, people haven’t always remembered to cite this watershed work whenit comes to tracing the evolution of modern Brazilian prose. There waseven, for a long time—and with echoes until today—a systematic cam-paign of silence against Oswald, which resulted in the minimization, if notdeliberate obliteration, of his important literary contributions. The creatorof Seaborne, in his usual combativeness, had already denounced this cam-
paign in another essay from Spearhead (“Fraternidade de Jorge Amado”
[“Brotherhood of Jorge Amado”]):
Then arose the fable that I only produced jokes, and a wall of silencetried to obscure the pioneer work that created Pau-Brasil [Brazilwood ],
from where, as Vinícius de Moraes has recently noted, all the elementsof modern Brazilian poetry emerged. The renewal in prose of 1922 was
deliberately forgotten, an experiment to which I contributed withMemórias sentimentais de João Miramar.
[...]
Ulysses and Miramar
Parody constitutes a fundamental device in Joyce’s Ulysses. It would even
be unnecessary to resort to episode 14 of the book, “The Oxen of the Sun,”
the parodic chapter par excellence. There, the embryonic development upuntil the moment of birth is presented through an elaborate paraphrase ofthe evolution of the English language and literature: from the primitive,monosyllabic, and alliterative Anglo-Saxon to the cockney or slang of thestreets, passing through an imitation of all the main stylists of the language.Even the parody of the Homeric epic in the one-day flânerie of an obscureDubliner already involves, in a sort of general program, its technicalaspects.
10In both Sentimental Memoirs of John Seaborne and Mário de
Andrade’s Macunaíma ,*parody is present as a stylistic and structural device,
a technique crucial to the understanding of some of modern literature’s
Reinventing Tradition 207* Novel by Mário de Andrade, one of the fundamental texts of Brazilian modernism, discussed in an
earlier part of the essay not included in this selection. Available in English: Macunaíma, trans. E. A.
Goodland (New York: Random House, 1984). —translator
greatest works, as well as to the understanding of certain literary works of
the past not easily pigeonholed: Folengo, Rabelais, and Cervantes. As wenoted, both de Andrades—Oswald and Mário—perfectly incorporated par-ody into the Brazilian context, endowing it with an active satiric function.But, focusing on Oswald, it is not just from this angle that one can compareSeaborne to Ulysses, although the parallel must be approached with caution
and the appropriate reservations. In reality, Sentimental Memoirs is far from
possessing the intricate and complex structure, the monumental nature ofJoyce’s Ulysses, a veritable encyclopedia of modern novelistic techniques. It
would be sufficient to consider the meticulous guide to the labyrinth (pre-pared by the author himself and first made available by Stuart Gilbert)
11
in order to have an idea of the distance separating the Joycean macro-microcosm—carefully planned to the minutest details—from the Oswaldiannovel, composed in a streak of brilliant improvisation, a small masterpieceof 163fragments-episodes condensed in little more than one hundred pages.
Seaborne, as a whole, could more readily be compared with an isolated
chapter from Ulysses (chapter 7: Eolus), set in a newspaper’s editorial room,
where the techniques of the headline, the captions, and the topics of thedaily press are employed. Seaborne, with its telegraphic style, is more a mix
of sentimental diary and a faits divers newspaper of a provincial and idle
society whose barometer was the ups and downs of the coffee trade.
12Anto-
nio Candido provides this eloquent synthesis of the book:
Sentimental Memoirs of John Seaborne, apart from being one of the great-
est books in Brazilian literature, is a most serious endeavor in style andnarrative as well as a first sketch of social satire. The moneyed bour-geoisie exposes, the world over, its emptiness and conventionality in ashow of terrifying sterility. Seaborne is a pince-sans-rire [deadpan-faced]
humorist who attempts to nonchalantly “Kodak” life using a syntheticand dazzling language, full of bold weldings and lapidary conciseness.
13
Evidently, in Ulysses ’ “Aeolus,” preordained or superimposed intentions are
imbricated through constant reworkings (the exploitation of journalistictechniques joins a sampler of rhetorical devices with its wealth of figures),all of which are alien to the associative immediacy of the collage of frag-ments in Seaborne. But they are similar in the topical and condensed char-
acter of the takes. Seaborne also does not lack the idea of the voyage. And
this is already in the title, which onomastically infuses the character with aperpetual sea-bound vocation, and, in Joyce’s Ulysses, is transposed to the
terrestrial and pedestrian journey in the urban enclave of Dublin. It is that
208 NOVAS
“Odyssean quality that the novel consciously acquired with Joyce” and to
which Oswald alludes with utter conviction.14But the journey in Seaborne
apparently has no consequences: it is a journey for the sake of thebohemian consumption of freedom, at the end of which the hero rejoinshis bourgeois context (marriage - lover - separation - poetasterings - financialvicissitudes). A bit out of phase, it is also true that Seaborne is also his post-
travel journal and the negation of that context through mockery. Seaborne,the protagonist, is a naive Ulysses without the slyness of Homer’s rusé per-
sonnage [cunning character], but for whom the journey represents an ini-
tial possibility, even if vague and undefined, of an opening to the worldand of a “critical” stance. “And he would return, innocent as he had gone,down the slope of an endless sea. He had only a new dimension in hissoul—he had encountered freedom” (Oswald, Um homem sem profissão [A
Man with No Profession ], 79).
*But the Odyssean destiny of the character
journeys to the novel that was sparked by Seaborne and which surpasses it
ideologically and formally: Serafim Ponte Grande [Seraphim Grosse Pointe ]
(1929/1933 ).†There, “the veneer of a bourgeois and conformist upbringing
is washed away by the utopia of a permanent and redemptive journey insearch of plenitude via mobility.”
15The myth of the “permanent voyage” is
also the anarchic counterpart of the permanent revolution that becomes apositive will to political engagement in the important retrospective andprospective preface to Seraphim. That new Odysseus, Seaborne/Seraphim,
will only find again, vivid and long-suffered, his spiritual Ithaca in theCântico dos cânticos para flauta e violão [Song of Songs for Flute and Guitar ]
(1942), song of peace in the aftermath of war where the beloved woman iscelebrated thus: “Port of my life / seven times departed / Port of my lifebroken / In the prisons / Sweated in the streets / Wrought / In the vaguedawn of hospitals.”
16
Serafim: A Great Un-Book (Selections)
“The most surprising symptom of modern literature is perhaps to wit-
ness the appearance under our noses of a form of writing so new, unitary,and global that the radical abandonment of the distinction of genres givesway to what could be called ‘books.’ But books for which, it should be
Reinventing Tradition 209* Oswald de Andrade, Um homem sem profissão: sob os ordens de mamãe. Memórias e confissões: Vol. 1,
1890–1919 (Rio de Janeiro: Civilização Brasileira, 1974). —translator
† In English: Seraphim Grosse Pointe, trans. K. D. Jackson and Albert Bork (Austin: New Latin Quar-
ter Editions, 1979). —translator
noted, no reading method has yet been practically devised.”17The author
of this reflection is a young French writer, Philippe Sollers, from the gen-
eration of the so-called nouveau roman and gathered, since the early 1960s,
around the experimental forum of the journal T el Quel.
The invention/novel18Seraphim Grosse Pointe by Oswald de Andrade,
“written from 1929 backwards” (or “finished in 1928,” as the preface reads)
and published in 1933, is one of those works that calls into question the tra-
ditional idea of genre and literary work, proposing a new concept of thebook and of reading. In Sentimental Memoirs of John Seaborne (concluded
in 1923, published in 1924), Oswald had already experimented with bound-
aries, abolishing the border between poetry and prose. Now, he radicalizedthe experiment in another dimension, making use of his previous stylisticconquests, but going deeper—if it is possible to say this—into the disas-sembly of the traditional novelistic form.
The challenge to the idea of the book as a well-defined object in a cod-
ified literary past including its cultural rituals begins here, of course, as anattack on the materiality, the physicality of the object itself. In the placeusually reserved for the “Works by the Same Author,” the list is headed bythe expression “Rejected Works,” and the very book that one is about toread, Seraphim Grosse Pointe, is included among the discarded titles. The
copyright—which sanctions the rights of the author and of literary prop-erty—is paraphrased in a mocking tone (“No rights reserved. May be trans-lated, reproduced, and deformed into all languages”). There is a “Printer’sError” slip dislocated from its habitual place, functioning autonomously, asan independent chapter. Finally, what corresponds to a colophon (indicat-ing the date and place of printing of the book) is also subject to an unusualtreatment: the chronology is listed backward, as if seen through the dis-tancing lenses of a pair of binoculars placed in reverse: “This book waswritten from 1929 (the era of Wall Street and Christ) backwards.” Not to
mention the parody included in the classical dating conventions ( b.c., a.d.,
year of the Lord, anno Domini, etc.).
Such indexical signs (in Peirce’s classification system)
19point like arrows
toward the reality of an object that we know through these localizing andcharacteristic markers—just as traffic signs show us the way or alert us tothe presence of a school or hospital. However, these signs simultaneously“estrange” the object, or “defamiliarize” it to our perception, through thevery act of pointing to it or emblematizing it.
Ostranenie—That’s how the Russian formalist critics in the first decades
of the twentieth century tried to define this technique used to demolish
210 NOVAS
“automatization,” the inertia that we are subjected to by routine. What is
familiar appears to us as new, unknown, if we alter the normal relationsthat the familiar is presented under through an “alienation effect.” ViktorShklovsky, who made use of this concept in his 1917 study “Iskusstvo kak
priem” (“Art as Technique”),
*considered a true manifesto of Russian for-
malism,20also developed the idea of “exposing the technique” (or “proce-
dure”— obnazhenie priema ) as a measure of the work of art’s specificity. For
him, Laurence Sterne’s Tristram Shandy was the most typical novel of world
literature (instead of the exceptional or extravagant case, as was previouslyheld) precisely because it exposed the very structure of the novel by dis-turbing it, “deautomatizing” it for the reader’s reception. “Formalistically,Sterne was an extreme revolutionary,” says Shklovsky; “it was characteris-tic of him to ‘lay bare’ his technique.”
21Tristram Shandy, this apparently
bizarre and idiosyncratic work written in the second half of the eighteenthcentury (1759–67 ), is in reality a pioneer milestone of the revolution of the
book as object. This revolution projects itself in an overwhelming and irreversible way into our [the twentieth] century, having now as allies (or at least, as instigators) the new technologies for reproduction and trans-mission of information, the mass communication of new media and intermedia.
Oswald de Andrade’s Seraphim, like Sterne’s Tristram, is a book that,
from the start, questions its own structure. Already in Sentimental Memoirs
of John Seaborne Oswald had developed the project of a fractured, fragmen-
tary book made up of elements that had to be articulated by the reader’sinner spirit, a book that looked like an anthology of itself.
22But in
Seaborne, even if the shattering of chapters might produce the effect of dis-
integrating the norm of linear reading, there is still a rarefied chronologi-cal thread, traced from a residual form of the bildungsroman, that presentsus with—in parodic terms, to be sure—the stages of childhood, adoles-cence, the educational travels, marital and extramarital loves, the separa-tion, the widowhood, and the meditative disenchantment of a hero, the“memorialist”/litterateur who gives the book its title.
Now, in Seraphim, Oswald’s concern with the framework of the book
leads him to a sort of continuum of invention, the protean, labile structure
of a surprise box. If in Seaborne the great novelty was in the realm of syn-
tax, at the microaesthetic level of the stylistic linking of text units (wordsand phrases), in Seraphim it is the great syntagmas of narrative that merit the
Reinventing Tradition 211*In Russian Formalist Criticism: Four Essays, trans. and with an introduction by Lee T. Lemon and Mar-
ion J. Reis (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1965). —translator
author’s special attention. In Seaborne, we can recognize a cubist style, or at
least a metonymic one, in the manner in which Oswald recombined the
phrasal elements at his disposal, arranging them in new and unusual neigh-boring relationships, altering them through a tie of contiguity. It is as if hewere a cubist painter disjoining and conjoining through a new optics thefragmented objects on his canvas. Now, in Seraphim, that cubist technique,
that metonymic treatment, seems to operate at the level of the generalarchitecture of the work itself, hence, at the macrolevel.
23Seraphim is a
composite, hybrid book made up of pieces or “samples” of various possiblebooks, and all of them propose and challenge a certain mode of the narra-tive genre or of the so-called art of prose (or, for that matter, of writing tout
court). Each one of these excerpts or “trailers” of virtual books works—at
the macrosyntagmatic level, at the level of the framework of the text—as ametonymic allusion to a certain cataloged type of prose, be it conventionalor pragmatic, that never manages to impose itself completely on theOswaldian book, giving it a unified directive. Instead, the excerpts point—allusively and elusively—to a literary mode that could be but isn’t. The
metonymic operation—or, more precisely, the synecdoche, in the pars pro
totoform of traditional rhetoric (the pieces of books which, taken for the
whole, indicate a certain genre or a certain species in the stock of literaryholdings)—acquires then a metalinguistic function. It is through this oper-
ation that the book effects the critique of the book (of the novel in partic-ular and, by extension, of prose and of “artistic” and “nonartistic” writing).In this manifestly parodic exercise, a review of the very history of the nov-elistic genre, of its diachrony, is not lacking; in a chaotic way, admittedly,but not because of this less significantly. Wellek and Warren, in theirexposé of André Jolles’s theory of how complex literary forms represent thedevelopment of simpler units ( Legende, Sage, Mythe, Rätsel, Spruch, Kasus,
Memorabile, Märchen, Witz ), note that the maturity of the novel also fed
on the einfache Formen [simple forms], such as the letter, the diary, the
travel book, the memoir, the essay, and so on.
24
Even in metonymy’s projection on the great syntagmas of narrative, as
they occur in Seraphim, it is possible to identify a technique that is typical
of cubism: collage, the critical juxtaposition of diverse materials, which incinematic terms may be equated with montage. Collage and even mon-tage—to the extent that they work with a set of tools and materials, mak-ing an inventory of them and manipulating their primitivefunctions—may be characterized as the type of activity that Lévi-Strauss
212 NOVAS
defines as “bricolage” (composition of structured sets, not directly but
through the use of residues and fragments), which, while typical of the pen-
sée sauvage [savage mind], also has much in common with the concrete,
combinatory logic of poetic thought.25
Oswald, bricoleur, made a book out of residues of books, from pieces
metonymically significant which are telescoped and imbricated in it in anapparently disconnected fashion. But he does so while exhibiting, throughthat very critical hybridity which could be called a structural “technique ofquotation,” the most profound calling of the Oswaldian project: to pro-duce an “un-book,” an antibook, from the parodic accumulation of thehabitual ways of making books or, by extension, of writing prose (or even,and also, of written language). Antonio Candido, in a seminal study ofOswald’s prose, referred to Seraphim as the “fragment of a great book.”
26
This assessment, which reveals Candido’s appreciation of the Oswaldianexperiment—“there is much in it of a great book,” he insists in anotherpassage—simultaneously evidences some reservations vis-à-vis a certain“aesthetic self-indulgence” in the technique employed, which would notallow for an elaboration of compositional problems. Today [in the 1970s],
with insights gained in the last twenty years, the question could be refor-mulated: it is precisely through the syncopated technique and the resultingunfinished quality that the construction becomes apparent, that the wood-work of the traditional novel, as priem, as procedure, was exposed. Elabo-
rating on Antonio Candido’s definition, we would like to reformulate itthus: Seraphim is a great un-book made up of book fragments.
27
Translated by Odile Cisneros
Reinventing Tradition 213
The Concrete Moment
Pilot Plan for Concrete Poetry
Augusto de Campos, Haroldo de Campos, and Décio Pignatari
Concrete poetry: product of a critical evolution of forms. Assuming that
the historical cycle of verse (as formal-rhythmical unit) is closed, concretepoetry begins by being aware of graphic space as structural agent. Qualifiedspace: space-time structure instead of mere linear-temporal development.Hence the importance of the ideogram concept, either in its general senseof spatial or visual syntax or in its specific sense (Fenollosa/Pound) as amethod of composition based on direct—analogical, not logical-discursive—juxtaposition of elements. “Il faut que notre intelligence s’habitue à com-prendre synthético-idéographiquement au lieu de analytico-discursivement”[“Our brain must get used to thinking synthetico-ideographically insteadof analytico-discursively”] (Apollinaire). Eisenstein: ideogram and montage.
Forerunners: Mallarmé (“Un coup de dés” [“A Throw of the Dice”],
1897) : the first qualitative jump—“subdivisions prismatiques de l’idée”;
space (“blancs”) and typographical devices as substantive elements of com-position. Pound ( The Cantos): ideogramic method. Joyce ( Ulysses and
Finnegans Wake ): word-ideogram; organic interpenetration of time and
Originally published by the authors in Noigandres 4, São P aulo, 1958;reproduced in Augusto de Campos,
Décio Pignatari, and Haroldo de Campos, T eoria da poesia concreta (T extos críticos e manifestos, 1950–60 )
(São Paulo: Edições Invenção, 1965; republished São Paulo: Duas Cidades, 1975; and São Paulo: Brasiliense,
1987). English translation by Jon Tolman published in The Avant-Garde Tradition in Literature, ed. and
with an introduction by Richard Kostelanetz (Buffalo, NY: Prometheus Books, 1982) and Manifesto: A
Century of Isms, ed. Mary Ann Caws (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 2000 ). —editors
217
space. Cummings: atomization of words, physiognomic typography;
expressionistic emphasis on space. Apollinaire ( Calligrammes ): the vision,
rather than the praxis. Futurism, Dadaism: contributions to the life of theproblem. In Brazil: Oswald de Andrade ( 1890–1954): “in compressed min-
utes of poetry.” João Cabral de Melo Neto ( 1920–99—the engineer, and his
“Psicologia da composição” [“Psychology of Composition”] and “Anti-
ode”): direct speech, economy and functional architecture of verse
.
Concrete poetry: tension of word-things in space-time. Dynamic struc-
ture: multiplicity of concomitant movements. Thus in music—by defini-tion, an art of timing—space intervenes (Webern and his followers: Boulezand Stockhausen; concrete and electronic music); in visual arts—spatial,by definition—time intervenes (Mondrian and his Boogie-Woogie series;
Max Bill; Albers and perceptive ambivalence; concrete art in general).
Ideogram: appeal to nonverbal communication. The concrete poem
communicates its own structure: structure-content. The concrete poem isan object in and of itself, not the interpreter of exterior objects and/or moreor less subjective feelings. Its material: word (sound, visual form, semanticcharge). Its problem: a problem of functions-relations of this material. Fac-tors of proximity and similitude, Gestalt psychology. Rhythm: relationalforce. The concrete poem, using phonetics (digits) and analogical syntax,creates a specific linguistic area— verbivocovisual —which shares the advan-
tages of nonverbal communication without giving up the word’s virtuality.The phenomenon of metacommunication occurs with the concrete poem:coincidence and simultaneity of verbal and nonverbal communication;but—it must be noted—it deals with the communication of forms, ofstructure-content, not with the usual message communication.
Concrete poetry aims at the lowest common denominator of language.
Hence its tendency toward nominalization and verbification. “The con-crete wherewithal of speech” (Sapir). Hence its affinities with the so-calledisolating languages (Chinese): “the less outward grammar the Chinese lan-guage possesses, the more inner grammar inheres in it” (Humboldt via Cas-sirer). Chinese offers an example of pure relational syntax, based exclusivelyon word order (see Fenollosa, Sapir, and Cassirer).
We call isomorphism the form-subject conflict looking for identifica-
tion. Parallel to form-subject isomorphism, there is space-time isomor-phism, which creates movement. In the first stage of concrete poetrypractice, isomorphism tends toward physiognomy, that is, movement imi-tating natural appearance ( motion ) where organic form and phenomenol-
218 NOVAS
ogy of composition prevail. In a more advanced stage, isomorphism tends
to resolve itself into pure structural movement ( movement proper); in this
phase, geometric form and mathematics of composition (rationalism ofsensibility) prevail.
Renouncing the struggle for the “absolute,” concrete poetry remains in
the magnetic field of perennial relativity. Chrono-micrometric measuring ofchance. Control. Cybernetics. The poem as a self-regulatory mechanism:feedback. Faster communication (problems of functionality and structureimplied) endows the poem with a positive value and guides its own making.
Concrete poetry: total responsibility before language. Total realism.
Against a subjective and hedonistic poetry of expression. To create preciseproblems and to solve them in terms of sensible language. A general art ofthe word. The poem-product: useful object.
Postscript 
1961: “There’s no revolutionary art without revolutionary form”
(Mayakovsky).
Translated by Jon Tolman, edited by A. S. Bessa
The Concrete Moment 219
The Open Work of Art
In order to bring to focus a willfully “drastic selection” in the pragmatic-
utilitarian terms of Poundian theory, one could name the works of Mallarmé(“Un coup de dés” [“A Throw of the Dice”]), Joyce, Pound, and Cummingsas the radial axes that generate the vectorial field of contemporary poetry.From the convergence of these axes and depending on the development ofthe productive process, certain results, some predictable, some not, willemerge.
It is not necessary here to enter deeply into the multiple problems which
the mere mention of these names together provokes on the threshold ofcontemporary experiments in poetry. Instead it will be sufficient to merelygive some hints of the morphocultural catalysis caused by their works.
The Mallarméan constellation-poem has as its base a concept of multi-
divisions or capillary structure. This concept liquidates the notion of lineardevelopment divided into beginning-middle-end. It substitutes in its placea circular organization of poetic material that abolishes any rhythmicclockwork based on the “rule of thumb” of metrification. Silence emergesfrom that truly verbal rosette, “Un coup de dés,” as the primordial elementof rhythmic organization. As Sartre has said: “Silence itself is defined by its
Published originally in Diário de São Paulo, March 7, 1955 . Republished in Rio de Janeiro in the follow-
ing year in Correio da manhã. The present revised version was published in T eoria da poesia concreta (São
Paulo: Editora Perspectiva, 1965). The English translation by Jon Tolman appeared in Dispositio 6,n o .
17-18 (Summer–Fall 1981): 5–7, and is reproduced by kind permission of Dispositio: Revista Americana
de Estudios Comparados y Culturales/American Journal of Comparative and Cultural Studies, published by
the University of Michigan, Department of Romance Languages and Literatures. — editors
220
relationship with words, just as the pause in music receives its meaning
from the group of notes which surround it. This silence is a moment oflanguage.”
1This permits us to apply to poetry what Pierre Boulez affirmed
of music: “It is one of those truths so difficult to demonstrate that music isnot only ‘the art of sounds’ but that it is better defined as a counterpointof sound and silence.”
2
The Joycean universe also evolved from a linear development of time
toward space-time or the infusion of the whole in the part (“allspace in anotshall”), adopting as the organogram of Finnegans Wake the Vico-vicious
circle. Joyce’s technique evolved pari passu with his own work
3and under
the influence of Bergson’s concept of “durée.”
Mallarmé developed a visual notion of graphic space, served by the pris-
matic notation of poetic imagination in ebbs and flows which are dislo-cated like the elements of a mobile, utilizing silence in the way that Calderused air. Joyce, on the other hand, holds to the materialization of a “poly-dimensional limitless flow”—the “durée réelle,” the “riverrun” of “élanvital”—which obliges him to undertake a true atomization of language,where each “verbi-voco-visual” unit is at the same time the continent-con-tent of the whole work and instantly “myriad-minded.”
Mallarmé practices the phenomenological reduction of the poetic
object. The eidos—“Un coup de dés jamais n’abolira le hasard” [“A throwof the dice will never abolish chance”]—is attained by means of the ellip-sis of peripheral themes to the “thing in itself” of the poem. In the struc-ture of the work, however, what Husserl notes with relation to his methodalso occurs: “Said with an image: that which is placed between parenthesesis not erased from the phenomenological table, but simply placed betweenparentheses and affected by an index. But with this index it enters againinto the major theme of investigation.”
4
Joyce is led to the microscopic world by the macroscopic, emphasizing
detail— panorama/panaroma —to the point where a whole metaphoric cos-
mos is contained in a single word. This is why it can be said of Finnegans
Wake that it retains the properties of a circle—the equal distance of all its
points in relation to its center. The work is porous to the reader, accessiblefrom any of the places one chooses to approach it.
For Cummings, the word is fissile. His poems have as their fundamen-
tal element the “letter.” The syllable is, for his needs, already a complexmaterial. The “tactical modesty” of that poetic attitude is similar to that ofWebern: interested in the word on the phonemic level, he orients himselftoward an open poetic form, in spite of the danger of exhausting himself in
The Concrete Moment 221
the one-minute poem, as he faces the hindrances of a still experimental
syntax. As Fano has said with respect to Webern’s early works, they are“Short organizations materializing a ‘possibility’ and concluding on theeventuality of new transformations. A catalytic procedure in which certainbase elements determine the disintegration and clustering of a substancewhich is transformed, without themselves being affected.”
5
Ezra Pound’s The Cantos, in particular “The Pisan Cantos,” also offer
the reader an open structure. They are organized by the ideogrammaticmethod, permitting a perpetual interaction of blocks of ideas which affecteach other reciprocally, producing a poetic sum whose principle of compo-sition is gestaltian, as James Blish has observed in “Rituals on EzraPound.”
6
The contemporary poet—having at his disposal a lexicon which encom-
passes acquisitions from the symbolists to the surrealists, and in a recipro-cal way, Pound’s “precise definition” (the poetic word comprehended in thefight of an art of “gist and piths”), and also having before him a structuralsyntax, whose revolutionary perspectives have been only faintly glimpsed—cannot allow himself to be enveloped by the Byzantine nostalgia for a fallenConstantinople, nor can he, polyplike, stagnate at the margins of the mor-phocultural process which beckons him toward creative adventure.
Pierre Boulez, in a conversation with Décio Pignatari, manifested his
lack of interest in the “perfect” or “classic,” the “diamond-like,” work ofart, in the sense of the diamond, and stated his concept of the open work
of art as a kind of modern baroque.
Perhaps the idea of a neobaroque, which might correspond intrinsically
to the morphological necessities of contemporary artistic language, terrifiesby its mere evocation those slack spirits who love the stability of conven-tional formulas.
But this is not a cultural reason for failing to enlist in the crew of Argos.
It is, on the contrary, a prompting to do so.
7
Translated by Jon Tolman, edited by A. S. Bessa
222 NOVAS
The Informational Temperature of the Text
Concrete poetry has been accused of impoverishing language. This rebuke
has often been made in almost apocalyptic terms, with some accusers speak-ing of “willful castration” and others going so far as to threaten the concretepoets with a “season in Dante’s Hell.”
Any artistic discipline implies a voluntary restraint. In poetry, this can be
seen in the terza rima of Dante or, even more pronouncedly, in the rigor-ous melopoetic texture of Arnaut Daniel’s sestinas. In both examples, theform chosen drastically limits the poets’ linguistic options. But without
delving further into such generic considerations, we will attempt to developour discussion in the objective field of modern aesthetic analysis. Informa-tion theory provides us with precise tools, free of visceral emotional appeals.In this way we can attempt to identify straightforwardly the linguistic andaesthetic characteristics which gave rise to the aforementioned censure and
proceed to locate them and the poetic object which they distinguish in awider process of formal evolution, as well as in the cultural context fromwhich they derive their necessity and their justification.
Max Bense, in laying out his theory of text,
1introduced, for aesthetic and
literary purposes, B. Mandelbrot’s theorem on the informational tempera-
ture of a text.2If we take 1as the highest limit of a text’s informational tem-
perature, that temperature, in a given text, will be higher the nearer it is to
Originally published in Revista do livro 18,n o .  5(June 1960). The English translation by Jon Tolman
appeared in Poetics Today (Tel Aviv, Israel) 3,n o .  3(Summer 1982): 177–87 and is reproduced here by
kind permission of Duke University Press. — editors
223
1. In such cases, for Mandelbrot, “the available words are ‘well employed,’
even rare words being utilized with appreciable frequencies. Low tempera-
ture, on the other hand, means that words are ‘badly employed,’ rare wordsbeing extremely rare” ( 30). Of the first case, Mandelbrot, basing himself on
Zipf,
3gives James Joyce, whose vocabulary is “quite varied,” as the exam-
ple; of the second, the language of children.
It is necessary, however, in order to transpose these concepts into aes-
thetic terms, to remember Bense’s admonition: Mandelbrot “limited him-self to linguistic investigations,” that is, his theorem is linked to“documentary or semantic information,” to “factual information,” andnot, therefore, to “aesthetic information” (which is “inseparable from itsactual accomplishment”). However, the “statistical-linguistic dimension”he reveals can furnish us an aesthetic indicator, precisely because of what “itsays with respect to the text’s productive process.”
First conclusion: aesthetically, the concept of informational temperature
is not necessarily linked to a criterion for evaluating good and baduse of
words in a text, as it appears in Mandelbrot’s linguistic formulation.Rather, Mandelbrot’s theorem agrees with an idea of “richness of vocabu-lary,” since he defines the “macroscopic description of the statistics of atext” as “a measure of the potential richness of its vocabulary” ( 28). How-
ever, richness of vocabulary and its stylistic opposite, “simplicity of vocab-ulary,” are not, by themselves, sure indicators of the aesthetic value of a text(see appendix at the end of this essay, section 1).
Mandelbrot himself makes this felt, permitting us to suggest a funda-
mental aesthetic corollary at this point, when he criticizes Zipf for havingconsidered the Joycean example as “the best model at his disposal, becauseof the length and variety of his works,” and for having accepted the infor-mational temperature of Joyce’s texts as being the “best estimate” of the“maximum potential number of different words” for all authors, “when, inreality, that value is due to the exceptionally great potential variety ofJoyce’s text” ( 30).
Concerning “aesthetic information,” it is doubtlessly true that the
degree of “informational temperature” is an element in its accomplish-ment, an integrating factor in the artistic process that leads to it. The rela-tive intensity or weakness of temperature, separate from any aprioristicnorm of merit or demerit, can be correctly approached only when it is con-sidered as a function of the specific creative process to which it contributes.Therefore, it will be factors of an aesthetic order, and not necessarily those
224 NOVAS
of an exclusively linguistic-statistical order, which will involve the need for
a higher or lower proportion, a maximum or minimum, in the informa-tional temperature of a given artistic text, such as a poem or a piece ofprose. There is, distinct from the linguistic sense, a self-sustaining conceptof the “informational temperature of an aesthetic text,” decidedly linkedto the evolution of forms on the creative plane.
And thus we are ready to proceed to the second phase of our study. As
an element of contact between both orders of ideas, we will use someremarks of G. A. Miller,
4another linguist, who in passing touches on prob-
lems which can be applied to aesthetics. Miller focuses on Basic English,5
comparing it with the language of James Joyce. Ogden’s Basic English,according to Miller, is “an attempt to take advantage of the statisticalaspects of language,” reducing English to “ 850lexical units . . . carefully
chosen so that, through combinations, they could be made the equivalentof a much larger vocabulary. . . . By reducing the number of word types to850lexical units the potential size of the audience is greatly increased.”
This, of course, makes possible rapid, easily assimilated communication.Ogden himself defines the process: “A reduction may be effected in thenumber of words that need to be used; i.e., how a given field of referencemay be covered with the greatest economy. . . . What is really required is,in fact, a scientifically selected vocabulary minimum; and it is this selectionthat Basic claims to provide.” As Miller points out, however, “there hasbeen an artistic and scientific swing to the opposite direction. The desirefor verbal diversification in literature is typified by James Joyce.” These twoaspects of language usage are synthesized by Miller in the following terms:“An increase in the size of the vocabulary is balanced by decrease in the sizeof the audience. A decrease in vocabulary is balanced by an increased audi-ence. There seems to be no simple way to have a large vocabulary and alarge audience at the same time.”
6Evidently, considered in relation to the
vocabulary potential of English, Basic English will exhibit, as compared tothe texts of Joyce, an extremely low “informational temperature” in Man-delbrot’s sense (see appendix, section 2).
Moving on to “aesthetic information” and to the “artistic process”
which makes it possible, it can be said that the notion of a “high informa-tional temperature of the text” is linked to something like a craftsman’smanipulation of poetry and prose. In such a procedure, the creative artistexhausts the possibilities of diversification and nuance in his or her lin-guistic arsenal, holding redundancy to a minimum and elevating to the
The Concrete Moment 225
maximum the number of syntactic-semantic options. Joyce in English lit-
erature and Guimarães Rosa in Brazilian literature exemplify that artisticprocess, which seems in itself, in each work—or more exactly in the uni-fied work in progress —to tend toward the closing of a whole cycle in the
craft of verbal invention, putting it at the same time into crisis. The lin-guistic artifacts of both authors (Joyce’s more than Rosa’s) acquire aunique quality of highly personal workmanship through the elaboratehandling of words and perfectionist refinement of linguistic textures. Thisis merely a stylistic observation and is in no way an attempt to play downthe exceptional importance of these authors in the redimensioning oftheir respective literatures. Both were instrumental in staking out the lim-its of a stage of craftsmanship, well captured by Harry Levin: “The novelto end all novels.”
7This statement, which critically summarizes the posi-
tion of Joyce’s work, can also well characterize the correlative if lessextreme position that Guimarães Rosa has come to assume in Brazilianliterature.
Concrete poetry is included in a different historical and cultural dimen-
sion. Its point of departure is the “crisis of verse” generated at the end of thelast [nineteenth] century by Mallarmé’s “Un coup de dés” [“A Throw ofthe Dice”]. It responds to a notion of literature not as craftsmanship but, so
to speak, as an industrial process. Its product is a prototype, not the typi-
cal handiwork of individual artistry. It tends toward a minimal, simplifiedlanguage, increasingly objectified and, for that reason, easily and quicklycommunicated. This presumes that the semantic reactions of the audiencehave been correctly conditioned toward structure instead of “swarms ofinarticulate feelings.” Its program is “the least common denominator” oflanguage, or (paraphrasing Ogden) of an “artistically selected vocabularyminimum” (see appendix, section 3). In this way it coincides with the sense
of a progressively technical civilization within which it is postulated.
8
That is why it rejects the airs and graces of craftsmanship—in spite of theseriousness with which it considers the artisan’s contribution to the stock-pile of extant forms—from the art of verse to the elaborate diversification
of vocabulary in prose.
9It has recourse in its turn to factors of proximity
and likeness on the graphic-gestaltic plane, to elements of recurrence and redundancy on the semantic and rhythmic plane, to a visual-ideogrammatic syntax (when not merely “combinatory”) for controllingthe flux of signs and rationalizing the sensible materials of a composition.This is how it limits entropy (the tendency to dispersion, to disorder, to the
226 NOVAS
maximum informational potential of a system), fixing the informational
temperature at the minimum necessary to obtain the aesthetic achievementof each poem undertaken (see appendix, section 4).
A counterpart of the same problem is the fact that in detail, in their
minuteness, both Joyce and Guimarães Rosa, whose extensively craftedmacrocosms involve microcosms which are intensively wrought andreduced to essences or chains of essences, are much closer to concretepoetry than the whole literature of dreamy, hedonistic alienation, the par-adigm of which is surrealism. It is impossible to discern in surrealism anyconstructivist organization, any semantic system after the manner of theinterconnected “complexes of meaning” which Adelheid Obradovic
10rec-
ognizes in Joyce’s art, for example, when comparing it with the destructiveavant-gardes of this [the twentieth] century’s beginnings.
It is not by chance that Joyce’s portmanteau word “silvamoonlake” can
be considered a concrete unit of composition, given that it is possible at alltimes to individualize series of concretions, perfectly defined as such, in hisverbal cosmology:
With Kiss. Kiss Criss. Cross Criss. Kiss Cross.Undo lives’ end. (Finnegans Wake)
The same can be said of Guimarães Rosa: “Os urubus—os, os, os” [“Thevultures—the, the, the”].
*
At this point the apparent “impoverishment of language”—in reality,
reduction and simplification of vocabulary within a syntax, not of the logical-discursive kind but of the analogical-visual type—which some thought tosee in concrete poetry, comes to be correctly redefined. This so-called impov-
erishment, emptied of the naive pejorative connotations attributed to it onlyin the heat of argument or in the levity of a less-than-rigorous observation,comes to assume, analytically and aesthetically, the character of a true “styl-istic principle.” As such, it is verifiable as a device and worthy—in a suc-cessfully achieved concrete poem—to be considered an integrating factor inits generative process. The question thereby is placed in a historical and cul-tural context, which, notwithstanding the schematic way it has been out-lined here, we can leave at this point as an all instigating subject for the
The Concrete Moment 227* From the short story “Cara de bronze” [“Bronze Face”] in Corpo de baile [Corps de Ballet ]. This literal
translation ignores the vowel play in the Portuguese original, which renders it like Joyce’s verbal games.
In phonetic transcription: uz urubuz uz uz uz. — translator
creative mind (especially for the young generation of poets which still has
not been contaminated by petrifying routines). Commitment to past artis-tic experience proves fruitful only when it leads to the disclosure of the vec-torial field of a new sensibility, contemporaneously valid and active.
Appendix: Pa rallel Themes
1—Verbal opulence alone cannot be equated with true artistic achieve-
ment. This is the case of Coelho Neto, whose vocabulary is calculated ataround 20,000 words.
*Even if one wanted to see in him a forerunner in
the formal handling of texts, the truth is that his notion of stylistic richnesswas almost always quantitative and not qualitative (re-evaluative). His eru-dite use of lexical rarities, archaisms, Lusitanisms, Orientalisms, Latinisms,and so on for their own sake was purely ornamental, like a decorative andcumulative tapestry reminiscent of the worst Flaubert. (The Flaubert wehave in mind here is not the defender of le mot juste , to whom Pound traces
the whole “colloquial-ironic” line of French symbolism—Laforgue, etc.—but the exoticist of Salammbô. ) That is why he was debunked by the Brazil-
ian modernists ( 1922) and, symptomatically, in Oswald de Andrade’s
preface to Seraphim Grosse Pointe (1933), a book which represents a land-
mark of verbal invention, of qualitative lexical and syntactic manipulationin Portuguese. On the other hand, it is to the verbal magrezza of Machado
de Assis, whose “informational temperature” would be comparatively low(from Mandelbrot’s linguistic point of view), that we owe, in Brazilian lit-erature, the finest examples of textual structuring prior to modernism. Wecite the extreme examples of chapters 55and 139in Epitaph of a Small Win-
nerwhere punctuation marks alone substitute for words in the best Stern-
ian tradition, conveying a psychological situation perfectly handled froman aesthetic point of view.
2—Claude Shannon observes that “two extremes of redundancy in Eng-
lish prose are represented by Basic English and by James Joyce’s Finnegans
Wake. The Basic English vocabulary is limited to 850words and the redun-
dancy is very high. [ . . . ] Joyce on the other hand enlarges the vocabularyand is alleged to achieve compression of semantic content.”
11In Joyce,
therefore, redundancy would be minimal. A curious sample of these twodirections of English can be studied by means of the parallel between a frag-
* Coelho Neto, a writer from the northern Brazilian state of Maranhão, famous for his luxuriant style,
was quite popular in the premodernist era. — translator
228 NOVAS
ment of “Anna Livia Plurabelle” and its version in Basic English by
Ogden.12One should keep in mind, however, in order not to distort the
terms of this comparison between the “simplest and most complex English,Mr. Ogden’s language of strict denotation and Joyce’s language of extremeconnotation,”
13that while the Joycean text strives for “aesthetic informa-
tion” and toward “aesthetic achievement,” Ogden’s Basic English was con-ceived as an instrument for conversation and practical communication.
3—The aesthetic possibilities of a method of reducing vocabulary essen-
tials, as developed by Ogden for communicative purposes, are hinted at byEzra Pound, preoccupied as always with his slogan program dichten: con-
densare, in his preface to Fenollosa’s Chinese Written Character.
14There,
Pound attempts to offer a valid contribution to “basic English” by meansof the ideogram. The principle of verbification peculiar to written Chineseis emphasized:
Many of the nouns in the Ogden list of 850words could very well serve
as verbs, thereby giving considerably greater force to that brief vocabu-lary. [. . .] I suggest also that the limited gamut of actions included byOgden in this essential vocabulary might be considered almost a declen-sion of a yet briefer set of main root possibilities.
15
Evidently, a “basic poetry” has its lexical potential not as a function of areduction in language to facilitate semantic communication but as a func-tion of the communication of a poetic product for the accomplishment ofwhich this basic concision is a structural principle. Its lexicon, therefore,will be potentially greater, since it is not limited exclusively by a standardof linguistic (denotative) utility, but by a principle of aesthetic functional-ity, varying from poem to poem, according to the problem to be solved.Pound’s Cantos, apart from the ideogrammatic method of composition, are
included in the craftsman’s cycle of creativity and thus offer a high “infor-mational temperature” or, more exactly, a high “referential temperature.”(Its richness is less due to lexical diversification than to referential com-plexes—to facts, events, characters, cultural contexts, implying a corre-sponding continuous variation and incorporation in style, from theDantesque mode to colloquial American, from Provençal cantabile to thearchaic English of The Seafarer , etc.) Pound, however, does come to speak
of a “basic canto”: “I propose starting a nice lively heresy, to effek, thatgimme 50more words, and I can make Basic into a real licherary and
muledrivin’ language, capable of blown Freud to hell and getting’ a teamfrom Soap Gulch over the Hogback. You watch ole EZ do a basic Canto.”
16
The Concrete Moment 229
This “basic Canto” is implicit in the very ideogrammatic macrostruc-
ture of The Cantos, where discursive language (from which Pound has not
completely dissociated himself) is criticized. As the work progresses, how-
ever, along with a stylistic plurality, which aspires to monumental crafts-manship, there occurs a parallel fragmentation of discourse. The device ofideogrammatic montage invades the microstructure of the compositionand—beginning with the Pisan Cantos—it can be said that the tension forthe “basic Cantos” constantly shows up in details:
2on 2
what’s the name of that bastard? D’Arezzo, Gui d’Arezzonotation
3on 3
chiacchierona the yellow bird
to rest               3 months in bottle
by the two breasts of Tellus
(auctor)
Or:
Hot      hole      hep      cat
Or:
8th day of September
ff
d
g
write the birds in their treble scaleTerreus! Terreus.
Or even (from Rock - Drill):
They who are skilled in fire
shall read tan the dawn.
230 NOVAS

Or:
And from far
il tremolar della marina
chh chh
the pebbles turn with the wave
chh ch’u
The Cantos , as a San Francisco practitioner of oral poetry once observed
(by way of censure), “end as a complete palimpsest of ideographs.”17
4—It is necessary to clarify (Bense mentions it only once) that Mandel-
brot used Shannon and Weaver’s concepts of information and entropy in
developing his theorem of “the informational temperature” of the text: “Letus clarify, therefore, that when we speak of information it will always be in
Shannon’s sense of the word, which is precise because extremely limited”(12). In Shannon’s theory of information, which is “normative, prescribinghow to encode a message, given certain desires and constraints typical of atelegraphic situation,” information is “a measure of one’s freedom of choicewhen one selects a message” ( 9). In that theory, always related to an infor-
mation source, entropy is a “measure of information”: “The quantity which
uniquely meets the natural requirements that one sets up for ‘information’turns out to be exactly that which is known in thermodynamics as entropy”(12). That is to say, the expression entropy is related to “the amount of free-
dom of choice we have in constructing messages” ( 13), just as “in the phys-
ical sciences, the entropy associated with a situation is a measure of thedegree of randomness, or of ‘shuffledness’ if you will, in the situation” ( 12).
Entropy always grows, physical systems tend to become increasingly disor-ganized. Thus, Weaver adds that for a communication source one can say,just as he would also say it of a thermodynamic ensemble: “This situationis highly organized, it is not characterized by a large degree of randomnessor of choice—that is to say, the information (or the entropy) is low” ( 13).
It is in that sense, of maximum de l’information, that Mandelbrot uses the
term “entropy.” We can therefore conclude that a “high informational tem-perature” means a high degree of chance, and of entropy. On the other
hand, Wiener
18sees the informative content of a system as a measure of its
degree of organization, and entropy as a measure of disorganization, one
being the opposite of the other. Thus informative content is “essentially a
negative entropy, ” while processes leading to a loss of information are strictly
analogous to those in which entropy is increased. In his “Informational
The Concrete Moment 231
Aesthetics,”19Bense uses “information” and “entropy” to some extent in
Wiener’s sense of the terms. The first is defined as a measure of the “degree
of order,” characterizing “aesthetic cosmo-processes,” where there is an“exceptional, selected distribution of elements,” and the second measuresthe “degree of disorder,” characteristic of “physical cosmo-processes.” Withrelation to that aesthetic application, based on cybernetic nomenclature, itseems valid to say that if the limitation of the “informational maximum” inthe production of a text (concrete poem) lowers the “informational tem-perature” in Shannon’s sense (freedom of choice, chance, in relation to thelexical potential of language), it also diminishes entropy and consequently,
in Wiener’s sense of the term, increases the organization, the negative
entropy, the informative content of the system. It is true that Bense in other
essays resorts to Shannon’s concept of information, which, as has been seen,
is formulated from a different point of view from that of cybernetics. As,for example, when he studies the principle of repetition in the work of
Gertrude Stein. There, Bense defines repetition with the term “redun-dancy” as “reduction in the total of aesthetic information in the process ofits achievement,” by means of which “the primitive originality also wanes,”making it “thus possible to develop this aesthetic information as a princi-ple of style.”
20The following text will serve as a sample of the process:
Money is what words are.Words are what money is.Is money what words are.Are words what money is.
In this case, it is evident that rather than speaking of “a reduction in aes-
thetic information,” it would be better to speak of a reduction in “informa-tional temperature,” à la Mandelbrot via Shannon, linked to the linguistic(semantic) idea of “richness of vocabulary.” As Bense himself indicated inanother text: “We cannot refrain from observing that concrete paintingoffers, in reality, little semantic information, but nevertheless relativelyhigh values of aesthetic information.”
21This passage seems to support our
proposition that there is a concept of “aesthetic informational temperature”(high or low) different from “linguistic or semantic informational temper-ature” (high or low). This concept can be readily applied to Stein’s “exhibit,”one of her best texts, and one which is quite close in its structural articulationto the “combinatory technique” of Eugen Gomringer’s “constellations.”
22
232 NOVAS
worte sind schatten
schatten werden worteworte sind spielespiele werden wortesind schatten wortewerden worte spielesind spiele wortewerden worte schattensind worte schattenwerden spiele wortesind worte spielewerden schatten worte
words are shadows
shadows become wordswords are gamesgames become wordsare shadows wordsdo words become gamesare games wordsdo words become shadowsare words shadowsdo games become wordsare words gamesdo shadows become words
The same concept may also be applied as a general rule to concrete poetry.
If aesthetic information is “information about structure,” “informativecontent” being the structure itself, the richer the former, the richer will thelatter be in the sense of innovation, of inventiveness. Therefore, concreteart by reducing the work “to the aesthetically essential, to the thematics ofsigns,” manifests in a particularly clear way the distinctive feature of aes-thetic information. The selection of a structure, the choice among “x num-ber of” structural possibilities of that one which best renders the particularproblem of the poem, will be in the concrete work the Mallarméanmoment of creation. This moment organizes and defines, in the sense of anirreversible decision, the raw materials of sensibility, that “torsion du con-certé sur l’instant” [twisting of the concerted upon the instantaneous], in
The Concrete Moment 233
the words of the French composer Michel Fano. The dialectical poles of
this decisive moment are reason and chance, intelligence and intuition,rigor and liberty. It implies not an “abolition” but a control, an integration
of chance in the compositional process. “The most lucid intellectual workfor the clearest intuition.”
23It is there that the problem of originality is
posited. It will no longer be described in terms of a thematics of contentbut as a thematics of structure. (Something altogether different, it must be
once again emphasized, is that concrete poets in no way renounce the con-tent of words. The semantic charges of the words selected are as importanta working material as their sound or their graphic shape and converge withthem toward the articulation of the desired structure.) It will no longer bepertinent, therefore, to speak of a “richness of vocabulary” but of a richness
of structure which will coincide, in concrete poetry, without programmatic
contradiction, with the most rigorous simplification and lexical trans-parency. In that sense, one last observation of Max Bense’s seems to us tobe meaningful, and we transfer it mutatis mutandis to concrete poetry: “In
presenting instruments of perception, eternal objects of that perception
24
such as colors themselves, the measure of information and the measure ofredundancy converge into a singular conjunction: Both contribute to per-ception, to presentification. In concrete painting information and redun-
dancy manifest themselves as mutually integrative, complementary
evidence of a single aesthetic fact.”
25
Translated by Jon Tolman, edited by A. S. Bessa
234 NOVAS
Concrete Poetry–Language–Communication
The Aristotelian principle of identity, according to Alfred Korzybski,
“tends to obscure the difference between words and things.” When we say,for instance, “this is a pencil,” we tend to identify the object with its verbalexpression; but Korzybski affirms that “as words are not the objects thatthey represent, the structure, and only the structure, becomes the exclusivelink connecting our verbal processes to empirical facts.”
1Hence the trans-
formations that have occurred in the traditional practice of thinking; thecosmic vision that is now offered to us by the current state of sciencedemands an analogous revolution in the structure of language, one thatwould enable language to adapt itself to the description of the world ofobjects. In place of the metaphysical, prescientific, animistic dualism thatthe traditional linguistic structure insists on fomenting, and whichobscures and erases functional relations—for instance, the concepts ofspace and time separated in an autarchic way—a linguistic structure closerto reality would give way to the Joycean notion of “spacetime.”
2In order to
renew language, Korzybski proposes a “mathematical method”: “systems ofpropositional functions, deliberately emptied out of any content, thatwould then be receptive to any content.”
3
These formulations present a fascinating perspective when put in the
context of the problematics of concrete poetry. The concrete poem puts in
235Originally published in the Suplemento dominical do “Jornal do Brasil” (Rio de Janeiro), 28April 1957and
5May 1957. Republished in various forms, most recently in Augusto de Campos, Décio Pignatari, and
Haroldo de Campos, T eoria da poesia concreta (T extos críticos e manifestos, 1950–60 ) (São Paulo: Brasiliense,
1987). —editors
check the logical structure of traditional discursive language, since it finds
in it a barrier to accessing the world of objects. The poet’s position is nev-ertheless fundamentally different from that of the semanticist. The formerenvisions a communication of forms; the latter aims to communicate con-tent. Yet they both want to communicate in the most direct and efficientmanner, and hence they reject structures that are unable to achieve thislevel of efficiency.
The kulturmorphologie produced in the last sixty years, leaning toward a
synthetic-ideogrammatic compositional technique, has provided the poetwith a linguistic instrument closer to the real structure of things and hasplaced him face-to-face with the modern creations of scientific thought.The concrete poem, which establishes an entire field of optical, acoustic,and signifying relations through its spatiotemporal structure, is an entitythat carries an isomorphic link with the “total world of objective actuality,”which, according to T rigant Burrow, is denied to modern man from hisearly education, “enveloped within a field of vicarious symbols.”
4
By searching for an instrument capable of bringing language closer to
things—a language superior to that of verbal-discursive poetry, enough toencompass a spatial (visual) as well as temporal structure—concrete poetrydoes not aim at a faithful description of objects.
5Its scope is not to develop
a system of signs structurally apt to transmit, without deformations, avision of the world rectified by modern scientific knowledge. Its aim is toput this rich and flexible instrument of intellectual work—ductile, close tothe real form of things—at the service of an unexpected goal: the creationof its own object. For the first time, it no longer matters if a word is not agiven object, since, in reality, it will always be, in the special domain of thepoem, the object given. Hence, a language that is able to communicate theworld of things in a quick, clear, and efficient way, exchanging it for struc-turally isomorphic systems of signs, opens an arsenal of possibilities to anew venture: to create, out of its own material, a new form, or rather, anentire parallel world of things—the poem. This flux of linguistic possibili-ties back to themselves—now powerfully renewed—mirrors and explainsthe special verbal process that is unleashed in the poetic field. If, for amoment, the paths of the language scientist and of the artist become entan-gled, this reflux also makes evident how they soon disentangle. A descrip-tion of these processes is made necessary, succinct as it will be in this essay,for a basic clarification of how they operate in one’s mind.
Commenting on Korzybski’s call for the development of, “by the wider
application of physical-mathematical methods, new languages of physic-
236 NOVAS
mathematical kind which would correspond in structure with the structure
of human behavior, individual and social,” Hayakawa notes that “there aretwo fields in which this program began to be realized: mathematical biologyand cybernetics.”
6Olivier Bloodstein, addressing the same problem, adds
that, like mathematics, modern art is a “non-Aristotelian system.”7
If we apply these concepts to concrete poetry, we will notice that it par-
takes of the same form of linguistic evaluation in a very radical way. Theconcrete poem, to use Gomringer’s notion of “constellation,” “is a reality initself, and not a poem about something or other.” Since it is not linked tothe communication of contents and uses the word (sound, visual form,fixed concepts) as compositional material rather than a vehicle of interpre-tation of the objective world, its structure is its true content. Only in thehistorical and cultural fields we find a relationship between the poem-object (concrete) and a content exterior to it, even though this relationshipwill be once again structural. Hence, the physiognomy of our era is to befound rather in structures prone to content which are related to the content-structure of the concrete poem. Not in this or that object, nor in one oranother subjective feeling rescued from the poet’s inner world or the worldoutside, despite the fact that semantic reactions that often occur throughthe manipulation of words, will leave traces in the poem, which the readerwill hang on to as a lifesaver. Certainly, these traces of content do exist inan art such as poetry, whose instrument—the word—unlike color orsound, cannot be treated as an entirely neutral element but rather carries animmediate cluster of meanings.
Concrete poetry’s function is not, as one would imagine, to empty the
word of its charge of content but rather to utilize this charge as workingmaterial in equal conditions with all other material that is available to it.The word-element is used in its entirety and not mutilated through theunilateral reduction to descriptive music ( Léttrisme ) or to decorative pic-
tography ( Calligrammes ). The simple act of tossing on paper the word terra
(earth, hearth) could denote an entire georgic. What the reader of a con-crete poem needs to know is that a given connotation is valid (and evenunavoidable) in an exclusively material plane, as long as it reinforces andcorroborates the other elements that are being manipulated; as long as itparticipates with its particular effects in the content-structure which con-stitutes the poem. Any other cathartic démarrage, or subjectivist detour, is
foreign to the poem and happens because of the tendency toward nomen-clature—that is, the exchange of objects by vague nominative labels—sowell identified by Hayakawa in this anecdote:
The Concrete Moment 237
A trivial but revealing instance of this adjustment to names occurred in
my own home recently, where I have hanging on the wall an abstractpainting by the late László Moholy-Nagy. A woman who was visiting uscouldn’t keep her mind on the conversation; she kept turning to stare atthe painting. Apparently it was disturbing her a great deal. Finally, shewalked up to it, found a tiny typewritten label on the frame saying,“Space Modulator, 1941.” “Space modulator, is it?” she said. “Isn’t that
nice!” She sat down, much relieved. She never even glanced at it againafter that.
8
If we go back to the word “terra,” it will provide an excellent test for the
understanding of the special kind of language operation that occurs in theconcrete poem and how the question of content is expressed therein.Dadaism, according to Gide, strove to dissociate verb from thought by dis-playing words side by side without any connection whatsoever, each wordan island of pure tone that would eventually resonate with other tones.This is the opposite of the concrete poet’s procedure, for whom the poemis a question of relations. In “terra,” Décio Pignatari has taken on the chal-lenge of constructing a poem composed basically of a single word, anexperiment that echoes Pierre Boulez’s “Étude sur un son” [“Study on aSound”], a work mentioned by Pierre Schaeffer in À la recherche d’une
musique concrète [In Search of a Concrete Music ], p. 197. The word terra
would be the generator of the relational complex that embodies the poem:
“terra—erra—ara terra—rara terra—erra ara terra—terra ara terra”
(earth/hearth—err—tend the earth—rare earth—err tend the earth—earth tends earth): these are the thematic elements that originate from thisnucleus, besides the expression “terra a terra” (down to earth), that followthroughout like a virtual phonetic chorus.
238 NOVAS
From cybernetics, Pignatari borrowed the process of “feedback” as a
structural device for the poem. W. Sluckin writes in Minds and Machines:
The machines which perhaps impress us most are not those which are
merely capable of performing complex calculations, but rather the onesthat work in a manner reminiscent in some striking way of animal orhuman behavior. All such machines incorporate some form of auto-matic regulation, or as it tends to be nowadays called automatic control.This is achieved by a mechanism, which in most cases is referred to as aservomechanism. It operates in such a way that it regulates the perfor-mance of the machine at every moment according to the result pro-duced by the machine’s performance immediately before. In otherwords, the output of the machine is made to control its operation witha view to not allowing the output at any time to exceed or to be less thana certain value. . . . Any arrangement employing negative feedback,whether known as servomechanism or not, may be regarded as “error-actuated” and “self-correcting” (or “error-compensating”). This isbecause it operates when the output deviates from a required level, or isin error with respect to it; the operation of the negative feedback com-
pensates the error, correcting the output.
9
In the seventh member-line of the poem “terra”—which up to this point
had been composed solely of this word, articulating and interrupting itself,as in the running of a teletype band or in the running words on an LED—there is the sudden introduction of a new element generated by its very ini-tial nucleus: the syllable rawhich forms arawhen it connects with the
discarded aof the word terr in the preceding member-line; this new ele-
ment (which stands as an error in relation to the expectation of the reader,
who would simply expect the continuous formation of the word terra and
not the duplication of its final syllable) is memorized by the poem and
begins to control its subsequent role, improving it and unleashing anotherelement, apparently unexpected, but nevertheless required by the processitself— rara(rare)—until it reaches the climax— terraterra —which balances
the poem’s field of action as a necessary and deliberately pursued goal. Thisstructure regulated by feedback is corroborated by the thematic elements inthe most efficient manner: the word erra(to err), already produced in the
poem’s second line, and which is constantly insinuating itself in the poem’sbody, makes explicit the structure-content: at once the operation of thepoem, the poet’s “olhar de errata” (errata eye),
10who rights (writes) through
The Concrete Moment 239
wrongs or who transforms his errors into profit in the semantic “field” pro-
duced by him; and—at once, we said—the very structure isomorphicallyproduced, ideoform. The error, as we have seen earlier, at the verbal andprocess level, expresses the autocorrection to which the poem subjectsitself, coerced by the will for structure with which the poet forged his work-ing method. Another correlated topic of cybernetics that should here beaddressed: the method of solving problems through “trial and error,” whichis also of interest to Gestalt psychologists. The “trial and error” behavior,according to Sluckin, can be described in terms of “negative feedback.”
The solution of the problem may be regarded as the creature’s immedi-ate goal or equilibrium level. Information as to the distance from thegoal is fed back to the center of control. It is—it may be said—thisstream of information which controls the creature’s steady movementtowards the goal.
11
This is the system that explains the deciphering mechanisms of
labyrinths built in the last few years [mid- 1950s] by Shannon, I. P . Howard,
and J. A. Deutsch. The poem terra also deciphers itself, concretely.
But not only that. The other thematic elements are also vectors that
compose the content-structure: the poem that generates itself, the activeerror—errar arar (to err, to plow)—as an earth (hearth) that cultivates itself
(terra ara terra), a rare earth (rara terra) and yet an operation so down to
earth (terra a terra ), so elemental, so characteristic of the human condition
as the act of man plowing the land. A concrete painting holds a certainchromatic number that controls, quantitatively and qualitatively, the array
of colors required for the solution of the particular problem it sets toresolve; the concrete poem also holds its thematic number: the charges of
content of the words, taken from the point of view of material, allow onlya certain number of meaningful implications, exactly those that act as thepoem’s structural vectors and that participate definitively in its gestalt. Noornaments nor any effect of subjective pyrotechnics.
At this point, it is necessary to fundamentally distinguish concrete
poetry from surrealism. The latter, facing the barrier of traditional logic,did not try to develop a language that would go beyond it; on the contrary,it established its “headquarters” on the maudit side of logical-discursive lan-
guage where are produced admirable propositions such as “A ring-tailedbaboon is not a constitutional assembly.”
12Bréton’s “white haired revolver”
rules over an absurd reign that is unleashed amid the language ordained bythe Aristotelian system, when the latter is taken, as a process, to its last con-
240 NOVAS
sequences. It’s the reign of paradox, nonsense, whose laws are the “confu-
sion of levels of abstractions.” Surrealism, although voicing against logic, isits bastard son. Hayakawa (on Korzybski):
T raditional Aristotelian language structure and accompanying semanticreactions tend to ignore a fundamental fact of the functioning of thehuman nervous system, namely, that we abstract at an indefinite num-ber of levels—by abstracting from abstractions, by abstracting fromabstractions of abstractions, etc. In mathematics, the procedure of sym-bol manipulation is such that, should a confusion of orders of abstrac-tion occur, the system will at once make the confusion evident byexhibiting a contradiction. The efficiency of mathematics in this respectis shown by the way in which many traditional logical paradoxes, inwhich shifts of orders of abstraction are concealed by everyday language,are simply solved by mathematical methods.
13
Concrete poetry—which, like mathematics, is a non-Aristotelian system
of language—also has, in its thematic number, a control instrument that
sorts and eliminates elements that would clash with its rigorous structure.Hence, in “terra,” words such as the noun eraor the interjection arre
(gosh!), for instance, would have been rejected as strange bodies by the reg-ulation device of the poem’s content-structure, although they could appar-ently be part of its phonetic structure. The concrete poem rejectstraditional logic and its crippled brother, “psychic automatism”: logic, asFenollosa pointed out, “has abused the language which they left to hermercy. Poetry agrees with science and not with logic.”
14
The poem “terra” is intrinsically connected to its structure both graph-
ically as well as visually. The generation of the poem—beginning with thesyllable ra,which immediately forms terra and goes on to take out of this
nucleus the word erra(err)—creates in the spatial field a movement all its
own, supported by elements of proximity and similarity: ( 1) the section
which decreases from terra until a(upper center in triangle-rectangle) con-
nects to another rectangle-triangle through one of the vertices, whichdecreases from terruntil t;(2) on the upper left section of the poem, an
orthogonal column formed by the reiteration of the element ter;(3) finally,
a larger triangle-rectangle, including in its area the other elements alreadydescribed, with the smaller base in terra ter and one of the vertices in t.
Another great triangular section with inverse orientation—with the
smaller base in terraterra and one of the vertices in ra(truncated)—is visi-
ble, in opposition to the other by the square angle; inside, delimited by a
The Concrete Moment 241
gap that runs between the lines of aaand tt,interact, confronted, a trun-
cated triangle ( rato terrara), a rectangle (the orthogonal column formed
by the element ra repeated six times) and a trapeze (the sides delimited by
the line of tt, by terra in the eleventh line and by a straight line that goes
from tto aforming the larger base of the trapeze); by its turn, the trapeze
generates visually a small triangle rectangle (apex in t,smaller base in terr)
and a parallelogram (element terra repeated six times). The whiteness of
the paper acts on the thin gap already mentioned as well as on the larger
gaps (one, separating the two larger triangles in opposition to each other;another, the upper center triangular sector— terra until a—from the col-
umn of elements ter). A large rectangle frames the poem’s general area and
levels the game. The conflicting directions of the main triangular elements;the perceptual production of shapes onto other forms; the two parallel gapsin space, and the other perpendicular two, whose intersection creates akind of visual flexion toward reading; the sections that dwindle from wordto letter; all that imposes a graphic-spatial-temporal structure to the poem,whose verbal flux has suddenly been altered, rectified, and conducted to itsprofit/climax through feedback, through autocorrective error. A passagefrom the physiognomic (white gaps = furrows in the cultivated land) to theisomorphic (visual structure = verbal structure). It should be added that theanalytical minutia here employed to didactically describe a process do notimply a greater difficulty in the field of perception, where the eye’s geom-etry simply and naturally rules over the senses.
A similar phenomenon happens at the acoustic level. The poem’s inte-
rior dialectics, the cuts and coagulation of phonetic elements—from theword-source terra, producing erra, rara, ara —become one with the desired
content-structure and demand elocution (the interplay of timbre, pauses,etc.), a human voice that would emphasize, reflect, through a creativevocalization, its proper movement. Only those who are not used to theactivating techniques for voice in modern music (Schönberg’s use of theSprechgesang in “Pierrot Lunaire” and “Ode to Napoleon,” for instance)
could question the aural effect of a concrete poem. Even a plain silent read-ing will be richer the closer it gets to the effects of such vocalization.
We should also briefly consider the opinion of a critic from São Paulo,
15
for whom the poetry of E. E. Cummings, fundamental to the concretistmovement, is “impossible to be heard” for being predominantly visual. Itis an opinion contrary to Susanne Langer’s, who, in studying the role ofsound in poetry, wrote: “There is poetry that profits by, or even demands,
242 NOVAS
actual speech (E. E. Cummings, for instance, gains tremendously by being
read aloud).”16
Since “terra” is not a georgic, and it narrates nothing that could appease
an imagination prone to discourses on nature or pastoral eclogues, its con-tent, such as a concrete painting, is also its structure. This structure willfind a structural connection, at the historical and cultural level, to a prob-lem that is exterior to itself—cybernetics’ idea of feedback—integrated tothe cosmic vision of modern man. The local contents of words andsequences of words required by the thematic number of “terra” are con-
nected and adapted to the poem’s structure to such a degree that they willnot satisfy the demand for catharsis that would eventually overcome certainreaders. Learning how to see and hear structures will thus be the key to theunderstanding of concrete poetry.
But for a scholar of general semantics like Bloodstein, modern art is a
non-Aristotelian system precisely because it considers structure, relations,and order the very content of art. This implies, obviously, in a revision ofthe reader’s habitual semantic reactions, which are accustomed to lookingin the poem for objects other than its object, to making the artwork a pre-text for meta-artistic divagations. Korzybski (quoted by Oliver Bloodstein):“Any fundamentally new system involves new semantic reactions; and thisis the main difficulty which besets us when we try to master a new system.We must re-educate, or change, our older semantic reactions.”
17If this is a
valid claim for any new language system, it will impose itself more force-fully in regard to concrete poetry, where the concern with structure is nottransitive (i.e., designed to convey another structure—that of reality—suchas in other non-Aristotelian systems) but self-sufficient, depleting itself inits own realization. It is here where the problem of communication lies.
It has been wrongly suggested that the concrete poets of São Paulo
believe that “the speed with which a work of art acts on a spectator decidesits validity and efficacy as a work of art.”
18What we have affirmed, and is
self-evident, is that the concrete poem has the virtue of putting into effectan immediate form of communication. A communication of forms, ofstructures, not of verbal contents. As a matter of fact, supported by ver-bivocovisual elements that integrate in structural consonance, the concretepoem attacks, on all sides and at once, the perceptive field of the readerwho is seeking in it what it has to offer: a structure-content.
Thus, the concrete poem, by regarding the word as an object, accom-
plishes the feat of bringing to the domain of poetic communication the vir-
The Concrete Moment 243
tual possibilities of nonverbal communication without losing any of the
peculiarities of the word. In other words, since a concrete poem commu-nicates its structure, the content charges of the words being manipulatedare controlled by the thematic number for the sake of the structure, and forthat reason, they appeal to the reader’s sense of nonverbal understanding.
19
Jurgen Ruesch and Weldo Kees establish the following distinction betweenverbal and nonverbal communication: The former is based on a codifica-tion of information of the digital kind, whose main examples are the pho-netic alphabet and the numeric system (“information transmitted throughsuch a system is obviously coded through various combinations of letters ordigits”); the latter uses analogical codification (“various kinds of actions,pictures, or material objects represent analogic types of denotation”). Andthey add:
In terms of codification, “digital” contrasts with “analogical”; in lan-guage terms, “discursive” contrasts with “non-discursive.” Discursivelanguage depends upon logic, made up of a set of artificial rules thathave been agreed upon, expressed in verbal terms about a circumscribedkind of work. Logic dispenses with analogical codification altogether, inspite of the fact that most of our thinking and communication is depen-dent upon the nonverbal as well as the verbal.
20
By rejecting the logical discursive order and opening itself to the possi-
bilities of the ideogramic method of composition, concrete poetry sets outto create with digits, with the phonetic system, a nondiscursive linguisticarea that shares the advantages of nonverbal communication (greater prox-imity to the object, preservation of the continuity of action and percep-tion), without mutilating its instrument—the word—whose special powerto express abstractions, to communicate interpolations and extrapolations,and to frame wide-ranging aspects of diverse events and ideas in compre-hensive terms are not rejected but rather used toward the creation of a totalcommunication. The notion of metacommunication explains the relationsbetween verbal and nonverbal codification; any message can be consideredas having two aspects: the proposition itself and the explanations pertinentto its interpretation. The nature of interpersonal communication requiresthat both parts coincide in time, and that can only be attained throughanother means. Thus, when a proposition is verbally phrased, one tends togive nonverbal instructions. The effect is similar to the arrangement of amusical composition for two instruments, where the voices move indepen-dently in different directions, modifying and supplementing each other,
244 NOVAS
and yet integrated in one functional and organic unity. A phenomenon akin
to metacommunication occurs within a concrete poem: the main differenceresides in the fact that the concrete poem does not communicate an outermessage and content, but rather it uses these resources to communicateforms, to create and corroborate, verbivocovisually, a content-structure.
Corollary observations to the problems discussed earlier: the concrete
poet’s task will be the creation of forms, the production of artistic content-structures whose material is the word. Value of this task: to place the poemin correspondence with a series of speculations taking place in the scienceand philosophy of our times. Consequence of this task: the immediatestimulation that a concrete poem can bring to the clarification of mentalhabits, to the creation of new semantic reactions that stir the reader’s per-ception of the real structure of everyday communication and prepare himfor non-Aristotelian systems of communication;
21the appeal to the non-
verbal level of communication makes the mind extremely sensitive to therelationship between words and things, warning us against the “distortionsof meaning” generated by the manipulation of verbal symbols towardabstraction, teaching us to use words in a scrupulous way and with a senseof integrity. At this juncture, Mallarmé’s and Pound’s mottoes complementeach other: “Donner un sens plus pur aux mots de la tribu” / “Artists arethe antennae of the race.”
The production of content-structures poses questions that are not
exhausted in the poem itself. New tendencies in the visual arts instigated anew world of forms in the field of industrial production (Bauhaus). Theconcrete poem instigates a new kind of typography and propaganda andeven a new kind of journalism, besides other possible applications (TV,cinema, etc). Here is a cogitation to be renewed: Mayakovsky’s plight for apropaganda that would also be poetry of the highest quality. Another con-stant source will be Mallarmé’s theory of the book and his interest in jour-nalistic techniques: a reversal of interests, from journalism toward thetechniques of concrete poetry, wouldn’t be so disconcerting.
Translated by A. S. Bessa
The Concrete Moment 245
A Laboratory of Texts
Brazilian and German Avant-Garde Poetry
Introduction
The influence of French culture on Brazilian letters is well known. In
poetry, for example, during the romantic, Parnassian, and symbolist peri-
ods, the French influence is crucial. The case of Parnassianism is typical:Perhaps only literature in France and in Brazil (the latter as a tributary ofthe former) may have had a movement so distinct. Its aesthetic contribu-tion in both countries, was—despite the major sway it held in Brazil—fairly modest, it could be said in passing. The Brazilian modernistmovement of 1922 was more universally aware. Nonetheless, the presence
of the French literary or artistic avant-garde—through the poetry of some-one like Paul Dermée, or Apollinaire, or Cocteau, or the Swiss FrenchBlaise Cendrars, or Max Jacob, etc., and of cubism, as seen in the firstgroup shows of the Salon d’Automne [Autumn Exhibition]—made itselffelt. This, as always, in counterbalance to the contribution of Italian futur-ism and its supranational “inseminatory” activities. (Marinetti, as a matterof fact, promoted his manifestos in Paris and wrote a great deal of his workin French.) Mário de Andrade, a spirit drawn to new trends, in his essay onmodernist aesthetics “A escrava que não é Isaura” [“The Slave Who Is NotIsaura”] (1924), surveys a number of major and minor authors from variouscountries (among them, significantly, the German poet August Stramm).
249Originally published in A arte no horizonte do provável e outros ensaios (São Paulo: Perspectiva, 1969).
—editors
But the main accent in the landscape of Brazilian letters was still the French
influence. In the 1940s, mainly thanks to a renewal of the methods of lit-
erary criticism, there was a great interest among Brazilians in Anglo-American culture: the new critical approaches of I. A. Richards, Eliot, andthe contribution of American New Criticism; this in parallel to poetry inEnglish, particularly Eliot’s neoclassicism. Also, during the 1940s, Rainer
Maria Rilke began to acquire prestige in Brazil. But mainly the Rilke of theElegies and the Sonnets to Orpheus; not the Rilke of the Neue Gedichte [New
Poems ] or of the Ding-Gedichte [Thing Poems ] (considered by critic Otto
Maria Carpeaux the poet’s “major work” and, in my view, probably themost currently relevant).
1
In the 1950s, with the advent of concrete poetry, launched by the poets
gathered around the São Paulo magazine Noigandres, an avant-garde move-
ment of national and international traffic was historically created for thefirst time—one which did not follow analogous European movements.This movement, while taking into account, in its theoretical configuration,the contribution of French authors such as Mallarmé and Apollinaire, onthe one hand, and of English-language ones, such as Pound, Joyce, andCummings on the other, exhibited an unusual trait in Brazil: it was bornin contact with the work of a German-language poet, the Swiss-BolivianEugen Gomringer, and chronologically coincided with it. Concrete poetryspread simultaneously to the two main Brazilian cities (São Paulo and Rio)and to Switzerland, Austria, and Germany as well. We can now [in 1969]
say that it has an active presence in Brazilian and German letters, havingtransnationally migrated to other countries—from Japan to Czechoslova-kia, from Italy to England—mainly thanks to the militant work of theBrazilian group.
The Connection with Eugen Gomr inger
It’s worthwhile here to stop to consider the figure of Eugen Gomringer.
Born in 1925 in Cachuela, Esperanza, Bolivia, to a Swiss father and a Boli-
vian mother of Indian descent, he was educated in Europe. From 1954 to
1957, he was Max Bill’s secretary at the Hochschule für Gestaltung in Ulm,Germany, the industrial design school that succeeded the Bauhaus.Between 1957and 1958, Gomringer was director of the press division of the
school, from which he later withdrew when Max Bill left. In 1953, he pub-
lished a book of poems in German, English, French, and Spanish underthe title Konstellationen [Constellations ]. Together with the painter and
250 NOVAS
visual artist Marcel Wyss, he then founded the international art review Spi-
rale[Spiral] (Bern). In 1955, in that magazine, he launched his manifesto
“From Verse to Constellation: Function and Form of a New Poetry.”2
In turn, after various experiments with fracture and montage of words,
including experiments privileging words spatially in poems such as “O
jogral e a prostituta negra” [“The Minstrel and the Black Prostitute”] ( 1949)
by Décio Pignatari and my “Ciropédia ou a educação do príncipe” [“Cyro-pedia or the Prince’s Education”] ( 1952), Brazilian concrete poetry reached
its first systematic achievement in Augusto de Campos’s series Poetamenos
[Minuspoet ] (January–July 1953). These are poems in colors that respond,
on the one hand, to Mallarmé’s concept of the “prismatic subdivisions ofthe Idea” and Pound’s technique of ideogrammatic montage. On the otherhand, musically they echo the Klangfarbenmelodie [melody of timbres] by
Anton Webern, the most radical of Vienna’s twelve-tone trinity, music witha power of synthesis comparable to that of Japanese haiku, according tocritic Antoine Goléa. Just as when in Webern a continuous melodymigrates from one instrument to the next continuously changing color(timbre), in these poems every color indicates a different theme, which isto be articulated by a different vocal timbre, producing, as a whole, a lyricideogram. (Almost all the poems had lyrical and love themes within a newconcept of lyricism, not a sentimental-discursive one but rather an existential-pointillist one, so to speak.)
Given the high costs of color printing, Poetamenos was only printed using
different typefaces in February 1955, in the second issue of the book-magazine
Noigandres. However, in January 1954, Pignatari, in collaboration with the
composers Damiano Cozzella and L. C. Vinholes, organized the first publicperformance of the poems in that series, on the occasion of the Fifth Inter-national “Pro Arte” Summer Course (in Teresópolis, directed by H. J. Koell-reuter). At that time also, as professor of the poetry and literature division,Pignatari lectured on the theoretical tenets of the new poetry and on the basiclist of authors that such poetry required.
3In the first half of 1955, Augusto de
Campos’s article-manifestos “Poesia estrutura” [“Poetry, Structure”] and“Poema, ideograma” [“Poem, Ideogram”] and my “Poesia e paraíso perdido”[“Poetry and Paradise Lost”] and “A obra de arte aberta” [“The Open Workof Art”] were published. All texts dealt with the aforementioned issues.
4
In October 1955, the label “concrete poetry,” launched as the title of an
article by Augusto de Campos (in Forum [publication of the Centro
Acadêmico in São Paulo], no. 3, August 22), began to circulate in the local
press, announcing a concert-recital commemorating the first anniversary
A Laboratory of T exts 251
of the movement Ars Nova, conducted by maestro Diogo Pacheco. (At this
concert, which took place in November of that year at the Teatro de Arena,there was a performance of pieces by the young Brazilian composers ErnstMahle and Cozzella, as well as readings and visual presentations of threepoems from Poetamenos. ) In November 1955, Pignatari visited the Ulm
Hochschule. By chance and without any previous contact or knowledge, hethen met Gomringer. After living in Europe for two years, especially inParis, Gomringer was the first poet that Pignatari met who was carryingout experiments similar to those of the Brazilian group Noigandres. In Paris,
Pignatari was mainly in contact with musicians (the composer PierreBoulez, the Domaine Musical concert group; it would be only years laterthat the new poetry would manifest itself noticeably in France).
The poet from Ulm acknowledged a list of basic authors almost identi-
cal to that of the Brazilians: instead of Pound, he quoted William CarlosWilliams (a disciple and friend of Ezra Pound); and he added, for the Ger-man context, the Phantasus by Arno Holz. Gomringer practiced an
extremely concise poetry, with a rigorous and orthogonal construction, the-matically limited to notes from nature or an urban landscape, or insteadabstract motifs of dynamical structures. He called his poems “constella-tions,” following Mallarmé’s example. “A constellation,” Gomringerexplained, “is the simplest way of structuring a poem founded on the word.As a group of stars, a group of words forms a constellation. T wo, three, ormore words—there don’t have to be a lot of them—vertically or horizon-tally laid out: an ‘idea-thing’ relationship is established. And that’s all!”Brazilian concrete poetry—as it appears in Poetamenos and in some other
unpublished poems—was more complex. It employed, instead of a two-dimensional (orthogonal) construction, a multidimensional, less concen-trated one. This structure partakes of a visual baroqueness that is perhapsone of the formal constants in the Brazilian spirit as is evidenced, forinstance, in our modern architecture. Contact between the Brazilians andGomringer was mutually beneficial, resulting in an exchange of encourage-ment and influences respecting each other’s paths.
5In December 1956, con-
crete poetry was officially launched, with a large exhibit at the Museum ofModern Art in São Paulo (later shown at the exhibition space of the Min-istry of Education in Rio de Janeiro). In a letter to Pignatari dated August30,1956, Gomringer had already accepted the name “concrete poetry,” sug-
gested by the Brazilians, as a general label for the movement, while stillkeeping the term “constellations”
6to characterize his own experiments.
252 NOVAS
Later on, the Brazilian group popularized Gomringer’s theoretical writings
and poetry in Brazil, while he promoted the work of the Noigandres team
in Switzerland, Austria, and Germany. In 1960, in issue 8of Spirale, Gom-
ringer published a Kleiner Anthologie konkreter Poesie [Little Anthology of
Concrete Poetry ], presenting sixteen poets from various countries: seven
Brazilians, three Austrians, two Germans, two Swiss, one Japanese, and oneItalian. That same year Gomringer began publishing a series entitledKonkrete Poesie/Poesia Concreta [Concrete Poetry ] with the epigraph: “Con-
crete poetry is the aesthetic chapter of universal linguistic form of ourtime.” (Individual volumes of selected poems by Brazilian poets areplanned, and an anthology in collaboration with the Noigandres group,
Ideogramme/Ideogramas [Ideograms ] has already been published.)
Making the balance of contemporary German poetry, Anatol Rosenfeld
argued in 1964: “It must be noted that Brazilian concretism has been exert-
ing a certain influence on German concrete poetry, and even recentlyGomringer has specifically made reference to Brazilian concretism (in theafterword to 33Konstellationen ,1960).”
7Let’s turn now to a typical exam-
ple of a Gomrigerian “constellation” (that the reader may compare withpoems from the series Poetamenos, republished in Antologia Noigandres, São
Paulo, 1962, since it is impossible to reproduce them in color here):
Eugen Gomringer:
Constellation
words are shadowsshadows become wordswords are gamesgames become wordsare shadows wordsdo words become gamesare games wordsdo words become shadowsare words shadowsdo games become wordsare words gamesdo shadows become words
*
A Laboratory of T exts 253*All poems translated from the original languages by essay translator, unless otherwise noted. — translator
Arno Holz, Schwitter s/Sousândrade, Oswald
A characteristic common trait of the international concrete poetry
movement originating from those two main matrices (Brazil and the Ger-
man domain) was precisely the attempt to demarginalize the avant-garde,integrating it to a living tradition. This required a revision of the literarypast, in order to substitute the morose and conventional view of literaryhistorians by another one, the inventive one of the creative artist. In the
German case, the works of Arno Holz ( 1863–1929 ) and Kurt Schwitters
(1887–1948 ) were reconsidered in light of the new poetic experiments.
Gomringer, as was said, included the poems of Phantasus (first edition:
1889–99, two issues) on the basic list of his article-manifesto ( 1955): “New
poetry is grounded in historical evolution. Its origins must be sought in theexperiments of Arno Holz ( Phantasusgedichte ) as well as in those of the last
Mallarmé and of Apollinaire’s Calligrammes. In these poets, a new layout of
the poem announces itself. Arno Holz gathers, in a single line, wordsrhythmically interrelated, hence the well-known contour of short and longlines in Phantasus. ”
8Holz, until fairly recently, had been the “disinherited
of the disinherited” of German literature, a name that was negated or omit-ted, according to a statement by the novelist Alfred Döblin in a volumededicated to the poet, part of a series eloquently titled Disappeared and For-
gotten (Mainz: Akademie der Wissenschaften und der Literatur, 1951).
Today he reappears, full of life and instigation, not only for concrete poetrybut also for the experiments of new prose writers such as Ferdinand Kriwetand Hans G. Helms.
In1962, I had the opportunity to study at length Holz’s Phantasus in
two articles, “A revolução da lírica” [“The Revolution of Lyric”] and “Ele-fantíase do projeto” [“Elephantiasis of the Project”].
9I argued there that
that “masterly baroque book,” as Döblin called it, could be placed next toJoyce’s Finnegans Wake thanks to its sense of elaborate and grandiose farce,
where language—inflated in a series of word-montages that take the nat-ural proclivities of the German language to their last consequences—wasthe protagonist of a Cyclopean struggle, a veritable clash of Titans againstthe basaltic strata of tradition. Between 1961 and 1962, the Phantasus was
published by Luchterhand in its definitive three-volume version, unpub-lished until then, and under the care of the poet’s widow, Anita Holz (anArgentine by birth), and Wilhelm Emrich. In 1964, Max Bense devoted a
magnificent essay to Holz (“Textalgebra Arno Holzes”), reassessing his
254 NOVAS
value in light of his own new aesthetics based on statistics and semiotics.10
The visual aspect of Holz’s poetry must be stressed: the poems are laid
out on the page, governed by the “middle axis” (hence the term Mittelach-
senpoesie )—a typographic/virtual backbone—that the poet used in an effort
to respond optically to the oral nature of his poetry, preserving the singletoneof words, the breath and pauses of spoken poetry. The subject matter
of Phantasus, in Otto Maria Carpeaux’s synthetic formulation ( A literatura
alemã [German Literature ] [São Paulo: Cultrix, 1964]), is the “impressionis-
tic impressions of everyday life.” I would add that the poem also containsmythological allegories, travel scenes, polyglot and burlesque dialogues, anencyclopedic gallery of heroes and illustrious men; it is also lyric poetryabout nature and the big city, childhood memories, and even philosophicmeditations, especially on destiny and the poet’s role (“Ecce Poeta,” last partof the third volume).
11In the monumental edition of 1916, the poem had
355pages, in a 32-by-44 centimeter format [ 12.6by 17.3inches]. In 1926,
three years before the poet’s death, a new, revised edition appeared. Massesof adjectives and adjectivized participles form, for instance, a gigantic, 743-
line sentence, which goes on for fifteen pages and whose organic laws ofgrowth gradually impose themselves on the author, until he ends up becom-ing (as he himself admits) “a creature of his own work, which self-createsitself.” A kind of polypary of predicates anchored to a verb or a final noun,that is how one could define the usual syntactic figure of the Phantasus, a
poem that the scholar René Lasne compared to a kind of “poetic encyclope-dia” (giving the expression a negative ring . . .). I quote below a fragment ofthe initial Barocke Marine [Baroque Seascape ] episode, from part 3—Götter
und Götzen [Gods and Idols] —in the first volume of the poem:
Arno Holz:
Baroque Seascape
Sea
Sea, sunniest, sea
as far as
you . . . see!
Over the rolling water here,
rage-
A Laboratory of T exts 255
roarromping,
unruly, rejoicehowling, rapturexulting, lustlaughing, swarming
gruntmoaning, waltzhurling,
backslinging,
warming
hollowhandcalling, hollowhandcrying,
hollowhandsbawling
greenseaweedhairy, shimmerscalebellied, sturgeontailfloating
swimdiveblinkering, swimpuffnimbling
swimpuffpanting
like
raging mad trumpetsnailhorn blowing
thousand . . . tritons!
So Brazilian concrete poetry, aside from having contributed to the process
of rehabilitation of Arno Holz, also promoted a parallel revision on theBrazilian front. It is the case of the poet from Maranhão, Joaquim de SousaAndrade (Sousândrade, 1833–1902 ), belonging to the second generation of
romantics and author of the long epic-dramatic-narrative poem O Guesa
errante [The Wandering Guesa ]. Sousândrade was unfairly criticized by his
contemporaries because his innovations exceeded the aesthetics of his age.Only recently, with the book Re/Visão de Sousândrade [Re/Vision of Sousân-
drade], a critical essay, anthology, and glossary,
12has Sousândrade been put
back into circulation. Only now can we appreciate Sousândrade’s vertigi-nous semantical innovations (as in the creation of new compound words,doing violence to the genius of the Portuguese language: fòssilpetrifique
[“fossilpetrify”] sôbre-rum-nadam [“over-rum-swimming”], florchameja
[“flowerflickering”], lágrima-pantera [“tear-panther”]); as well as in the
realm of syntax: a montage of news items from newspapers of his time andof events and characters from the past and present in a chaotic, polyglotwhirl set in the New York Stock Exchange in the 1870s, the time when
Sousândrade lived in the United States.
In the article “De Holz a Sousândrade” [“From Holz to Sousân-
drade”],
13Augusto de Campos and I drew parallels between both poets.
We showed that while Holz had to his advantage the nature of the Germanlanguage in creating his lexical montages, something that allowed him togo farther and systematize his process, Sousândrade must be credited withhaving had the unusual nerve to fight against the genius of his language,twisting it for his creative purposes. It’s important to note that for the
256 NOVAS
episode of the Stock Exchange (entitled The Wall Street Inferno ) as well as
for another similar episode ( T atuturema, which focuses on the Jurupari rit-
uals performed by Amazon forest dwellers corrupted by the white man),
Sousândrade followed the model of Goethe’s Faust (the Nights of Walpur-
gis). He also followed Heine’s Atta Troll (A Midsummer Night’s Dream,
1847), a satire against the philistine bourgeois personified in Atta T roll, thebear, who tries to give wise moral and theological lessons to his offspring,warning them against the treachery of the young “barbarians.”
14Goethe’s
paradigm is specifically mentioned by Sousândrade in the lines that pre-cede the Inferno of the New York Stock Exchange:
Romantics I saw you, danceat night from Brocken in Amazona.Behold classic Pharsalia, on glacial daysBy the Hudson. Guesa stops to gaze. 
The witches’ Sabbath on Mount Brocken ( Faust, part 1) is reproduced in
the pandemoniac dance of the Indians on the banks of the Amazon;Sousândrade’s second Walpurgisnacht, parallel to the classic Pharsalia of the
Second Faust, takes place next to the Hudson River, in New York. Note the
last stanza of the second Inferno episode in Sousândrade:
(A magnetic handle-organ; ring of bears sentencing the architect of the
pharsalia to death; an Odyssean ghost in the flames of
Albion’s fires:)
– Bear . . . Bear is beriberi, Bear . . . Bear . . .= Mahmmuhmmah, mahmmuhmmah, Mammon!
– Bear . . . Bear . . . ber’ . . . Pegasus
Parnassus
= Mahmmuhmmah, mahmmuhmmah, Mammon!
The poet, in the persona of the Guesa (an adolescent who must be sacri-ficed to the Sun God by a ring of priests), is about to be ritually killed bya ring of bears (one of the circles of Tammany, the North American secretsociety; by extension, in this episode, the bear also designates the Yankee,placed under the sign of the northern constellations of Ursa Major andMinor; “bear,” in stock exchange jargon, was a speculator who caused anartificial drop in market prices). The poet was also the architect of the
A Laboratory of T exts 257
Pharsalia of Wall Street in the same way that Lucan was of the epic
Pharsalia and Goethe of the Faustian one. An infernal chorus, speaking
with the nasal twang of a barrel organ, praises the god of the Stock
Exchange (“Mammon” or “Mammonas”), and their refrain is an amalgamof the words Mamma (German for “mama”) and Mumma (the Bear-
Mother, wife of Atta T roll in Heine’s poem). Speculation (“Bear”) generatesdisease (“beriberi”). In this financial Inferno, the “Pegasus” of the poetic“Parnassus” is grotesquely transformed into a bear. An Odyssean ghost iswitness to this, since Ulysses also descended to hell (“Nekuia,” book 11of
the Odyssey ). The flames are realistic, drawn from a true incident (the
famous fire that destroyed the city of London in 1666), substituting the
symbolic infernal blaze. “Albion ” is the ancient name given to England by
the Greeks. Because of his fragmentary style, of his fusion across time ofevents and characters, Sousândrade can be seen as one of the precursors ofmodern poetry internationally and, without a doubt, the forefather ofBrazilian avant-garde poetry.
15
Another first-rate poet rehabilitated by the German-language avant-
garde is Kurt Schwitters. Schwitters was a notable innovator in the visualarts, combining Dadaist trends with the contributions of Russian construc-tivism in his painting and sculpture, which he named merz (a syllable from
the word Kommerz: the process of clipping a term found in urban signs
embodies an entire creative agenda). Schwitters’s production—paintingand sculpture as well as literature—is characterized by the constant use ofcollage. It profits from the humor that arises from unforeseen associationsof everyday detritus, whether it be tram tickets and letter envelopes placedin sudden assemblage or bits of ordinary conversation, slang and newspa-per lingo, the stock of clichés, and so on. Now [ 1969] the neo-Dada trend
is taking over all fields: avant-garde music, with its aesthetic of the unfin-ished and chance; poetry, with its techniques of syntagmatic montage (oneof the main techniques of concrete poetry, for instance); painting, with popart, happenings, and neorealism.
It is thus evident that “Dadá não está gagá” [“Dada is not senile”], as
Anatol Rosenfeld put it when he wrote about the large Schwitters showincluded in the Fourth São Paulo Biennial ( 1961).
16With this colorful for-
mulation, not unworthy of the linguistic findings of the merz poet, Rosen-
feld tried to emphasize the currency of Schwittersian issues. Brazilianconcrete poetry, since 1956 (five years before the Fourth Biennial and seven
years before the large Schwitters retrospective at the Wallraf-Richartz
258 NOVAS
Museum in Cologne) had been issuing a cry of warning, stressing the
importance of his poetry. This was also two years before the acknowledg-ment of his importance in England (where the poet, fleeing Nazi persecu-tion, spent the last years of his life), a recognition that came with the bookby Stefan Themerson, Kurt Schwitters in England (London: Gaberbocchus,
1958). In “Kurt Schwitters ou o júbilo do objeto” [“Kurt Schwitters or theJoy of the Object”],
17I tried to show the contribution of the creator of merz
art to new poetry in terms of his correlation with the latest musical experi-mentation, which culminates in the piece “Gesang der Jünglinge” [“Song ofYouth”] by Karlheinz Stockhausen, written between 1955and 1956. Between
1921and 1923, Schwitters composed a “Primordial Sonata” or “Pre-Syllabic
Sonata” (“Ursonate”), the most radical and consistent of all experiments car-ried out to our day in the field of phonetic (sound) poetry and which ren-ders pale all that was attempted by the French léttristes under Isidore Isou.
Schwitters was also a virtuoso of diction, having left behind recordings of hiscompositions using the sound material of language. Stockhausen, for hispart, in his “Gesang der Jünglinge,” did nothing but fragment and reassem-ble eighteen lines from a biblical psalm from the book of Daniel, so that thewords, set in the context of an electronic composition, may wander from astate of asemantic noise (devoid of meaning) to one of intelligibility (wheresome words or syntagmas are gradually allowed to agglutinate semantically:Sonne, Mond, Winde, Himmels, Jubelt dem Herrn, and are perceived as
momentary islands in a sea of phonetic residue). Commenting on this,Stockhausen writes: “Language can approach music and music, language,until the boundaries between sound and meaning are abolished,” explainingthat in his work he created “a series of degrees of intelligibility” with a struc-tural function.
18
Alongside its interest in Schwitters—as an associate and even a fore-
runner of today’s German avant-garde—Brazilian concrete poetry, fromits earliest manifestos, fought for the reexamination of the oeuvre ofOswald de Andrade ( 1890–1954 ), who, in many respects, occupies a place
similar to Schwitters’s in the Brazilian context. Oswald was the mostdynamic figure of the 1922 modernist movement: the creator of our new
poetry ( Brazilwood poetry) and our new prose (the novels-inventions
Memórias sentimentais de João Miramar [Sentimental Memoirs of John
Seaborne ] and Serafim Ponte Grande [Seraphim Grosse Pointe ]),
*and of our
A Laboratory of T exts 259*See the selections from “ Miramar on the Mark” and “Seraphim: A Great Un-Book” in the essay “An
Oswald de Andrade T riptych” in this volume. — editors
new theater ( O rei da vela [The Candle King ], O homem e o cavalo [The
Man and the Horse ], A morta [The Dead Woman ], a Brechtian-style theater
written between 1933and 1937, i.e., before Brecht’s most notable phase).
Speaking only of the poetry, it could be said that Oswald was the forerun-
ner of concrete poetry, thanks to his “poemas-minuto” (minute-poems)which can be reduced to a mere two words—title: amor (love); poem:
humor . Also thanks to his direct juxtaposition of phrases and situations
gathered from the quotidian; thanks to his sensibility (taste) which DécioPignatari accurately termed Dadaist and “pop”
19avant la lettre; thanks to
his simplicity that countered the national vice of rhetoric. Compare this“ready-made” poem by Oswald with Anna Blume [Anna Flower ]b y
Schwitters.
Oswald de Andrade:
Berlitz School
All pupils have an eager face
But the teacher-suffragetteMistreats the poor pretty typistsAnd hates
The spring
Der Frühling
La primavera scapigliata
There’s a bunch of books to be boughtWe’re left sort of waitingThe bells alert usThe doors close
Is the peacock beautiful?
What color is Senhor Seixas?Senhor Lázaro, bring me some inkWhat’s the first letter of the alphabet?Ah!
Kurt Schwitters:
260 NOVAS
Anna Blossom Has Wheels
O Thou, beloved of my twenty-seven senses,
I love thineThou thee thee thine, I thine, thou mine.—we?That belongs (by the side) not here!Who art Thou, uncounted woman?Thou art—art Thou?—People say, Thou werst,—Let them say, they don’t know, how the churchtower stands.You wearest your head on your feet and wanderst on your hands,On thy hands wanderst Thou.Hallo thy red dress, clashed in white folds,Red I love Anna Blossom, red I love Thine!Thou Thee Thee Thine, I Thine, Thou mine,—we?That belongs (by the side) in the cold glow.Red Blossom, red Anna Blossom, how say the people?
Price question1. Anna Blossom has wheels.2. Anna Blossom is red.3. What color are the wheels?
Blue is the color of thy yellow hair.Red is the whirl of thy green wheels.Thou simple maiden in everyday-dress,Thou dear green animal,I love thine!Thou Thee Thee Thine, I Thine, Thou mine,—we?That belongs (by the side) in the glow box.Anna Blossom,Anna,A—N—N—AI trickle your name.Thy name drops like soft tallow.Does thou know it, Anna,Does thou allready know it?One can also read thee from behind,And thou, thou most glorious of all,
A Laboratory of T exts 261
Thou art from the back, as from the front:
A—N—N—ATallow trickles to strike over my back.Anna Blossom,Thou drippes animal,ILoveThine!
*
A poem that makes one think about Wittgenstein’s dictum: “Philosophyexists because languages are absurd.”
Morgenstern, Stramm, Ka ndinsky, Klee
In this effort to create its own tradition—or its antitradition —and to
withdraw the living literary past from the timorous custody of literary his-torians in order to reestablish the obscured paths of an evolution of forms,directed by creation, Brazilian concrete poetry—its concerns in sync withthe new guard of German poetry—chose also to promote in Brazil thework of authors such as Christian Morgenstern, August Stramm, Kandin-sky, and Klee.
In1958, I devoted an essay to the linguistic fabulation of Christian Mor-
genstern ( 1871–1914 ).
20I tried to show there how, in the Galgenlieder [Gal-
lows Songs ], there are contributions to the sonorist trend of the new poetry
(“Das Grosse Lalula” [“The Big La-lu-la”]), to the visual trend (“FischesNachtgesang” [“Fishes’ Nightsong”], a poem without words where theopening and closing of the mouth of a fish in an aquarium—its “noctur-nal song”—is indicated by symbols of long and short syllables), the trendof lexical and vocabulary humor (the transfiguration of animals and objectsinto fable characters through mere linguistic manipulation). The followingexamples belong to this last trend in which the visual element is alsoimportant.
Christian Morgenstern:
262 NOVAS*English version by Kurt Schwitters in Das literarische Werk, vol. 1, ed. Friedhelm Lach (Cologne: DuMont
Buchverlag, 1974), 150, reprinted by kind permission of DuMont Literatur und Kunst Verlag, Cologne,
Germany. — translator
The Aesthetic Otter
An otter
sets his daughter
on gravel near swift water
Do you know,
though, why?
The mooncalf, whispered low,
And told me, on the sly:
That sublime
-ly keen beast does
because
he can’t resist the rhyme.*
The Lonely Rocking Chair on the Deserted Terrace
“I am a lonely rocking chair
And I rock in the wind,
in the wind
That moves so cool on the terrace whereI rock in the wind,
in the wind
And I rockle and knockle the livelong dayWhile knockles and crockles the linden.Who knows what more might rock and swayIn the wind,
in the wind,
in the wind,
in . . .”
†
A Laboratory of T exts 263* English translation from Christian Morgenstern, Gallows Songs, trans. W. D. Snodgrass and Lore Segal (Ann
Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1967), 72. Reprinted by kind permission of the translators. — translator
† English translation from Christian Morgenstern, Gallows Songs, trans. W. D. Snodgrass and Lore
Segal (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1967), 65. Reprinted by kind permission of the trans-
lators. — translator
August Stramm ( 1874–1915 ) is a true precursor of the creations of Schwit-
ters, a poet in whom expressionism meets futurism. His poetry, through
visual verticalization, reveals at times the influence of the “median axis” ofArno Holz; through the composition of words, it also shows the lesson ofPhantasus, although in a more radical way through the lexical crumbling he
practices. To this effect, consider the poem:
Brothel
Lights wench out of windowscontagionstraddles at the doorand offers moaning whores for sale!Women’s souls shame shrill laughter!Mothers’ wombs yawn child-death!Unborn thingsspookmustilythrough the rooms!Aghastin a cornerthrough the rooms!shame-mortifiedcowerssex!
*
A word such as Schamzerpört fuses Scham [shame], Empörung [disgust],
and zerdrückt [crushed] to mean “crushed and disgusted by shame.” In “Os
estenogramas líricos de August Stramm” [“The Lyrical Shorthand ofAugust Stramm”],
21I tried to study the telegraphic style ( T elegrammstil )o f
the poet (who, by the way, was a postal worker . . .). This style, by virtueof its synthesis, imagetic surprise, and speed, also has something in com-mon with Oswald de Andrade’s writing style (defined in those same termsin the jocular-serious preface to João Miramar [John Seaborne ]: “telegraphic
style” and “piercing metaphor”). There is also something else worthy of
*English version quoted from August Stramm, Twenty Two Poems, trans. Patrick Bridgwater (Wymond-
ham, Eng.: Brewhouse Press, 1969), reprinted by kind permission of the translator. — translator
264 NOVAS
note: the book of war poems written between 1914 and 1915 and titled
Tropfblut [Dripblood ], where what was ardent and exclamatory in Stramm’s
lyrical-love shorthand gives way to a dry and sorrowful pointillism. Now,
the first book by Mário de Andrade (who knew the entire work of his Ger-man confrere) is precisely called Há uma gôta de sangue em cada poema
[There’s a Drop of Blood in Every Poem ](1917) and is made up of texts
equally inspired by the war of 1914. It is true that Tropfblut was only pub-
lished in 1919, but many of Stramm’s poems appeared before in the maga-
zine Der Sturm [The Storm ], founded in 1910. Compared to Stramm’s, the
poems of Mário de Andrade’s first poetry book seem pale and conven-tional.
Mário de Andrade:
Howitzer Refrain (fragment)
.................
But in the supreme glory of ascending,
to feelthat strength will fail:and to come back to Earth;and to serve as an instrument of war;and to explode,and to kill! . . . 
August Stramm:
Signal
The drum plods onThe horn risesAndDeath propsIts head on a fluttering deathBristlesGoing GoingBristle
A Laboratory of T exts 265
Goes
And goes and goesAnd goes and goesAnd goes and goes and goes and goesGoesPlodsGoes
Concrete poetry also became interested in poet-painters, such as Kandin-sky and Paul Klee, who transmuted into verbal language the new syntacticinventions and the new visual art of their pictorial worlds, managing toshake the literary convictions that professional poets frequently seemedincapable of fracturing. Consider the following examples:
Kandinsky:
White Horn
A circle is always something.Sometimes very much.Sometimes—seldom—too much.Like a rhinoceros is sometimes too much.In com-pact violet it sits at times—the circle.
The circle of whiteAnd necessarily gets smaller. And smaller.
The rhinoceros lowers its head, its horn. It threatens.The com-pact violet looks angry.
The white circle has gotten smaller—a small dot, an ant’s eye.And it flickers.
But not for long. It swells up again—the little dot (ant’s eye).
It swells in swelling.
266 NOVAS
Swelling twitches the little dot (ant’s eye)
Until it becomes the white circle.It twitches once—only once.
All white.Where is the com-pact violet?And the ant?And the rhinoceros?
(Paris, May 1937)
Paul Klee:
Last
In the heart’s middleAs sole requestFading stepsA cat’s act:
her ear spoons a sound
her leg runs offher lookburns thin and thickshe faces no returnpretty as a floweryet full of weaponsand has, on the whole, nothing to do with us.
The Anthologie der Abseitigen [Anthology of the Marginal ] (Bern, 1946),
compiled by the distinguished Swiss essayist and art critic Carola Giedion-Welcker, played a decisive role in the recovery of that lost tradition. All thepoets cited participate in that anthology, as well as Paul Scheerbart (authorof an 1897 sonorist poem Kikakoku! Ekoralaps! ) and the Dadaistas Hugo
Ball and Hans Arp, poet-painter-sculptor.
A Laboratory of T exts 267
Current Situation of the German Ava nt-Garde
German-language poetry is the one that, nowadays in Europe, reveals
the most experimental line of action, which is particularly interesting for
Brazilian poets who locate writing in the category of invention.
To begin with, I’d like to mention the name of Helmut Heissenbüttel
(b. 1921), who lives in Stuttgart, and is cultural editor of the Süddeutscher
Rundfunk [South German Radio]. He is the author of Kombinationen
[Combinations ](1954), Topographien [Topographies ](1956), and a T extbuch
[T extbook ] in five fascicles ( 1960-65 ). In his first books he reveals expres-
sionist and surrealist influences, especially in the use of images. However,he gradually strips and rarefies his language through his contact with theexperiments of Gertrude Stein, to whom he dedicated an essay in 1955.
22In
this way, he manages to obtain a poetry that essentially operates with the“formal apparatus of logistics” with the “elementary functional schemes oflanguage,” a poetry that, in many aspects, can be considered concrete.(Max Bense has classified it thus.) Heissenblüttel’s texts gradually reveal a“thematics-of-being” irradiating a Kafkaesque aura imbued with Wittgen-stein’s philosophy of language, which plays with the ambiguities and theabsurdities of the discursive structures of Western languages. More wide-ranging semantically than Gomringer’s work, this poetry encompassesproblems that could be defined as ideological; in this way, it comes close toBrazilian concrete poetry. Consider for instance these examples:
Helmut Heissenbüttel:the remaining standing
the remaining standing of the one who remained standingthe fall of the one who remained standingthe fall of the one who fellthe remaining standing of the one who fell
of the one who fell
Political Grammar
Persecutors persecute the persecuted. But the persecuted become thepersecutors. And because the persecuted become persecutors this made
268 NOVAS
the persecuted persecuting persecuted and the persecutors persecuted
persecutors. But persecuted persecutors become in turn persecutors[persecuting persecuted persecutors]. And the persecuting persecutedbecome in turn persecuted [persecuted persecuting persecuted].The per-secutors produce persecuted. The persecuting persecuted produce perse-cuted persecutors. The persecuting persecuted persecutors producepersecuted persecuting persecuted. And so on ad infinitum.
Heissenbüttel’s poetry represents the radicalization of a premonitory line
already present in the poetry of Bertolt Brecht ( 1898–1956 ). This can be ver-
ified either through the dialectical manipulation of the phrase structure, or
via the elliptical rarefaction of the poems of Brecht’s last phase, where thepoems seem to follow a path that goes from the “epigram to the pic-togram,” under the influence of Chinese poetry, especially of Japanesehaiku.
23T wo examples:
Bertolt Brecht:
Pleasures (The First Look Out the Window)
The first look out the window in the morningThe old book, found againInspired facesSnow, the change of seasonsThe newspaperThe dogDialecticsShowering, swimmingOld musicComfortable shoesUnderstandingNew musicWriting, plantingT ravelingSingingBeing friendly
A Laboratory of T exts 269
Rowing, Conversation
It’s evening. T wo inflatable
boats glide by. On them,T wo naked youths. Rowing side by sideThey talk. TalkingThey row side by side.
Another important name is Hans G. Helms, a young author working
with the team of experimental musicians of the Cologne Radio Studio. Hispoem-novel Fa:m’ Ahniesgwow (1960), a satire of Nazism and its survival in
postwar Germany, is a polyglot experiment modeled after Joyce’s late prose,with an emphasis on the phonetic values of words and syntagmas. (Thebook comes with a “synchronization plan” and a record.) The title of thework is already programmatic and can be interpreted as: FAME(from/ vom): AMIGAU and/or ANISGAU, i.e., SAGA (from Latin, fama
= legend) OF THE (from, vom ) DISTRICT ( Gau = district, in the Nazi
administrative organization, where Gauleiter = chief of district) OF THE
FRIEND ( Ami= colloquial expression used to designate Americans during
the time of the German occupation) and/or OF ANIS (aromatic liqueur).In this amalgam, there are other reverberations: the idea of prediction orpremonition (ahnen ); the onomatopoeia of a dog’s barking ( gwow); an
exclamation of relief (“wow” in American slang).
24
The launch of this book allowed T. W. Adorno to make the defense and
illustration of experimental literature through an instigating essay, where,at a certain point, he affirms that “the maligned word ‘experiment’ must beused in a positive sense; only as experimentation, not as something keptaway from danger, can art, in the end, have a chance.”
25Golem, Polemic for
9Solo Voices (1962) is Helms’s second composition. It is an operetta of
phrases in freedom taken from books by Heidegger ( Sein und Zeit,
Holzwege, Einführung in die Metaphysik ). In it, Helms, in the guise of a
bouffe assemblage of fragments that succeed themselves and cross over,criticizes the philo-Nazi inclinations he detects in the writing of the exis-tentialist philosopher. (The opening of this satire caused great uproar inGermany.) Currently, Helms is working on a text of political analysis (theproblem of statistic obedience in a society of advanced economic and tech-nological development, the “Anonymous Society” as he calls it).
26
Ferdinand Kriwet, based in Düsseldorf, also wrote a poem-novel, Rotor
(1961), inserting in an oneiric mixture isolated images, clichés, reminis-
270 NOVAS
cences of family-circle idle-talkers and of the urban hubbub. In this way,
for critic Philippe Jaccottet, he manages to go beyond, say, a Beckett or aNathalie Sarraute.
27Today, invoking as slogan a phrase by Walter Benjamin
(“The typewriter will alienate the hand of the man of letters from the penonly when the precision of typographic forms has directly entered the con-ception of his books”),
*Kriwet develops a literature of optical perception,
the Sehtexte, panels of words in space, collected and commented on by the
author in Sehtextkommentare (1965 ) with the suggestive subtitle “Leserat-
tenfänge.”28Franz Mon, who in 1959 published an anthology of concrete
poetry ( Artikulationen ), has also done research on typograms, fusing
poem/graphic image. Following this line in Brazil, there are examples ofvarious trends, in the new visual work by Wlademir Dias Pino, in the semi-otic poems (code-poems) created by Décio Pignatari and Luiz ÂngeloPinto, in the “popcrete” poems by Augusto de Campos, in the tactilogramsby Edgard Braga, and in the labyrinths by Pedro Xisto.
It’s also important to mention the Swiss Diter Rot, who lived in Iceland
and currently works in the United States, a creator of books without words,which are purely typographical (he was connected to Gomringer and Mar-cel Wys of Spirale magazine); Claus Bremer, professor at the School of
Ulm, author of poems composed according to tables of semantic variation;the Austrian concrete group: Gerhard Rühm, Friedrich Achleitner, OswaldWiener, and Ernst Jandl (this last one in an interesting line of oral poetry,a “cabaret” poet, a concrete Minnesänger );
29Reinhard Döhl, assistant pro-
fessor of German literature at the Technical University in Stuttgart, whoseFingerübungen [Finger Exercises ] date back to 1962; and Ludwig Hrig, from
Saar, author of a permutational prose piece (the short story “Das Fussball-spiel” [“The Soccer Game”], 1962 ); in East Germany, Carlfriedrich Clause,
whose pictographic poems were published in 1964 by Typos Verlag in
Frankfurt ( Notizen zwischen der experimentellen Arbeit [Notes between
Experimental Work ]). Markus Kutter, Swiss, is a name that cannot be for-
gotten: in 1957 he published an experiment-novel Schiff nach Europa [Ship
to Europe], optically organized by Karl Gerstner, a graphic designer andpainter from Basel. Influenced mainly by Joyce’s Ulysses, Kutter seeks a
“synthetic novel,” a “hypothetical theater” in which reality is “produced”rather than “reported”; in a word, “writing as an exact process, not aromantic one,” an “intoxication of things, not of feelings.”
30T wo antholo-
A Laboratory of T exts 271* Walter Benjamin, “Teaching Aid,” Reflections: Essays, Aphorisms, Autobiographical Writings, trans.
Edmund Jephcott (New York: Schocken Books, 1986), 79.— translator
gies followed in 1959 and 1961, containing texts, concrete poems, and
typograms ( Leser gesucht [Reader Sought ] and Inventar mit 35[Inventory
with 35]). Other names could be mentioned, if it were not too long to list
them. It’s enough to say that the weight of the avant-garde is felt even in
the case of a poet of a less extreme experimental bent, such as Hans MagnusEnzensberger (b. 1929), perhaps the best-known poet of the young Ger-
man literature, for some, the equivalent of the Beat poets, the “angry youngmen,” or of the Russian Yevtushenkos and Voznesenskys. While criticizingthe radical avant-garde, Enzensberger—a poet in the conversational-ironicline of Pound and Brecht—allows himself to become influenced and fasci-nated by it. It’s instructive to know that he was in contact with Max Benseand was a visiting professor at the Hochschule of Ulm. When Enzensbergerpresents the poem as an “object for use,” he is echoing, albeit in a personalway, Max Bill’s aesthetic of the “objects for use by the spirit.” (“Thesepoems are objects for use, not gift items in a strict sense.”) This aesthetichas had repercussions on Gomringer’s theory of concrete poetry and on theNoigandres group. The Brazilian case’s definition is very close to what
would interest Enzensberger because it is linked to Mayakovsky’s techno-logical conception of the poem as an industrially produced form.
31It’s
important to see how, in a traditional poetry scheme, Enzensberger makesuse of combinatory techniques and sound effects reaped from the mostradical avant-garde.
32
Hans Magnus Enzensberger:
Bait Song
My wisdom is a rushCut your finger with itand paint a red ideogramon my shoulderKi wit Ki wit
My shoulder is a fast ship
Lie down on its sunny deckand rock your way to an islandmade of glass of smoke
272 NOVAS
Ki wit
My voice is a gentle dungeonDon’t get caughtMy rush is a silk daggerDon’t listenKi wit Ki wit Ki wit
The fact that I have dealt with works nominally in prose, while speak-
ing of experimental poetry, should not be surprising. For an avant-gardeliterature under the sign of invention, the traditional genres of poetry and
prose prevail only for the purposes of didactic reference, but they are abol-
ished, they lose their character of waterproof compartments, under a newconcept, a more encompassing and illuminating one as far as the goals ofexperimentation are concerned, the category of text.Thus, it should not be
surprising that we would attribute to a prose writer, Arno Schmidt (bornin 1914, now living in Bargfeld bei Celle), a prominent role in anticipating
the currents of contemporary avant-garde literature in German. An appar-ently marginal and isolated figure possessing a very personal style termed “adead end”
33by critic Otto Maria Carpeaux in his excellent A literatura
alemã [German Literature ], Arno Schmidt is, however, inevitably present in
experiments such as those of Helms, Kriwet, or Kutter. In his short-storytrilogy Leviathan (1949), two stories are written from the perspective of
antiquity and the third, main one is set in occupied Nazi Germany on theeve of capitulation. It forms a skillfully linked triptych in which the valuesof freedom and of the individual fight against totalitarianism and oppres-sion (Nazism being the modern incarnation of the monster) and reveal asuggestive fusion of an expressionist heritage and Joycean techniques.(Schmidt, who performed a devastating critique of the German translationof Ulysses,
34has devoted himself to translating into German fragments of
Finnegans Wake. ) A “staccato” style, a succession of images, slang, words
derived from Latin and Greek, legends, oneiric flights, erudite digressionswhere notions of astronomy, mathematics, and philosophy intervene, allof this constitutes Schmidt’s verbal environment in Leviathan, which,
being his first book, is prototypical in relation to the later ones. His theo-retical notes on the new formal modalities required by prose (“Berechnun-gen” [“Calculations”], parts 1and 2, in Rosen and Porree, 1959) are also of
major importance. Although the author thought of them in relation to thedevelopment of his own work, they undoubtedly offer stimulus to younger
A Laboratory of T exts 273
writers. Some examples of note are the following procedure: when Schmidt
invokes a combination of units of image and commentary (“photo album”or “photo-text”) in order to capture “complex living” data; when he stud-ies the phenomenon of the “porous present” of “existence in a mosaic”;when he proposes substituting the uninterrupted “epic flux” for the inter-rupted “epic waterfall”; when he discusses “mind games” of the “passive”dream to the waking “chosen,” “active” dream.
I deliberately reserved the conclusion of this essay for the case of the per-
sonality of Max Bense. Born in 1910 in Strasbourg, Bense is professor of
philosophy and theory of knowledge at the Technical University ofStuttgart. His new aesthetics in four volumes, the first of which was pub-lished in 1954, is based on semiotics, on information and communicationtheory, and on a statistical analysis of style.
35Bense is also a critic (Ratio-
nalismus und Sensibilität [Rationalism and Sensibility ], 1956) and the cre-
ator of experimental texts ( Bestandteile des Vorüber [Components of the Past ],
1961;Entwurf einer Rheinlandschaft ,1962;Die präzisen Vergnügen [The Pre-
cise Pleasure ], 1964, etc.). Bense’s critical and aesthetic work has been pop-
ularized in Brazil by the concrete-poetry group. From his creative work, Itranslated the essay-poem about Brasilia “Esboço de uma PaisagemRenana” (“Entwurf einer Rheinlandschaft” [“Draft of a Rhineland Land-scape”]).
36In turn, Bense and his assistant, Elisabeth Walther (also essayist
and translator, specializing in semiotics),37have intensely promoted Brazil-
ian concrete poetry in Germany since 1959 through exhibits, lectures, and
studies.38Thus, he is today the main mediator between the Noigandres
group, the Invenção magazine team, and German-language avant-garde lit-
erature. In Stuttgart, in 1964, and at the invitation of Max Bense, I had theopportunity to deliver a series of lectures in which I dealt with, aside fromconcrete poetry, the most creative work of contemporary Brazilian litera-ture: Oswald de Andrade, Guimarães Rosa, and João Cabral de MeloNeto.
39Having visited Brazil already four times, in contact with its litera-
ture and visual arts, Max Bense published in 1965 a book entirely devoted
to the new artistic manifestations of our country. Regarding literature, hespecifically dwells on Guimarães Rosa ( The Devil to Pay in the Backlands
and “My Uncle, the Iauaretê”) and on concrete poetry. In the introductionto his Brasilianische Intelligenz [Brazilian Intelligence ] (Wiesbaden: Limes
Verlag, 1965), he writes:
Also, this small book, dedicated to my Brazilian friends and which owesits birth to four stays in that country, should call attention to the fact
274 NOVAS
that a progressive civilization does not conquer general interest through
power relations but through its relations of intelligence; that mercantilerelations are not the decisive ones but rather the spiritual ones; that theglobal organizer is not the businessman but rather the intellectual.
There is a Brazilian progressive intelligence that maintains internal
and external relations with Europe, America, and Asia, that develops, inan original and creative way, themes, styles, knowledge, points of view,and experiments which are worthy of the highest esteem and which donot discourage the tension of spiritual life and show themselves to befree from metaphysical decadence and barbarism.
It also seems that the idea and practice of humanity in the tropical
centers of civilization possess dimensions that are not found elsewhere;that this idea and practice constituted themselves less historically than ina continuous present; that creativity, rather than contemplation, is themain point; and that existential relations are dictated less by the idea of(theoretical) separation than by that of (practical) absorption.
These formulations recall Oswald de Andrade’s new “cannibalist” human-ism,
*placed under the double sign of antimessianism and critical devour-
ing (the creative, rather than contemplative, “absorption” of the legacy oftradition, carried out in a synchronic, a “continuous present” perspective,rather than a diachronic one).
Translated by Odile Cisneros
A Laboratory of T exts 275*See “Anthropophagous Reason: Dialogue and Difference in Brazilian Culture” in this volume. 
—editors
The Ghost in the Text (Saussure and the 
Anagrams)
The aesthetic function of language hardly lends itself to analysis, being as
tightly woven as it is with the communicative and expressive functions. This,
at least, according to A. Martinet, in his Elements of General Linguistics.1
It is especially appropriate that a linguist, Roman Jakobson, be the one
to challenge this difficulty and lift this interdiction. In his essay “ClosingStatement on Linguistics and Poetics,” originally presented at an interdis-ciplinary conference on problems of style hosted by Indiana University, wecan read, by way of a conclusion:
The present conference has clearly shown that the time when both lin-guists and literary historians eluded questions of poetic structure is nowsafely behind us. . . . If there are some critics who still doubt the compe-tence of linguistics to embrace the field of poetics, I privately believe thatthe poetic incompetence of some bigoted linguists has been mistaken foran inadequacy of the linguistic science itself. All of us here, however,definitively realize that a linguist deaf to the poetic function of languageand a literary scholar indifferent to linguistic problems and unconversantwith linguistic methods are equally flagrant anachronisms.
2
This essay originally appeared in A operação do texto (São Paulo: Perspectiva, 1976), 103–17.— editors
I have standardized and expanded the bibliographic citations in the original essay, keeping all of the
original notes but providing full citations and including references to English-language translationswhere appropriate. — translator
276
In his analysis of a poem by Bertolt Brecht, Jakobson insists on the same point:
Among the literary studies of various countries, languages, tendencies,
and generations, there are always some that regard the structural analy-sis of poetry as the trespass of linguistics into a prohibited zone; on theother hand, there are linguists of various schools who, from the start,exclude poetic language from the circle of topics of interest to their sci-ence. It is a problem of troglodytes remaining troglodytes.
3
One would say that Jakobson is not exactly a linguist. Or rather, he is
more than simply a linguist: he is a genius. Even if the argument does jus-tice to Jakobson, it doesn’t do justice to the science of language, which inthis way is reduced to the condition in which it exists in certain Americanuniversities—the same ones that Jakobson himself spoke of and whichdemonstrated a pettiness that was unable to embrace the genius of a manlike Charles Sanders Peirce.
4In his excellent Survey of Structural Linguistics,
Giulio C. Peschy reports, in agreement with this, that a curious critique hasbeen made of Jakobson: his “excess of intelligence.” Because of this “exces-sive intelligence,” the Russian-American maestro would be seen to cast hisshadow over certain still nascent problems, anticipating and sometimes pre-determining their normal development, thanks to the intuitive foresight ofconclusions which, lacking adequate data and thorough and systematicresearch, would not be able to be satisfactory to everyone . . .
5
The relatively recent publication of Ferdinand de Saussure’s notebooks
has demonstrated that, quite contrary to what one would expect, Jakob-son, with his heuristic talents and a phonological imagination quick touncover the arcana of poetic structure, was not alone in this endeavor, norwas he an extravagant case in the field of linguistics. Rather, the professorfrom Geneva, the recognized father of structural linguistics, proves to be apremonitory and illustrious companion.
Those who have read Jacques Lacan’s celebrated study “The Insistence
of the Letter in the Unconscious” know that Lacan, the man responsiblefor expanding the scope of structuralist psychoanalysis, critiques the prin-ciple of linearity of Saussurian linguistics in terms that presuppose Saus-sure’s ignorance or a lack of interest with regard to poetry. Lacan writes:
The linearity that F . de Saussure holds to be constitutive of the chain ofdiscourse, in conformity with its emission by a single voice and with itshorizontal position in our writing—if this linearity is necessary in fact,it is not sufficient. . . . But one has only to listen to poetry, somethingSaussure was perhaps not in the habit of doing, to hear a true polyphony
A Laboratory of T exts 277
emerge, to know in fact that all discourse aligns itself along the several
staves of a score. There is in effect no signifying chain which does nothave attached to the punctuation of each of its units a whole articulationof relevant contexts suspended “vertically” from that point.
6
In 1957, when Lacan published his study, Saussure’s unpublished work on
the problem of the “anagrams” had not yet been disclosed; it would cometo light only in 1964, in the Mercure de France, thanks to Jean Starobinski.
7
In an interview conducted by Jean Pierre Faye, Jakobson considers the
congruence of linguistics and poetics. Taking these and other unpublishedSaussurian texts into account, he was already able, in 1966, to respond:
One such unity can already be drawn from Saussure’s lessons. Considerhis “Anagrams.” I have just seen the Geneva manuscripts, thanks toStarobinski. It is his most inspired work, which managed to frighteneven his disciples. And so they tried to keep this part of the Saussurianoeuvre a secret for as long as possible. Saussure, however, wrote to Meil-let that it was his masterwork.
8
But, after all, what are the “Anagrams,” where Saussure, surely, would havedisplayed an excess of intelligence and imagination to such a degree, thatzealous disciples, bereft of equal creativity, would have prudently decided,for the sake of the master’s reputation, to delay their publication?
Starobinski, whose commentaries accompany the fragments of Saus-
sure’s text, explains:
In the years in which he was presenting a course to his students at theUniversity of Geneva—the notes to which would form the posthumouspublication of the General Linguistics—Ferdinand de Saussure turnedhis attention to some quite different problems. To judge from theninety-nine notebooks left unpublished, the most important of thesepreoccupations concerned a particular type of anagram, which Saussure
termed, successively: anaphone, hypogram, and paragram.
9
Properly speaking, the anagram, as we know, deals with letters: the graphicsigns, or digits, of a phonetic alphabet. As defined by Mattoso Câmara Jr.,it is a question of an “artifice which, based on the written form, consists ofdisguising a word by exchanging the position of the letters and, thus, ofthe corresponding phonemes.”
10In this way, “Eva” is the anagram of “ave,”
“Roma” of “amor,” and vice versa.11
Saussure, however, was interested in the anagram exclusively at the
278 NOVAS
phonemic level, in the anagram as an “acoustic image,” as Jakobson would
say: the anagram as constituted by the repetition of certain sounds whosecombination imitated a given word. Hence Saussure’s consideration of the
name “anaphone,” which he subsequently reserved for a phonically imper-fect anagram, in which the repetition of the phonemes of a theme-word werenot complete. A simple vocal correspondence (alliteration, rhyme, asso-nance), which Saussure called “phonic harmonies,” should not be confusedwith the anagram, nor with the anaphone, because they do not include theimitative aspect of a given word. Saussure recognized this theme-word (anonomastic, the name of a god or hero) quite freely and without regard to thesuccessive, linear sequence of phonemes—as if some “privileged” elements(as it would be appropriate to say in the technical sense of Gestalt theory)would have stood out against a phonetic frame of less relevant elements.
Saussure’s observations emerged from his examination of Latin Saturni-
an poetry, which is characterized by its alliteration. By the end of his stud-ies, that alliterative practice in Saturnian verse appeared to be only aparticular and minor manifestation of fixed phonetic laws, whose fulcrumwould lie exactly in the anagram and anaphone. Thus, in the exampleT aurasia Cisauna Samnio cepit, Saussure recognized the name of Scipio,
ghosting up and phonetically reconstructed by the syllables Ci(of
“Cisauna”), pi(of “cepit”), and io(of “Samnio”). He then caught a glimpse
of another almost perfect repetition, of the same theme-name, in thephonemes of Samnio cepit (the initial syllable and the final vowels of the
first word, plus the four first phonemes of the second). In another exam-ple, Mors perfecit tua ut essent, Saussure discerned the ordered repetition of
a vocalic series: o-e-i-u ,modeled after the vowels in the name “Cor-
nelius,” with a single imperfection: the first short eof perfecit, which did
not exactly correspond to the long eof the theme-name, although it still
maintained the vocal quality of the e.
Saussure also thought of giving his discovery the name “hypogram,” a
word whose denotations—“to allude to”; “to reproduce in writing, like anotary, a secretary”; “to emphasize with cosmetics the features of a face”—all adapted themselves completely to the definition of the phenomenon inquestion: “emphasizing a name, a word, making a point of repeating its syl-lables, and in this way giving it a second, contrived being, added, as it were,to the original of the word.”
12
Ultimately, however, he came back to the term “paragram,” always
insisting that the use of the root “gram” should not imply that figure beingstudied would be of a graphic or written nature. “Anagram” would be
A Laboratory of T exts 279
reserved, in this last terminological specification, for cases in which a
theme-word was contained within a delimited phonic space (one or twowords), almost as in the traditional definition of the device. In this way,the anagram would represent only a restricted and less important aspect ofa broader phenomenon of the phonic mimetism of the paragram.
This paragram (or hypogram), notes Starobinski, “inserts a simple name
into the complex array of syllables in a poetic line; its function will be to rec-ognize and reassemble its leading syllables, as Isis reassembled the dismem-bered body of Osiris.”
13The metaphor is all the more appropriate, to add
my own twist to this trope, when one also notes that the name of Osiris, inits turn, contains the redistributed, anagrammatized phonemes of Isis . . .
But Saussure didn’t leave it at that. Besides the paragram, in its various
modalities, or concomitant with it, he also deciphered phonic harmoniesresulting from the repetition of elements in equal number (which he called“coupling”). Thus, in the line Subigit omne Loucanam opsidesque abdoucit,
he discerned the following phonic elements, each repeated twice: ouc, d, it,
i, o, n, m.
From the evaluation of his research, Saussure concluded that, taking all
the syllables into consideration to contribute to a phonic symmetry, thereexists in the carmen a second combinatory principle, independent of the
metrical scheme of the verse, but that allies itself with that metrical patternto constitute a poetic form. In order to satisfy this second principle, poets
had to devote themselves to the phonic analysis of words. Saussure stressed that
a science of the vocal form of words is what, since the most ancient Indo-European times, would have accounted for the superiority and extraordi-nary quality of the Hindu kavys and the Latin vates.
*
In fact, Saussure encountered the same phenomena in his analysis of
Vedic poetry. In the hymns dedicated to Agni Angiras, for example, hedetected a series of calembours such as girah (songs), anga (union), and so
on, which aimed at replicating the syllables of the sacred name. In the firsthymn of the Rig-Veda, he discovered a poetic-grammatical analysisinstilled in the phonopoetic analysis of the base. (This hymn, according toSaussure, declined the divine name Agni.) In this way, Saussure also recog-
nized paired vocal symmetries in Hindu poetic art.
Extending his investigations to medieval German alliterative poetry,
Saussure made a curious etymological digression. It was the poets’ duty, by
280 NOVAS* Cf. Starobinski, Words upon Words (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1979), 22. Saussure uses the
term kavis (kavys), which actually refers to a type of poetry. Because in this passage he is referring to the
abilities of the poet, not the texts, he most likely meant kevthe Hindi term for poet. — editors
the timeless precepts of their art, to analyze the phonic substance of words
(whether by the organization of purely acoustic series governed by propor-tional rule or by the constitution of imitative-allusive series—paragrams—around a theme-name). So it follows that one should investigate how apoet would compute the analyzed phonic elements. This thought allowedSaussure to interpret the German word Stab, in its triple sense of “rod,”
“alliterative poetic phoneme,” and “letter.” While composing a song, thepoet, who would have to combine sounds in determined number, woulduse pebbles of different colors or small rods of various sizes to mark thosesounds already used. The connection between “rod” and “phoneme” wouldthus make historical sense, since the poet counted phonemes by means ofrods. Antedating writing, this Stab (computing instrument of phonemes,
or simply phoneme by metonymy) would later have been agglutinatedwith Buch (from buoch, the beech bark on which characters would be
traced) in order to form the modern composite Buchstabe (letter).
The nodal point of Saussure’s reflections on the anagrammatic
phonemes is exactly the point at which they touch on the question of thelinearity of language. It is a matter, as Starobinski says, of the question oftime in language, which, by virtue of the anagram, appears in a new light,
as the phonemes of the theme-word are dislocated from their proper initialorder and are motivated to undergo a fugal treatment.
As we know, one of the fundamental postulates of Saussurian linguistics
is the linearity of the signifying aspect of the linguistic sign (“[A]cousticsignifications only have at their disposal a temporal line; elements presentthemselves one after the other; they form a chain”; this “linear character oflanguage excludes the possibility of two elements being pronounced at thesame time” [Saussure, Course ]). Jakobson contested the validity of this
assertion, invoking, in order to weaken it, the nonlinear but simultaneouscharacter of the distinctive traces which constitute the phoneme. Theauthor of “For a Phonemic Structure” writes: “Yes, it is clear that twosounds cannot be articulated at the same time in speech, but when thereare two or more phonic properties, it is clearly possible!” This is exempli-fied by showing that the conjunction of two distinctive qualities—cleartonality and muffled acoustic effect—in the same phoneme is a relation oftwo simultaneous elements in praesentia.
14
From the point of view of structural psychoanalysis, we see the refuta-
tion that Lacan also made to the linearity principle, using as argument pre-cisely the polyphonic character of poetry and, by extension, the scored
arrangement that all discourse implicitly bears.
A Laboratory of T exts 281
So it is of the utmost importance to know that Saussure himself went on
to admit a weakening of his axiom, at least in the field of poetic language,
in the study of the paragram, which does not obey the principle of tempo-ral consecutivity. The master muses:
Can one give TAE by ta+te,i. e., by inviting the reader to what is no
longer a juxtaposition in consecutivity, but to a mean of acousticimpressions beyond time, beyond the order in time these elements haveand the linear order which is observed if I give TAE by TA—AE orTA—E, but is not if I give it as ta+te,to be amalgamated outside time,
as could be done with two simultaneous colors?
15
Here, in the phonic plane, is a Mallarméan precept, of the more general
“prismatic subdivisions of the Idea,” which inspired an explicitly scoredconfiguration (horizontal/vertical) in Un coup de dés [A Throw of the Dice]
(1897) and which subsequently led to the simultaneity of futurism and
Dada. Jakobson, in 1914, would write to Velimir Khlebnikov about the
problem of “simultaneous semiotic units” of “simultaneity” ( odnovremen-
nost) in poetry, and of the analogies with music notes, without knowing
that some years before, a great many identical preoccupations had beenobsessing Saussure, who would die in 1913.
16
In Brazilian concrete poetry, we have an emphatic example of an even
programmatic denial of the dogma of linearity (from the very first mani-festos, culminating in the “Pilot Plan” of 1958: “space-time structure in-
stead of mere linear-temporal development,” like the cr eative manipulation
of the effects of simultaneity for the production of texts destined for anonlinear but plural reading).
17In the poem “Lygia fingers,” from
Augusto de Campos’s series Poetamenos (1953), inspired by the Klangfar-
benmelodie (timbral melody) technique of composer Anton Webern, there
is, for example, a true, gradual anagrammatization of the theme-name,running through the entire piece, with all of its complete or partialphonemes redistributed through other words (digital, linx, felyna, figlia,etc.), which themselves function as metonymic or metaphoric emblemsof femininity and its attributes. Like the ancient Germanic poets, whoused colored stones to mark the phonemes of their composition, the con-crete poet made use of his own notation, in which different colors distin-guish different reading “parts” (in the musical sense). Each phonothematiccollection must be executed by a different vocal timbre (five voices in allin the poem under consideration).
18
282 NOVAS
But let’s go back to the Saussurian notebooks. In them, Starobinski
reports, strictly expositive texts are rare, standing out in counterpoint to
the exercises of paragrammatically deciphering Homer, Virgil, Lucretius,Seneca, Horace, Ovid, Plautus, and so on.
Spurred by the results of his analysis, and considering undeniable the
general worth of the observed phenomena, the master questioned himselfabout the origins of the anagrammatic process. Was it a matter of an“occult” or “secret” tradition? Saussure found no evidence to confirm thisin the ancient writings. However, he concluded hypothetically:
1. One can never know precisely how to measure the strength of this
kind of tradition. There are many nineteenth-century French poets whowould not have written in the style foreseen by Malherbe if they had feltfree to do otherwise. But, additionally, if the practice of anagram hadalready been established, a poet like Virgil must have easily seen theextended anagrams in Homer . . . [and] would have wished to remainwithin the rules and not be inferior to Homer on a point which the lat-ter had valued.
2. Poetic difficulty could serve as the instigator of composition (as in the
case of rhyme). Recognizing that the fundamental and habitual method
of poetry would consist in the presupposed decomposition, the theme-word, then the difficulty of the anagram would also serve the poet, whowould be inspired by the syllables of the word for expressing ideas tochoosing expressions.
19*
But the problem continued to preoccupy him. Could the paragrams not bemere products of chance? For the observer predisposed to discern signifi-cant structures through the conjunction of dispersed phonemes, wouldlanguage, by its internal dynamics, not engender them almost automati-cally? Starobinski mentions Saussure’s following observation as representa-tive of the dilemma that confronted the thinking of the master in his finalstage: “Can the materiality of the fact be a matter of chance? Are not thelaws of the ‘hypogram’ sufficiently spacious that inevitably, and withoutsurprise, one finds within them every proper name?”
†
Just as Mallarmé, pursued by Le Hasard and trying to abolish it through
(“perhaps”) a “constellation” ( compte total en formation ), Saussure (Le
A Laboratory of T exts 283* De Campos paraphrases Saussure in this passage. Cf. Starobinski, Words upon Words, 96.— editors
† De Campos paraphrases Saussure in this passage. Cf. Starobinski, Words upon Words, 97.— editors
Maître / hors d’anciens calculs ) fought with chance, seeking to capture it in
the motile figure ( dispersion volatile ) of his paragrams, harnessing it in the
combinatorial web of his “phonic harmonies.” In both examples, chance if
not eliminated is irrevocably incorporated into the reflections of its antag-onists (“si c’était le Nombre / ce serait le Hasard” [“if it was the number /it would be chance”], warns Mallarmé). Just as the genius poet of “Un coupde dés” queried Valéry, upon showing him his poem—“Does it not seem toyou an act of madness?”—Saussure also wrote to Meillet, on doubting thathe was falling victim to a subjective illusion. Meillet, in his reply—Starobinski reproduces the letter—invokes the example of Bach, in order tojustify that which, to the eyes of outsiders, could seem a foolish andgroundless idiosyncrasy:
I don’t know whether you’ve seen a general thesis by André Pirro,L ’esthétique de Bach. In it, one can see very well how preoccupations
apparently as puerile as that of the anagram obsessed Sebastian Bach andin no way prevented him from writing highly expressive music butrather guided him in the labor of expressive form.
20
Starobinski concludes his first presentation of the Saussurian notebooks
with a suspension of judgment. For Saussure, classical poetry would be acombinatorial art; but all language is combination. The field is thus openfor the decoders, whether they be cabalists or phoneticists. And will therenot be ciphers to decipher (a “latent depth,” a “secret language within thelanguage”)? There will always remain—concludes Starobinksi—the “attrac-tion of the secret,” an “anticipated discovery” of “steps astray in thelabyrinth of exegesis. . . .”
21
The fact remains, however, that although focused on the art of classical
poetics, Saussure’s inspired theory of the paragrams—his final “throw ofthe dice”—appears as an invaluable instrument for evaluating the essenceof poetry. The paragram (which is, as Lepschy says, a type of “spatializedparaphrase” of the theme-word) achieves, in the final analysis (and here itis not necessary to know a timeless poetic ritual is in operation behind thefigure), a fusion of sound and sense characteristic of the “poetic function”of language, which Jakobson independently investigated in his firstworks.
22In the simultaneity of paragrammatic reading is mirrored that pro-
jection of the paradigm over the syntagma that, according to Jakobson, dis-tinguishes poetry. In fact, the paragram takes the form of a phonicparadigm, in which the theme-word functions as the center of an associa-tive constellation, and the combinatorial variants of the phonemes of that
284 NOVAS
word-nucleus play the role of the coordinated terms that converge on that
nucleus. (Paradigm, in the traditional definition, denotes a schema, a tableof inflections of a word given as the model of a series, of a declension.)Paronomasia (wordplay, pun), the queen figure of poetry in Jakobson’s esti-mation, is merely another, broader way of seeing the phenomenon of theSaussurian paragram.
23By virtue of this, phonological similarity is felt as a
semantic relationship, as is the case of anaphony (paragram), whereby thetheme-name repeatedly takes shape against the signifying horizon of thepoem. When Poe, in the famous Jakobsonian analysis, has his crow(“raven,” ra‘v n) pronounce its own name backward (“never”)—R.V.N. /N.V.R.—he has anagrammatized a theme-word, just as Virgil, in the Saus-surian decoding, makes the phonemes of Priamides appear in those lines ofthe Aeneid that describe the apparition in a dream, to Aeneas, of Hector,
son of Priam (canto 2, verse 268and following): “Tempus erat quo prima
quies mortalibus aegris / Incipit, et dono divum gratissima serpit” [“It wasthe hour when gentle sleep first comes, / welcome, by God’s grace, wel-come to weary men”],
*etc.
In this way, Saussure’s reflections on the paragram, extrapolating from a
pure phonological investigation, touch on the very essence of poetry. Moreimportantly, although thriving on classical poetry, they fully project them-selves into the present, as if demonstrating the continuity of poetic inven-tion, the synchronic coexistence of cultural past and creative present.Starobinski, though emphasizing that the Saussurian analyses do not con-sider modern poetry, notes that they nonetheless suggest the potential ofthe method. He notes, for instance, that the compositional method of Ray-mond Roussel (a pioneer of contemporary French écriture ) could be
approached using paragrammatic criteria, mentioning, in connection tothis, Michel Foucault’s 1963 book on the author of Impressions of Africa.
And it is not surprising that Julia Kristeva, a member of the group associ-ated with the journal T el Quel, has again taken up Saussure’s final specula-
tions as directives for an important and ambitious semiotic research oftextual production: “Pour une sémiologie des paragrammes.”
24There are,
as Kristeva establishes, starting from Saussure, a set of principles whichcould lead to a revision of the general concept of the literary text:
a) Poetic language “adds a second mode of being, an artificial, supple-mentary mode of being, so to speak, to the original mode of the word.”
A Laboratory of T exts 285* Virgil, The Aeneid, 2d ed., trans. Frank O. Copley (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1981), 32.— editors
b) There is a correspondence between elements, through pairing and
through rhyme.
c) These binary poetic laws go so far as to transgress the laws of gram-
mar.25
d) The elements of a theme-word (even a letter thereof) can “extend over
the entire text or be concentrated in a tiny space, such as one or two
words.”26
Thus, in a corollary mode, Kristeva’s three theses:
1. Poetic language is the only infinity of code.
2. The literary text is a double: writing-reading.3. The literary text is a network of connections.
27
In this last thesis there is a challenge to “linearity,” by way of a “tabular
model,” a system of multiple connections, a polyvalent web, a “dynamicand spacial graphism designating the over-determination of meaning.”
Saussure is thus transformed, by his extreme and most daring “throw of
the dice,” into a theoretician of the avant-garde. His work, like that of Mal-larmé, whose exact heuristic profile only the future would be able to define,ends also at a cliff.
28
Translated by Craig D. Dworkin
286 NOVAS
Poetic Function and Ideogram/
The Sinological Argument
Poetic Function a nd Ideogram
As a practitioner of poetry, Ernest Fenollosa was not able to go beyond
the conventional horizon of the belles lettres of his time. Yet as a theoreti-
cian—as a poeticist—it must be recognized that he intuitively captured thefundamental structures of his art and was able to provide the instrumentswith which to meet future needs. Something analogous might be said ofSaussure, who was out of tune with contemporary poetic practice—Mal-larmé, above all—and entirely concerned with the poetry of antiquity(Vedic, classical Greek and Latin, or Germanic and considered his contem-porary Giovanni Pascoli worthy of attention only as a scholarly cultivatorof the Latin versifying art).
1At the same time, his work on anagrams put
forward a conception of how poetry is engendered, which was to meet withits most definitive counterpart not in the sealed mysteries of the past but
287This section comprises two parts of a longer essay in eleven parts entitled “Ideograma, anagrama, dia-
grama: Uma leitura de Fenollosa,” published as introduction to Ideograma: Lógica, poesia, linguagem, 2d
ed., ed. Haroldo de Campos (São Paulo: Cultrix, 1986; reprint, São Paulo: EDUSP , 2003), 9–113 [page
numbers refer to the 1986 edition]. This English translation by Kevin Mundy and Marc Benson with
an introductory note by Lúcia Santaella Braga (here omitted) was originally published in Dispositio 6,
no. 17–18 (Summer–Fall 1981): 9–39. The translation is reprinted, with minor editorial alterations, by
kind permission of Dispositio: Revista Americana de Estudios Comparados y Culturales/American Journal of
Comparative and Cultural Studies, published by the University of Michigan Department of Romance
Languages and Literatures. — editors
in the breakthroughs of the future, inaugurated precisely by Mallarmé’s
exemplary radicalism. (Indeed, after the manner of an amateur linguist,Mallarmé provided him in advance with his own alphabetic-alliterativetheory in unwitting circumstantial counterpoint, while at the same timedreaming of how science would one day write the “history of the letters ofthe alphabet,” as he wrote in 1877 in his Les mots anglais [English Words ],
also entitled Petite philologie à l’usage des classes et du monde [Short Philol-
ogy in the Usage of the Classes and of the World ]. . . .)
2
At this point, it might be useful to stress that one of the primary aims of
Fenollosa’s essay is the translation of poetry, understood as a re-creative oper-
ation. It is here that his dispute with the Sinologues begins:
It was perhaps too much to expect that aged scholars who had spenttheir youth in gladiatorial combats with the refractory Chinese charac-ters should succeed also as poets. Even Greek verse might have faredequally ill had its purveyors been perforce content with provincial stan-dards of English rhyming. Sinologues should remember that the pur-pose of poetical translation is the poetry, not the verbal definitions indictionaries.
*
In this sense, it can be said that as a translator-inventor of Chinese
poetry, Ezra Pound was not only Fenollosa’s cultural heir but also the mostfaithful and providential executor of his testament.
Fenollosa was opposed to those who considered Chinese and Japanese
poetry to be a trivial and childish amusement, and he distrusted transla-tions whose lack of skill created this futile image of “milk-and-waterpoetry.” He set out to make an intrinsic analysis of Chinese ideographiccharacters and thereby to discover the sources of the aesthetic pleasure Chi-nese and Japanese poetry gave him. In order to do so, and precisely becausethe object of study—written Chinese—was evidently so extremely distantfrom Western forms (indeed, in this sense there was the widest possiblegulf, at least apparently, between it and phonetic-alphabetic languages),Fenollosa resolved to investigate those “universal elements of form” whichconstituted a “poetics” (as did Jakobson, later on, in his “poetry of gram-mar”) and the way that such elements worked in this peculiar and alienbody of poetry. It must be pointed out that for Fenollosa the study of
* All references to this essay quoted from Ernest Fenollosa, The Chinese Written Character as a Medium
for Poetry, ed. Ezra Pound ( 1936; reprint, San Francisco: City Lights Books, 1968). Quotation on p. 5.
Hereafter, page references to this work will be given in parentheses directly after the passage quoted in
the text. —editors
288 NOVAS
poetry was rooted in the study of language, and the criterion for distin-
guishing between language as a means to transmit a “prosaic meaning” (itsreferential function, as we would now put it) and language which can be
recognized as poetry (its poetic function ) was a difference in form. The “plas-
tic” character of this language, as evidenced by a “regular and flexiblesequence,” was the poetic itself. Although Fenollosa’s formulations are a farcry in technical and linguistic precision from those of Jakobson, it is rele-vant here to recall certain passages from the latter’s “Linguistics and Poet-ics.” There he points out, following an “empirical criterion,” that the“poetic function” is designed to “promote the palpability of signs”:
The repetitiveness effected by imparting the equivalence principle to thesequence makes reiterable not only the constituent sequences of thepoetic message but the whole message as well. This capacity for reitera-tion whether immediate or delayed, this reification of a poetic messageand its constituents, this conversion of a message into an enduringthing, indeed all this represents an inherent and effective property ofpoetry.
*
In his scrutiny of poetry written in phonetic languages, Jakobson sought
out the interchanging recurrence of “figures of sound and sense” (as Saus-sure before him, in his vertiginous deciphering of anagrams, had yielded tothe “frenzy of the phonic interplay,” the “Chinese puzzle” [sic] of wordsresounding beneath other words).
3In Chinese written poetry, on the other
hand, and thus at the level of graphemes, Fenollosa was able to recognizethe “overtones” which vibrated before the eyes, “coloring” all the semanticplanes like a “dominant.”
This is indeed Fenollosa’s main contribution to the understanding of
how poetry works in any language —for the “Chinese model” to him was
simply a touchstone for the approach to the problem of English-languagepoetry (and, by extension, of all poetry in the phonetic languages of theWestern world). Despite his insistence on the directly “pictorial” aspect ofthe ideogram in relation to external nature (and we shall soon see the pre-cise meaning of this problem of relation ), Fenollosa is lucid enough to tone
down his hyper-philological hypothesis by the end of his essay. There hestresses its qualities as a model, above all, and its effectiveness as a func-tional framework: “Such a pictorial method, whether the Chinese exempli-
A Laboratory of T exts 289* Roman Jakobson, “Closing Statement: Linguistics and Poetics,” in Style in Language, ed. Thomas A.
Sebeok (New York: Technology Press of MIT, 1960), 371.— editors
fied it or not, would be the ideal language of the world”( 31, emphasis
added). Ideal in what sense? Most directly, in the sense that Fenollosa (like
Vico before him and the transcendentalist Emerson) defended themythopoeic thesis of an original language, the language of Eden or Adam,where words reverberated the halo of things in a paradisiacal communion,radiating out through the tropological force of metaphors. Vico even madethe distinction between a “holy language” invented by Adam, endowed byGod with the gift of onomathesia (the faculty of granting original names to
things in accordance with the nature of each one), and the “primitivespeech” of “theologian poets,” the “Atlantic language,” which reclaimedpart of this divine faculty through “poetic logic,” whose corollaries werethe “tropes,” and among them the most “luminous” and “necessary”: meta-phor. Thus, the argument continued, the ideas of things were conceived“through fantastic characters of animated substances,” figurative personifi-cations always related to the “nature of things” with their “natural proper-ties.” (Joyce, a self-confessed disciple of Vico, expresses through his“persona,” the young artist Stephen Dedalus, the intention of reading innature “the signature of things,” signatura rerum, as he writes in Ulysses.)
In his famous 1844 essay, Emerson writes: “The poet is the Namer or
Language-maker, naming things sometimes after their appearance, some-times after their essence, and giving to every one its own name and notanother’s, thereby rejoicing the intellect, which delights in detachment orboundary. The poets made all the words, and therefore language is thearchives of history, and, if we must say it, a sort of tomb of the muses.”And he continues: “For, though the origin of most of our words is forgot-ten, each word was at first a stroke of genius, and obtained currency,because for the moment it symbolized the world to the first speaker and tothe hearer. The etymologist finds the deadest word to have been once abrilliant picture. Language is fossil poetry.”
4
Fenollosa believed he had found a living instance of Emerson’s hypoth-
esis, miraculously preserved, in the “Chinese model.” He is echoing thepoet he so admired during his Harvard years when he declares:
Metaphor, the revealer of nature, is the very substance of poetry. . . .Poetry only does consciously what the primitive races did unconsciously.The chief work of literary men in dealing with language, and of poetsespecially, lies in feeling back along the ancient lines of advance. . . .[P]oetry was the earliest of the world arts; poetry, language and the care ofmyth grew up together. . . . Our ancestors built the accumulations of
290 NOVAS
metaphor into structures of language and into systems of thought. Lan-
guages today are thin and cold. . . . Nature would seem to have becomeless like a paradise and more and more like a factory. . . . Only scholars andpoets feel painfully back along the thread of our etymologies and piecetogether our diction, as best they may, from forgotten fragments. ( 24)
Hence, for Fenollosa, the exemplary and revivifying nature of the Chi-
nese paradigm:
In this Chinese shows its advantage. Its etymology is constantly visible. Itretains the creative impulse and process, visible and at work. . . . Theirideographs are like bloodstained battle-flags to an old campaigner. Withus, the poet is the only one for whom the accumulated treasures of therace-words are real and active. Poetic language is always vibrant with foldon fold of overtones and with natural affinities, but in Chinese the visibil-ity of the metaphor tends to raise this quality to its intensest power. (25)
Jacques Derrida highlights the fact that at the end of the seventeenth
century and during the eighteenth the “Chinese model” functioned (at
least apparently) as an interrupter of Western logocentrism and acted as “akind of European hallucination.” It matched contemporary concerns tofind a “universal language,” a goal formulated by Descartes and later byLeibnitz. The latter saw ideographic writing as a philosophic language parexcellence, although he had an idealized conception of its nature. This“model” of a supposedly artificial, ahistorical language gave Leibnitz thebasis for his projected “universal characteristics,” a set of combinations ora “calculus” which was to culminate in the invention of a script with all theadvantages of Chinese characters, “because everyone would understand itin their own language,” but at the same time none of the obstacles to rapidlearning so intrinsic to Chinese. The second moment of this Sinologicalfascination was to be seen in America with Fenollosa and Pound. (Thoughit should be remembered, as Hugh Kenner argues, that Emerson’s organi-cism and, more broadly, New England transcendentalism had also hadtheir “Chinese affinities” before Fenollosa through readings of the sameneo-Confucian works of Jesuit missionaries in China which had stimulatedLeibnitz to write his Specimen calculi universalis. . . .) There was a differ-
ence, however. The first moment saw the constitution of the “Chinesemodel” as a means to fertilize a renewal of Western logic in terms of analgebraic combination (the “calculus” developed by Leibnitz—wrote R. H.Robins, in A Short History of Linguistics [Bloomington: Indiana University
A Laboratory of T exts 291
Press, 1967]—“anticipates certain features of modem symbolic logic,
though it is based on the Aristotelian syllogism”[ 113]). The second, on the
other hand, highlighted the poetic and rose up against Aristotelian logic:
instead, it proposed something in the order of a “poetic logic” (to use Vico’sexpression), a logic of analogy or imagination, which in its turn embracedanother aspect of Aristotle, now brought back into the limelight not as thefather of the syllogism but as the theoretician of metaphor, the distinguish-ing mark of poetic genius. . . .
Both moments, for their seminal purposes, idealized the Chinese para-
digm, endowing it with virtues which could even be seen as opposites. ForLeibnitz, the important element in Chinese was what he presumed to be itspurely institutional and purely arbitrary character, free of historicity. (Chi-nese was invented, according to this view, as an artificial means of commu-nication between the different peoples who inhabited the great ChineseEmpire.) Whereas to Leibnitz Egyptian hieroglyphs represented a “sensory”and “allegorical” script, Chinese characters seemed “more philosophical,”as they were “founded upon more intellectual considerations” and madeup of “disconnected strokes which are not aimed at resembling any kind ofbody in any manner.” (In his Cours, Saussure echoes this conception, see-
ing in Chinese the “ultralexicological” type par excellence, among lan-guages where lack of motivation reaches its apogee and arbitrariness is thussubject to minimal restrictions: this is derived from the assumption thatthe “grammatical instrument” is irrelevant in Chinese.) Fenollosa, on theother hand, saw Chinese as the mirror of nature because of its “pictorial-ity,” which brought it close to the active world of things: for him, theabsence of explicit grammatical canons was an obvious proof of this lan-guage’s fidelity to the dynamics of the natural processes of energy relationsand transfer, something in the way of a structural, morphological, organic-evolutionary mimesis. According to Fenollosa’s reading, ideograms arerooted deep down in history or rather in a quasi-paradisiacal arche-history.They are, as it were, the mnemonic records of mankind, where diachronyis exhibited in a dioramic display: “The prehistoric poets who created lan-guage discovered the whole harmonious framework of nature, they sangout her processes in their hymns” ( 32). This radiant, Emerson-like vision of
the poet as a “translator of nature” in fact coincides with the legendary Chi-nese tradition of the origins of writing as a transcription (an “emblematics,”as Marcel Granet would say) of natural signs. It is said that during the reignof the semimythical Emperor Huang Ti (twenty-sixth century b.c.), a min-
ister invented writing “after studying the celestial bodies and their forma-
292 NOVAS
tions as well as the natural objects around him, especially the footprints of
birds and animals” (M. Granet, La pensée chinoise [Chinese Thought ]; V.
Alleton, L ’écriture chinoise [Chinese Writing ]).*In strictly semiotic terms,
this “myth of origin” can be interpreted as the translation of indices (ves-tiges) into icons with progressively accentuated conventionalizationthrough stylizations of a symboloid tendency . . .”
5
The Sinological Ar gument
How would a scholar be received if he were to lean down from the nar-
row chair of his specialty in order to pore over the Scienza nuova, only to
condemn its pseudoetymological whims and lucubrations, its fanciful over-doses of mythopoeia, all in the name of philological rigor and without anygrasp of the fundamentals of the philosophy of language at the heart ofVico’s revolution?
This is the procedure followed by the Sinologists (with a few honorable
exceptions) with regard to Fenollosa’s legacy. “Fenollosa’s essay is a smallmass of confusion,” declared George Kennedy in 1958. Kennedy is the most
acrimonious of such censors; at the same time, he hails Pound as a poet butnever as a translator, for Pound has the practice but lacks the necessaryknowledge (“Fenollosa, Pound and the Chinese Character”).
†
The most shocking aspect of Fenollosa’s view to the specialists is the
argumentative stress he places on the “pictorial appeal” of Chinese. Its refu-tation is—without G. Kennedy’s acrimony—properly summarized in astudy by Yu-Kuang Chu.
‡Of the four principles on which the construction
of Chinese characters was based, only the first centers on pictorial represen-tation (the second, according to the same view, is a kind of diagram of theidea, such as a dot over a stroke to indicate “over”; the third is a means toevoke something through suggestion, by combining two characters inorder to release a third ideative element; the fourth—from which mostChinese words are derived—is a combination of one of the 214“radical”
A Laboratory of T exts 293*Michel Granet, La pensée chinoise (1934; reprint, New York: Arno Press, 1975), 48; Viviane Alleton,
L ’écriture chinoise, 2d ed. (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1976), 71.— editors
†InSelected Works of George A. Kennedy, ed. Tien-yi Li (Li Tianyi) (New Haven, CT: Far Eastern Publi-
cations, 1964). —editors
‡The essay that de Campos refers to is “Interplay Between Language and Thought in Chinese,” Etc: A
Review of General Semantics 22(1965 ): 307–29, a translation of which was published in Ideograma: Lóg-
ica, poesia, linguagem, the same volume containing the original version of the present essay. The quota-
tion at the end of the paragraph appears on pp. 312–13.— editors
elements, or rather “semantic classifiers,” with a “phonogram” or indicator
of the pronunciation of the composite whole: a necessity in order to avoidthe high incidence of homophony in a basically monosyllabic language—at least as regards classical Chinese). Moreover, the author proceeds, thegrowing stylization of the pictograms and the changes introduced over theages by, among others, the learned lexicologists, with their transcriptionerrors and/or imaginative idiosyncrasies, have made the original pictogra-phy largely unrecognizable. Finally, in ordinary use, Chinese readers treatideograms in the same way as users of alphabetical languages treat script, asconventionalized symbols, without any longer seeing in them the visualmetaphor—the visible etymology—which so impressed Fenollosa andwhich he is alleged to have overestimated. It is curious that, having conve-niently “discredited” Fenollosa’s reading, Yu-Kuang Chu feels compelled tomake a reservation: “However, it remains true that the Chinese treat thewritten character as an artistic design. It is perhaps no coincidence thatChinese art excels in the visual field.”
If we consider the practice of the poetic function, in the sphere of phonetic
languages themselves, we can see how the main stress shifts when dealingwith a similar problem. Whereas for the referential use of language it makesno difference whether the word astre(“star”) can be found within the adjec-
tive désastreux (“disastrous”) or the noun désastre (“disaster”), or whether
there are affinities between espectro (“specter”) and espectador (“spectator”),
Calme bloc ici-bas chu d’un désastre obscur—Mallarmé
Stern block here fallen from a mysterious disaster
*
Spectros espectadores que surgiam
Vindo ao espetac’ lo horrendo horríveis de palor
—Sousândrade†
Specters spectators that emergedcoming to the horrendous spectacle horribly pale
for the poet this kind of “discovery” is of prime relevance. In poetry, warns
294 NOVAS* From the English version of the poem Mallarmé himself made in 1877 for Sarah Helen Whitman in
Stephane Mallarmé, Oeuvres complètes, ed. B ertrand Marchal (Paris: Gallimard [Pléiade], 1998), 1193.
T ranslation suggested by Richard Sieburth. — editors
† From Poesia e prosa reunidas de Sousândrade, ed. Frederick G. Williams and Jomar Moraes (São Luís
de Maranhao, Brazil: Edições AML, 2003). —editors
Jakobson, any phonological coincidence is felt to mean semantic kinship
(not only those coincidences which can be etymologically justified, as inparekesis, but more extensively, as in the case of paronomasia in the broad
sense, any phonic similarities which can be semantically confronted in anoverall fecundating process of pseudoetymology or poetic etymology; thus,in the foregoing quotation from Sousândrade, the last word in thesequence, palOR (“pallor”), shares the same phonic figure as in hORrendo
(“horrendous”) and hORríveis (“horrible”), thus being, as it were, prepared
for by the emphatic repetition which precedes it).
What the Chinese example enhanced for Fenollosa was the homological
and homologizing virtue of the poetic function. Because it was written in char-
acters, Chinese poetry gave Fenollosa the chance to explore (inspect) these“homologies” within a visual framework from the point of view of thegrapheme.
6Now, leaving aside the comparative degree of stylization or con-
ventionalization (the “symboloid features,” to use the terminology coined byPeirce, that remarkable fellow countryman and contemporary of Fenollosa’s),the fact is that if the question is not examined from the philological but ratherfrom the semiotic standpoint, the “iconicity” factor always seems to be pre-sent in varying degrees in Chinese writing (“iconicity,” like “artistic realism”in Jakobson’s demonstration, is a matter of degree and depends on variablecodes of perception, immersed in tradition and history). This factor is atwork, with varying levels of “mimetic” intensity, in each of the four principlesbehind the formation of characters listed by Yu-Kuang Chu. It can at once beseen that the “pictogram” is undeniably an “icon”: it is a painting whose char-acteristics give it some kind of relationship, by similarity, with reality,although this “representative quality” may well be derived not from servileimitation but from a differentiated pattern of relationships, in accordancewith a selective and creative criterion. (At this point it must be recalled thatFenollosa refused to admit “copybook” naturalism in painting; on the con-trary, he encouraged a reorganization of natural relations in a new creativesynthesis, taking nature not as a mold for transfer-like imitation, but as adynamic model.) If imagined inside its potential frame at the stage of evolu-tion it had reached when Fenollosa examined it, the “pictogram” alreadyforms a small cubist painting, an aggressively metonymized metaphor. (Eisen-stein, whose 1929 essay on the cinematographic principle and the ideogram
*
coincides with so many points of Fenollosa’s, was well aware of this aspect
A Laboratory of T exts 295*Sergei Eisenstein, “The Cinematographic Principle and the Ideogram,” in Film Form [and] The Film
Sense, ed. and trans. Jay Leyda (New York: Meridian Books, 1957), 28–44.— editors
when, with his filmmaker’s eye focusing on the process, he stressed the
antinaturalism of the psychological “disproportions” in Japanese art.Indeed, he considered this “method of expressive representation,” in itsturn, “organically natural,” spontaneous in children, and traceable tosources as far back as prehistory. The “natural scale” always gives way to anintrinsic “pictorial scale,” while “absolute realism” is by no means “the cor-rect form of perception,” but simply a function of given social structureswhich are also absolutist. . . .)
The sign that results from the application of the second formative prin-
ciple (called “diagram” by Yu-Kuang Chu himself) can be described inPeirce’s terminology as a “hypo-icon” with indexical features, a small map ortopological graph. The third principle is that of “suggestive” association.(Eisenstein calls it “copulative” or “combinatory,” emphasizing that its resultis not a mere sum total but a “product,” a value of a different degree.) T wo“pictograms” are joined to suggest a new relation that was not present in theindividual elements in isolation. Or in the words of V. Ivanov (“Eisensteinet la linguistique structurale moderne,” 1970):
*“The association of two rep-
resentations (two “pictographic” hieroglyphs or cinematographic images)leads to the designation of the abstract concept which representation in itselfis unable to evoke.” (Ivanov points out that a study of this phenomenon isespecially relevant to present-day semiology as it entails transforming syntaxinto a means for a study of semantics.) Now, this is exactly the “ideographicmethod of composition” described by Fenollosa and which he places on apar with “metaphor”: the use of “material images” to suggest “immaterialrelations,” or, as Eisenstein puts it, the passage from “thought throughimages” to “conceptual thought.” But in Peirce’s triadic classification,metaphor is also a “hypo-icon,” although it is a tertiary “hypo-icon,” closeto the pole of conventionality of the symbol. (However, whereas inmetaphor properly speaking, as Jakobson explains it, there is an equation atthe level of meanings between a “primary” and another “secondary” mean-ing, in the ideogramic complex the visual or grapheme notation corrobo-rates the metaphorical equation at the level of the signans as a kind of
paragraphia, which can be assimilated to Jakobson’s paronomasia.)
7
Finally, in the fourth formative principle iconicity is fully manifest in
the form of the “semantic classifier” (also known as “radical”). This belongsto the family of “pictograms,” analyzed above: each one of these 214“radi-
296 NOVAS* Viacheslav Ivanov, “Eisenstein et la linguistique structurale moderne,” Cahiers du cinéma: Russie années
vingt 220–21 (May–June 1970): 46–50.— editors
cals” points to, or rather “displays,” the “general category of things” to
which the compound ideogram into which it fits refers. The “phonogram”element, however, apparently plays an arbitrary role in the compound, asa mere orthoepic reminder (that is, a record of the pronunciation of theresulting word). And yet even here what is arbitrary a priori may oftenbecome (in Lévi-Strauss’s words) interrelated a posteriori, at least for thepoet engaged in the practice of his craft (or for the imaginative etymologistand lexicologist). Thus, in the very example given by Yu-Kuang Chu, theideogram for ocean,
we have, on the one hand, the “semantic classifier” indicating the presence of
something “liquid” (the pictogram for “water”—radical no. 85—
metonymized visually by a few laconic strokes resembling trickles of waterfrom a spring); on the other, there is the phonogram which indicates the pro-nunciation yang (i.e., yang uttered in the second of the four tones of classi-cal Chinese); this is also individually the pictogram for “ewe” or “sheep” (azoomorphic head, detached from the animal’s body by a stroke of synec-doche and stylized so as to represent the muzzle and horns with six brush-strokes). According to Yu-Kuang Chu, the second element has nothing moreto do with “sheep” but is now a mere phonetic graph. However, the mind ofa poet can hardly resist this Vicoesque “miniature fable,” which seems tothrob in the juxtaposition of the “radical” and the “phonogram” as if alreadypushing its product toward the third category, that of “associative” or “sug-gestive” ideograms. The Portuguese verb encarneirar (referring to the curling
of small choppy waves in the sea as ifit were a flock of sheep) and the French
verb moutonner help to make explicit the metaphorical process thus intu-
itively sensed (or constructed?) a posteriori. In their book Pictorial Chinese-
Japanese Characters (1950), Oreste and Enko Vaccari, who as analysts are
aware of the fascination of the visual, provide some confirmation of this “dis-covery” by the poetic imagination.
*According to these authors, the idea of
representing the ocean by means of this combination of characters originatedprecisely in the immemorial perceptive fact that “a flock of sheep in motionreminds one of the rolling of white-capped waves on the open sea.”
8
To Fenollosa, “relations” between things were more important than
A Laboratory of T exts 297* Oreste Vaccari and Enko Elisa Vaccari, Pictorial Chinese-Japanese Characters: A New and Fascinating
Method to Learn Ideographs, 6th ed. (Tokyo: Vaccari’s Language Institute, 1968). —editors

things themselves. This genuine structuralist credo ante litteram is
expressed in the same passage of his essay as the section where he discusses
the question of “homologies” or “sympathies” between poetry and nature.This excludes, on the grounds of oversimplification, any reading whichclaims (in ignorance of Fenollosa’s ideas on painting) to reduce his view onthe mechanics of the ideogram (grounded in a supposed “identity of struc-ture”) to the mere “imitation” of reality, to figuration understood as aservile “copy” of an external object. Fenollosa was interested in deepeningthis “structural analogy,” discerning the lines of force in nature and captur-ing them within a new harmonious synthesis.
Relations are more real and more important than the things which theyrelate. . . . Similar lines of resistance, half-curbing the out-pressing vital-ities, govern the branching of rivers and of nations. Thus a nerve, a wire,a roadway, and a clearing-house are only varying channels which com-munication forces for itself. This is more than an analogy, it is identityof structure. Nature furnishes her own clues. Had the world not beenfull of homologies, sympathies, and identities, thought would have beenstarved and language chained to the obvious. ( 22)
(This puts the whole of McLuhan in a nutshell, including his “new
media” as “extensions of man.”) Nature is a web of multiple dynamic ten-sions. For Fenollosa, the ideograph—and, as an expansion of it, poetry—is the written homologue of these tensions in the abbreviated world of thetext. (An “ ‘imagist’ transformation of the dialectical principle,” concludedEisenstein, attempting through the notion of “conflict”—“montage is con-flict”—to replace a description of the “progressive-evolutionary” type witha synthesis of the “dialectical substance of events.”)
*
In his essay, Fenollosa makes his way through a suggestive endeavor to
“naturalize” grammatical processes—all of which are traced back to theirenergy source in the transitive verb through, as Kenner points out, a kind ofpre-generative-transformational grammar. I would add, however, that Fenol-losa’s is diachronic and evolutionary, or “genetic,” rather than synchronicand formal, as Chomsky’s. He then proceeds to condemn the tyranny ofmedieval logic and the syllogistic pyramid (an aspect to be considered belowwith all due emphasis). It is only toward the end of his essay that Fenollosafinally touches on what seems to me the essence of his problem:
298 NOVAS* Eisenstein, “Cinematographic Principle,” 38.— editors
It is true that the pictorial clue of many Chinese ideographs cannot now
be traced, and even Chinese lexicographers admit that combinations fre-quently contribute only a phonetic value. But I find it incredible thatany such minute subdivision of the idea could ever have existed alone asabstract sound without the concrete character. ( 30)
(The reference to a “minute subdivision of the idea” reminds one of
those “subdivisions prismatiques de l’Idée” which, like a Hegelian spoor,permeate Mallarmé’s preface to “Un coup de dés” [“A Throw of the Dice”].. . .) Fenollosa then proceeds in terms which might be read as an anticipa-tion of Derrida’s hypothesis on “arche-writing”:
Therefore we must believe that the phonetic theory is in large partunsound?
9The metaphor once existed in many cases where we cannot
now trace it. Many of our own etymologies have been lost. . . .The poetcan never see too much or feel too much. His metaphors are only waysof getting rid of the dead white plaster of the copula. He resolves itsindifference into a thousand tints of verb. His figures flood things withjets of various light, like the sudden up-blaze of fountains. . . . Thus inall poetry a word is like a sun, with its corona and chromosphere; wordscrowd upon words, and enwrap each other in their luminous envelopesuntil sentences become clear, continuous light-bands. ( 30-32)
Here we have a description of the recurring structure (or “isotopic”
structure, as Greimas puts it, elaborating on Jakobson) of the poetic mes-sage. “Poeticalness,” recalls the Russian linguist, echoing Mayakovsky’sremark before the members of the Moscow Linguistic Circle in 1919, “is
not a supplementation of discourse with rhetorical adornment but a totalre-evaluation of discourse and of all its components whatsoever.”
*
Fenollosa now moves on, still using quasi-Jakobsonian terms, to define the
modus operandi of the poetic function: “Poetry surpasses prose especially inthat the poet selects for juxtaposition those words whose overtones blend into
a delicate and lucid harmony”( 32). I have underlined “selects” and “juxtaposi-
tion” because these terms correspond exactly to the operations “selection” (inthe paradigm) and “combination” (in the syntagma), “the two basic means ofarrangement utilized in verbal behavior” to which Jakobson is obliged toresort in order to answer a question as to what the essence of poetry is.
A Laboratory of T exts 299* Jakobson, “Closing Statement,” 377.— editors
What is the empirical linguistic criterion of the poetic function? In par-
ticular, what is the indispensable feature inherent in any piece of poetry?To answer this question, we must recall the two basic modes of arrange-ment used in verbal behavior, selection and combination. . . . The selec-
tion is produced on the base of equivalence, similarity and dissimilarity,synonymy and antonymy, while the combination, or the build up of thesequence, is based on contiguity. The poetic function projects the principle
of equivalence from the axis of selection into the axis of combination. Equiv-
alence is promoted to the constitutive device of the sequence.
*
Fenollosa aims to designate something similar to this “projection” of the
“equivalence principle” during the unfolding of the “sequence” when herefers to music and the theory of harmony in music, which “tints” or “col-ors” the horizontal development of the melodic line with vertical effects:“All arts follow the same law; refined harmony lies in the delicate balanceof overtones. In music the whole possibility and theory of harmony arebased on the overtones. In this sense poetry seems a more difficult art” ( 32).
(It was in “music heard at a concert” that Mallarmé sought out the inspi-ration for his arrangement of “Un coup de dés” as a music score, wherebyhe borrowed back from music something that he considered always to havebelonged to literature as well. . . .)
10
“How shall we determine the metaphorical overtones of neighboring
words?” (32 ) This is Fenollosa’s next question, of capital importance, for
here he put his finger on the nerve ending of the problem. It is the exam-ple of Shakespeare that at once springs to his mind, yet Chinese offers abetter vantage point from which to make this objective identification ofthe “empirical criterion” required to apprehend the mechanism behind this“concord” or “harmonizing” (Fenollosa’s way of understanding the “equiv-alence principle projected into the sequence”). To him, it seemed less easyto single out this aspect “tangibly” in poetry written in phonetic languages.He goes on: “Here also Chinese ideography has its advantage, in even asimple line; for example, ‘The sun rises in the east’” ( 32). He then shows
how, in the Chinese sequence,
sun   rises   east,
*Jakobson, “Closing Statement,” 358.— editors
300 NOVASsun rises east,
the pictogram for “sun” is redistributed through all the signs which make
up the line, passing through the sign for “rise” and that for “east,” as if onesingle overtone in grapheme form were governing the whole filmlike chainof the phrase with its changing figures.
This, then, is the “Chinese model” ( vero or ben trovato ) as established at
the ideal level of poetic fruitfulness; but its validity (if not veracity) canonly be measured properly by the exercise of the relevant function, that is,the poetic function of language, ultimate aim of Fenollosa’s analysis. In
poetry, “sentences must be like the mingling of the fringes of feathered ban-ners, or as the colors of many flowers blended into the single sheen of ameadow” ( 31).
The Sinologists share a common tendency to reject as completely fanci-
ful this possibility of an etymo-poetico-graphemic reading. A further exam-ple of this disapproving attitude can be seen in J.Y. Liu’s book devotedprecisely to the art of poetry ( The Art of Chinese Poetry ), wherein he reduces
to a mere “suggestive” excrescence the importance of the visual parameterin Chinese poetry but frequently fails to notice how far the examples hehimself quotes contradict him.
11
Hugh Kenner has commented humorously on one of them, the com-
pound sign, translated as “loyalty”:
heart middle   loyalty
“Heart” + “middle”: J.Y. Liu gives this second part as a mere phonogram,although a few pages farther on, he is forced to admit: “It would not be outof the question to think of loyalty as having someone’s heart in the center,
although etymologically this is incorrect.”
12This quotation gives a very clear
idea of the philological opposition between “etymological truth” and “pseu-doetymology” as an ad hoc product of the poetic imagination. Another elu-cidative example: in his analysis of a reputedly “obscure” poem by LiShang-yin, the “Chinese Mallarmé,” J.Y. Liu associates the word “ashes”(huei) with the compound ideogram “despair” ( huei-hsin ), represented
graphically by “ashes beside the heart.” He does this without showing anysign of noticing that this association in absentia might have been caused bythe presence of the pictogram “heart” in the sign which corresponds posi-
A Laboratory of T exts 301

tionally to huei in the line below, that is, ch’ou2(melancholic, sad), and
which can be interpreted “à la Verlaine” as “autumn over the heart”:
ashes       ashes+heart=despair       autumn over heart=feel sad, melancholic   fire
Significantly, the pictogram of “fire” is present, as an “overtone” in
grapheme form, both in “ashes” and in “autumn,” that is, in bothideograms placed parallel in the text. It is moreover well known that per-ception of this kind of parallelistic affinity is a feature of the “translinear”reading proper to Chinese verse (cf. Viviane Alleton).
13My own alertness
to the visual nature of the ideogram (following the lesson of Fenollosa/Pound) led me to translate the line as follows,
A lâmpada se extingue em lágrimas: coração e cinzas
The lamp goes out in tears: heart and ashes
breaking down the suggestive concreteness of the ideogram for “despair”
and capturing the intertextual allusion between huei and huei-hsin
noted by J.Y. Liu. The English translation he himself gives is feeble andconventional:
The candle will drip with tears until it turns to ashes grey.
14
It is of course true that some exceptions must be registered even among
academic Sinologues. H. G. Porteus, for example, took pains to highlightthe following when speaking of Pound’s translations stimulated by Fenol-losa’s ideas: “His pseudo-Sinology releases his evident clairvoyance, just asthe pseudo-sciences of the ancients often gave them above normal vision”(“Ezra Pound and His Chinese Character: A Radical Examination”).
*A
further noteworthy aspect of Porteus is that, when evaluating the heuris-tic balance of Pound’s poetic re-creations inspired by the Fenollosianmethod of “intelligent reading,” he remains undisturbed by the fact thatPound, in his hesitant and as yet amateur “deciphering” of the plates ofideograms which illustrate Fenollosa’s essay, did perpetrate certain “pre-liminary” reading errors. For example, he confused “radical” no. 64
*I nEzra Pound: A Collection of Essays to be Presented to Ezra Pound on His 65th Birthday, ed. Peter Russell
(London-New York: P . Neville, 1950), 203–17.— editors
302 NOVAS
(“hand”) with no. 93(“bull”), and both of them with a third, no. 68
(“measure”). Porteus remarks:
What is remarkable about Pound’s Chinese translations is that so often
they do contrive to capture the spirit of their originals, even when, asquite often happens, they funk or fumble the letter. Pound’s knowledgeof Chinese, at least up to the time of his second version of the T a Hsüeh,
was so inadequate that he had been incompetent even to use a Chinesedictionary properly. This has however, by no means impaired the valueof his achievements. In his edition of Fenollosa’s essay, “The ChineseCharacter As a Medium for Poetry,” Pound provides an illuminatingcommentary on his own practice, in the form of “some notes by a VeryIgnorant Man.” And one might go so far as to argue that it is ratherbecause of that frankly acknowledged ignorance than in spite of it thathis Chinese “inventions” (to follow up Eliot’s hint) are so valuable.
15
Later on, in the same work, Porteus stresses: “Plainly Pound, handi-
capped as he necessarily is, sees something—or at any rate looks for some-thing—that Sinologues in general are blind to.”
16
A decisive contribution to this kind of analysis has recently been made
by François Cheng, head of the Chinese Linguistics Center at the ÉcolePratique des Hautes Études in Paris, in his essay “Le ‘langage poétique’ chi-nois” [“The Chinese ‘Poetic Language’”] (in the collective work La traver-
sée des signes [The Passage of Signs ]). Cheng seems to have returned in a
determined fashion to Fenollosa’s hypothesis of a “harmonic reading”(although he does not mention this specifically in this work), and he haselaborated on it and strengthened it in the process, with new, up-to-datearguments. The author writes:
More than being mere supports for sounds, ideograms bring all theweight of their physical presence to bear. They are sign-presences ratherthan sign-utensils, and they attract our attention by their emblematicforce and the gestual rhythm they contain. Because of their writing, theChinese have the impression that they learn the universe through theessential strokes whose combinations reveal the dynamic laws of trans-formation. It is no accident that, in China, calligraphy, which exalts thevisual beauty of the characters, has become a major art form.
17
He goes on to analyze a line by the poet Wang Wei, which is valid as a splen-
did illustration of Fenollosa’s fundamental postulate concerning “overtones”vibrating before our eyes and coloring all the semantic planes of the text:
A Laboratory of T exts 303
“branch” “tip” “hibiscus” “flowers”
(“at the tip of the branch hibiscus flowers”)
NB: “radical” for plant =
François Cheng comments that this example “shows how a poet exploits
the possibilities offered by ideograms, their evocative visual appeal andtheir multiple semantic levels.”
18As if replying to Fenollosa’s detractors,
Cheng goes on:
Any reader, even if he knows no Chinese, can be sensitive to the visualappeal of these characters, whose succession harmonizes with themeaning of the line. If we contemplate the characters in order, we doindeed have the impression that we are watching a tree in the veryprocess of flowering (first character: a bare tree; second: somethingbuds at the tips of the branches; third: a new shoot appears, repre-sented by the “radical” for plant; fourth: branching out of the newshoot; fifth: a full-fledged flower). Yet being what is shown (visualaspect) and what is denoted (normal meaning), a reader who knowsChinese could not fail to discover, through the ideograms, a subtlyconcealed idea, that of a man who, in spirit, enters the tree and takespart in its metamorphosis.
19
(Here we feel tempted to recall that passage of Eisenstein’s essay where,
having referred to the two complementary aspects—“denotation” via“image”; “figurative representation” via “expressive deformation”—whichcoexist within the “hieroglyphic principle,” the author compares them tothe unfolding of the arches of a hyperbola, which, mathematically speak-ing, should meet only in infinity. This might be imagined to happenthrough successive instances of dialectical mediation, one of which couldbe exemplified by Japanese puppet theater and another by Joycean word-montage.)
*François Cheng proceeds:
304 NOVAS* “Thus we have seen how the principle of the hieroglyph—‘denotation by depiction’—split in two:
along the line of its purpose (the principle of ‘denotation’), into the principles of creating literaryimagery; along the line of its method of realizing this purpose (the principle of ‘depiction’). . . . And,just as the two outspread wings of a hyperbola meet, as we say, at infinity . . . so the principle of hiero-glyphics, infinite splitting into two parts . . . unexpectedly unites again from this dual estrangement,in yet a fourth sphere—in the theater.” Eisenstein, “Cinematographic Principle,” 35.— editors
The third character in fact contains the element “man,” which in its
turn encompasses the element “homo” (the tree in the first two charac-ters is henceforth inhabited by a human presence):
A Laboratory of T exts 305“lotus”
(part of the
compoundideogram hibiscus)“man”(adult)“homo”(simplifiedform,representationby synecdoche: 2legs)
The fourth character contains the element “face” (the new shoot branches
out in the form of a “face”), which in turn encompasses the element“mouth” (something which speaks). Finally, the fifth character includesthe sign for “transformation” (sharing in universal transformation):
“hibiscus mutabilis” “face” “mouth” “transformation”
(“persona,”
“facies”)
Thus, with an astonishing economy of means, and without resorting to
external commentary, the poet brings a secret experience alive anewunder our very eyes, in all its successive stages.
20
This detailed demonstration gives us palpable evidence of the nature of
the “continuous moving picture” effect (similar to a “cartoon,” we might say
today) captured by Fenollosa in his reading of poetry in Chinese characters.
In a footnote, François Cheng makes the reservation that his analysis “is notbased exclusively on etymological data”;
21for example, etymologically speak-
ing, there is no “necessary link” between the ideogram he translates as “homo”and that for “tree.” He stresses the fact that his purpose is to “show thegraphic relations which exist between the characters.”
22Would it not be true
to say that Pound’s “eye for errata” (even when he committed those “primary”
errors in ideographic deciphering, later counterbalanced by his “empathetic”perception of the whole) was hunting precisely for those “more-than-

etymological” affinities, “gestalt” links by irradiation and reciprocal conta-
gion of the forms (graphemes) in themselves? Moreover, would this not be amore extreme consequence of the “hyper-etymological” method put forwardby Fenollosa, at least as a possibility of a “plural” reading? If this assumptionis developed on the acoustic plane, the following quasi haikai could representa phonic paraphrase (“paraphone”) of the “Zen” line by Wang Wei:
hibisco: (hibiscus
na trama in the web
dos ramos of branches
brilhos gleams
de chama of flame )
(The sparkling floral flame of chAMA is already resplendent in trAMA and
rAMos, while the BrIlhOS —gleams—are like an echo of hIBIScOS, in an
overall process of luminous metamorphosis within the text.)
In what follows, I would like to use this criterion of “visual-harmonic”
reading to examine the fifth line of the famous poem by Li-Tai-Po, “sayingfarewell to a friend.” Pound translated it thus:
Mind like a floating wide cloud.
Based on Pound, Mário Faustino rendered it as follows in Brazilian Por-tuguese:
A mente é ampla nuvem flutuante.
My own “hyper-Poundian” translation, returning to the original, is:
nuvens voláteis: o ânimo de quem viaja
volatile clouds: the mood of one who travels
The line by Li-Tai-Po (here laid out in the Western fashion, for ease of hor-
izontal reading) unfolds like this:
“floating” “cloud” “travel” “(-er)” “mood”
fu2 yün2 yu2 tzu3 i4
306 NOVAS

I wish to focus on the course of this character:
(“boy,” “child,” “pup”),
which in isolation represents “radical” no. 39,through the poem. It appears
at once, in the first ideogram, to the right of the “radical” for “water”; it
consists of the representation of the “feet” of a bird, metonymically set overa “child,” as if in the act of protecting it (by “suggestive” extension, thisconnotes “sympathy,” “trust”):
(old form)         (present form);
the whole thus obtained, including the pictographic “radical” for “water”(no. 85):
(old form)       (present)       (abbreviated),
is usually translated as “floating.” However, it could be interpretedmetaphorically through the following “miniature fable”: “floating with thetranquillity and security a child protected by its mother reposes with.” Thesame sign for “child” reappears later, in the third ideogram, whose radical,to the left of the complex character, is a pictographic abbreviation for“foot” or “boot,” giving the idea of “walking” (“radical” 162):
On top of the “boot,” there are graphic elements which can be interpretedas “hanging branches, lianas, in undulating movement,” beside or fallingonto “a swimming man.” (The man is represented by the pictogram for“child” because when he swims his legs are underwater, like a newbornbaby wrapped in a shawl; it should be noted that in a noncontracted form,this complex ideogram would also contain the element “water”):
A Laboratory of T exts 307

“hanging
branches”(old form)idem (middle form)idem + “child” “ undulating
movements of a swim-ming man”(present form, abbreviated, of precedingcomplex)idem (present form,uncontracted)
Thus, the idea of “traveling,” through the implicit sign for “water” (in
“undulating, swimming movements”), involves that for “floating,” so thatthe third ideogram of Li-Tai-Po’s line makes a “chord” with the first.Finally, in the fourth character, which can be counted as a simple “suffix”(like the “-er” in “traveler”) but which is also translated as “man” or “noble-man,” the pictogram we are tracing as an “overtone” can be seen in fullfocus. In its three appearances, the character for “boy” shifts its position, itsgraphic framing and its semantic scope, culminating in a magnified close-up inside the imaginary frame (the “four-sided cage of the shot,” as Eisen-stein puts it).
These are the “visual rhymes”—the “overtones” vibrating before our
eyes—that Fenollosa the philosopher-poet, who lacks the Sinologues’ pro-fessional cataract, manages simply to teach us to see.
23
The Italian scholar Girolamo Mancuso, in the chapter entitled “Lingua
cinese como metodo di poesia” of his book Pound e la Cina [Pound and
China]( 1974)*has also given us a sound contribution to a fresh considera-
tion of the problem at the theoretical level. Mancuso writes:
Since in China there is no clear differentiation between painting, callig-raphy, and poetry, a poet is often both calligrapher and painter. At theroot of the impersonality and atemporality of Chinese poetry, there isthus the influence of the writing system, but in a very different sensefrom that understood by Fenollosa and Pound. What matters is not itsideo-graphic, but its graphic nature; this becomes completely manifest
308 NOVAS* Milan: Feltrinelli, 1974.— editors
in the “cursive” forms, which are as distant as possible from icono-
graphic reproduction, and where the purely graphic quality of the signis enhanced. Once again, Fenollosa was after the right thing, althoughin the wrong direction. His interest in and sensibility toward the figura-tive arts made him attentive to the pictorial qualities of Chinese poetry,which in contrast had escaped the notice of so many Sinologues. Thesame happened with Pound, who had always been aware of the visualqualities of poetry. Yet both were led astray by prejudice with regard tothe ideographic nature of Chinese characters.
Here it is worth considering, once again, that the problem is not so much
graphic as iconic, not in the usual sense of iconology as an imitative represen-
tation, but rather that of semiotic iconicity, which includes degrees of con-
ventionality (codes of “stylization”) and does not permit realization in a
“pure” state, as Peirce stresses, but through “attenuated” (“degraded”) medi-ations, or “hypo-icons.” Thus, despite the force of its initial impact (with itseminently “cathartic” function of unblocking perception), the importantaspect of Fenollosa’s essay is not the “pictographic” argument (the ideogramas a painting of ideas via things), but rather the “relational” argument (theideogram as a relational process, as a structural metaphor). For this to be-come clear, it is enough to recall Fenollosa’s remarks on painting:
I do not like the word decoration. It seems to imply too much artificial-
ity, a superficial prettiness. The word we ought to use is structural. Thelines, the spaces, the proportions lie in the structure of the thing itself. . . . Representation is not art, it is literature. That a picture represents aman does not interest us. . . . It is a question of spacing, of how the pat-tern is worked out, that interests us. . . . Not the representational ele-ment but the structural element . . . not the realistic motive but thedesire to find a finer space relation and fine relations.
*
This manner of conceiving of painting (“intelligent seeing”) undeniablyunderlies Fenollosa’s manner of interpreting the ideogram (“intelligentreading”). In one of his Boston lectures (referred to by L. W. Chisolm),Fenollosa shocked his audience by a statement that, as an “extensionaldevice,” could be compared to Moholy-Nagy’s anecdote as retold byHayakawa. “The Japanese,” Fenollosa maintained, before his suspicious
A Laboratory of T exts 309*Quoted by Van Wyck Brooks in “Fenollosa and His Circle,” Fenollosa and His Circle and Other Essays
(New York: Dutton, 1962), 49.— editors
audience, “would just as lief at first see a picture upside down; that is, they
admire beauty of line and color in art, rather than . . . merely depictingnature. . . .”
*(We should perhaps point out that Fenollosa delivered this
lecture in 1892. . . .) For him, imagination is distinguished by its “power of
construction”; it acts upon reality not in an “imitative” but a “creative”(selective) manner. The “image” is the result of this “quick power of theimagination which seems in a moment to explore a million possible com-binations and to seize upon the right one” (“Imagination in Art,” an essaywritten in 1894). To rephrase the point in Jakobson’s terms, it is the
metonymic aspect which breaks through the metaphoric movement.
24
This aspect occurs in the “psychological disproportion” and “expressive
deformation” of Chinese script (cf. Eisenstein). Yet far from removing itsiconic nature, this aspect retains it and tints it with indicial and/or symbol-like features (subordinating the characters to “notation codes” of a graphemicorder and giving them, as we have seen, the semiotic nature of “hypo-icons”).
In his lectures on art and education, Fenollosa endeavored to show that
the historical development of artistic capabilities had led the perfecting of askill in “creating spatial relations” to predominate over that of making imi-tative copies of nature. Thus, when Pound refers to the ability of his friend,painter and sculptor Gaudier-Brzeska, to sight-read certain ideograms with-out any knowledge of Chinese, because he was “accustomed to looking atthe real shape of things” ( ABC of Reading )
†and “used to consider all life and
nature in terms of planes and of bounding lines,”‡we should not be sur-
prised (without exaggerating the primarily apologetic aim of the anecdote):Gaudier’s Cubist-Vorticist eye was above all a metonymic eye. . . .
Fenollosa was eminently concerned with relations (“relations are more
real and more important than the things which they relate”[ 22]; “in this
process of compounding, two things added together do not produce a thirdbut suggest some fundamental relation between them”[10]), and as such hewas able to glimpse in Chinese poetry the workings of a relational intracode,
similar to harmony in music: the “chromosphere” of the “overtones” flood-ing over the visual strip of a poem in characters. This intracode translates a
“saturation” process on the semiotic level which Fenollosa was able to for-mulate in a pioneering manner, using his vividly “organicist” vocabulary.
310 NOVAS* Lawrence W. Chisolm, Fenollosa: The Far East and American Culture (New Haven, CT: Yale Univer-
sity Press, 1963 ), 94.— editors
† Ezra Pound, ABC of Reading (New York: New Directions, 1960), 21.— editors
‡ Ezra Pound, footnote in Fenollosa, Chinese Character, 31.— editors
First he describes the “new calculus,” which the sensibility of the artist
must carry out to make use of the manifold possibilities for colors and linesat his disposal. This would entail the ability “to feel their several tensionsvibrating in a microscopic balance; to rush along the criss-cross paths oftheir subtle affinities and actually see them displaying the secret process oftheir crystallization. . . .”
25And he concludes:
In short, the trained soul of the artist, while not itself the principle ofcrystallization, is just the peculiar solvent or medium in which the crys-tallization occurs. The real crystallization is in the units of the art itself;. . . “Art is a saturated solution of all the involved elements in terms ofeach other.” (“The Logic of Art,” 1906)
26
When Décio Pignatari writes, following Peirce’s line, “The quasi sign is
not a thing, but a relation, a process. It is contained in all basic, founda-tional semiotic operations—in all operations of code saturation, all trans-lations, all inter- and pansemiotic operations,”
27he is unwittingly
returning, through an involuntary (and all the more illuminating) conver-gence, to a proposal already outlined by Fenollosa.
Translated by Kevin Mundy and Marc Benson, edited by Odile Cisneros
A Laboratory of T exts 311
Translation as Creation and Criticism
In 1958, the essayist Albrecht Fabri, professor at the Hochschule für
Gestaltung in Ulm, Germany, wrote an article on the problem of artistic
language for the journal Augenblick.1In this article, which he entitled
“Preliminary Notes to a Theory of Literature,” Fabri develops the thesisthat “the essence of art is revealed by the fact that art is tautological,” thatworks of art “do not mean but are.” In art, he says, “it is impossible to dis-
tinguish between what is representation and what is represented.” Then,turning to literature, he adds that what is unique to the language of a lit-erary work is the “absolute phrase,” the phrase “which has no contentother than its own structure” and “which only exists as its own instru-ment.” For this very reason, maintains Fabri, such an “absolute” or “per-fect phrase” cannot be translated, because “translation begins with thepossibility of separating word and meaning.” That is to say, translation isbased on the “discrepancy between what is said and what is said.” ForFabri, then, translation indicates the less perfect or less absolute (or, itcould be said, the less aesthetic) character of the phrase. It is in this sensethat Fabri affirms that “all translation is criticism,” because translation “isborn from the deficiency of the phrase,” from its insufficiency to be some-thing by itself. “One does not translate what is language in a text, butwhat is not-language.” And, “both the possibility and the necessity of
312This essay was originally written for the Third Brazilian Congress on Criticism and Literary History, held
at the University of Paraíba in 1962. It was published soon after in the journal T empo brasileiro (Rio de
Janeiro) 4–5(June–September 1963). It has since been republished a number of times, most recently in
Metalinguagem, 4th ed. (São Paulo: Editoria Perpectiva, 1992), 31–63 .—translator/editors
translation depend on the fact that sign and signified ( signatum ) may be
separated and alienated from each other.”
In the same issue of Augenblick, writing on the same problem but trans-
planting it into the terms of his New Aesthetic, an aesthetic founded on a
semiotic and theoretical-informative base, the philosopher and critic MaxBense establishes a distinction between “documentary information,”“semantic-information,” and “aesthetic information.”
2It should be remem-
bered that for Bense, information is any process of signs that exhibits a
degree of order. “Documentary information” reproduces somethingobservable and forms an empirical phrase, a phrase that may be scientifi-cally proven or verified. We may illustrate Bense’s theory with this example:
The spider spins her web.
“Semantic information” goes beyond what is purely documentary andtranscends the limits of what is observed, and thus, it is information aboutan element that is not in itself observable, a new element such as the con-cept of true and false: “The spider spins her web” is a true proposition, anexample of “semantic information.” And finally, “aesthetic information”transcends “semantic information” inasmuch as it corresponds to the“unpredictability, the surprise, and the improbability of the order of signs.”So, when João Cabral de Melo Neto writes,
A aranha passa a vidatecendo cortinadoscom o fio que fiade seu cuspe privado
(The spider spends her life
weaving webswith the thread she spinsfrom her private drivel)
—from “Serial”[“Serial”], “Formas 
do Nu”[“Forms of Nakedness”], in T erceira Feira [Third Fair]
we have an example of “aesthetic information.” These distinctions are fun-damental and allow Bense to develop the concept of the “fragility” of aes-thetic information as their corollary, a concept that refers to all that is
A Laboratory of T exts 313
inherently fascinating in a work of art. While both documentary and
semantic information may have different codification and may be trans-mitted in many different ways (“The spider makes her web,” “The web iswoven by the spider,” “The web is a secretion of the spider,” etc.), aestheticinformation cannot be codified except in the form in which it was transmit-
ted by the artist. (Here Bense refers to the impossibility of an “aesthetic cod-
ification”; it would perhaps be more exact to say that aesthetic informationis identical to its original codification.) The fragility of aesthetic informa-
tion is, therefore, colossal. (In fact, any modification in the sequence of ver-bal signs in João Cabral’s poem, no matter how small, no matter howminimal, would profoundly disturb this text’s aesthetic realization.) Insemantic and documentary information, Bense adds, “redundancy” (thepredictable and replaceable elements that may be reconstituted in anotherform) is high, while, in contrast, in aesthetic information, such redundancyis minimal; “in a successful work of art, the difference between maximumpossible aesthetic information and the aesthetic information found indeveloped form in the work is always minimal.” Aesthetic information isinseparable from its realization; “its essence, its function, are tied to itsinstrument, to its singular realization.” Bense comes to the conclusion that“the totality of information in aesthetic information is, in all cases, equal tothe totality of its realization” and that this very fact accounts “at least inprinciple, for its untranslatability. ” “In another language, the aesthetic
information will be different, even though it may be semantically equal tothe language of the original text. It follows, then, that aesthetic informationcannot be semantically interpreted.” Here Bense makes us think of Sartre’sdistinction between poetry ( mot-chose ) and prose ( mot-signe ), between the
use of the word in poetry and prose. In Situations II, Sartre says, with
regard to Rimbaud’s verses “O saisons! O châteaux! / Quelle âme est sansdéfaut?”:
Nobody is questioned; nobody is questioning; the poet is absent. Andthe question involves no answer, or rather it is its own answer. Is it there-fore a false question? But it would be absurd to believe that Rimbaud“meant” that everybody has his faults. As Breton said of Saint-Pol Roux,“if he had meant it, he would have said it.” Nor did he mean to say
something else. He asked an absolute question. He conferred upon thebeautiful word “soul” an interrogative existence. The interrogation hasbecome a thing as the anguish of Tintoretto became a yellow sky. It is nolonger a signification, but a substance.
3
314 NOVAS
It is true that the problem of the untranslatability of Fabri’s “absolute
phrase” or Bense’s “aesthetic information” becomes particularly acute in the
case of poetry. Nevertheless, it may be shown that the Sartrean dichotomy isartificial and inconsistent (at least as an absolute criterion) once we take intoaccount prose works that give great importance to the treatment of the wordas an object and thus come to possess certain qualities of poetry. We think,for example, of Joyce’s Ulysses and Finnegans Wake or, to mention a few
Brazilian works, of Oswald de Andrade’s Memórias sentimentais de João Mira-
mar [Sentimental Memoirs of John Seaborne ] and Serafim Ponte Grande
[Seraphim Grosse Pointe ], of Mário de Andrade’s Macunaíma and of João
Guimarães Rosa’s Grande sertão: Veredas [The Devil to Pay in the Backlands ].
Such works, like poetry (and to a greater extent than some poetry), postulatethe impossibility of translation; in these and other cases, it seems to us moreexact to replace the concepts of prose and poetry by that of “text.”
Once we admit, in principle, the thesis of the impossibility of translat-
ing “creative” texts, it seems that we may also admit, in principle, the corol-lary of this thesis, the possibility of re-creating the texts. The texts mayexist, then, as Bense wishes, in two languages and as two bodies ofautonomous aesthetic information, which, we should like to add, will belinked to each other through an isomorphic relation: they will be differentin language, but like isomorphic bodies, they will crystallize within thesame system.
This very idea was discussed by the Hungarian-Brazilian writer Paulo
Rónai, who, in his book Escola de tradutores [School of Translators ],
4remarked
that the demonstration of the theoretical impossibility of literary translationimplies the affirmation that translation is art. As Rónai says, “Isn’t the objec-tive of all art something impossible? The poet expresses (or tries to express)what is inexpressible, the painter reproduces what is unreproducible, thesculptor molds what cannot be molded. It should not be surprising, then,that the translator seeks to translate what is untranslatable.”
We may say, then, that every translation of a creative text will always be
a “re-creation,” a parallel and autonomous, although reciprocal, transla-tion—“transcreation.” The more intricate the text is, the more seducing itis to “re-create” it. Of course in a translation of this type, not only the sig-nified but also the sign itself is translated, that is, the sign’s tangible self, itsvery materiality (sonorous properties, graphical-visual properties, all of thatwhich forms, for Charles Morris, the iconicity of the aesthetic sign, when an
iconic sign is understood as that which is “in some degree similar to itsdenotation”).
5The signified, the semantic parameter, becomes just a kind of
A Laboratory of T exts 315
boundary marker for the “re-creative” enterprise. We are, then, at the oppo-
site end of the “spectrum” from the so-called literal (or servile) translation.
In our time, the prime example of the translator/re-creator is, of course,
Ezra Pound. Pound’s poetic career was always marked by his adventures asa translator, by means of which he was able to criticize his own linguisticinstrument and subject it to the most varied diction and to accumulatematerial for his poems in progress. In this way, Pound developed a wholetheory of translation and an entire vindication of the aesthetic category oftranslation as re-creation. It is thus that in “Notes on Elizabethan Classi-cists” he writes: “A great age of literature is perhaps always a great age oftranslations; or follows it.”
6And in “How to Read”: “Curiously enough,
the histories of Spanish and Italian literature always take count of transla-tors. Histories of English literature always slide over translation—I supposeit is an inferiority complex—yet some of the best books in English aretranslations.”
7He adds that after the “Seafarer” and a few other fragments
of primitive Anglo-Saxon literature, “English literature lives on translation,it is fed by translation; every new exuberance, every new heave is stimu-lated by translation, every allegedly great age is an age of translations,beginning with Geoffrey Chaucer, Le Grand T ranslateur, translator of theRomaunt of the Rose, paraphraser of Virgil and Ovid, condenser of old Sto-
ries he had found in Latin, French, and Italian.”
8In still another essay,
“Date Line,” Pound enumerates the functions of criticism and upholdstranslation as a mode of criticism. “Criticism by translation.” This ideabecomes perfectly comprehensible once we recall that, for Pound, the twofunctions of criticism are: ( 1) The attempt to theoretically anticipate cre-
ation, and:
2. Excernment. The general ordering and weeding out of what has actu-ally been performed. The elimination of repetitions. . . . The ordering ofknowledge so that the next man (or generation) can most readily findthe live part of it, and waste the least possible time among obsoleteissues.
9
Thus, Pound, animated by these proposals, embarks on the task of
translating Chinese poems and Japanese Noh plays; Provençal troubadours;Guido Cavalcanti; French symbolists; and making use of his experiencesin the handling of Laforguean logopoeia (“the dance of the intellect among
words”), he rewrites Propertius in “vers de société” and translates the Tra-
chiniae of Sophocles into a colloquial American speech driven by the beats
of slang. His work is both criticism and pedagogy, since while it diversifies
316 NOVAS
the possibilities of his poetic of idiom, it also offers up to new poets and
readers of poetry a whole repertory (often unsuspected or obscured by theconventions of academic taste) of basic poetic products, now reconsideredand revivified. “Make it new”: give new life to the valid literary past viatranslation. To understand this better, it suffices to recall T. S. Eliot’s obser-vations about the translations that Professor Murray, the eminent Hel-lenist, did of Euripides:
We need a digestion which can assimilate both Homer and Flaubert. Weneed a careful study of Renaissance Humanists and T ranslators, such asMr. Pound has begun. We need an eye which can see the past in its placewith its definite differences from the present, and yet so lively that uti-lizing it shall be as present to us as the present. This is the creative eye;and it is because Prof. Murray has no creative instinct that he leavesEuripides quite dead.
10
Of course it is true that many times (in tribute to the expression traduttori-
traditori ) Pound “betrays” the words of the original text, but even when he
does so, not by choice but through a flagrant error,11he almost always suc-
ceeds—a kind of miraculous intuition or perhaps through a greater soli-darity with the final “gestalt” of the work to which he adapted his technicalskills—in being faithful to the “spirit,” to the particular “climate” of thetranslated text; and the new effects and variations which he adds to it arelike a continuous accumulation of heuristic strata and are, in fact, autho-rized by the inventive virtuality of the original. Hugh Kenner stresses in hisintroduction to The Translations of Ezra Pound:
Since he doesn’t translate the words, he may deviate from the words, if the words blur or slide, or if his own language fails him. . . . If he doesn’t translate the words, the translator remains faithful to the origi-nal poet’s sequence of images, to his rhythms or to the effect producedby his rhythms, and to his tone. Insofar as he is faithful, he does homageto his predecessor’s knowledge of his job.
And he concludes:
The labor that precedes translation is therefore first critical in thePoundian sense of critical, an intense penetration of the author’s sense;then technical in the Poundian sense of technical, an exact projectionof one’s psychic contents, and so of the things on which one’s mind hasfed.
12
A Laboratory of T exts 317
Kenner’s opinion is that Pound’s best translations stand midway
between pedagogy and personal expression, participating in both.
When Kenner speaks of Pound’s enterprise of translating the tone, or
“tonus,” of the original, he employs the same words that Pasternak, another
great translator and theorist of translation, used:
Among us, Rilke is virtually unknown. The few attempts that have beenmade to translate him have not been very fortunate. It is not the transla-tors who should be blamed. It is a habit to translate the meaning, not thetone, of what is said, and with Rilke, everything is a question of tone.
13
In fact, it was from this perspective, which goes beyond the specific case
of Rilke and can be extended to creative texts in general, that Pasternaksought to translate Shakespeare, with an unmistakably personal tone, allow-ing himself the luxury of great liberty in its re-elaboration.
14 A similar cre-
ative freedom may be found in the case of Ungaretti, another greatpoet-translator, who translated not the plays but the sonnets of Shakespeare.
In Brazil, it does not seem possible to speak of the problems of creative
translation without mentioning the one person who was the first to pro-pose and put into practice what could be called a true theory of transla-tion. We call the attention of the reader to the preromantic Brazilian fromthe northeastern state of Maranhão, Manuel Odorico Mendes. Much inkhas been spilled in an effort to disparage Mendes the translator, to criticizehis irritating preciosity and the “bad taste” of his compound words. Indeed,it is very easy to take a negative approach to his translations, and from Sil-vio Romero (who considered them to be “monstrosities” written in a “mac-aronic” Portuguese)
15on, that is what almost everyone has done. Still, it
should be recognized that Odorico Mendes, an admirable humanist, wasable to develop a coherent and consistent system of translation in which hisvices (undoubtedly numerous, but to some extent the result of his period)are counterbalanced by his virtues. From the very beginning, his project oftranslation included the idea of synthesis (for example, according to thecomparative chart that accompanies the edition of his translation of theOdyssey,
16he reduced Homer’s 12,106 verses to 9,302 verses), be it to prove
that Portuguese is capable of as much concision as Greek and Latin, ormore, or to accommodate the Homeric hexameters in blank heroic hen-decasyllables, or to avoid the repetitions and the monotony that arise whenan inflected language, in which one may manipulate the different case end-ings and give new sonorous values to the same words, is transplanted intoa noninflected language. In this respect, Odorico Mendes declared: “If
318 NOVAS
Homer’s repetitions were translated slavishly, the result wouldn’t be as
pleasing as his: the worst kind of infidelity.”
Inspired by the examples of Monti and Pindemonte, the Italian 
translators of Homer, he attempted to translate the “fixed metaphors,” the characteristic Homeric epithets, by creating compound words in Portuguese—at times taking this paradigm to an extreme, because hefound Portuguese to be “ever more receptive than Italian to compoundwords, and even more daring.” He strove to be realistic and reproduceexactly the crudities of certain passages in the Homeric cantos. (His sharpcriticism of the euphemisms used by the French translator Giguet for therendering of the scene in which Ulysses appears before Nausicaa is note-worthy.) He insisted upon the “right term,” be it for the reproduction of ahue of the sea’s water or for the denomination of a piece of armor. Hisnotes to the translated cantos give an idea of the care he took to capture theliveliness and animation of the Homeric text so that he might later, withinhis chosen aesthetic coordinates, transpose these qualities into Portuguese.(Note the comparison that he makes between Ulysses’ raft [ Odyssey, book
5] and the scows used by the jangadeiros [raft-fishermen] in the northeast-
ern state of Ceará, or even better, the passage where he alludes to the use,in Maranhão, of a large iron kettle, similar to the Greek tripod.) He dis-cusses, and many times refutes harshly, the solutions of the translators whopreceded him in other languages. He adopts the technique of interpola-tion, incorporating verses of other poets (Camões, Francisco Manoel deMelo, Antonio Ferreira, Filinto Elíseo) when he suspects that a certainHomeric passage can be translated through these references. Obviously, hispractice is not as good as his theory, and many of his solutions, his intricatesyntax and especially his compound words, are truly sesquipedalian,bizarre, and unacceptable. The excesses of his period also seemed to haveplayed a role. Thus, “velocípede Aquiles” (velocipedalian Achilles), for“swift-footed,” or simply “rapid Achilles” is today patently out of the ques-tion, since a “velocipede” has come to mean a kind of tricycle. Nonetheless,considering our present way of evaluating literary texts enriched by Joyceancoining of word montages or by Guimarães Rosa’s inexhaustible lexicalinventions, and freefrom prejudice against mannerism and the baroque,
other “cultist” neologisms, such as “Iris alidorada” (goldenwinged Iris),“criniazul Netuno” (bluemaned Neptune), or, for a river, “amplifluente”(amplyflowing) or, better yet, “bracicândida” (albescentarmed/white-armed) for Helen are stylistically successful in Portuguese within the con-text Odorico Mendes created and the rules of the peculiar game he
A Laboratory of T exts 319
proposed. In many cases, Mendes is able to reproduce the melopoeia that,
according to Pound, reaches a peak in the Homeric epic and would have
the tone of pure poetry for a modern ear educated in the theories of Bremond:
Purpúrea morte o imerge em noite escuraBrilha puníceo e fresco entre a poeira
Purple death immerses him in obscure night
He shines Punic and fresh amid the dust
In matters of sonority, which, through its impressive and uninterrupted
parade of Greek names and patronymics approaches a kind of “sonorism,”it is worth noting the great care taken by Odorico Mendes in transposinginto Portuguese the list of names of the captains of the Greek ships andtheir places of origin in verse 429and following of book 2of the Iliad,
17
resisting the idea of omitting this part in his text.18He also succeeded in the
onomatopoeic transcription of the sounds of the sea, a constant occurrencein the Homeric epic:
Muge horrísona vaga e o mar reboaCom sopro hórrido e ríspido encapelamo clamoroso pélago
the horrisonous waves roar and the sea resounds
with a horrible and harsh blow they swellthe clamorous sea
One “touchstone” that Ezra Pound chooses as an example of “untrans-
latable melopoeia” is the verse:
pará thina polyphóisboio thalasses-
“The impetus of the waves on the beach and their reflux,” says Pound,
19
gains (once hyperbaton is admitted) a lovely sonorous quality in OdoricoMendes’s version:
pelas do mar fluctissonantes praias
along the beaches of the polysonorous sea
320 NOVAS
Odorico Mendes also has, frequently, good moments of logopoeia. Note,
for example, in book 11of the Odyssey, this description of the specter of
Hercules about to shoot an arrow:
Cor da noite, ele ajusta a frecha ao nervo
Na ação do disparar, tétrico, olhando
The color of night, he girds the arrow to his nerve
In the act of shooting, gloomily, gazing
Clearly, it is a laborious task to read Odorico Mendes’s translations (a
task more difficult than that of reading the original texts, according to theironic opinion of João Ribeiro,
20who, nonetheless, did praise him whole-
heartedly). But in the general panorama of the creative history of Brazilianpoetry—a history still in the process of formation (and in many cases, onethat has to be developed by selecting verses, extracts of poems, “corner-stones,” rather than entire poems)—it would be an error to deny OdoricoMendes’s honorable and pioneering role. And, for those who decide tostudy his theory of translation, expounded fragmentarily in the commen-taries to his versions of Homer and Virgil, there awaits an intriguing adven-ture: that of accompanying pari passu, and within the context of his
language of special forms and conventions, the successes and failures of thepoet in the plan he sought to follow. The argument that, provided with a“preestablished system,” he coldly (“without emotion”) gave himself over tohis task, which Sílvio Romero uses to criticize him, is actually what makeshis efforts all the more interesting.
Chapman’s mannerisms, his “excesses of added ornaments,” his “paren-
theses and inversions,” which impede the reading at many points, did notprevent Ezra Pound from recognizing him as the best English translator ofHomer; the idea that Pope was out of fashion did not prevent Pound fromholding his inventive topoi in high esteem—even though he did temperhis praise (“full of beautiful passages”) with the remark that they “remainalmost wholly unsuccessful, or rather, there are glorious passages but nolong or whole satisfaction.”
21Paraphrasing Pound, writing in regard to
Chapman and Pope, the translations of Odorico Mendes are “of interest tospecialists.”
22This does not mean, however, that their importance should
be denied. For they do become very important, once one recognizesMendes’s influence on a writer like Sousândrade, the most revolutionarypoet of Brazilian romanticism, who called Odorico Mendes our “Rococo
A Laboratory of T exts 321
father.” In Novo Éden [New Eden], Sousândrade follows Mendes’s example
and seeks to achieve a Greek sonority:
Alta amarela estrela brilhantíssima
Cadentes sul-meteoros luminososDo mais divino pó de luz; véus ópalosAbrindo ao oriente a homérea rododáctilaAurora!
High, yellow, most brilliant star
Declining, luminous, south-meteorsOf most divine dust of light; opal-veilsOpening to the Orient the Homerean rhododactilianAurora!
23
When the Noigandres poets proposed the task of reformulating contem-
porary Brazilian poetics, they linked their theoretical and productive activ-ities to a systematic work in the field of translation. In so doing, they wereconscious of the didactic method that emanates from Pound’s theory andpractice of translation and from his ideas with respect to criticism’s func-tion—via translation—as “nutriment for the creative impulse.” WithPound’s ideas in mind, they began a team translation of seventeen of hiscantos,
24trying to bring to this modern master of the art of the translation
of poetry the same criteria of creative translation that he himselfexpounded in his writings. Shortly after, Augusto de Campos undertookthe translation into Portuguese of ten poems by E. E. Cummings, poemsin which even “optical data” had to be translated (through typographicalspacing, fragmentation, and interlinear relations), and which, at times,necessitated taking into account the number of letters and physical (plas-tic, acoustic) coincidences in the verbal material to be employed.
25After
other experiments with “difficult” texts (ranging from German avant-gardepoems to Japanese haiku; from Dante’s Rime petrose and the Provençal
troubadours to the English Metaphysic poets), Augusto de Campos and Itried to re-create in Portuguese some fragments of Finnegans Wake,
26many
of which had not previously been translated into other languages. Theseexperiments carried out with intelletto d’amore, with patience and devotion,
did, at the very least, permit the realization of an intensive work in poetictranslation, a fact that does allow us to have a definite point of view on theproblematics of this field.
322 NOVAS
T ranslation of poetry (or of prose with an equal degree of difficulty) is,
above all else, an experiment in introspection into the world and technique
of the text to be translated. It is as if one took apart and, at the same time,put back together again the machine of creation, that frail and apparentlyinaccessible beauty that offers us a finished product in a foreign languagebut which, nevertheless, is able to give itself over to an implacable vivisec-tion, to an operation in which it will be literally disemboweled and then re-formed, reconstituted, in a new and different linguistic body. It is for thisvery reason that translation is criticism. In Escola de tradutores, Paulo Rónai
quotes J. Salas Subirat, the Spanish translator of Joyce’s Ulysses: “T ranslat-
ing is the most attentive way of reading.” And Rónai adds, “It is preciselythis desire to read with attention, to better understand complex and pro-found works, that is responsible for many modern versions, including thisCastilian one of Joyce.”
The main stakes for a translator, when he is a poet or prose writer as
well, are in the outlining of a live tradition (from which it may be deducedthat the choice of the text to be translated is not an indifferent one butalways revealing and worthwhile) and the acquisition of a deep under-standing of the text and thus the aptitude for carrying out an operation ofliving criticism. One of the most important consequences that such stakes,when achieved, would bring about would be the enactment of a pedagogythat is neither dead nor obsolete but, rather, fertile, stimulating, and active.Much is said, for example, about the influence of Joyce on the work ofGuimarães Rosa. Nevertheless, no example of such influence would bemore clear or eloquent than a simple comparison of the text of Grande
sertão: Veredas with fragments of Finnegans Wake that have been re-created
in Portuguese. This is the “ideogrammatic” method recommended by EzraPound: the analysis of the materials and their comparison (criticism viatranslation).
Years ago, I began to study Russian, with hopes of translating Mayakovsky
and other Russian avant-garde poets. For the initial experiment, the poemchosen was “To Sergei Esenin,” a poem written by Mayakovsky on theoccasion of the suicide of his contemporary—and adversary in aestheticideals. This poem, “Sierguéiu Iesiéninu,” was the basis for a whole theoryof poetic composition which Mayakovsky developed in his admirable essay“How Are Verses Made?” [ 1926]. My translation of this poem, first pro-
posed as an exercise in re-creation—on its sonorous, conceptual, and for-
A Laboratory of T exts 323
mal level—of the formal elaboration of the original through the use of
equivalent Portuguese structures, was carried out bearing in mind the scopeand the demands of Mayakovsky’s essay. The result was the remaking, step-by-step, of the stages described by Mayakovsky in his theoretical work and,mutatis mutandis, the repetition, in every line of the poem, of the opera-
tions of trial and selection among all the different possibilities of choicethat came to my imagination. It was then the best reading that I could everhave made of the poem, linking the text to its theoretical matrix and repro-ducing its praxis, a truly critical reading. One example: There exists in theoriginal a case of alliteration that receives special emphasis in Mayakovsky’scommentaries:
Gdié onbronzi zvonili granita gran?
The lines refer to the monument which has not yet been erected to the
dead poet and could be literally rendered as “Where the resounding ofbronze or the edge of granite?” Fidelity to the effect desired by the poetgave rise to a version that does not depart from the general semantic fieldof the original but does “translate” more of the alliteration than of themeaning:
Ondeo som do bronzeou o grave granito?
Where
the sound of bronzeor the grave granite?
The noun “edge” is replaced by the adjective “grave,” and thus the
sound scheme of the original is maintained.
From experiments such as this comes the conviction that it is impossi-
ble to teach literature, particularly poetry (and the prose that is compara-ble to poetry in its formal quests), without first giving a demonstration ofthe problems of criticism via translation. Since our literary patrimony isuniversal, we cannot think of a cloistered teaching of literature. Thus, notheoretical work on the problems of poetry, no aesthetics of poetry, will be
324 NOVAS
valid as an active pedagogy if the materials to which they refer, the creative
patterns (texts), are not placed in evidence. If translation is a privilegedform of critical reading, it will be by means of translation that one can leadother poets, readers, and students of literature to an understanding of themost profound workings of the artistic text, its most intimate mechanismsand gears. The aesthetics of poetry constitutes a kind of “metalanguage”whose real value can be measured only in relation to its language-object (the
poem, the text). It is not for nothing that so many poets, since Poe’s exem-plary essay, “The Philosophy of Composition,” have undertaken to tracethe genesis of their poems, to show that poetic creation can be the objectof rational analysis, of methodical approach (an approach that does notcompletely exclude but is complemented by sensitive intuition and phe-nomenological description).
The problem of creative translation can only be resolved in ideal cases,
when linguists and poets (who have at least some acquaintance with thelanguage of the original text to be translated) work together as a team. It isnecessary to replace the barriers between language professors and verbalartists by productive cooperation. It is, of course, necessary for the artist(poet or prose writer) to understand that it is a highly specialized task thatdemands both devotion and meticulous care, and, on the other hand, it isnecessary for the language professor to possess what Eliot called a “creativeeye”: he should not be restricted by academic prejudices, and he shouldfind in the re-creation of a verbal work of art that peculiar joy thatemanates from a noncontemplative beauty, an active beauty, a beauty inmotion. In “Ezra Pound and his Chinese Character: A Radical Examina-tion,” Porteus speaks of this dilemma when he compares the versions ofthe Chinese poems done by the Orientalist Arthur Waley (very competentin their fidelity to the text) and those of Ezra Pound (notable as creations):
Pound is first and last a poet. Waley is first and last a Sinologue. In Sino-logical circles, no doubt, Pound’s excursions into Chinese raise no morethan a wry smirk. . . . On the other hand, those responsive to the subtleniceties of Pound’s verse cannot be expected to take seriously the hit-or-miss poetic technique of Mr. Waley.
27
Such problems must be overcome through the project of a Laboratory
of Texts, where the two contributions, that of the linguist and that of theartist, will complement each other and be integrated into a work of trans-lation that is simultaneously competent as such, and valid as art, in a prod-uct that only ceases to be faithful to the textual meaning in order to be
A Laboratory of T exts 325
inventive and that is inventive to the same degree that it deliberately tran-
scends faithfulness to meaning in order to achieve a greater loyalty to theshaping spirit of the translated original, to the very aesthetic sign seen as atotal entity, indivisible in its material reality (in its physical base, its sig-
nans, something particularly important for the translator) and in its con-
ceptual weight, its signatum.
In this Laboratory of Texts, with the collaboration of linguists and guest
artists, it would be possible to have a series of experimental publications ofre-created texts and, at the seminar level, a series of pedagogical experi-ments in which students would collaborate in collective works of transla-tion that would include such matters as the exposition of the adoptedsolutions, the proposal and discussion of possible variants, and so on.
Translated by Diana Gibson and Haroldo de Campos, edited by A. S. Bessa
326 NOVAS
Hölderlin’s Red Word
La littérature, c’est la contestation de la philologie.
Literature, the refutation of philology.
—Michel Foucault
Around Easter 1804, Johann Heinrich Voss, who had gained renown with
his German translations of the Odyssey (1781) and the Iliad (1793), wrote to
a friend:
What do you say of Hölderlin’s Sophocles? Is the man really crazy or
does he only pretend to be. . . . The other night while I was having sup-per with Schiller and Goethe at Goethe’s house, I regaled both poetswith the question. Read for instance the fourth chorus from hisAntigone. You should have seen the way Schiller laughed; or Antigone,
line 21: “Was ists? Du scheinst ein rotes Wort zu färben.” [“What’s hap-
pening? You seem to color a red word.”] I offered this passage to Goetheas a contribution to his Optics.
1
In July of the same year, the philosopher Schelling wrote to Hegel about
these translations and their author, who was a mutual friend: “His transla-tion of Sophocles shows he is a complete degenerate.”
2
327This essay was originally intended as an introduction for Haroldo de Campos’s excellent translation
into Portuguese of act 1, scene 1of Hölderlin’s Antigone (1967). The English translation by Albert J.
Bork was published in 20th Century Studies 11(September 1974): 4–10, and is reproduced by kind per-
mission of the translator and Professor Stephen Bann, former editor of 20th Century Studies. —editors
One of the most laughable products of pedantry. Had Sophocles spoken
to his Athenians in so stiff, so drawling, and so un-Greek a fashion asthese translations are un-German, his audience would have left the the-ater at a run! In every respect, Mr. Hölderlin’s translations of Sophocles’two plays must be included among the worst. It’s up to the reader toguess whether Mr. Hölderlin has undergone metamorphosis, or whetherhe wished by a veiled satire to appeal to the public’s depraved taste.
3
In these terms—as a subject of scorn or as evidence of insanity—the
Swabian poet’s contemporaries denounced his translations of Sophocles.And if Hölderlin was to survive by around thirty years this lack of compre-hension by his peers, he was also pushed by it toward a long period of mad-ness; this he was to spend at Tübingen, in a small room with a view on theNeckar, referring to himself as “Mr. Librarian” or “Scardanelli,” composingfragmentary poems,
4fingering a piano whose strings he had cut, and bear-
ing in mind right up to the end, to the very year of his death, those slan-dered translations of the Greek tragedian. (“I have tried to translateOedipus, but the bookseller was a . . . !”
5wrote the poet in the winter of
1842–43 ; it was the carelessness of his publisher that accounted for the typo-
graphic mistakes which added to and perhaps aggravated the contemptwith which the work was received.) Three years before the First World War,Norbert von Hellingrath, a member of Stefan George’s circle, undertookhis own reedition of Hölderlin. Reevaluating the unjustly treated poet’sactivities as a translator, von Hellingrath categorically affirmed:
For the first time, the linguistic form of Greek poetry was clearly under-stood and transposed into living language in a new form suited to it,without suffering, in the transition, adulteration from that which wasforeign to it, such as is introduced by other translators when they haverecourse to traditional forms, whether of the national poetry or of Latinpoetry. The historic place of these translations corresponds to their sig-nificance for the present: To those whose knowledge of Greek is not suf-ficient for a total blossoming of the original, they are the only means ofaccess to the Greek words and images. The next best translations byGerman translators follow them at a great distance: Humboldt’sAgamemnon and Voss’s Homer.
6
In1923, in his famous essay “The Task of the T ranslator” (more than a
mere physics, a veritable metaphysics of translation), Walter Benjamin did
not hesitate to say of Hölderlin’s versions:
328 NOVAS
In them the harmony of the languages is so profound that sense is
touched by language only the way an aeolian harp is touched by thewind. Hölderlin’s translations are prototypes of their kind; they are toeven the most perfect renderings of their texts as a prototype is to amodel. . . . For this very reason Hölderlin’s translations in particular aresubject to the enormous danger inherent in all translations: the gates ofa language thus expanded and modified may slam shut and enclose thetranslator with silence. Hölderlin’s translations from Sophocles were hislast work; in them meaning plunges from abyss to abyss until it threat-ens to become lost in the bottomless depths of language.
7
In the winter of 1947–48, upon returning to Europe, Bertolt Brecht took
it upon himself to prepare a version of Sophocles’ Antigone. He used as a
source, deliberately, Hölderlin’s text, simplifying it and adapting it to theexigencies of the scenic oralization. And he recorded on the margin of hisattempt: “The language of Hölderlin’s Antigone deserves a closer study than
I can presently give it. It is admirably radical.”
8
The bibliographic fate of Hölderlin’s translations is, as can be seen,
exemplary. From the supercilious mockery or stigma of madness withwhich his contemporaries received them, to the awed recognition and rev-erence of modern criticism, their path illustrates a fundamental break: withthese translations, and unbeknownst to those who were eyewitnesses to thefact, an entire concept of literature was suddenly quashed, and poeticmodernity was founded. Schiller’s amused laughter, in the illustrious com-pany of Goethe and Voss, was in truth the ironic epitaph (in the sense thatit blithely failed to recognize itself as an epitaph) of a certain vision ofpoetry and artistic decorum. The same translations which the Germannineteenth century branded as “monstrous,” in the words of its most rec-ognized and representative authors, the twentieth century would revive asideal landmarks of their genre.
But what was so strange about these works? Wolfgang Schadewaldt, ally-
ing his competence as a Hellenist and philologist with the acuity of onewho brings sensitivity to bear on the aesthetic aspects of a problem, clari-fies this for us. Hölderlin’s knowledge of Greek was quite limited, evenwhen one considers the state of research in this field during his time. Forthat reason, he fell into frequent mistakes in reading and interpreting theoriginal text. Moreover, the poet relied on a little recommended edition ofSophocles’s text, and to cap it all, the printing of the translations, as has
A Laboratory of T exts 329
been mentioned, was tainted by typographical errors. (Hölderlin prepared
an erratum for Oedipus Rex, and in subsequent editions, various passages
had to be reconstructed by means of conjecture.) Notwithstanding all ofthat, and after having painstakingly enumerated the semantic and syntac-tic errors of Hölderlin’s translations with reference to the Greek text,Schadewaldt refers us to the words with which von Hellingrath describesthese translations in the following quotation:
...A strange mixture of familiarity with the Greek language and a keen
understanding of its beauty and character, combined with ignorance ofits simplest rules and a complete lack of grammatical precision . . .Scarcely could the dead language be more congenial and alive whileGreek grammar and all of its philological apparatus remained unfamil-iar to one and the same person.
9
And Schadewaldt adds, after stressing that the sum of Hölderlin’s errorssignifies neither the first nor the last word about his creations:
When as a translator he blazed his own trail through completely unex-plored territory, he took some false steps and stumbled. Nevertheless, hewas thus able to avoid the beaten paths of conventional translation andtreat with originality Sophocles’ original word. . . . Hölderlin as a trans-lator of Sophocles, metaphorically speaking, can be compared to thoseexcavators of the Greek soil, who, without formal training or method,set to work on their own, their hearts full of enthusiasm, and guided bygreat instinct: They went about it violently many times and destroyedmany things; however, they also managed to get to the depths and inthis way indicated the path of discovery to their successors.
10
Hölderlin’s mistakes, given his existential predisposition to his task, hisprivileged bond with the essence of tragedy, were creative errors:
The larger part of Hölderlin’s linguistic errors is made up of creativeerrors, errors which are due to peculiarities of the text, behind which,notwithstanding, there is a general truth, whatever it may be, be it thatthe translation error led to a new and peculiar verbal vision or thatHölderlin’s mistakes were from the outset guided toward a creative goal.
11
In addition to common understanding, which goes from the particular to
the general and surely and by degrees arrives at the essence, there exists
another, genial-anticipatory understanding, which, emerging from “a mini-
mum of facts, penetrates directly to the center and with an objective capac-
330 NOVAS
ity for premonition grasps the essential.”12This type of understanding,
Schadewaldt concludes, was Hölderlin’s.
At this point one is tempted to establish a comparison between Hölder-
lin and that other prime poet-translator, Ezra Pound. Hölderlin is an
“exegetical” translator, performing a kind of liturgical translation, transub-stantiating the language of the original into the language of the translationlike the hermeneutical officiant of a sacred rite who attempts to conjurethe primordial word (and this is why in his Hyperion, before Mallarmé, the
Swabian poet “reads” the stars like letters, through which “the name of thebook of heroes is written in the sky”). Pound, on the other hand, is a prag-matic, “laical” translator, performing his translation in the fashion of a les-son, as a critical-creative reinvention of a tradition. Both Hölderlin andPound resemble each other with respect to the results which, by their dif-ferent paths, they finally achieve.
13For both poets, translating the form is a
basic criterion. Pound (among whose translations from various languagesthe most serious scholars never tired of gleaning mistranslations) proposedto draw forth from Chinese ideograms, through a return to the picto-graphic elements composing them, the original vibrations, which had beensmothered by the routine of repetitions; thus compensating almost bysome kind of empathy, of revealing intuition, for his deficiencies as a Sinol-ogist and his resultant reading mistakes, he managed to confer on his re-creations a strength and beauty which the versions of the most notableOrientalists did not come close to possessing. (As Eliot has pointed out,“Pound is the inventor of Chinese poetry for our time.”)
*
H. G. Porteus (“Ezra Pound and his Chinese Character: A Radical
Examination”) explains for us this process of “elective affinity” whichoccurs between Pound’s mind and the Chinese text:
What is remarkable about Pound’s Chinese translations is that so oftenthey do contrive to capture the spirit of their originals, even when, asquite often happens, they funk or fumble the letter. . . .His pseudo-Sinology releases his latent clairvoyance, just as the pseudo-sciences ofthe ancients sometimes gave them a supernatural insight.
14
With reference to Hölderlin, a characteristic of his method of transla-
tion is his stressed literalness, a literalness as regards the form (not merely
the content) of the original. It is a matter of “superliteralism,” in Schade-waldt’s expression. (It is worth remembering that Brazil’s own Mário de
A Laboratory of T exts 331*This often-quoted line is from Eliot’s introduction to Ezra Pound: Selected Poems (London: Faber and
Gwyer, 1928). —editors
Andrade spoke of “supertranslation,” to conceptualize a form of transla-
tion in which the “order of dynamogeneity” of the words of the originalwas captured.) Thus, for example, that redword—that speech which is tur-
bid with red —which Hölderlin’s divinatory instinct wrested from the
Greek text to the glee of Goethe’s dining companions (Voss, let it beremembered, offered it to the master of Weimar as a contribution to hisFarbenlehre )appears, in the Les Belles Lettres edition of Antigone, simply as
“quelque propos te tourmente” [what troubles you]. The Bailly dictionaryexplains that the verb kalkháino, in Greek, means “to have the dark color
of purple,” and that in the figurative sense (a meaning which the lexicog-rapher notes expressly for the Sophoclean passage in question), it means“to be somber, to be immersed in thought, reflection, to meditate some-thing profoundly, deeply.” Schadenwaldt adds: “The Greek expressionwould sound in a literal imitation: ‘you purple a word.’ To purple . . . stems
here from the dark red color that the sea assumes when a tempest isapproaching.”
15Hölderlin scandalized his contemporaries (including the
poets . . . ) because he preferred, to the pallid convention of the translatedsense, the concrete force of the original metaphor (in the same way asPound made emerge from the lexicalized ideograms, distinguishing, for
example, the abbreviated paintings of sunand moon together where a lin-
guist would see only the noun “brightness,” or the adjective “bright,” orthe verb “to shine”).
16There is no doubt that the sense (its denotative con-
tent) of the original in that fashion refines itself and becomes hermetic; butthe poetic compulsion of language, by contrast, increases considerably.Recall, for example, the tactile concreteness of those “parole di coloreoscuro” [words of dark color] inscribed on the portico of Dante’s Inferno.
According to Walter Benjamin, next to Goethe’s “Notes” for the West-
östlicher Divan, the best material in German on the theory of translation is
this passage by Rudolf Pannwitz:
Our translations, even the best ones, stem from a wrong premise. Theywant to turn Hindi, Greek, English into German instead of turningGerman into Hindi, Greek, English. Our translators have a far greaterreverence for the usage of their own language than for the spirit of theforeign works. . . . The basic error of the translator is that he preservesthe state in which his own language happens to be, instead of allowinghis language to be powerfully affected by the foreign tongue.
17
Hölderlin (and Pound, with his versions of the Chinese, for example,where the exploration of the pictographic strata of the ideograms is stressed
332 NOVAS
together with the syntactic propensity of the English language for the iso-
lating kind of sentence) did not commit this fundamental error, whateverthe imperfections of “content” of his re-creations of Sophocles may be. Inthe translation of a poem, the essential is not the reconstitution of the mes-sage but the reconstitution of the system of signs in which this message isincorporated, of the aesthetic information, not of the mere semantic infor-
mation. For this reason, Walter Benjamin holds that a bad translation (ofa work of verbal art, be it understood) is characterized by being a meretransmission of the message of the original, or in his own words, “the inac-curate transmission of an inessential content.”
18
Goethe, in the “Notes” quoted by Benjamin, understood this problem
profoundly, from the theoretical viewpoint. So much so that he admits tothe existence of three types of translation and describes the highest and lasttype or stage as being that in which one would like to make the translationidentical to the original, so that the former would not merely approxi-mately replace the original but would in actuality assume its very place.Nor did the effect of “estrangement,” so to speak, which occurs in thisphase, escape him, when the translator broadens the frontiers of his ownlanguage and subverts its dogmas to the influx of the foreign syntax andmorphology; in that sense, he writes (Pannwitz, using other terms, touchedupon the same point, as can easily be seen): “This method encounters atthe outset the most vigorous opposition, for the translator who clingsclosely to the original is up to a certain point renouncing the originality ofhis own nation, whence comes a third term to which the taste of the pub-lic must begin to adapt itself.”
19Paradoxically, Goethe and Voss (who, for
the author of Faust, would be the ideal of that type of translator), did not
understand Hölderlin’s translations, which as a matter of fact took to themost extreme consequences this same methodological assumption.
This lack of comprehension, by its very proportions, is extremely signif-
icant and should warn us against the noncritical repetition of the clichés ofhistoriographical evaluation, against the automatic reiteration of judg-ments without appeal, with which certain authors were, once and for all,labeled and forgotten in the more or less immutable sepulchre of theanthologies and literary histories. Hölderlin’s red word may be considered
as a paradigmatic case for the type of historical poetics based on successivesynchronic approaches envisaged by Roman Jakobson.
Translated by Albert G. Bork, edited by A. S. Bessa
A Laboratory of T exts 333
Eucalypse: The Beautiful Occultation
In Octavio Paz’s last book of poems, Árbol adentro [A Tree Within]( 1987),*
there is a composition particularly notable for its structure and its intrigu-
ing thematic development, the former exerting a magnetic field over thelatter. This poem is “La guerra de la dríade o vuelve a ser eucalipto” [“TheDryad War or Return to Being Eucalyptus”].
First T empo (1–17)
The poem articulates itself through a play of metamorphic figures that
bring about its transformations. Anaphoric structures of repetition conductwhat I call the first tempo: the adventures of the enorme perro (huge dog),
three-headed like the mythological and Dantesque Cerberus ( 5–6),
unleashing, in a vortex, successive mutations:
1
1.el enorme perro . . . (the huge dog)
9.el gato . . . (the cat)
10.el perro . . . (the dog)
11.el gato . . . (the cat)
12.el perro . . . (the dog)
334This essay was presented on July 3,1990, in a summer course on the work of Octavio Paz at the Uni-
versidad Complutense de Madrid, at Escorial. It was first published in Portuguese in the Revista USP
8(December-February 1990–91): 70–80.— translator
* For a complete translation of this poem, see Octavio Paz, “The Dryad War,” A Tree Within, trans. Eliot
Weinberger (New York: New Directions, 1988), 118–25 . This essay does not follow that translation. Ref-
erences to the line numbers of the poem are given in parentheses in the text. — translator
13.el humo . . . (the smoke)
14.el cielo . . . (the sky)
15.la tempestad . . . (the storm)
16.el rayo (. . .) (the lightning)
17.las cenizas (. . .) (the ashes)
19.el cuarto (the room)
22.el trueno (thunder)
25.el agua (water)
As in the “fantastic” tales analyzed by Vladimir Propp in Morfológia
skázki [Morphology of the Folktale ](1928),2the developments of the action
in Paz’s poem are produced through the exploration of the conflicts
between archetypal antagonists: in the particular case mentioned earlier, el
enorme perro [the huge dog] on the one hand and el gato montés [the wild
cat] on the other (8). From their confrontation emanate two axes of muta-tion. As the gato(upsetting our natural expectation) manages to win over
the three-headed perro, he is in turn struck by a rayo[lightning bolt] that
fulminates and reduces him to cenizas [ashes] ( 16–17 ). This action occurs in
the middle of a numbered sequence that is fantastic although not chaotic(in the manner of enumeration systems considered by Spitzer). To this end,the logic of the “absurd” is rigorously used, such as in the logic of “semiol-ogy” that presides the engendering of folktales. Hence, an antecedent, seenin regard to its position as a cause, necessarily produces (and motivates) aconsequence:
11.gatowins over perro (“le sacó un ojo” [ripped an eye])
12.perro transforms into a humo (“ladrido de” [woof of])
13.humo ascends to cielo
14.cielotransforms into tempestad
15.tempestad produces rayos (“bajó armada de” [came down armed])
16.rayofulminates gato(reducing him to cenizas, 16)
Second T empo (17–25)
With the combustion of the gato montés [wild cat], the poem moves into
its second metamorphic tempo: the feline cinders are spread over the entireuniverse (17–18). After spreading its spatial limits in such an incalculablemanner, the poem, like a photographic camera adapting its lens for a close-up, opts to focus in on a precise site: a cuarto (room). The demarcation of
this strictly domestic setting leads us to imagine a protagonist (the “I” of
A Laboratory of T exts 335
the enunciation that is also the composition’s lyric “I”), subject and agent
of this series of transformations: a man (the poet?) who sleeps in the bed-room and dreams of these voracious mutations. The bedroom, thanks to atypical oneiric amplification—since dreams are characterized, in theirmetaphoric and metonymic workings, by a lack of limits
3—is converted
immediately into the vastness of the Sahara. The descriptive notations arethen distributed through two semantic networks. On one side are alignedthe elements that have to do with the domestic environment announced bythe word cuarto:
a) cuarto (19)—azotea (rooftops) ( 22)—cielo raso (ceiling) ( 25)
On the other side is aligned a series that I would define as “universal” (byopposition to the particularization of the spatial marking characteristic ofthe foregoing series). This series takes off from the fantastic geography ofline 18(“las cuatro esquinas del universo” [the four corners of the uni-
verse]), stretching the image of the Sahara evoked in line 19. From there it
evolves, by an effect of compulsive contiguity, into that of the simún
(sirocco) ( 20: “sopló el simún” [the sirocco blew]). Then comes the “thun-
der” (el trueno, 22) and the torrential “rain” (23–25 : “llovió sin parar” [it
rained without stopping]), crisscrossed by “lightning” (“cuarenta relámpa-gos” [forty lightning bolts], 24). Thus we have:
b) Sahara— simún —trueno —lluvia —relámpagos (Sahara—sirocco—
thunder—rain—lightning bolts)
The two series will eventually meet and blend into each other but not untilthe flooding rain has reached the cielo raso [ceiling]
*(25: “el agua llegó al
cielo raso” [the water reached the ceiling]). It is a conventional expression,a lexical metaphor meaning that which the Diccionario manual de la Real
Academia Española [Small Dictionary of the Royal Spanish Academy ] defines
as “trecho de superficie plana en lo interior de los edificios” (piece of flatceiling inside a building). And again we find ourselves in the particularspace of a “bedroom” by virtue of this sudden translation that takes us fromcielo(indicated by the word arriba in line 23: “se quebraron los cántaros de
arriba”
4[the pitchers of the sky cracked open]) to cielo raso . The metaphor-
ical stereotype is revitalized in a context charged with references to atmos-pheric or meteorologic phenomena that are made from line 20(“sopló el
simún”) until line 25.
336 NOVAS* The expression cielo raso (ceiling) literally means “flat sky.” — translator
Third T empo (26–38)
The second character in the poem’s plot is introduced in line 26: the
warrior woman. She is the personification, perhaps, of the loved one who
does not let herself be conquered. It is the theme of the “amorous fight”that Dante, for instance, developed so dramatically in the Rime petrose:
*
Così nel mio parlar voglio esser aspro,com’é ne li atti questa bella petra . . .Ed ella ancide, e non val ch’om si chiudané se dilunghi da ’colpi mortalliche, com’avesser ali,giungono altrui e spezzan ciascun’arme:s’I ch’io non so da lei né posso atarme.
I want to charge my speech with so much harshness
as this enchanting Stone . . .’tis she who slays, however one may manageto hide or run from all her mortal blowswhich, as endowed with pinionsreach everybody and all armors break;so there is no defense that I may take.
The woman-antagonist comes into the scene through a reference to thecama (nuptial thalamus?) that is transformed into a rocking boat, with bed-
sheets improvised as sails ( 26: “en el vértice de la cresta tu cama se bande-
aba” [your bed bobbed at the top of a wave]; 27: “con las sábanas armaste
un velamen” [with the sheets you rigged a set of sails]; 28: “de pie en la proa
de tu esquife inestable” [standing at the prow of your unstable skiff]). Atthis point begins the description of the “combat.” Standing at the prow,the Amazon captains her cama-esquife [bed-skiff], which is at once ship
and triumphal tram since it is carried “por cuatro caballos de espuma y unáguila” [by four sea-foam horses and an eagle] ( 29). Her hair is compared
to a “llama ondeante” [rippling flame] ( 30: “una llama ondeante tu cabel-
lera eléctrica” [your electric hair a rippling flame]). Sailing on ( 31–32), the
warrior woman “attacks” the male protagonist with her “artillery.” Not by
A Laboratory of T exts 337* For the two excerpts from Dante’s “I want to charge my speech with so much harshness,” I have used
Joseph T usani’s translations from The Age of Dante (New York: Baroque Press, 1974), 206, 208.
—translator
chance, line 32 is split in two segments, the second part projecting itself on
the page, in isolation ( 33):
y te hiciste a la mar
tu artilleríadisparaba desde estribor ( 32–34)
and you set out to sea,your cannonsfired from starboard
Here design plays the role of a “relational icon,” as in diagrams, and aimsto evoke, isomorphically, as a syntactic film still, the “cannons” aiming,shooting. . . . The composition resorts to its iterative aspect, no longerthrough the anaphora as introduced by the determinative article ( elor la,
1–25), but rather through a succession of verbs that function as signs of thebellicose action unchained by the “warrior”:
tu artillería (your cannons)      34.disparaba (fired)
35.desmantelaba (dismantled)
36.hacía (añicos ) (shredded)
tus espejos ustorios 38.incendiaban (cremated)
(your incendiary mirrors)
Notice that this series was preceded by still another dynamic sequence:
31.levaste (el ancla ), (raised [anchor])
31.capeaste (el temporal ), (lay [to the storm])
32.te hiciste (a la mar), (set out [to sea])
Another aspect to be underlined is that the battle happens on the rhetori-cal level of a metaphor, since the effects of the bellicose attempt are pro-duced on this level. Hence, premisas (premises) are dismantled ( 35);
consiguientes [consequences] (i.e., “segunda proposición del entimema o del
argumento que sólo tiene dos proposiciones” [second proposition of theenthymeme, or of the argument that has only two propositions] in the spe-cific sense given by Dialectics, Diccionario de la Real Academia ) torn to
pieces; convicciones (convictions) burned. The male character is assaulted
338 NOVAS
at the level of language, by the formation of syllogisms and of logical think-
ing. Stemming from this specific semantic area, terms such as premisas,
consiguientes, and convicciones produce an effect of contrast with the verbs
of which they are the objects. Verbs that rule concrete actions, as in the caseof English metaphysical poetry or that of the Mexican poet Sor Juana (“sil-ogismos de colores” [syllogism of colors])—residues of the baroque.
Fourth T empo (39–51)
The fourth tempo of the poem is focused around the “exit of the male
character” and in his decision to “react” against the implacable Amazon,exacting revenge. And again we find in Dante’s Rime petrose a similar sit-
uation:
S’io avessi le belle trecce prese,che fatte son per me scudiscio e ferza,pigliandole anzi terza,con esse passerei vespero e squille:e non sarei pietoso né cortese,anzi farei com ’orso quando scherza;e se Amor me ne sferza,io mi vindicherei di più de mille.
Oh, if I could but seize those lovely locks
which have become both whip and lash for me from very early matinsI’d make them ringing bells unto the night:and I would not be pitying or kind,but like a playful bear with her I’d play;and since Love whips me stillI would avenge myself a thousand-fold.
The I-narrator (the afflicted “lover”?) exits the scene. The serialization ofactive signs that sublimate the agent’s motion occurs once again:
39.me replegué (hacia la cocina ); [I retreated (to the kitchen)]
40.rompí (el cerco en el sótano ); [broke (a grate in the cellar)]
41.escapé (por una alcantarilla ). [escaped (through the gutter)]
A Laboratory of T exts 339
During his flight, it occurs to him to organize his resistance and plot
revenge against the cruel Amazon who antagonizes him:
(en el subsuelo ) [underground] 42.hallé (madrigueras ) [I found (burrows)]
(el insomnio ) [insomnia] 43.encendió (su bujía ) [lit (its candle)]
(su luz díscola ) [its flickering] 44.iluminó (mi noche ) [filled (my night)]
The deliberation to resist is underlined in line 45by a sequence of nouns
derived from the verbs “to inspire,” “to conspire,” and “to immolate”
(inspiraciones, conspiraciones, inmolaciones [inspirations, conspiracies,
immolations]). These verbs mark the evolution of the idea of revenge thatwill be concretized with the premeditated “immolation” of the warriorwoman. In that endeavor, the breathless pursuer searches for a weapon ( 48):
“(forjé) un puñal de misericordia” [I forged a dagger of mercy], which hasthe characteristic of the “magic objects” used by the heroes in Propp’s fan-tastic tales. Hence the dagger to immolate the beloved woman is forged:
46.con rabia verde [with green rage] (Chomsky’s “green ideas”?)
46.una llamita iracunda [a furious little flame]
47.el soplete de ¡me las pagarás! [the blast of “you will pay for this!”] 
Having now in his possession the magically prepared weapon, the pursuersets off to punish the Amazon, even undergoing “trials” or “difficult tasks”(whose execution constitutes another paradigmatic element in Propp’sanalysis).
49.me bañé (en la sangre del dragón ) [I bathed in the dragon’s blood]
50.salté(el foso ) [I leaped over the moat]
50.escalé (las murallas ) [I scaled the walls]
51.aceché (en el pasillo ) [I ducked down a corridor]
51.abrí(la puerta) [I opened the door]
Fifth T empo (52–63)
A new movement (the fifth tempo) is set forth in the poem by a string
of events—“encounter with the antagonist,” “escape,” and “persecution”:
52.te mirabas (en el espejo) [you were watching yourself in the 
mirror]
340 NOVAS
52.sonreías [you smiled]
53.desapareciste (en un destello ) [you disappeared in a flash]
This time around it is the warrior woman who runs away from her adver-
sary in an inversion of the functional schema in lines 39to 41. He chases
her or tries to:
54.corrí (tras esa claridad desvanecida ) [I run after this vanishing 
brilliance]
55.interrogué (a la luna del armario ) [I asked the mirror in the
closet]
56.estrujé (las sombras de la cortina ) [I punched shadows in the 
curtains]
Notice that in “la luna del armario” we have yet another lexical syntagma,of the metaphoric kind, which is revitalized in this context since luna, in
this case, means “mirror” (“tabla de cristal o de vidrio cristalino, de que seforma el espejo” [slab of crystal or crystalline glass, of which mirrors aremade], in the Diccionario de la Real Academia ). The chase concludes with
the realization of the Amazon’s “escape” ( ausencia) and with the lover-
hunter finally understanding his inescapable solitude. The images thatcarry these semes are the following:
57.(plantado en el centro de) la ausencia [planted in the center of 
absence]
58.(fui estatua en una )plaza vacía [I was a statue in an empty 
square]
59.(fui palabra )encerrada en un paréntesis [I was a word enclosed in 
a parenthesis]
60.(fui aguja de un )reloj parado [I was the hand of a stopped watch]
61.(me quedé con un )puñado de ecos [I was left with a fistful of 
echoes]
62.(baile de )sílabas fantasmas [dance of phantom syllables]
63.(en la cueva del cráneo ) [in the cave of the skull]
In this passage we find once again the “baroque-metaphysical” artifice ofmixing notations related to concrete objects and/or situations with termsfrom another semantic zone (related to language, to grammar terminology:palabra, paréntesis, sílabas [word, parenthesis, syllables]).
A Laboratory of T exts 341
Sixth T empo (64–82)
The sixth tempo corresponds to what I would like to call “revelation” 
or the Dryad’s APOCALYPSE. In fact, the “cruel” beloved reappears in 
line 64:
64.reapareciste (en un resplandor súbito ) [you reappeared in sudden 
splendor]
65.llevabas (en la mano derecha un sol diminuto ) [you carried in your 
right hand a small sun]
66.(en la izquierda un cometa de cauda granate ) [in the left a comet 
with garnet tail]
67.(los astros )giraban [stars whirled]
cantaban [and sang]
68.(al volar )dibujaban (figuras ) [drawing figures as they flew by]
69.se unían [they gathered]
se separaban [they departed]
unían [they gathered]
The anaphoric chain of verbs again propels the movement of phrase-verses.It is important to notice that to the “reapparition” in line 64corresponds
the “disappearance” in line 53(“al verme desapareciste en un destello” [see-
ing me you disappeared in a flash]). The luminous and cosmic images oflines 64–66 (“resplandor súbito” [sudden splendor], “sol diminuto” [small
sun], “cometa de cauda granate” [comet of garnet tail]) were also antici-pated by lines 53–55 (“destello” [in a flash], “claridad desvanecida” [vanished
clarity], “luna del armario” [mirror in the closet]). The change of attitudeof the “former warrior” toward the male character is already glimpsed inline 52(“sonreías” [you smiled]): a “smiling” that is later associated with
the seme of “luminosity” (such as in Dante’s Beatrice: “e cominciò, raggian-
domi di un riso” [and begun, with a glowing smile]; Paradiso, canto 7,17).
The same “smile” is present in line 81, key to the “revelation” (APOCA-
LYPSE) of the dryad (“tú reías en mitad de la pieza” [you laughed in themiddle of the room]). The cuarto of line 19is reintroduced in line 81, just
as the espejo in line 52has returned in line 79(“el espejo era un arroyo
detenido” [the mirror was a still stream]). There is no “battle” any longer,no more confrontation between the “lover” and his cruel and bellicose“beloved.” The poem is now on its way to the finale, under the sign of paci-fication, of the reconciliation of opposites. The agent of this transforma-tion is apparently the “doble pájaro de lumbre” [double bird of fire] that
342 NOVAS
emerges in line 71as the avatar of the “sol diminuto” ( 65) and of the
“cometa de cauda granate” ( 66), cosmic elements that design “figuras” and
that unite in line 70. This luminescent bird affects the “lover” immediately:
72.anidó (en mis oídos ) [nestled in my ears]
73.quemó (mis pensamientos ) [burned my thoughts]
73.disipó (mis memorias ) [dissipated my memories]
74.cantó (en la jaula del cerebro ) [sang in the cage of my brain]
The memory of the humiliations suffered by the “lover” is dissipated by
the luminous bird’s lenitive action. The bird also sings a nuptial hymn inthe narrator’s mind (“en la jaula del cerebro,” which is a reworking of“cueva del cráneo” in line 63). The canticle, through hyperbolic images, is
defined as “el solo del faro en la noche oceánica” [the lighthouse solo in theoceanic night] ( 75), and also as “el himno nupcial de las ballenas” [the
whales’ nuptial hymn] ( 76). It is the festive moment of harmony that suc-
ceeds the aggressive confrontation. The “beloved” (former warrior) assumesher condition of dryad (a tree nymph, whose life was associated with, andpreserved the life of, a particular tree). Although the designation “dryad”appears only in the title, the “revelation” or “unveiling” ( apo-kálypsis ) of the
nymph, hidden under the persona of the bellicose and cruel “beloved,”happens in the transfigured image of a “columna de luz líquida” [columnof liquid light] ( 82). An eidetic image, nonetheless, since it unveils the char-
acter’s essence, reuniting the seme of “luminosity” and that of the “aquatic”
nature proper to dryads. The elevation to the condition of dryad occursafter a new series of transformations: The dagger (from line 48) blossoms
(“el puñal floreció” [the dagger flowered], 77); the dog, who was aggressive
in the initial lines, is now domesticated, licking the nymph’s feet (“el perrode tres cabezas lamía tus pies” [the three-headed dog licked your feet], 78);
the mirror of line 52is morphed into “arroyo” [stream] ( 79), and the cat
from line 8also rises from ashes as fish, bucolically, “imágenes en el arroyo”
[images in the stream] ( 80).
Seventh T empo (83–91)
This last section is governed by the phrase “Vuelve a ser eucalipto”
[Return to being eucalyptus] ( 83), uttered by the nymph and through
which the “lover” is transformed into a tree. Just as in Ovid’s Metamorpho-
sis,the nymph Daphne is transformed into a laurel by Phoebus:
A Laboratory of T exts 343
Atque conjunx quoniam mea non potes esse,
Arbor eris certe—dixit—mea
Since you cannot be mine
My tree—he said—you shall be
—Metamorphosis, book 1, 556–57
Or just as in Pound (whose poetry is a weaving of “magic or metamorphic
moments”), when Neptune’s son, Cygnus, is killed by Achilles and is trans-formed into a swan, an episode that Pound takes from book 12of Ovid’s
poem:
. . . Victum spoliare parabat:Arma relicta videt. Corpus deus aequoris albamContulit in volucrem, cujus modo nomen habebat
...H e  w ent to strip the dead:
the vanished body from the arms was fled.
His Sea-God Sire, to immortalize his frame,had turned into a bird that bears his name
—Metamorphosis, book 12, 143–45
In Pound’s version, the entire operation is synthesized into a sole phrase or
movie still: “The empty armor shakes as the cygnet moves” (canto 4).
*
As in both examples, the transformation in Paz’s poem is given at once,
without major transitions: “el viento mecía mi follaje” [the wind movingmy foliage] ( 84). The following verses complete the description of the veg-
etal metamorphosis:
Yo callaba y el viento hablaba,murmullo de palabras que eran hojas,verdes chisporroteos, lenguas de agua,tendida al pie del eucaliptotú eras la fuente que reía ( 85–89)
I was silent and the wind spoke,
344 NOVAS*Ezra Pound, The Cantos of Ezra Pound (New York: New Directions, 1998), 15.— editors
whisper of words that were leaves
crackles of green, tongues of water,stretched out by the eucalyptusyou were the laughing fountain
Also involved in the metamorphic process, the dryad now shows herself inher aquatic condition: “lenguas de agua” (of a stream that flows from underthe tree, and also referring to the mirror-streams in lines 79–80); “fuente
que reía” (laughing fountain, remission to 52and 81).
The nymph is now at rest, in peace and not at war, amiable instead of
belligerent. She veils over her “eucalyptus” for the “lover,” once made hos-tile but now hidden under the arboreal cover ( eu-kalyptós, in Greek, means
“beautifully occulted”).
5An idyllic distich closes the poem:
90.vaivén de los ramajes sigilosos [swaying of secret branches]
91.eras tú, era la brisa que volvía [it was you, it was the moving 
breeze]
The dryad here returns in a new, complementary shape, as the brisa
[breeze] that blows through the branches. The branches are now “silent,”having become “mute” before the wind’s “voice” ( 85). The “lover” trans-
formed into eucalyptus also becomes “mute”: the nymph now “smiles” asafuente [fountain] ( 89) and “murmurs” (as wind or breeze, 85–86 and 91),
moving through the tree’s boughs in which her destiny is forever sealed.The words, one by one, yield the idyllic theme. The verb volver (vuelve, 83;
volvía, 91; although of slightly distinct shades, are in this context harmonic)
seals this magic instant of reconciliation, the closure of the entire metamor-phic cycle which unravels through out the poem.
Up to this point, I have attempted to articulate the narrative syntagmas, to
reveal the “diegetic” progress of the composition. Now we can backtrackand try to piece together a little of what goes on in the poem when con-fronted with the literary series to which it is affiliated.
This poem, regardless of its clear Ovidian matrix, belongs nevertheless
to the tradition of visionary literature that has its roots in the biblicalprophets and in the New Testament’s apocalypse, a tradition that has beenfollowed by authors such as Dante and Blake, to name a few.
6We find a
hint of this linkage in lines 28–29, in the description of the esquife inestable
[unstable skiff], which belongs to the same realm of triumphal chariots and
A Laboratory of T exts 345
war vessels. The verse mentions that the bizarre vehicle was “tirado por cua-
tro caballos de espuma y un águila” [pulled by four sea-foam horses and aneagle]. Standing at the prow, the warrior woman, whose electric hair resem-bles a “llama ondeante” [rippling flame] ( 30), sets out to attack the male
character (the narrator).
The vision of the chariot or war vessel reminds one of Dante’s encounter
with Beatrice ( Purgatorio, canto 30, 31: “donna m’apparve sotto verde
manto / vestita di color di fiamma viva” [a lady appeared under a greencloak / dressed in the color of live flame]). She appears on a triumphal char-iot pulled by a griffin (eagle and lion in one). The image of the chariot wasinspired, as Dante himself mentions, by the prophet Ezekiel’s visionarytheophany (Ezek. 1:15–21), but we might also add by the prophet Elijah’s
“chariot of fire” ( 2Kings 2:11): “un carro, in su due rote, triunfale, / ch’al
collo d’un griffon tirato venne” [a chariot, in two wheels, triumphal / har-nessed to the neck of a Griffon came] ( Purgatorio, canto 29, 107–8 ). Borges,
in his Nueve ensayos dantescos [Nine Dantesque Essays ],
7has thus interpreted
this “encuentro en un sueño” [encounter in a dream] between Dante andBeatrice: “Negado para siempre por Beatriz, soñó con Beatriz, pero la soñóseverísima, pero la soñó inaccesible, pero la soñó en un carro tirado por unleón que era um pájaro y que era todo pájaro o todo león cuando los ojosde Beatriz lo esperaban ( Purgatorio, canto 31, 121 )” [Forever denied Beatrice,
he dreamed of Beatrice, but dreamed her as terribly severe, dreamed her asinaccessible, dreamed her in a chariot pulled by a lion that was a bird andthat was all bird or all lion while Beatrice’s eyes were awaiting him]. Adream that is also a nightmare (“Tales hechos pueden prefigurar unapesadilla” [Such images can prefigure a nightmare]). The woman whom thenarrator in La guerra de la dríada meets in his dream is not dressed in flames
but has flaming hair. Sea-foam horses and an eagle pull her triumphal char-iot. But their encounter, even though tumultuous and aggressive at first (inthe poem’s third tempo), manages to avoid becoming a bad dream to endin apparent appeasement. After escaping her antagonist’s revenge, the war-rior woman reappears amid a “resplandor súbito” [sudden splendor] ( 64)
and, bathed in this luminosity, takes over the male character, who thenenters in a process of amorous combustion (73, “Quemó mis pensamientos,disipó mis memorias” [burned my thoughts, dissipated my memories]).Manifested, in her condition of dryad, as a “columna de luz líquida” [col-umn of liquid light] ( 82) around which the poem’s ferocious animals are
pacified ( 78and 80), this new and most essential transfiguration of the war-
346 NOVAS
rior woman is now celebrated in a “himno nupcial” [nuptial hymn]. As a
counterpoint to this revelation—the unveiling of the dryad in her luminousand benign condition—to this APO-CALYPSE, corresponds, symmetri-cally, the process of EU-CALYPSE (“beautiful occultation”) of the malecharacter, metamorphosed into a tree by the nymph’s very will ( 83). “T ree”
and “stream/breeze (Dryad),” united in their final destiny, apparently over-coming conflict. The war to which the title refers seems to conclude in theidyllic conciliation of the antagonists. No mismatch (like in Borges’s read-ing of Dante), but true encounter: a reunion of opposites now made com-plementary through consummated love. The poem’s last scene conjures upthe Edenlike atmosphere of a paradise regained. But a final shadow stilllingers. This reconciliation was only possible in nature, while a naturalaccord between elements in a landscape: “tree” and “stream/breeze.” On theanthropomorphic level, on which the poem is developed up to lines 82–83 ,
an understanding was not possible; there, in fact (from 1–63), the dream is
constantly invaded by nightmarish images (war, conflict). The ultimatefeeling elicited by the poem is “melancholy.” The “vegetal/fluvial” harmonyis developed against a backdrop of refusal and absence (the settings of 57–63
evokes a De Chirico painting). It is from this refusal and absence, this eva-sive void, that the melancholic character,
8under Saturn, falls in love—as Sor
Juana Inés de la Cruz has masterfully expressed in her baroque-conceptualway (“Détente, sombra de mi bien esquivo, / imagen del hechizo que másquiero, / bella ilusión por quien alegre muero, / dulce ficción por quienpenosa vivo” [Tarry, shadow of my scornful treasure, / image of my dearestsortilege, / fair illusion for which I gladly die, / sweet unreality for which Ipainfully live]),
*and as have Paz, in his exegesis of Sor Juana’s poetry and
personality, and Walter Benjamin, in his analysis of allegory and ruin in theGerman baroque theater.
9
In Paz’s poem, melancholy seems to intervene as a shadow, as the flap-
ping of a dark wing against the quasi-pastoral clarity that takes over at theend. Melancholy insinuates itself in the text, not as intentional effect butas a theme so that the reader’s animus, approaching the poem reflexively,dwells in the instant of “naturalized” reconciliation that follows the “war”between the characters. Hence the reader does not lose sight of the fact thatfor this conciliation to take place, an irremediable erasure of the human
A Laboratory of T exts 347*Anthology of Mexican Poetry, ed. Octavio Paz, trans. Samuel Beckett (London: Thames and Hudson,
1958), 83.— translator
aspect was necessary, for the characters are reconciled not as man and
woman but rather as “tree” and “stream/breeze.” Not exactly as partners ofa fulfilled affair but rather as “accidents” (whose union the dryad mythsecures and deems fatal) or elements of a landscape.
10As in Hegel’s Aesthet-
ics,where “natural beauty” (Naturschönes) is but an echo, an imperfect
“reflex” of “artistic beauty” ( Kunstschönes ),11here too the harmony of nature
is a precarious substitute that does not supply our need for harmonic real-ization on the interpersonal, interhuman level. Hence it is not true pleni-tude of the magnitude where the human element becomes foreign. It canonly serve as a nostalgic, deferred mirage.
Translated by A. S. Bessa
348 NOVAS
Light: Paradisiacal Writing
White on White
Writing about Guido Cavalcanti’s “Donna mi prega” [“A Lady Asks
Me”] in an essay that should be read in the manner of a Borgesian vision-
ary fiction rather than as a cautious piece of philological erudition, EzraPound defined it as a “metaphor on the generation of light.”
1T. S. Eliot, in
turn, tried to characterize the whole of Dante’s Commedia as a “vast
metaphor.”2The Paradiso, the Commedia’ s third and last installment ( can-
tica), could then be seen, in an essential dimension, as the gradual expan-
sion of that metaphor on light, now under the influence of the theology ofAquinas.
In the aforementioned canzone by the “freethinker” Cavalcanti, a het-
erodox with shades of Averroes, Amore, generated as “diafan di lume d’una
schuritade” [a mist of light upon a dusk], was the lyric-esoteric sign of theProvençal tradition rather than the “ appetitus rationalis for wisdom” (Auer-
bach), hypostatized by Dante in Beatrice, his theological muse. Cavalcanti’scanzone is an inspired exercise in natural philosophy (Physics), which seekssupport in the sensorial proof against the “tyranny of syllogism” (“nonrazionale, / ma che sente, dico” [not by reason / but ’tis felt, I say])—asPound realized it many years before Derrida, in Of Grammatology, alerted
us to the “logocentric” tendency in Western philosophy.
This 1975 essay appeared in book form in a volume of Dante translations and essays by Haroldo de
Campos: Pedra e luz na poesia de Dante (Rio de Janeiro: Imago, 1998), 67–83 .—editors
349
For Cavalcanti, Amore is not divine but human love. His canzone does
not move from “accident” toward “substance” but instead concentrates on
examining the modus operandi of the phenomenon of love as such ( acci-
dens in substantia ), annexing it to the “sensitive soul,” rigorously separated
from the “intellect possible” (Nardi, via Contini). In this sense, by con-demning Averroes’s doctrine of the non-immortality of soul, Dante ( Pur-
gatorio, canto 25,62–66 ), would be implicitly refuting Cavalcanti’s concept
of the philosophical canzone.
In the Paradiso, invested in conciliating the Thomist system with the
mystic-amorous ideology of cor gentile (Auerbach), Dante stretches, sus-
tains, and totalizes that radiant speculation on the kind of Love that isLight. He moves from accident and towards substance, since in God, sim-
plicissima substantiarum, Eternal Light, nihil accidens: substance, accident
and its manifestation unite in the same knot ( Paradiso, canto 33,88–91 ).
However, between Dante’s text and Cavalcanti’s, a subtle dialogic screen isestablished. The two texts interact through diverse semantic threads, vestige-words that allow Pound, in his translation of “Donna mi prega,” to tran-scribe (in the musical sense) Cavalcanti in terms of Dante, to clarify thelexical and syntactic abstruseness of the “philosophical canzone” with thesupplement of the luminous paradisiacal material. This mediation is madepossible through the hypothesis that Guido Cavalcanti (ca. 1259–1300), insome way, had knowledge of the philosophy of light through Robert Gros-seteste ( 1168–1253 ), for whom: “Lux ergo, qual est prima forma in materia
creata. . . . Lux enim per se in omnem partem se ipsam diffundit” [thislight, which is the first form created in matter, . . . Light of its very naturediffuses itself in every direction]. Or, as Umberto Eco (who glimpsed thepossibility of a parallel “between this metaphysics of energy and contempo-rary concepts of physics such as electric fields ”)
3explains:
Grosseteste’s cosmos was an enormous explosion of luminous energysolidifying in mathematical relations . . . luxis, above all, free diffusion,
origin of all movement, and it penetrates the entrails of earth, formingminerals and the germs of life, bringing to them a virtus stellarum [starry
quality].
4
Thus, when the sdegnoso e ardito [scornful and daring] Cavalcanti, in
one of the most controversial points of the elegantissima e mirabile can-
zone [most elegant and wonderful canzone], concludes in regard to
Amore:
350 NOVAS
E non si po conoscer per lo viso
comprisobianco in tale obietto cade,
Pound, in a splendid tour de force, reads compriso bianco in the sense of
“understood as a whole,” clarified by a total light (“all colors united inwhite”),
5which remits us to the verb imbiancare, used by Dante in Para-
diso(“vuo’ tu che questo ver piu ti s’imbianchi?” canto 8, 112; “per che del
lume suo poco s’imbianca,” canto 7,81), and translates (transreads?/trans-
lights?) thus:
Nor is he known from his faceBut taken in the white light that is allnessToucheth his aim,
Which I dare to hypertranslate into Portuguese (Cavalcanti via Pound viaDante):
O rosto não vê de Amor que talNa luz totalalveja branco no alvo.
“Augustinian dealbatio ”—Pound would conclude. T ranscultural
synchronicity. Malevich: white on white.
Stars
Commentators of the Commedia often note that the three sections of
the poem end with the word stella [star], as if to underscore the three stages
of the ascent—the excelsior vocation—from the infima laguna [bottomless
lake] of the Inferno.
As he leaves hell, the poet, in a transport, exclaims: “e quindi uscimmo
a riveder le stelle” [from there we came out to see once more the stars];later, at the conclusion of his stay in the Purgatorio, already preparing for
his last ascent:
Puro e disposto a salire alle stelle
Pure and prepared to leap up to the stars
A Laboratory of T exts 351
and finally, at the end of line 145 of canto 33of Paradiso, leaving the final
stellar point, apex of the journey and restart (or revolution) of everything
in the wheel of divine Love, principium et finis [beginning and end]:
L ’amor che move il sole e l’altre stelle.
The love that moves the sun and the other stars.
Having passed through the first two prestellar stages (although marked,
indexed, as star), the whole poem is configured in the last, as a constella-
tion, when the paradisiacal matter is progressively consubstantiated insemantic light—a kind of isomorphism that the Paradiso promotes, elabo-
rates, and, in the final canto, sublimates.
The Op Poem
Paradiso, for that matter, will be the least dramatic cantica of the Com-
media. At any rate, less popular and less read than the Inferno. T. S. Eliot
has observed that “we have (whether we know it or not) a prejudice againstbeatitude as material for poetry.”
6From this perspective, the Paradiso can
be seen as a truly abstract poem (in the sense that a modern art critic would
speak of “abstract constructivism” in order to define certain operative andevolutionary tendencies from Malevich and Kandinsky to op art). A poemin which those “sujets d’imagination pure et complexe ou intellect” [sub-jects of pure and complex imagination or intellect] that so deeply movedMallarmé—who strove not to exclude them from poetry—were alreadyanticipated by several centuries. Dante’s eye, here, is that of an opticalartist, kinetic, apt at devising the light in light, iris in the iris, fire in theflame: luminous specimens, different shades of clarity. (I think of the lucidsculptures of Vantongerloo, who sometimes preferred the photographs ofthem instead, for only they—he often said—captured a radiant ectoplasm,nimbus, or fluorescence, dissolving the crystal in crystals.) And the mys-tery, the theological enigma, resolves itself in epiphany, phaneroscopia, par-adisiacal writing: light.
From Kinetic to Iconic
Like a cosmonaut in luminous transnavigation—just like before he was
a speleologist of terrestrial depths in his infernal, chthonic descent—
352 NOVAS
Dante, at the culmination of the Sacrato poema [sacred poem] witnesses the
conversion of the kinetic into figural, of the optical into iconic, by witness-
ing the transfiguration of the reverberating vortex of the T rinity (“tre giri ditre colori” [three circles of three colors]; Paradiso, canto 33, 116–17 ) into the
face of Christ: the true effigy ( vero icon = veronica) stamping itself in the
iris of the iris. In the hypostatic union of three in one, light incarnatingitself, transubstantiated: Christ. And the face of Christ was also his face.“La nostra effige” [our effigy].
The face of Man. Of any man. Of HCE/Here Comes Everybody (“Hoc
est enim corpus meum”), as Joyce, another writer influenced by Aquinas,would write in the ecumenical dream of Finnegans Wake.
Lucifer: The Rever sed Meta phor
From those apexes where the mind “in-paradises” ( imparadisa ) itself,
emerges the possibility for a retrospective reading of the Inferno as the sym-
metrical inversion of the light metaphor. Satan as the antithetical double,“degraded,” of the T rinity-God ( Inferno, canto 34,38–44). According to
Jüri Lotman’s cultural typology, the Middle Ages offer a cultural model ofdominant paradigm: at the top of the semiotic hierarchy, the “text,”charged with the highest coefficient of truth, reducible to a sole significantopposition, is omnipresent. “The entire group of particular semantic oppo-sitions tended to be reduced to fundamental cultural antithesis (heaven-earth, eternal-temporal, salvation-ruin, good-evil, etc.), which in turnwould generate semantic series that, on a more abstract level, were reducedto a sole fundamental semantic opposition.”
7Auerbach has already
observed that Dite, the civitas diaboli [city of the devil] in the Inferno
(canto 8, 66–68 ), is the antithesis of the civitas Dei [city of God] in the Para-
diso(cantos 30–33). He also added that Dite “ is represented, to be sure, as
part of the total divine order which includes evil, and in that sense it is wellordered; but it persists in impotent rebellion against the high power ofGod. . . .”
8Numerological semiotics of the degrees of sin and virtue in
preestablished correspondence. Whereas the paradisiacal splendor is allflames (the beatos of the milizia santa [holy army] and the angelic choir
burn in divine Love), the deepest recesses in Dante’s Inferno are made not
of “fire,” but of its opposite, “ice” (Giudecca, the last circle of the frozenlake formed by Cocito: “quindi Cocito tutto s’aggelava” [this was the cause,Cocytus was all iced]; Inferno, canto 34, 52), implying, on a symbolic level,
the absolute absence of Love (light, fire). Hibernating in the central ice,
A Laboratory of T exts 353
suspended in the void, reigns Lucifer, the ancient “light-bearer” (Latin:
lucifer ), also Lusbel, the most beautiful of all angels (“la creatura ch’ebbe il
bel sembiante” [the creature who was once so beautiful]; Inferno, canto 34,
18), but now fallen light, ex-lumen (“colui che fu nobil creato” [him whowas created noble] and that has fallen folgoreggiando [like a streak of light-
ning]; Purgatorio, canto 12,25–27).
In his transition from Inferno to Paradise, passing through purgatory,
Dante will be first helped by Luzia, the illuminating grace, gratia illumi-
nans (Purgatorio, canto 9, 55; Inferno, canto 2,97–100). Later on, before
stepping into Earthly Paradise (a place of transition, status viatoris —pre-
Paradise already, or quasi coelum ), the pilgrim-poet will be subjected, under
a guardian Angel, to a purification through “fire” ( Purgatorio, canto 27,10-
12: “Più non si va, se pria non morde, / anime sante, il foco . . .” [you maygo no further, holy souls, / unless the fire sting you]) and will find himselfcompelled to cross a “measureless fire” (“incendio senza metro,” Purgatorio,
canto 37,51). Igneous indexes of the oppositional-complementary disjunc-
tion/conjunction between the Kingdom of Reverse Light (whose center isthe eternal ice of the Cocito) and the Kingdom of T riumphal Light, theEmpireo, with its flaming celestial Rose. Dante, in his letter to Cangrandedella Scala (a text that serves as an authentic metalinguistic description ofthe Commedia ), clarifies: “It is called Empireo, which is the same as the sky
inflamed with fire or ardor; not because there is fire or material ardor, butspiritual, which is saintly love or charity.” The seme “fire,” in the Comme-
dia,is pervasive, coloring three distinct, although interconnected, func-
tions: jubilant fire, Amore, in Paradiso (Empireo, from Greek pyr, fire);
purifying fire, in Purgatorio; and punishing fire, in Inferno (in the infernal
Seventh Circle, those who raged against God are punished under a rain of
fire;“d’un cader lento, piovean di fuco dilatate falde” [falling slowly, flakes
of flame came floating down]; Inferno, canto 14,28–29). Thence the possi-
bility of Norman Brown’s unifying reading in Love’s Body: “Love is all fire;
and so heaven and hell are the same place. As in Augustine, the tormentsof the damned are part of the felicity of the redeemed. T wo cities; which areone city. Eden is a fiery city: just like Inferno.”
9This hypothesis shows that,
at the extremity of the paradigm, the two opposite poles show themselvesin a very clear way: lack of love (infernal ice) versus Amore (paradisiacal
fire), Giudecca versus Empireo, Judas versus Christ, Satan versus God.
On the other hand, Dite, toponym of the diabolical city, is also, by
synecdoche, the name of Lucifer himself ( Inferno, canto 34, 20 ). From the
Latin dis(Dante was inspired by the infernal passages in Virgil’s Aeneid ), it
354 NOVAS
identifies etymologically with dives, itis (meaning “rich,” just as in Greek
ploutus means “wealth”), Dite being the god of the treasures hidden deep in
the earth. Mallarmé, always aware of the resonance of imperfect languages
under the influence of the supreme, original one (“l’immortelle parole” [theimmortal word]), registered in “Les dieux antiques” [“The Ancient Gods”]:
pluto : Merely a Greek name for Hades . . . considered the guardian of
treasures hidden in the earth! In Latin it was given another name, Dis,
which has been taken for an abbreviated form of Dives, rich, but that is
probably linked to Deus, Divus, Theos in Greece, and Dyaus in India.
10
Dite, the negative Deus, anti-Deus, Plutonian custodian of the gold
from the depth—retained gold, sequestered light, glacial feces—now rulesover the frozen swamps of the Cocito (“Lo’mperador del doloroso regno /da mezzo il petto uscia fuor della ghiaccia” [The emperor of the kingdomof despair / Rose up from mid-chest out of the sheer ice]; Inferno, canto 34,
28–29).
The rebel angel’s (“il primo superbo” [that first proud angel]; Paradiso,
canto 19, 46) greatest sin was his transgressive attempt to trespass the lim-
its of the sign: “il trapassar del segno,” semiological sin (paradigm, later on,of the “original sin” of Adam and Eve; Paradiso, canto 26, 117). One should
be reminded that Dante accomplishes his transhumanization ( Paradiso,
canto 1, 70) only via divine grace, mediated by Beatrice. He is nevertheless
admonished, midway through the voyage, that the Lumen supreme [divine
light] is but inscrutable: Not “creata vista,” not even the beatific Virgin,“the soul that most shines in heaven,” nor the Seraphim whose “eye is fixedin God,” can penetrate it entirely; less yet the “mortal” mind, who is notallowed to presume, of its own intellective force, that “a tanto segno moverli piedi” [to move his feet toward such goal] ( Paradiso, canto 21, 91–99).
Aspiring to become equal to or greater than God—pretending in vain to
be converted into the ultimate interpreter of the Supreme Sign “that itself
alone understands and of itself alone is understood” (Paradiso, canto 3 3,
124–25 ); trying to supersede it with a new Super-Sign (“Non solum autem
voluit esse aequalis Deo . . . sed etiam maior voluit esse” [However, not onlywanted to be equal to God . . . but also wanted to be even greater],Anselmo, De casu Diaboli, as in Scartazzini and Vandelli), Lucifer, before “la
somma d’ogni creatura” [the sum of all creatures], the sign of similitude,who once shared the delights of divine paradise (“in deliciis Paradisi Dei”);Lucifer, the “light bearer” who once feigned himself alone capable of theLumen, has sinned (and fallen) by excess of luminous presumption, by
A Laboratory of T exts 355
impatience of light: “per non aspettar lume, cadde acerbo” [not waiting for
the light, fell unripe] ( Paradiso, canto 19, 48 ). Hence the mark of inversion
in his oxymoronic name, that claims light and rules darkness.
Translation / Tra nslight
The work of translation aims for, at its limit, the same goal as the one
defined by Benjamin: to liberate, in the language of the translation, thepure language veiled in the original, in relation to which the sense of com-munication ( Bedeutung ) is but a tangential reference. “One can feel only
awe at the power of the master who could thus at every moment, realize theinapprehensible in visual images” (T. S. Eliot).
11A concise and luminous
style; a spiritual experience close to enlightenment; “the vigor of sunlight in
the ‘Paradiso,’ is unmatched in art”12—thus Pound punctuates his reading
of the Paradiso. Max Bense, at the end of Aesthetik und Zivilisation [Aes-
thetics and Civilization ], tries to transpose (with ironic distance) the theo-
logical notion of God in the “aseptic” lay terms of informational theory: inhis model, God would be the “antivisual and nonreflective” theme parexcellence that would respond to the supposed aesthetics of improbability,which culminates in the impossibility of perception itself, inscrutability(Nichtwahrnehmbarkeit ), hence the alternative to transform it in the poten-
tial reservoir for a symbolist aesthetic of the highest triviality.
*Dante con-
firms Bense’s findings: working at the level of the signifier, he is capable, ateach moment, of “verbivocovisualizing” in innovative ways what would be,in principle, antivisual, nonapprehensible.
Dante takes the Italian language to a point where Latin, caught in plain
flight of metamorphosis, makes itself transparent in the very moment ofnaming. Not a dead language any longer, but an active language in live lan-guage. “The poem’s latitude, as a matter of language, is the most reverber-ating of our literary language en masse, it is—without margin of error—the
phenomenon of utmost reach” (Sanguinetti, on the dilatation operated byDante in the Italian “space of expression”). Dante, inventor and master.There where a word is needed to short-circuit an idea, or in a rhyme posi-tion, anything goes: a verb is born of a temporal adverb ( insemprasi, from
sempre [always]; Paradiso, canto 10, 148 ); of a personal or possessive pro-
noun (inluiarsi, intuarsi, inmiarsi, from, respectively, lui, te/tuo, me/mio
[his, you, yours, me, mine]; Paradiso, canto 9, 73, 81 ); from a locative
356 NOVAS* Max Bense, Ästhetik und Zivilisation (Baden-Baden: Aegis Verlag, 1958). —translator
(insusi, from susi[rise], Paradiso, canto 17, 13; indovarsi, from dove[where],
Paradiso, canto 33, 138 ). Plenty of lexical and syntactic mannerisms, of
which Gustav René Hocke has already written. The intensification of
redundancy, strategically thought out, generates original, surprising infor-mation: every time the name of Christ appears in rhyme position, itdemands to be repeated two more times, thus breaking the expectation ofthe terza rima, since Christ is consonant only with Christ (see, for exam-ple, the thundering apparition of Christ’s cross in the skies of Mars; Par-
adiso, canto 14, 104–8); somewhere else, the terzina’s rhythmic scheme can
be made to sound strange through the cut of the word in terminal positionand the rejection of one of its parts (in this case, the modal adverbial suf-fix) to the following verse, thus tracing the diagram of the dancing move-ment ( Paradiso, canto 24, 16–17 : “così quelle carole, differente- / mente
danzando . . .”). Alliterations and paronomasia extend the orchestration ofrhyme; parechese, a variant of paronomasia, gives way to a theological tau-
tology of that which refers only to itself: see the verbal configuration ofeternal light that itself alone understands, of itself alone thinks, and byitself alone is understood (“O luce etterna che sola in te sidi / sola t’intendi,e da te intelleta / e intendente”; Paradiso, canto 33, 124–26 ); and finally,
anagrammatic dispersions decompose and recompose certain key-words:for example, Amor(e), in line 145, is preconstituted by ROtA and MOssA in
key positions in line 144.
All these operations the translator has to transcreate, exceeding the lim-
its of his language, alienating its lexicon, compensating the loss here withan inventive inoculation there, fighting the forced infratranslation with theadventurous hypertranslation, until the ultimate hubris (Luciferian guilt,semiological transgression?) renders him powerless and insane, by trans-forming the original in the translation of his translation. Like Dante’sbeatific eye in the divine eye, anything can thus be transilluminated, evenif only by a fiery and fleeting lightning. The paradisiacal text inscribes itself(as a mirage?) by a double sparkle, minute as it might be.
Translated by A. S. Bessa
A Laboratory of T exts 357
359Notes
Except where indicated, all notes have been written by Haroldo de Campos and
translated by the volume editors.
Poetry
The Poem: Theory and Practice
In the “Sermão da Sexagésima” [“Sermon of the Sixtieth”] ( 1655), where he uses
the expression “star chess,” Father Vieira, while chastising the excesses of “cultis-
mo” [“erudite style”], was “unwittingly describing his own [compositional] style”in the geometric form of a chessboard. (Cf. Antonio J. Saraiva, O discurso engen-
hoso[São Paulo: Perspectiva, 1980].)
The Essence of Omega
This series, originally made up of five poems, carries as subtitle the specification “Aphenomenology of composition.” It was meant to dialogue with Edgar Allan Poe’s“The Philosophy of Composition,” an essay on the origin of the poem “TheRaven” and also with the sequence of poems Psicologia da composição [Psychology
of Composition ](1947) by João Cabral de Melo Neto. Following the phenomeno-
logical method, I attempt here to arrive at the eidos (essence) of language andpoetry through the “husking” of words and through phonic fracture.
Hunger of Form
The poems included in this section exemplify concrete poetry in its most rigorousphase: the “mathematics of composition” (sense rationalism). The composerGilberto Mendes set “nascemorre” [“bornover”] to music, exploring the possibili-ties of multiple readings. One could even speak here of “minimalism,” long beforethat term came into use, especially in painting and music.
Transient Servitude
[...] Transient Servitude is composed of two parts: Proem and Poem. Proem con-
tains three pieces, which develop, in a dialectical way, the linguistic and existentialplay between poesia pura (pure poetry) and poesia para (committed poetry, poetry
for a social purpose, poetry for). The first one is the “fly of blue”; the second, the“fly of flies.” Hölderlin: “Und wozu Dichter in dürftger Zeit” [And what forpoetry in a time of scarcity?]. And Heidegger on Hölderlin: “Poetry is the founda-tion of being through the word.” These somewhat metaphysical statements aretransformed by the poem into a physical matter of facts: hunger in Brazilianunderdeveloped regions as a counterweight in the poet’s mind in the very act ofcomposing his poem: nomeio o nome [I name the noun], nomeio o homem [I name
360 Notes to Pages 36 –98the man], no meio a fome [in the middle is hunger]; in Portuguese, by merely cut-
ting the word nomeio [I name] one finds no meio [in the middle], which introduces
“hunger” in the very act of nominating. Feuerbach: “Der Mensch ist was er isst”
[Man is what man eats], and Brecht: “Erst kommt das Fressen, denn kommt dieMoral” [First comes grub, then comes the moral]. In the circumstance of scarcity,the poet tries to give “un sens plus pure aux mots de la tribu” [a purer sense to thewords of the tribe]. A committed poetry without giving up the devices and tech-nical achievements of concrete poetry.
excriptures
1. [The lines “la tua / coscia / distacca / di sull’ / altra” (your / thigh / separates / from
the / other) is a quote from Giuseppe Ungaretti’s Sentimento del tempo (Feeling of
Time), 1931.— editors]
Alea I—Semantic Variations
Billed as “uma epicomédia de bolso” [a mock-pocket-epic] “Alea I” was publishedin the journal Invenção, Ano 6, Número 5[Invention, Year 6, Number 5](1967), pub-
lished in São Paulo by Décio Pignatari. — editors
Paradisiacal Signifiers
The book Signância: quase céu [Paradisiacal Signifiers ] is divided into three parts,
each one corresponding to one of the strata of Dante’s topography, but in reverse.It begins through a quasi coelum, a quasi paradise, scattered epiphanically on earth
and thus hard to recognize (according to the German romantic Novalis whoappears here in two poems in the form of an epigraph [ tiereische Natur der Flamme
(savage nature of the flame)] and as an exemplary reading. The second part is “Sta-tus viatoris,” a transit zone of triviality and the quotidian, equivalent to purgatory,followed by a descent into hell in the third part, “Esboço para uma nékuia”[“Sketchfor a Nekuia”]. [The last two parts are not reproduced in this volume.]
The Education of the Five Senses
C. S. Peirce: “I can imagine a consciousness whose whole life, alike when wideawake and when drowsy or dreaming, should consist in nothing at all but a violetcolor or a stink of rotten cabbage.” The Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce—
Volume 1ed. Charles Hartshorne and Paul Weiss (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press
of Harvard University Press, 1965), paragraph 304.
Ode (Explicit) in Defense of Poetry on St. Lukács’s Day
This poem, entirely made up of citations, has as point of departure the followingexcerpt from the conversations between W. Benjamin and B. Brecht, in Svend-borg, July 25, 1938 (cf. W. Benjamin, Essais sur Brecht [Paris, Maspero, 1969]): “In
the afternoon, Brecht found me in the garden reading Capital. Brecht: ‘I think it’s
Notes to Pages 98–114 361a good idea to read Marx, especially now that has become so unfashionable
among us.’ I answered that I often occupy myself with unfashionable books. Webegin to speak about Russia’s policy on literary matters. ‘With those people—Isaid, referring to Lukács, Gabor, Kurella—it’s impossible to create a State.’Brecht: ‘Better yet, one can only create a State, never a community. They are
indeed the enemies of production. Production does not mean a thing to them.One can not trust production. It is by definition unpredictable. One can’t tellwhat will come of it. And they themselves do not want to produce. They want therole of apparátchiki and to be in control of others. Each one of their critiques hold
a menace.’”
Je est un autre: Ad Augustum
This poem was published in Código 5(Salvador, Bahia), a special number celebrat-
ing Augusto de Campos’s fiftieth birthday.
Mencius: Theorem of White
Mencius (372–289 b.c.): the most important Chinese moral philosopher afterConfucius. Cf. I. A. Richards, Mencius on the Mind (London: Kegan Paul, 1932).
Goethean Opuscule
Goethe to Eckermann, 4February 1829: “The conviction of our survival comes to me
from the concept of factivity, because if I, until the end, stay untiringly active, nature,in this way, will be forced to endow me with another form of existence when my pres-ent form is unable to sustain my spirit.” Goethe to Eckermann, 1September 1829:“ I
have no doubts with respect to our survival, for nature cannot dispense with the en-telechy. . . .” Cf. Goethe, Faust (Munich: Goldman Verlag/Klassiker, 1978).
Goethean Opuscule II
Marianne Jung is the Zuleika of the West-östlicher Divan. An aging Goethe, trav-
eling to Frankfurt where he would meet a young Marianne, witnessed a uniquemeteorological phenomenon—a “white rainbow”—and he interpreted it as a signof a second erotic youth. Senesco sed amo: “I grow old but I love.” Probably
Anacreon, the Greek lyric poet of the sixth century b.c., quoted by Pound in Latin
(Cantos LXXX and LXXXIII). Saxifrage rose: allusion to W. Carlos Williams’s line
“Saxifrage is my flower that spits / the rocks . . .” Sousândrade in “Harpa XLV”[“Harp XLV”]: “and the warm breeze / that my dark hair scented / the tremulouswing of my hair / will whiten . . .”
1984, Anno Orwelli I
This poem was commissioned by the daily Folha de São Paulo and was published
on the front page of the Sunday edition with a visual arrangement by Wesley DukeLee on January 1,1984.
362 Notes to Pages 118 –31Heraclitus Revisited (1973)
By “transluminations” I mean texts, so to speak, “reimagined” (even more than
“transcreated”). In this Heraclitean series I tried to recover the language of the pre-Socratic philosophers from under the patina of conventional prose versions usingthe techniques of avant-garde poetry, including the spatialization of language.Pánta rhei is a mere adaptation of the Joycean “riverrun,” already Brazilianized by
Augusto de Campos (A. and H. de Campos, Panaroma de Finnegans Wake [São
Paulo: Perspectiva, 1971]).
Paraphernalia for Hélio Oiticica
Text for Ivan Cardoso’s film H.O., dedicated to the career of the visual artist Hélio
Oiticica, creator of the “parangolés.”
Galaxies
The first text of Galaxies (beginning/end: “and here I begin . . .”) is from 1963; the
last (end/beginning: “. . . I close I conclude”), from 1976. A text imagined in the
extreme limits of poetry and prose, bioscriptural pulsation in galactic expansionbetween these two permutable forms (having as its thematic magnet voyage as abook or the book as a voyage, and for that it is also known as a “book of essays”),I see it now, in hindsight, as an epic insinuation resolved as epiphany.
Finismundo: The Last Voyage
When it was first published as a book (Ouro Preto: Tipografia do Fundo, 1990),
under the care of Guilherme Mansur, this poem carried the following explanation:
Homer is silent about Ulysses’s end. Tyresias’s ambiguous prophecy ( Odyssey,
canto 11) that may contain an allusion to a “death originating from the sea” ( thá-
natos eks halós ) was the object of much debate throughout the classical and medieval
times, finding an echo in Dante (cf. D’Arco Silvio Avalle, “Último viaggio
d’Ulisse,” Modelli semiologici nella “Commedia” di Dante [Milan: Bompiani, 1975]).
In the Inferno (canto 26,83–142 ), Odysseus, transformed into a tongue of fire,
answers a question posed by Virgil: “but one of you tell me where / after dying hecame to rest.” He notes how insatiable curiosity (“l’ardore . . . a divenir del mondoesperto”) moved him, in his old age and with few companions (“lo e’ compagnieravam vecchi e tardi”), to embark on a “folle volo” (an adventure, the “recklessflight”), that is, to face, once again, the “alto mare aperto” in search of the forbid-den island of Purgatory (the “montagna bruna,” on top of which, according toDantesque topography, the Garden of Earthly Delights was located). The old Greekseaman’ s hubris is punished with a shipwreck: “per voler veder trapassò il segno”
(“because he wished to see, he trespassed the sign”), in Boccaccio’s words. In thatsense, some viewed this episode as analogous to other exemplary cases of the trans-gression of norms: Lucifer, “the first proud being” ( Paradiso, canto 19,46–48 ),
Notes to Pages 131–58 363Adam ( Paradiso, canto 26,117), Prometheus. In freely revisiting this topos, I
attempted to rework it in two tempos: in the first, with an epic cadence, fusing it
to the theme of shipwreck in Mallarmé; in the second, as an ironic paraphrase, pro-jecting it onto a contemporary setting, the search (laughable but always new) ofpoetry in a trivialized world, “abandoned by the gods.”
In 1996, Sette Letras, a Rio publishing house, issued a long statement of mine
on the origin of this poem.
Poems for Qohelet
Qohelet, He-Who-Knows, is the Hebrew name of the anonymous book in the
Bible also known as the Ecclesiastes. He was a melancholic sage who lived proba-bly in the third century b.c. My transcreation of the poem of wisdom was pub-
lished by Perspectiva in 1991.
Links for a Renga
I wrote these texts for a multiauthor renga (“chained poem,” in the Japanese tradi-
tion). Cf. R. Bonvicino, ed., Together (um poema, vozes ) (São Paulo: Ateliê Edito-
rial, 1996).
The Left-Winged Angel of History
This poem is a protest against the massacre of the sem-terra, i.e., the landless agrar-
ian workers, in Eldorado do Carajás, in the state of Pará, northern Brazil, in April1996. As yet, the authorities responsible for the massacre (members of the Military
Police) have not been punished, and the question is being pursued in a slow legalbattle.
Gongorine Tribute to Sá de Miranda
Via Góngora ( 1561–1627 ), I pay homage here to Sá de Miranda ( 1481?–1558 ), who
more than once practiced the “obscure” style. In this text, lines by both poets enterinto a dialogue.
Essays
Anthropophagous Reason: Dialogue and Difference in Brazilian Culture
1. Haroldo de Campos, “A poesia concreta e a realidade nacional,” T endência
(Belo Horizonte) 4(1962 ); republished in the review Anos 60,no.1(Kairos: São
Paulo, n.d.): 27–31 . See also “Avanguardia e sincronia nella letteratura brasiliana
odierna,” Aut-Aut (Milan) 109–10 (1969 ).
2. One could also quote this passage from Marx: “It is well known that certain
periods of highest development of art stand in no direct connection with the gen-
eral development of society, nor with the material basis and the skeleton structure
364 Notes to Pages 158 –68of its organization. Witness the example of the Greeks as compared with the mod-
ern nations or even Shakespeare.” Karl Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of
Political Economy, trans. N. I. Stone (Chicago: Charles H. Kerr and Co., 1904),
309.
3. Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, The Communist Manifesto, trans. Paul M.
Sweezy (New York: Modern Reader Paperbacks, 1964), 8.
4. I am referring especially to Voloshinov’s Marxism and the Philosophy of Lan-
guage, published in Leningrad in 1929 and attributed by some scholars to M.
Bakhtin. [In English: trans. Ladislav Matejka and I. R. Titunik (Cambridge: Har-vard University Press, 1986). —translator ]
5. See, for example, my introductory study to Oswald de Andrade, Trechos
escolhidos (Rio de Janeiro: Agir, 1967). See also a more recent essay, “Oswald de
Andrade,” Europe 599(March 1979). [In this volume see “An Oswald de Andrade
T riptych,” in the section entitled “Reinventing T radition.” — translator ]
6.Cf. Hans Robert Jauss, “Geschichte der Kunst und Historie,” Literatur-
geschichte als Provokation (Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 1970).
7.Theodor Adorno, Thesen über Tradition. [InInsel Almanach auf das Jahr 1966,
21–33. Quoted by Jauss in “Geschichte de Kunst und Historie.” — translator ]
8. Here, I would like to make a brief reference in passing to the thesis of a pos-
sible pre-Columbian “indigenous baroque,” characterized by a “language of signsand symbols, based on myth.” This view (which displays some affinity with Euge-nio d’Ors’s concept of a pan-baroque) was suggested by Prof. Alfredo A. Roggiano(University of Pittsburgh) in a talk presented at the 17th Congress of the Instituto
Internacional de Literatura Iberoamericana, Madrid, 1975. Roggiano supported his
argument using the case of Mexico and of Paul Westheim’s concepts in Ideas fun-
damentales del arte prehispánico en México (Mexico City: Fondo de Cultura
Económica, 1967).
9. Mário Faustino, “Evolução da poesia brasileira—Gregório de Matos e
Manuel Botelho de Oliveira,” Suplemento dominical do “Jornal do Brasil,” 14and 28
August 1958.
10. Augusto de Campos, “Arte final para Gregório,” Bahia/Invenção (Salvador:
Propeg, 1974), an antianthology of Bahian poetry. J. Miguel Wisnik follows this
suggestion in his introduction to Gregório de Matos, Poemas escolhidos (São Paulo:
Cultrix, 1976).
11.Ludwig Pfandl, J
uana Inés de la Cruz, die zehnte Muse von Mexico, ihr Leben,
ihre Dichtung, ihre Psyche (Munich: H. Rinn, 1946).
12.See Haroldo de Campos, “Serafim: um grande não-livro,” and “Serafim:
análise sintagmática,” Suplemento literário de “O Estado de São Paulo, ”14December
1968 and 8March 1969. Also see my introduction to the reissue of Oswald de
Andrade, Serafim Ponte Grande (Rio de Janeiro: Civilização Brasileira, 1971). [In
English: Seraphim Grosse Pointe, trans. K. D. Jackson and Albert Bork (Austin: New
Notes to Pages 168–76 365Latin Quarter Editions: 1979). In this volume, see “An Oswald de Andrade T rip-
tych,” in the section “Reinventing T radition.” — translator ]
13. See my essay, “Structuralism and Semiotics in Brazil: Retrospect/Prospect,”
Dispositio 7–8(1973): 175–87. There I noted, in reference to Candido’s “Dialética
da malandragem,” that the peculiar narrative structure which he calls the “novel of
the rogue” is close, in some way, to Mikhail Bakhtin’s thesis on “carnivalesque” lit-erature, as well as to certain of Northrop Frye’s typological speculations. Cf. alsoSevero Sarduy, “Barroco y neobarroco,” América Latina en su literatura, ed. César
Fernández Moreno (Mexico City: UNESCO/Siglo XXI, 1972), 167–84; and the
excellent critical summary in Emir Rodríguez-Monegal, “Carnaval/antropofagia/parodia,” Revista iberoamericana 108–9 (1979): 401–12.
14. I am referring to the sonnet in which Gregório de Matos mocks the pedi-
gree of the Brazilian “new nobility” (the “descendants of armadillo blood”) whoinvoked the privileges of genealogical nobility, tracing their lineage to the Por-tuguese Captain Diogo Álvares Correia, the Caramuru (“son of thunder” or “sea-
emerging dragon”) who married the daughter of an Indian leader. “Tatuturema”(1868 ), part of Sousândrade’s long epic poem Guesa, is a satiric-orgiastic saraband
of Indians, missionaries, and colonizers based on the model of the Walpurgisnacht
in Goethe’s first Faust. Pau brasil (“Brazilwood,” a reference to a type of wood pro-
ducing a red dye highly prized by Europeans), Oswald de Andrade’s first collectionof poems ( 1925), uses excerpts from chronicles and the written reports about Brazil
at the time of discovery and the beginning of colonization, in a kind of a montage.
15. Taken from Oswald de Andrade’s “Manifesto antropófago.” [English trans-
lation by Leslie Bary, “Oswald de Andrade’s Cannibalist Manifesto, ”Latin Ameri-
can Literary Review 19,n o .  38(1991): 35–47.— translator ]
16. Max Bense, “Konkrete Poesie” (Anlässlich des Sonderheftes noigandres zum
zehnjährigen Bestehen dieser Gruppe für “Konkrete Poesie” in Brasilien), Sprache
im technischen Zeitalter, vol. 15(Stuttgart: Kohlhammer, 1965). Also in Brasilianis-
che Intelligenz (Wiesbaden: Limes Verlag, 1965).
17. I am referring to Umberto Eco, Opera aperta (Milan: Bompiani, 1962). For
the preface to the Brazilian edition of this book, Eco wrote the following com-ment: “It is indeed a curious thing that a few years before I wrote Opera aperta,
Haroldo de Campos, in one of his articles, anticipates its themes in a surprisingway, as if he had reviewed the book I had not yet written and I would later writewithout having read his article. But this means that certain problems emerge in anurgent way at given historical moments, arising almost automatically from theresearch in progress.”
18. Oswald de Andrade signed articles in his Revista de antropofagia (1928–29)
with the punning pseudonym “M ar
xilar.”
19. The scattered poetry and sparse prose of Pedro Kilkerry ( 1885–1917 ) was col-
lected posthumously and analyzed by Augusto de Campos in Re/Visão de Kilkerry (São
366 Notes to Pages 176 –205Paulo: Fundo Estadual de Cultura, 1971). The study by Octavio Paz to which I refer
is “Literatura y literalidad,” El signo y el garabato (Mexico City: Joaquín Mortiz, 1973).
Disappearance of the Baroque in Brazilian Literature: The Case of Gregório de Matos
1. Lecture given at the Biblioteca Pública Municipal de São Paulo in 1945.C f .
Boletim bibliográfico 2,n o .  7(April–June 1945).
2. Antônio Candido and J. Aderaldo Castello, Presença da literatura brasileira—
História e antologia, vols. 1–3 (São Paulo: Difusão Européia do Livro, 1964).
3. Stuart B. Schwartz, Sovereignty and Society in Colonial Brazil: The High Court
of Bahia and Its Judges, 1609–1751 (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of Califor-
nia Press, 1973), 324.
4. Fernando da Rocha Peres, Gregório de Matos e Guerra: uma revisão biográfica
(Bahia: Edições Macunaíma, 1983), 16–17 .
5. Walter Benjamin, “Fate and Character,” Reflections: Essays, Aphorisms, Auto-
biographical Writings, trans. Edmund Jephcott (New York: Schocken Books, 1978).
The Trans-American Pilgrimage of Sousândrade’s Guesa
1. Hanno Beck, “Los países tropicales como iconografía natural: Alexander von
Humboldt y los comienzos del pensamiento ecologista,” Humboldt 25,n o .83
(1984): 22–29.
2. “O Sol, de todo desaparecera. / Atahualpa, dos céus desamparado, / T remeu
vendo-se ao meio da cratera / Qual um que se assombra e está petrificado!” [Joaquim
de Sousândrade, O Guesa, canto 11, ed. Jomar Moraes (São Luís de Maranhão,
Brazil: Serviço de Imprensa e Obras Gráficas do Estado, 1979), 295.—editors ]
3. “Oh! como é triste da moral primeira / da República ao seio a corrupção! ao
seio da pureza—se dissera— / de Cristo o corpo em decomposição.” [Sousândrade,O Guesa, canto 10,p .  261.—editors ]
4. “Oh! o Diamante que, de ser tão puro / foi chama e o mesmo Eterno! Se o
contemplo, / nem do fulgor distingo o que é fulguro,” [Sousândrade, O Guesa, canto
10,p .198 .—editors ]
An Oswald de Andrade Triptych
1. “O Modernismo,” Anhembi (São Paulo) 49, vol. 17 (December 1954): 31–32.
2. See Mário da Silva Brito, História do modernismo brasileiro (Saraiva: São
Paulo, 1958), 198–215 .
3. “The book was of a clear epigonic Parnassianism: Mário, at the time, admired
Vicente de Carvalho and lived to collect apt sonnet endings,” according to PériclesEugênio da Silva Ramos in A literatura no Brasil, vol. 3, part 1(Rio de Janeiro:
Livraria São José), 496.
4. Oliveira Bastos traced this blueprint in “Esquema, poesia e processo,” Diário
de notícias (Rio de Janeiro), 1January 1956.
Notes to Pages 205–113675. João Ribeiro, “Crítica—Os Modernos,” Obras (Rio de Janeiro: Academia
Brasileira de Letras, 1952), 90–98.
6. Ibid., article referring to Oswald de Andrade’s A estrela de absinto.
7. The title of this poem-novel can be translated freely into Portuguese as Finni-
cius revém, which includes the idea of end and beginning [ fim/início ], of wake or
vigil and a new awakening; and, on the other hand, it incorporates the name of
Finn, the giant of the Irish legend, whose resurrection, according to the same fic-tional story, would occur whenever the country would require it. See Augusto andHaroldo de Campos, Panaroma de “Finnegans Wake” (São Paulo: Commissão de
Literatura, 1962).
8. Mário de Andrade, Cartas a Manuel Bandeira (Rio de Janeiro: Simões Edi-
tora, 1958), 60. Oswald and Sérgio (Milliet) were in Europe at the time.
9. Oswald de Andrade, Ponta de lança (São Paulo: Livraria Martins Editora, n.d.), 55.
10. For W. Y. Tindall, that use of parody in Joyce would express a “comic view
of life.” Tindall, James Joyce: His Way of Interpreting the Modern World (New York:
C. Scribner’s Sons, 1950), 43–46.
11.Stuart Gilbert, James Joyce’s “Ulysses” (1930; reprint, London: Faber & Faber,
1952), 41.
12. “Modernism is a diagram of the coffee’s bull market, of bankruptcy, and of
the Brazilian revolution.” Oswald de Andrade, Ponta de lança, 120.
13. Antonio Candido, “Estouro e libertação,” Brigada ligeira (São Paulo: Editora
Martins, n.d. [ 1945]), 21.
14. Oswald de Andrade, Ponta de lança, 68.
15. Antonio Candido, “Oswald viajante,” O observador literário (São Paulo:
Commissão Estadual de Literatura, 1959), 91.
16. In this poem, Oswald also achieves a surprising fusion of the lyric “I” with
the collective, participatory “I,” as I tried to show in “Lirismo e participação,”Suplemento literário de “O Estado de São Paulo,” 6July 1963 .
17. Philippe Sollers, Logiques (Paris: Éditions du Seuil, 1968), 
 206.
18. On the cover of my copy of Serafim Ponte Grande, which I received person-
ally from the author, the term “novel” was crossed out and replaced by the word“invention.”
19.See Elisabeth Walther, “Semiotische Analyse,” Mathematik und Dichtung
(Munich: Nymphenburger Verlagshandlung, 1965), 145: “The index maintains real
relations with its object, it points directly to its object. For instance: the signs onthe road, the road itself, proper nouns and, even, all of the indications that deter-mine an object’s place, time and number, etc.” See also Max Bense, Semiotik
(Baden-Baden: Agis-Verlag, 1967).
20. This concept of the “estrangement” of Russian formalist theory seems to
have inspired the Brechtian “Verfremdungseffekt” in drama theory, which is wellknown in the West.
368 Notes to Pages 211 –1321.See Viktor Shklovsky, “Parody in T ristram Shandy,” Theory of Prose (Moscow,
1925). [In English: “Sterne’s Tristram Shandy: Stylistic Commentary,” in Russian
Formalist Criticism: Four Essays, trans. and with an introduction by Lee T. Lemon
and Marion J. Reis (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1965), 3–24. A full
translation of Shklovsky’s Theory of Prose, by Benjamin Sher, was published in 1990
by Dalkey Archive Press. —editors ]
22. See the article by Prudente de Moraes Neto and Sérgio Buarque de Holanda
in Estética (Livraria Odeon, Rio de Janeiro) 2(January–March 1925): 218–22 . These
critics had already noted that “one of the salient characteristics of this ‘novel’ by
Mr. Oswald de Andrade derives possibly from a certain anthological feature thathe imprinted on it. [. . .] The construction is made in the reader’s inner spirit.Oswald provides the loose pieces. They can only be combined in a certain way. It’sjust a matter of combining them and that’s it.”
23. See Haroldo de Campos, “Estílistica miramarina,” Metalinguagem (Rio de
Janeiro: Editora Vozes, 1967), 87–97. There I perform an analysis based on the lan-
guage axes identified by Roman Jakobson: ( 1) the metaphoric, which relates things
by similarity (paradigmatic axis); ( 2) the metonymic, which relates things by conti-
guity (syntagmatic axis). See Krystyna Pomorska, Russian Formalist Theory and Its
Poetic Ambience (The Hague: Mouton, 1968), 82: “[A]ccording to the linguistics of
our time, these notions could be applied on every level of language activity,” hencethe justification for the extension of the concept that I am making here.
24. René Wellek and Austin Warren, Theory of Literature (New York: Harcourt,
Brace & World, 1956), 236.
25. C. Lévi-Strauss, “La science du concret,” La pensée sauvage (Paris: Plon,
1962), 3–47. [In English: “The Science of the Concrete,” The Savage Mind
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1966). —editors ] See also Paolo Caruso,
“Lévi-Strauss e il bricolage,” Almanacco letterario Bompiani (Milan: Bompiani,
1966), 61–64 ; Roland Barthes, “Littérature et discontinu” and “L ’activité struc-
turaliste,” Essais critiques (Paris: Éditions du Seuil, 1964), 186and 214–18, respec-
tively
. [In English: “Literature and Discontinuity” and “The Structuralist Activity,”
Critical Essays, trans. Richard Howard (Evanston, IL: Northwestern University
Press, 1972), 182 and 214–18.— editors ]
26. Antonio Candido, “Estouro e libertação,” Brigada Ligeira (São Paulo: Edi-
tora Martins, [ 1945]), 11–30 . From the two novel-inventions ( Miramar/Serafim ),
Candido privileges Miramar, which he considers “one of the greatest books in
Brazilian literature.” We’d rather not choose and confront both as complementaryand, in a way, inseparable aspects of the same experiment.
27. The aesthetics of Serafim make it an instance of what semiotician Julia Kris-
teva calls “intertextuality” (dialogue of texts), based on Mikhail Bakhtin’s idea ofthe “polyphonic novel” with a “carnivalesque structure” as opposed to the tradi-tional, “monologic” novel. Furthermore, Serafim, thanks to its nature and themat-
ics, lends itself wonderfully to exemplifying the process of “carnivalization” in
Notes to Pages 213–23 369literature, a popular and desecrating technique whose origins Bakhtin traces to
Greek and Roman antiquity and the Middle Ages. See J. Kristeva, “Le mot, le dia-logue, le roman,” Semeiotikè (Paris: Éditions du Seuil, 1969) [in English: “Word,
Dialogue, and Novel,” Desire in Language: A Semiotic Approach to Literature and
Art,ed. Leon S. Roudiez; trans. Thomas Gora, Alice Jardine, and Leon S. Roudiez
(New York: Columbia University Press, 1980), 64–91 .—translator ]; M.
Bakhtin, Rabelais and His World, trans. Hélène Iswolsky (Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 1968).
The Open Work of Art
Umberto Eco, in his preface to the Brazilian edition of his work Opera aperta,
said the following in reference to this essay: “It is indeed a curious thing that a fewyears before I wrote Opera aperta, Haroldo de Campos, in one of his articles, antic-
ipates its themes in a surprising way, as if he had reviewed the book I had not yetwritten and I would later write without having read his article. But this means thatcertain problems emerge in an urgent way at given historical moments, arisingalmost automatically from the research in progress,” Obra aberta (São Paulo: Edi-
tora Perspectiva, 1968), 17.
1. Jean-Paul Sartre, Situations II (Paris: Gallimard, 1948), 74–75.
2. Pierre Boulez, “Domaine musical,” Bulletin international de musique contem-
poraine (Paris), no. 1(1954): 124.
3. Or, to use the expression of Adelheid Obradovic: ( 1) “Nacheinander ohne
Durchdringung”—“one part following another without interpenetration” (as inthe structure of Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man ); (2) “Nebeneinander ohne
Durchdringung”—“one part juxtaposed to the other without interpenetration”(Ulysses ); (3) “Durchdringung”—organic “interpenetration” ( Ulysses, from Molly
Bloom’s silent monologue, and Finnegans Wake ), in Die Behandlung der Räum-
lichkeit im späteren Werk des James Joyce (Marburg-Würzburg: T riltsch, 1934), 11.
4. Edmund Husserl, Ideas: General Introduction to Pure Phenomenology, trans.
W. R. Boyce Gibson (New York: Macmillan, 1952).
5. Michel Fano, “Pouvoirs transmis,” La musique et ses problèmes contemporaines,
Cahiers Renauld-Barrault (Paris), no. 41(1963 ): 40.
6. James Blish, “Rituals on Ezra Pound,” Sewanee Review 53,n o .2 (Spring
1950): 196.
7. Published originally in the newspaper Diário de São Paulo, 3July 1955. Later
included in Augusto de Campos, Décio Pignatari, and Haroldo de Campos, T eo-
ria da poesia concreta (T extos críticos e manifestos, 1950–60 ) (São Paulo: Edições
Invenção, 1965). [R eprints: São P
 aulo: Duas Cidades, 1975; and São Paulo:
Brasiliense, 1987.— editors ]
The Informational Temperature of the Text
1. Max Bense, “Klassification in der Literaturtheorie,” Augenblick 2(1958).
370 Notes to Pages 223 –342. B. Mandelbrot, “Linguistique statistique macroscopique,” Logique, langage et
théorie de l’information, vol. 3of Études d’épistemologie génétique (Paris: Presses Uni-
versitaires de France, 1957), 1–78. Subsequent parenthetical page numbers in the
text refer to this source.
3. George K. Zipf, Human Behavior and the Principle of Least Effort (Cam-
bridge: Addison, 1949).
4. G. A. Miller, Language and Communication (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1951).
5. Charles Kay Ogden, The General Basic English Dictionary (London: Evans
Brothers Limited, 1940).
6. Miller, Language and Communication, 115–16 .
7. Harry Levin, James Joyce (New York: New Directions, 1960).
8. This sense is well emphasized by Max Bense, in “Klassification in der Liter-
aturtheorie” and elsewhere.
9. “Verse,” Mário Pedrosa wrote, “with its unfolding movement, its cuttings
and junctures, has a cultivated nature, unmistakably erudite and discursive.”
Mário Pedrosa, “Poeta e pintor concretista,” Jornal do Brasil (Rio de Janeiro), 6
February 1957.
10. Adelheid Obradovic, Die Behandlung der Räumlichkeit im späteren Werk des
James Joyce (Marburg-Würzburg: T riltsch, 1934).
11. Claude E. Shannon and Warren Weaver, The Mathematical Theory of Com-
munication (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1964), 56.
12. Levin, James Joyce, 196–97 .
13. Ibid., 197.14. Ernest Fenollosa, The Chinese Written Character as a Medium for Poetry (New
York: Arrow Editions, 1936).
15. Ibid., 5.16. Pound to Ogden, Rapallo, 28January 1935, in Ezra Pound, Letters 1907–1941 ,
ed. D. D. Paige (London: F
aber and Faber, 1951), 266 .
17. Ferlinghetti’s censure derives from his traditional concept of “oral poetry,”
not linked with the development of vocal techniques in contemporary music.Pound’s text, in a way like Mallarmé’s, is a true musical score waiting for perform-ing voices. See Ferlinghetti, The Pound Newsletter (San Francisco: Mimeo, 1956), 19.
18. Norbert Wiener, Cybernetics (New York: J. Wiley, 1948).
19. Max Bense, Aesthetica II (Baden-Baden: Agis-Verlag, 1958).
20. Max Bense, “Das Existenz—Problem der Kunst,” Augenblick 1(1958).
21. Max Bense, Ästhetik und Zivilisation (Baden-Baden: Aegis Verlag, 1958).
22. Jerome Rothenberg, The Book of Hours and Constellations: Poems of Eugen
Gomringer (New York: Something Else Press, 1968).
23. Décio Pignatari, “New Poetry: Concrete,” in Haroldo de Campos et al.,
T eoria da poesia concreta (São Paulo: Duas Cidades, 1975).
24. Bense here refers to the “eternal objects” of Whitehead, such as “colors or
color and form relationships.”
Notes to Pages 234–39 37125. Max Bense, “Konkrete Malerei,” in Aesthetica III (Baden-Baden: Agis Ver-
lag, 1958), 88.
Concrete Poetry–Language–Communication
1. Korzybski, quoted by S. I. Hayakawa in “What Is Meant by Aristotelian
Structure of Language?” in Language, Meaning and Maturity: Selections from “Etc.
A Review of General Semantics,” 1943–1953 , ed. S. I. Hayakawa (New York: Harper
& Brothers, 1954), 220.
2. Adelheid Obradovic, “Zeit und Raum und ihre Relationen,” chap. 2of Die
Behandlung der Räumlichkeit im Späteren Werk des James Joyce (Marburg-
Würzburg: T riltsch, 1934), 10.
3. “No individual is free to describe nature with absolute impartiality but is
constrained to certain modes of interpretation even while he thinks himself most
free. The person most nearly free in such respects would be a linguist familiar withmany widely different linguistic systems.” —Benjamin Lee Whorf, quoted byHayakawa (“What is Meant,” 222), who comments: “Here Korzybski would feel,
I am sure, that a person acquainted with modern mathematics—or at least withthe methods of modern mathematics—is already in the situation of ‘a linguistfamiliar with many widely different linguistic systems,’ with the advantage, more-over, that these mathematical systems are not the haphazard residue of primitivemetaphysical notions and animisms, but are systems of propositional functions,which, being deliberately emptied of content, can be given any content.”
4. T rigant Burrow, The Biology of Human Conflict (New York: Macmillan,
1937).
5. A crucial point in Fenollosa’s essay “The Chinese Written Character as a
Medium for Poetry” relates to the ideogram’s spatiotemporal character: “One supe-riority of verbal poetry as an art rests in its getting back to the fundamental realityof time. Chinese poetry has the unique advantage of combining both elements. It
speaks at once with the vividness of painting, and with the mobility of sounds. Itis, in some sense, more objective than either, more dramatic. In reading Chinesewe do not seem to be juggling mental counters, but to be watching things workout their own fate.” See essay in The Little Review Anthology, ed. Margaret Ander-
son (New York: Hermitage House, 1953), 192.
6. S. I. Hayakawa, “Semantics, General Semantics, and Related Disciplines,” in
Language, Meaning and Maturity, 32.
7. Oliver Bloodstein, “General Semantics and Modern Art,” in Language,
Meaning and Maturity, 289.
8. Hayakawa, “What Is Meant,” 221.
9. W. Sluckin, Minds and Machines (Harmondsworth, Middlesex: Penguin
Books, 1954), 16–18 .
10. See eupoema (Ipoem ), by Décio Pignatari: “eu jamais soube ler: meu olhar /
de errata a penas deslinda as feias / fauces dos grifos e se refrata / onde se lê leia-se”
372 Notes to Pages 239 –44(“I could never read: my errata / glance painfully interpretties the ugly / fauces of the
griffins and refracts: / where it reads should be read.” T ransl. Soraya Ferreira Alves).
11. Sluckin, Minds and Machines, 159–60 .
12. “I have mentioned the tyranny of mediaeval logic. According to this Euro-
pean logic thought is a kind of brickyard. It is baked into little hard units or con-cepts. These are piled in rows according to size and then labeled with words forfuture use. This use consists in picking out a few bricks, each by its convenientlabel, and sticking them together into a sort of wall called a sentence by use eitherof white mortar for the positive copula ‘is,’ or of black mortar for the negative cop-ula ‘is not.’ In this way we produce such admirable propositions as ‘A ring-tailedbaboon is not a constitutional assembly.’” Fenollosa and Pound, “Chinese WrittenCharacter,” 204.
13. Hiyakawa, “What Is Meant,” 223.
14. Fenollosa and Pound, “Chinese Written Character,” 206. “By contrast to
the method of abstraction, or of defining things in more and still more generalterms, Fenollosa emphasizes the method of science, ‘which is the method ofpoetry,’ as distinct from that of ‘philosophic discussion,’ and is the way the Chi-nese go about it in their ideograph or abbreviated picture writing.” Ezra Pound,ABC of Reading (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1934), 20. The comparison
between Fenollosa and Pound’s ideogramic method and Korzybski’s non-Aristotelian systems of language would prove a most suggestive study.
15. Adolfo Casais Monteiro, “Palavra, letras e poesia,” O Estado de São Paulo, 17
February 1957: “The preponderance of the visual over the aural, which is evident
in Mallarmé and even more so in Cummings, makes it impossible to listen topoems that are made to be seen, a position taken to its extreme by the concretists,whose poems can’t be heard.” See, in this regard, Diogo Pacheco’s “Musicalidade everbalização,” Suplemento dominical do “Jornal do Brasil” (Rio de Janeiro), 17
March 1957.
16. Susanne Langer, Feeling and Form (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1953),
277.
17. Oliver Bloodstein, “General Semantics and Modern Art,” in Language,
Meaning, and Maturity, 289.
18. Oliveira Bastos, “Por uma poesia concreta,” Suplemento dominical do “Jor-
nal do Brasil” (Rio de Janeiro), 24March 1957.
19. Mário Pedrosa, in his insightful essay “Arte concreta ou a ausencia de
ícones,” Jornal do Brasil (Rio de Janeiro), 15February 1957, has emphasized the
importance of nonverbal communication in concrete poetry.
20. Based on Chang T ung-sun’s essay “A Chinese Philosopher’s Theory of
Knowledge,” Etc. A Review of General Semantics 9,n o .3 (Spring 1952): 203–26 ,
Ruesch and Kees also note that “Western thought, including scientific logic, hasbeen largely based—or was until recently—upon an Aristotelian approach, whichin turn is rooted in the Greek grammar and its subject-predicate language struc-
Notes to Pages 244–52 373ture. Within such a structure the subject of discourse has to be stated and the level
of abstraction defined. This is not true, for example, in Chinese logic and lan-guage, in which the subject-predicate dichotomy is avoided. It is not without inter-est that the tremendous advances made in Western technology developed onlywhen scientists adopted a language that was not bound by the subject-predicatedichotomy—namely, mathematics.” Jürgen Rüsch and Waldo Kees, Nonverbal
Communications—Notes on the Visual Perception of Human Relations (Berkeley and
Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1956), 9.
21. “The orientation recommended by Korzybski to free the individual from
the tyranny of words was called by him extensional. Roughly speaking, to be exten-
sional is to be aware of things, facts, and operations in the way they are related innature instead of in the way they are talked about. The extensionally-oriented per-son differentiates better than the word-minded (intentionally-oriented) one. He isaware of the basic uniqueness of ‘things,’ ‘events,’ etc., and so he is more aware ofchange than the intentionally oriented person, who mistakes the fluid, dynamicworld around him for the static, rigid word of labels, ‘qualities,’ and ‘categories’ inhis head.” Anatol Rapoport, “What Is Semantics,” in Language, Meaning, and
Maturity, 13. To which Oliver Bloodstein adds: “The extensional and intentional
orientations to art correspond respectively to the perception of form and the per-ception of content.” Bloodstein, “General Semantics and Modern Art,” in Lan-
guage, Meaning, and Maturity, 287.
Brazilian and German Avant-Garde Poetry
1. O. M. Carpeaux, “Revelações sobre Rilke,” Correio da manhã (Rio de Janei-
ro), 12 January 1956.
2. Previously printed in Augenblick 2(May 1955). The reference to this first pub-
lication in the last edition of Gomringer’s Konstellationen (1963) is inaccurate
because the first phase of Max Bense’s and Elisabeth Walther’s Augenblick only
began to appear in 1955(not 1954). I published a Brazilian translation of the man-
ifesto in Suplemento dominical do “Jornal do Brasil,” on March 17,1957. Up until
1950, Gomringer had written Shakespearean sonnets; after two years of silence, hebegan to produce his first visual poems for the magazine Spirale (1953). This is what
he himself tells in “The First Years of Concrete Poetry,” Form (Cambridge) 4
(1967 ).
3. See Augusto de Campos, Haroldo de Campos, and Décio Pignatari, T eoria
da poesia concreta: T extos críticos e manifestos, 1950–60 (São Paulo: Edições Invenção,
1965). [Second edition under the same title (São Paulo: Duas Cidades, 1975). 
—editors ]
4. Ibid.5. Note what Gomringer says, in his statement quoted in note 2, about Pigna-
tari’s kine-poem “LIFE” ( 1958): “Since I am inclined to express all thoughts in a
short form, and had always taken pleasure in algebraic equations, I found it won-
374 Notes to Pages 252 –56derful that one could say so much with a single word. I still find sublime, for
example, the way in which my friend Décio Pignatari called attention to the wordLIFE at a later date. It is the architecture and symbolism of this word that makethe poem unique for me.” H. Heissenbüttel points out that for Gomringer theideal concrete poem would be summarized in a single word. See Über Literatur
(Olten: Walter-Verlag, 1966).
6. Gomringer: “The title that you are proposing, ‘concrete poetry,’ pleases me
very much. Before I named my ‘poems’ constellations, I had really thought of call-ing them ‘concrete.’ As far as I’m concerned, the entire anthology could be named‘concrete poetry.’” (He was talking about the project of an international anthology,only finally published in 1960.)
7. Anatol Rosenfeld, “Balanço da poesia alemã,” Suplemento literário de “O
Estado de São Paulo,” 1November 1964.
8. In a statement from 1967 (quoted in note 2), Gomringer writes: “Although I
had to confess to myself many times that Holz was a strange character, mon-strously self-absorbed, in whom I could not place the slightest bit of trust, heexerted a formidable fascination on me. What I could not get off my mind werehis grandiloquent verbal creations and his rhythmic directives. He seemed to mesomewhat extravagant, from the German point of view, and not sufficiently ‘plas-tic’ in his expression. Nonetheless, I still found it impressive that he had had takenthe liberty to interfere with the order of language, and that he, more than anyother German poet, would concern himself in such a minute way with either thevisual layout of the poem or its sound pattern.”
9.Suplemento literário de “O Estado de São Paulo,” 3October and 5December 1962.
10. “One is tempted to affirm, with good reason, that the material and linguis-
tic possibilities of the German language, its visual, metaphoric, acoustic resourcesand its ambivalence, have never been put to use in a more original and completeway as in Arno Holz’s Phantasus ” (Max Bense, “Textalgebra Arno Holzes”).
11. The poem ends in a way that could be equated with the rising of the “con-
stellation” in the Mallarméan sky, issued by thought casting the dice, in an unend-ing struggle against chance:
Mydust fluttered;rising,my memory, likea star!
12. [Edited by] Augusto and Haroldo de Campos (São Paulo: Invenção, 1964);
includes special contributions by Luiz Costa Lima and Erthos Albino de Sousa.Third, revised and expanded edition published in São Paulo by Perspectiva in2002.
Notes to Pages 256–62 37513.Suplemento literário de “O Estado de São Paulo,” 17November 1962 .
14.In Atta Troll there is also an aesthetic controversy about biased (tendentious)
poetry (which we would now term “committed” or “engagé”). In “Heinrich Heine als
nationaler Dichter,” Lukács tries to characterize the dual goal of the controversy. It
was not simply a defense of the autonomy of poetry but rather, an attack against nar-
row (tendentious) poetry “devoid of talent,” “stupid” (“die bornierte Tendenzpoesie”),
narrowly sectarian and unable to view things in a complex and multifaceted move-ment, in a word, against “prosaically bombastic tendentious poetry,” as Heine termedit. [Deutsche Realisten des 19. Jahrhunderts (Berlin: Aufbau-Verlag, 1956) (in English:
“Heinrich Heine as National Poet,” in German Realists in the Nineteenth Century,
trans. Jeremy Gaines and Paul Keast, ed. Rodney Livingstone [Cambridge, MA: MITPress, 1993] ). —translator ] And Lukács concludes: “Heine’s struggle against ten-
dentiousness is therefore a thrust in the direction of true, genuine and deep politicalpoetry, where the tendentiousness develops organically out of the subject itself, ratherthan being plastered over the contents in abstract and prosaic manner” [ German Real-
ists,146]. With the same words, we could define the political poetry of Sousândrade,
in contrast to overflowing and superficial Brazilian romantic oratory.
15. “His major poem, Guesa errante, is one of the most ambitious works ever
produced in Latin America; and his life illustrates the archetypal struggle of theLatin American intellectual between ‘barbarism’ and ‘civilization.’ . . . If any poemdeserves the title of Latin American epic this is it.” See “Sousândrade’s Stock,”Times Literary Supplement (London), 24June 1965 ,541.
16.Suplemento literário de “O Estado de São Paulo,” 23December 1961.
17.Suplemento dominical do “Jornal do Brasil” (Rio de Janeiro), 28 October and
4November 1956 [republished in A arte no horizonte do provável (São Paulo: Per-
spectiva, 1969). —editors ].
18. Stockhausen, “Sprache und Musik,” Darmstädter Beitrage zur neuen Musik
(Mainz) ( 1958). In Cologne, in July 1959, I had the opportunity to discuss with the
composer the relationships between the new music and the new poetry. In Augustof that same year, at a lecture given during the Darmstadt summer course, Stock-hausen made reference to the new Brazilian concrete-poetry experiments (recentlypublished in Germany by the magazine nota2[Munich]) and to the new German
poetry (Hans G. Helms). He compared them to what was being done in music byhim (“Zyklus”); Cornelius Cardew (“Five Books of Study for Pianist,” 1958; “Piano
Piece,” 59); Sylvano Bussoti (“Piano Pieces for David T udor”); John Cage (“Piano
Concerto”); Mauricio Kagel (“T ransición II”). See Stockhausen, “Musik undGraphik,” Darmstädter Beitrage (Mainz) ( 1960).
19. “Marco Zero de Andrade,” Suplemento literário de “O Estado de São Paulo,”
24October 1964.
20.“M
orgenstern, poeta alemão de vanguarda,” Jornal de letras (Rio de Janeiro),
June 1958; “O fabulário lingüístico de Christian Morgenstern,” Página Invenção
do “Correio paulistano,” 4December 1960.
376 Notes to Pages 264 –7421.Página Invenção do “Correio paulistano,” 15May 1960.
22. “Reduzierte Sprache / Über einen Text von Gertrude Stein,” republished in
the work quoted in note 5.
23. Cf. Patrick Bridgwater, ed. and trans., Twentieth-Century German Verse
(Harmondsworth, Eng.: Penguin, 1963). The comparison between Heissenbüttel
and Brecht was done by Walter Jens, Deutsche Literatur der Gegenwart (Munich:
Piper, 1962). See also Haroldo de Campos, “T rês poemas de Helmut Heissenbüt-
tel,” Página Invenção do “Correio paulistano,” 21February 1960, and “Breve Antolo-
gia de Bertolt Brecht,” T empo brasileiro (Rio de Janeiro) 9/10 (1966 ).
24. Cf. Afterword by the composer Gottfried Michael König.
25. “Voraussetzungen (Aus Anlass einer Lesung von H. G. Helms),” Akzente
(Munich) 5(1961 ).
26.Die Ideologie der anonymen Gesellschaft (Cologne: DuMont Schauberg,
1967). Helms seems to have abandoned, at least temporarily, the field of artistic
creation.
27. “Premières notes sur la poésie concrète,” Gazette de Lausanne, 3June 1961 .
28. As Curt Meyer-Classon pointed out to me, this subtitle is ambiguous and
can mean: ( 1) hunt chase of maniacal readers; ( 2) claws or canines of those avid
readers.
29.I n1965, in the Albert Hall of London, before an audience of 6,000 people
who were merely expecting to hear Beat poetry (by poets such as Ginsberg, Corso,and Ferlinghetti), Jandl achieved eloquent success, demonstrating the somewhatcomplex oralization possibilities of concrete poetry. Cf. “Stirring Times,” Times
Literary Supplement (London), 17June 1965 .
30. I quote the introductory remarks of playwright Friedrich Dürrenmatt.31. See H. M. Enzensberger, Die Entstehung eines Gedichtes (Frankfurt:
Suhrkamp, 1962); Haroldo de Campos, “Maiakovski em português: Roteiro de
uma tradução,” Revista do livro (Instituto Nacional do Livro, MEC, Rio de
Janeiro) 23/24 (1961 ).
32.I nBildenschift (F
 rankfurt: Suhrkamp, 1965), the experimental trend in
Enzensberger’s poetry is accentuated.
33. Otto Maria Carpeaux, A literatura alemã (São Paulo: Editora Cultrix, 1964).
On Schmidt, see also Carpeaux, “A álgebra do caos,” Correio da manhã (Rio de
Janeiro), 17February 1962.
34. See Walter Widmer, Fug und Unfug des Übersetzens (Cologne: Kiepenheuer
and Witsch, 1959).
35. The four volumes are bound into a single one, Aesthetica (Baden-Baden:
Agis Verlag, 1965). T wo other important volumes are Theorie der T exte (Cologne:
Kiepenheuer and Witsch, 1962 ) and Semiotik (Baden-Baden: Agis Verlag, 1967).
Bense’s work, forerunner of many of the trends of French structuralism, is surpris-ingly not very well known in France. In the bibliography of issue 4(“Recherches
sémiologiques”) of Communications, 1964, only Theorie der T exte is listed.
Notes to Pages 274–77 37736. See especially: Haroldo de Campos, “A nova estética de Max Bense,” Suple-
mento literário de “O Estado de São Paulo,” 21March and 4April 1959(republished
in Metalinguagem [Petrópolis: Editora Vozes, 1967]); “Montagem: Max Bense,”
Página Invenção do “Correio paulistano,” 6March 1960; “Max Bense: A fantasia
racional,” Correio da manhã (Rio de Janeiro), 9May 1964; “Max Bense on Brasília”
(translation), Invenção (São Paulo) 2(1962 ).
37. Among E. Walther’s most notable works are Francis Ponge, Eine aesthetische
Analyse (Cologne: Kiepenheuer and Witsch, 1965) and the organization and intro-
duction of the writings of Charles Sanders Peirce, Die Festigung der Überzeugung
(Baden-Baden: Agis Verlag, 1965).
38. Especially: Noigandres / Konkrete T exte, ed. M. Bense and E. Walther, with a
preface by H. Heissenbüttel, Rott (Stuttgart) 7(1962); “Poesia concreta” (version of
the lecture delivered by M. Bense at the opening of the Brazilian concrete-poetry
exhibit at the Latin American Circle of the University of Freiburg, curated by JúlioMedaglia, 1963), Invenção 3(1963); “Konkrete Poesie,” Manuskripte (Graz, Austria)
11(1964); Experimentelle Schreibweisen, Rot (Stuttgart) 17(1964); “Konkrete Poesie
(Anlässlich des Sonderheftes noigandres zum zehnjaehrigen Bestehen dieser
Gruppe fur Konkrete Poesie in Brasilien),” Sprache im technischen Zeitalter (special
issue: T exttheorie und Konkrete Dichtung ) (Stuttgart) 15(1965 ). This last piece was
republished in Humboldt (Hamburg) 13 (1966 ).
39.Max Bense and Elisabeth Walther published in 1964 W
 illy Keller’s German
translation of “O cão sem plumas” by João Cabral de Melo Neto, Rot14.
The Ghost in the Text (Saussure and the Anagrams)
1. André Martinet, Élements de linguistique générale (Paris: Colin, 1960), translated
by Elisabeth Palmer as Elements of General Linguistics (London: Faber and Faber, 1964).
2. Roman Jakobson, “Closing Statement: Linguistics and Poetics,” in Style in
Language, ed. Thomas A. Sebeok (New York: Technology Press of MIT, 1960), 377.
Portuguese translation in Lingüística e comunicação (São Paulo: Cultrix, 1968).
3. Roman Jakobson, “Der grammatische Bau des Gedichts von B. Brecht ‘Wir
sind sie,’” in Beitrage zur Sprachwissenschaft, Volkskunde und Literaturforschung, eds.
A. V. Isacenko, W. Wissmann, and H. Strobach (Berlin: Akademie, 1965). Por-
tuguese translation as “A construção gramatical do poema ‘Nós somos ele’ de B.Brecht,” Lingüística, poética, cinema (São Paulo: Perspectiva, 1970).
4. Jakobson, “Der grammatische Bau de Gedichts.” [In French as “À la recher-
che de l’essence du langage,” in Problèmes du langage (Paris: Gallimard, 1966); in
Portuguese in the collection Lingüística, poética, cinema, note 3; and in English as
“Quest for the Essence of Language,” in Diogenes 51(1966 ), and collected in Lan-
guage in Literature (Cambridge: Belknap, 1987), 413–42.— translator]
5. Giulio C. Lepschy, La linguistica strutturale (T urin: Einaudi, 1966). Brazilian
publication under the title A lingüística estrutural (São Paulo: Perspectiva, 1971).
English version as A Survey of Structural Linguistics (London: Faber, 1970).
378 Notes to Pages 278 –826. Jacques Lacan, “L ’instance de la lettre dans l’inconscient, ou la raison depuis
Freud,” translated as “The Insistence of the Letter in the Unconscious,” Yale
French Studies 36–37 (1966 ): 122. In the book edition of Écrits (Paris: Seuil, 1966),
Lacan rewrote the original text in order to revise his judgment on Saussure and
poetry in light of Starobinski’s work.
7. Jean Starobinski, “Les anagrammes de Ferdinand de Saussure,” Mercure de
France 250(February 1964): 243–62. Subsequently, Starobinski published four
more works on the topic, which were collected in 1971in the book Les mots sous les
mots (Paris: Gallimard, 1971). [In Portuguese as As palavras sob as palavras (São
Paulo: Perspectiva, 1974); and in English as Words upon Words, trans. Olivia Emmet
(New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1979). —translator]
8.Le récit hunique (Paris: Editions du Seuil, 1967), 279.
9. Starobinski, “Les anagrammes.”10. Joaquim Mattoso Câmara Jr., Dicionário de fatos gramaticais (Rio de Janeiro:
Ministério da Educação e Cultura/Casa de Rui Barbosa, 1956), 30.
11. The superb hermeneutic work on the “verbal masks” of Lautréamont, pub-
lished by Leyla Perrone-Moisés, Suplemento literário de “O Estado de São Paulo,” 24May 1969, focuses above all on the field of the anagram strictly speaking (in this
case, a combinatory manipulation of the letters of a personal name).
12. Saussure quoted in Starobinski, Words upon Words, 18.
13. Starobinski, Words upon Words, 20.
14.I nFonema e fonologia, ed. and trans. J. Mattoso Câmara Jr. (Rio de Janeiro:
Livaria Acadêmica, 1967).
15. Saussure quoted in Starobinski, Words upon Words, 30.
16. Cf. “Retrospecto,” in Fonema e fonologia (note 14). Jakobson declared that,
in his pursuit of the nucleus of the poetic word, in his paronomastic handling ofminimal opposed pairs, Khlebniko v promoted the anticipation of the ultimate
phonemic units. 
The poet designated these phenomena as “the internal declension
of words.” Note for the first book edition: This essay of mine was published in 1969.
In1971, in the journal L ’homme, Jakobson printed the study “La première lettre de
Ferdinand de Saussure à Antoine Meillet sur les anagrammes,” which confirmedthe conjectures developed here about the affinities hinted at between the Saus-surian anagram and the Jakobsonian definition of the poetic function (affinitieswhich were made clear only with the discovery of the Genevan master’s unpub-lished manuscripts). Jakobson’s piece is now available in Questions de poétique(Paris: Seuil, 1973).
17. To see how this problem has today become a trend in the French avant-
garde of the 1960s and 1970s, read Jean Louis Houdebine’s paper, “L ’analyse struc-
turale et la notion du texte comme espace, ”Linguistique et littérature, a special
number of the journal La nouvelle critique (Paris, Colloque de Cluny, 1968).
18. Already in 1955, at the Teatro de Arena, this and other poems from the series
were rendered into oral form by the group Ars Nova, directed by Diogo Pacheco,
Notes to Pages 282–85 379simultaneously with a slide projection of its text-score, in a performance that also
included the music of Webern. Note for the first book edition: In a recent essay on
“Un coup de dés,” included in La révolution du langage poétique: l’avant-garde à la fin
du XIXe siècle: Lautréamont et Mallarmé (Paris: Seuil, 1974), Julia Kristeva recognizes
the relationship between the “phonic rhythm” of Mallarméan language and the “tim-bral melody” of Webern, a confirmation of the claims that concrete poetry was mak-ing in both the theory and the practice of the poem since the beginning of the 1950s.
[See the English translation of Kristeva’s essay in Revolution in Poetic Language, trans.
Margaret Waller (New York: Columbia University Press, 1984). —translator]
19. Starobinski, Words upon Words, 96.
20. Ibid., 128. See André Pirro, L ’esthétique de Jean-Sébastien Bach (Paris: 
Fischbacher, 1907); A Translation of the First Nine Chapters of “L ’esthétique de Jean-
Sébastien Bach” by André Pirro, trans. Esther Elizabeth Jones (Smith College the-
sis, 1933). Note for the first book edition: Scholars hesitate over the relationship
between Meillet and his teacher Saussure. Georges Mounin, Saussure: ou le struc-
turaliste sans le savoir (Paris: Seghers, 1968), writes: “One of the chief elements of
Saussure’s isolation is Meillet’s (profound) incomprehension.” T ullio de Mauro, inhis notes to the Italian edition of the Corso di linguistica generale (Bari: Laterza,
1968), comments in the following terms the correspondence exchanged by the
teacher and his student about the anagrams: “From Saussure’s selected correspon-dence one can infer that the Parisian student hesitated to reply frankly and musthave had a negative opinion about the whole investigation.” Jakobson, with goodarguments, seeks to demonstrate the opposite in his essay from 1971 quoted in note 16.
21. [De Campos is both paraphrasing and quoting Starobinski, Words upon
Words, 129.— translator ]
22. It would, in any case, be a matter of a phenomenon of “subliminal config-
uration,” like those that Jakobson studies in Slavic folk poetry. Cf. “Configuraçãoverbal subliminar em poesia,” in Lingüística, poética, cinema [see note 3]—a study
significantly headed by an epigraph drawn from Saussure’s manuscripts: “Que lecritique d’une part, et que le versificateur d’autre part, le veuille ou non” [Whetherthe critic on the one hand, and the versifier on the other hand, like it or not]. See“Subliminal Verbal Patterning in Poetry,” in Language in Literature, ed. Krystyna
Pomorska and Stephen Rudy (Cambridge: Belknap, 1987), 250–61 .
23. Compare with the following: “In poetry, verbal equations are raised to the
category of the constitutive principle of the text. . . . A phonological similarity isfelt to be a semantic kinship. The play on words, or, to introduce a more eruditeand perhaps more precise term, a paronomasia, queen of the poetic art” (“Apectos
lingüísticos da tradução,” in Lingüística e comunicação [São Paulo: Cultrix, 1968];
translated as “On Linguistic Aspects of T ranslation,” in Language in Literature
[Cambridge: Belknap, 1987], 428–35). Note for the first book edition: Evidently, the
concept of paronomasia, in J
akobson, is broad and functional (as are those of
metaphor and metonymy), overflowing from the “paronomial” words of the
380 Notes to Pages 285 –87rhetorical handbooks in order to gather “all the constituents of the verbal code,”
collated according to the principles studied in Jakobson’s “poetry of grammar.”
24.T el Quel 29 (1967); translated by Roland-François Lack as “Towards a Semi-
ology of Paragrams,” in The T el Quel Reader, ed. Patrick ffrench and Roland-
François Lack (London: Routledge, 1998), 25–49 .Note for the first book edition:
Brazilian publication in Julia Kristeva, Introdução à semanálise (São Paulo: Perspec-
tiva, 1974). I reproduce here what I wrote in my essay “Umbral para Max Bense,”
introducing Pequena estética (São Paulo: Perspectiva, 1971) by the philosopher from
Stuttgart: Kristeva undertakes in “Pour une sémiologie des paragrammes” a pro-ductive interpenetration of semiology and logical-mathematical formal diagrams,whose transposition is able to furnish a theoretical model for the explication of sig-nifying systems in natural language, considering any other application a posterioriof those diagrams as a secondary formalization, however not devoid of interest.Umberto Eco regards this “exasperated formalization of poetic discourse” withreservations ( A estrutura ausente [São Paulo: Perspectiva, 1971]); and Jacques
Roubaud and Pierre Lousson dispute it at the level of mathematical correctness(Action poétique, no. 41–42 ,[1969]). Nevertheless, Kristeva’s study (even aside from
her logico-mathematical pomp, which could be seen in this particular case as a use-ful “secondary” technique of illustrative diagrammatization), seems to me rich increative observations and daring provocations, thanks above all to the fascinatingelaborations that it makes on the “anagrammatic” postulates of the late Saussure.
25. Kristeva, it would seem, extracts this principle from Saussure’s following
observation: “I believe I could prove, by a large number of examples, that formalimprecisions, sometimes taken for archaisms, in Saturnian epigraphic poetry, aredeliberate, and are in accordance with the phonic laws of this poetry.”
26. Kristeva, “Towards a Semiology,” 25–26.
27. Ibid., 26.28.Note for the first book edition: It is quite true that, from a diachronic angle,
the investigations into the “anagrams” (undertaken between 1906 and 1909)a r e
more or less coeval with the lectures that are reproduced in the Cours (delivered
until 1911). From the synchronic perspective of today’s observer, however, these
exercises in anagrammatic deciphering, interrupted by unanswered questions andexcluded from the knowledge of the readers of the posthumous Cours (whose first
edition was in 1916)—Jakobson even speaks of the “dissimulation” of the manu-
scripts for “half a century”—reveal the hidden face of the master, laden with boldpremonitions, that only his successors would be capable of recuperating. (Remem-ber that even a specialist like R. Godel, still in 1960, would refer to the anagramnotebooks as a “tedious and sterile investigation.”)
Poetic Function and Ideogram/The Sinological Argument
1. Saussure attempted to establish a correspondence with Giovanni Pascoli
(1855–1912 ), a “Latinizing” Italian poet. The correspondence was ephemeral, how-
Notes to Pages 287–90 381ever, for so far as we know, Pascoli failed to answer the second letter Saussure sent
him regarding the occurrence of anagrams and related phenomena in modernLatin poetry. In Starobinski’s opinion, it was the Italian poet’s silence which, inter-preted as a sign of disapproval, caused Saussure to discontinue his research on thesubject. [Cf. Jean Starobinski, Words upon Words, trans. Olivia Emmet (New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1979), 120.— editors]I n  La letteratura italiana/
otto-novecento (1974), Gianfranco Contini opens up new perspectives from which
to consider these facts. According to this account, it was his craftsman’s “cunning”that lay behind Pascoli’s reluctance to furnish any information on the workings ofhis poetic activity and the “intimate structure of his texts.” At the same time, how-ever, Contini considers Pascoli’s poems in Italian sufficient to make him, withinthe existing literature in that language, “the greatest of the innovators of his time”(and the source of important contributions in the field of rhythm and timbre, forexample). For the same reason, Croce disapprovingly attributed to him (and toD’Annunzio) the responsibility of being “a forerunner and preparer of futurism.”Thus, rather than a denial, Pascoli’s silence may represent a voluntarily assumedprohibition.
2. Here it is worth recalling the importance which Robert Greer Cohn confers
to Les mots anglais in his book L ’oeuvre de Mallarmé: Un coup de dés, trans. René
Arnaud (Paris: Librairie les lettres, 1951). The extremely detailed study of this work
gives him a key to genuine deciphering operations of the anagram type (beforeStarobinski’s revelations), and which he performs on Mallarmé’s poetry inspiredby the poet’s own hypothesis that there was a “relation” between “the meaning ofwords” and their “external pattern.”
3. “Car c’est un véritable jeu chinois que le Saturnien, en dehors même de toute
chose regardant la métrique” (“For Saturnian verse, quite apart from any metricconsiderations, is like a Chinese game in its complexity”). Letter from Saussure,July 14,1906, quoted by Starobinski, Les mots sous les mots (Paris: Gallimard, 1971).
[English translation by Olivia Emmet, ed., Words upon Words, 9.— editors ]
4. This essay, “The Poet,” is fundamental to an understanding of Fenollosa’s
thought (in Ralph Waldo Emerson, Essays and Lectures [New York: Library of
America, 1983], 447–68 , quoted passages at 456–57 ). With regard to Vico, it is
worth noting that, in his Principi di una scienza nuova (1744), he took the “Chi-
nese model” into account, albeit marginally, in order to highlight the musicality ofthe Chinese language, related in his view to the “first song of the peoples”: “TheChinese, whose vulgar language has no more than three hundred articulate voca-bles, give them various modifications of pitch and time to match their one hun-dred and twenty thousand hieroglyphs, and thus speak by singing.” [In English:The New Science of Giambattista Vico, trans. Thomas Goddard Bergin and Max
Harold Fisch (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1968), 155.—editors ] On the
topicality of Vico’s poetics, see Alfredo Bosi’s invaluable work, “O ser e o tempo dapoesia,” Discurso 3(1972).
382 Notes to Pages 293 –975. According to V. Alleton, the thesis of the “pictographic origins” of writing is
“generally accepted”; in the case of Chinese, it is supported, if not exactly demon-
strated, by “the significant number of primitive characters which representobjects”—such figurative elements, she holds, survive in the corresponding present-day characters, although in an extremely schematic form. [See Viviane Alleton,L ’écriture chinoise, 2d ed. (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1976), 8.— edi-
tors] Derrida recalls the suggestive psychoanalytic interpretation of Chinese writ-
ing developed by Melanie Klein: for her, “(Note [Klein’s footnote]: [. . .] earlierpicture-script, which underlies our script too, is still active in the phantasies ofevery individual child, so that the various strokes, dots, etc., of our present scriptwould only be simplifications, achieved as a result of condensation, displacementand other mechanism familiar to us from dreams and neuroses, of the earlier pic-tures whose traces, however, would be demonstrable in the individual.) The sexual-symbolic meaning of the penholder is apparent in these examples. . . . It can beobserved how the sexual symbolic meaning of the penholder merges into the actof writing that the latter discharges.” [Jacques Derrida, Of Grammatology, trans.
Gayatri Chakravorty-Spivak (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1976),
334n.37.— editors ]
6. Matila C. Ghyka, a mathematician who doubled as a poet-philologist, took
a special interest in the phenomena of phonic or “dynamic” suggestion observedin words. In his invaluable Sortilèges du verbe (Paris: Gallimard, 1949), he wrote:
“Because Chinese ideograms represent visual and not phonetic symbols, Chinesemetaphors remain, in general, images in a strict sense. We can say in an approxi-mate way that Chinese people think and express themselves in enumerations, com-binations (permutations), and in images; the Semitic peoples in images andparables; “Westerners” in analogies and metaphors (condensed analogies)” ( 187).
7. In Brazil, D. Pignatari has been concerned, since his pioneering study Semi-
ótica e literatura (São Paulo: Perspectiva, 1974), with the problem of the Peircean
hypo-icon. He proposes that paronomasia rather than metaphor (the tertiaryhypo-icon) should be considered “the figure most suited to the paradigmatic axisof similarities”—at least, “as far as the artistic iconic sign is concerned.” Pignatarigoes on to assert, referring to Freud and Lacan, that it is not a case of “associationof ideas” but rather of “association of forms” ( 47, 48, 49, 82, 83 ).
8. V. Alleton points out: “The explanation of the Chinese character as being a
kind of etymological rebus has always enjoyed the greatest prestige. . . . It is aneffective mnemonic system, often with an etymological basis, although it does notconstitute a linguistic analysis” ( 19–20). She further notes that, although “it does
not suffice to look at the characters in order to discover their meaning,” this doesnot mean that “when meeting an unknown ideogram a Chinese reader does notattempt to guess or imagine what word it represents” (by analogy with knowncharacters) “and very often manage to decipher it” ( 20). This “imaginative” or cre-
ative lexicographic tradition, which originates in ancient Chinese practices, was
Notes to Pages 297–99 383exhaustively documented and established in the West by the Jesuit L. Wieger in his
book Chinese Characters: Their Origin, Etymology, History, Classification, and Sig-
nification; A Thorough Study from Chinese Documents (1915, English translation,
reissued in 1965 by Dover Publications, New York, from the French original of
1899). Some authors, such as R. A. D. Forrest, The Chinese Language (London:
Faber and Faber, 1948), deplore, from the viewpoint of practical efficacy, the
“hyper-refinement” of these scholars, which led to their “beautifying written formswith unnecessary or pleonastic significations.” In Sound and Symbol in Chinese
(London: Oxford University Press, 1923), B. Karlgren speaks of “errors of compre-
hension” of the ancient characters, of “deliberate substitution” and of “the inven-tions of careless scribes”; and he refers to the celebrated compilation made by Li Siin about 213 b.c. H. G. Porteus, on the other hand (“Ezra Pound and His ChineseCharacter: A Radical Examination,” 1950), counterargues that this kind of criti-
cism represents “the insensitive solemnity of professional philologists.” In this caseit would not be appropriate to speak of “errors.” Li Si, he asserts, was not a “blindfool”; on the contrary, “there are countless indications that he was a poet of greatresourcefulness and imagination”; a poet-etymologist who was often skillfulenough to “rehabilitate obsolete characters with the vivacity of new images, andthus preserve the concrete and poetic essence of the language.” In this sense, in hisPound e la Cina (Milan: Feltrinelli, 1974), G. Mancuso misses the mark, when, in
referring to a second compilation, Shuo-Wen (a revision and expansion of Li Si’s,
in about 200 a.d .), he remarks: “The latest studies show that many traditional
characters classified as compound ideograms are in reality phonetic compounds”;ancient Chinese literati often committed veritable “ad hoc reconstructions” to jus-tify the etymologies they put forward, striving “very fancifully to interpret themetaphorical meaning of certain compounds which it would be more appropriateto classify as phonetic.” If we recall the importance of a dictionary such as the Lit-
tréhad for Mallarmé, we can see how at the poetic level the weight of this 
centuries-old etymo-fugurative tradition renders the criterion of philologic “truth”irrelevant. . . .
9. Within the framework of Derrida’s conception of archi-écriture—the move-
ment of différance —the oral language is already writing in the general sense,
regardless of “graphics,” strictly speaking. “Arche-writing” involves a trace, which,as an “arche-phenomenon of memory” that precedes the nature/culture opposi-tion, belongs to “the very movement of signification itself,” always “written a pri-ori” whether or not it is inscribed in a sensible “external” form. The question oforigin (“the myth of the simplicity of origin”) is thus shifted. Having stressed thatfrom the viewpoint of linguistic science, both the theory of the precedence ofspeech over writing (“classical structuralism”) and that of the absence of hierarchyin the “substance of expression,” be it vocal or graphic (glossemic), seem to be con-sistent and that “it is hard to decide which is more valid,” V. Alleton refers back toDerrida’s Grammatologie for the philosophical implications of the problem (see
384 Notes to Pages 299 –301Alleton, L ’écriture chinoise, 68). It would be appropriate at this point to recapitu-
late the contribution made by the Prague Linguistic Circle, through Mukaˇ rovsk´ y,
to the aesthetic enhancement of the graphic plane (choice of type, arrangement on
the page, innovative use of punctuation, capitals and lowercase, etc.), whose
importance in the “structure of poetic works” had been neglected, according to theCzech theoretician, in favor of the preponderance of the acoustic viewpoint (cf.“Plan graphique, phonique et poétique,” Travaux du Cercle linguistique de Prague
4[1931]; transcribed in Change 3, 1969 ).
10. In his essay on modernist poetics, “A escrava que não é Isaura” ( 1923), writ-
ten under the influence of post-Mallarméan European simultaneism (Divoire,Beaudoin), Mário de Andrade focuses on the passage from “melody” (concatena-tion) to “polyphony” (superimposition), with the aim of obtaining a “final totalcomplex sensation” in the renewed poem. He makes a further distinction between“harmony” (“combination of simultaneous sounds”) and “harmonic verse” (madeup of loose words without connection): “instead of melody (grammatical phras-ing) we have arpeggios, harmony-harmonic verse,” and “poetic polyphony” (“loosephrases”): “same feeling of superimposition, no longer of words (notes) but ofphrases (melodies).” (Cf. “Prefácio interessantíssimo,” 1921 [English version as
“Most Interesting Preface” in Mário de Andrade, Hallucinated City, trans. Jack E.
Tomlins {Nashville: Vanderbilt University Press, 1968}—translator].) The lin-
guist Mitsou Ronat, in “Vers une lecture des ‘Anagrammes’ par la théorie saussuri-enne,” Change 6(1970), defines the postulate of the “linearity of the signifier” as
“music without chords” and the principle of the anagram as “music with chords.”
11.With a tactical gesture, Fenollosa places the phonic level of Chinese poetry in
parentheses, precisely in order to concentrate on the graphic plane, which providedhim with incomparable raw material for reflection. It does not seem justifiable toattribute this attitude to a lack of interest in the acoustic aspects of poetry. Thiswould be inconceivable in someone who for years had studied and practiced thesinging and acting methods of Noh theater under Umewaka Minoru and admiredin this ancient art of poetic theater the “delicate combination” of “appeals to the eye,the ear and the mind” in order to obtain a “lucid and unified impression.” Thus, thelegitimate concern expressed by J.Y. Liu when he in turn highlights “the highly com-plex organic development of sound and sense” ( Art of Chinese Poetry [Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, 1962], 19) in Chinese poetry should not serve as a motive to
obscure once again the visual aspects which Fenollosa brought to light, howevermuch they were accompanied by excesses which performed a “shifting” function (inDerrida’s sense of the word). It should be noted that since his “terminal note” addedin 1935to his edition of Fenollosa’s essay, Pound had recognized the importance of
sound as a parameter in Chinese poetry: “Whatever few of us learned from Fenol-losa twenty years ago, the whole Occident is still in crass ignorance of the Chineseart of verbal sonority. I now doubt if it was inferior to the Greek” ( 33). In his intro-
Notes to Pages 301–11 385duction to The Classic Anthology Defined by Confucius (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1954), Achilles Fang recalls another assertion of Pound’s: “There
can’t be any real understanding of a good Chinese poem without knowledge both of
the ideogram reaching the eye, and the metrical and melodic form reaching the earor aural imagination” (xii). David Gordon recalls the poet in the 1950s, during a
moment of leisure on the lawn at St. Elizabeths Hospital, “chanting the Chinesesounds” of the Odes he was translating with an “operatic” virtuosity of expressionand “tremendous subtlety of intonation” (at a time when Pound was already faradvanced in his long-lasting dealings with Chinese poetry) (“‘Root/Br./By Product’In Pound’s Confucian Ode 166,” Paideuma 3[1974]: 13–25).
12.Liu, Art of Chinese Poetry, 12.
13. For my interpretation of the ideograms, I have made use of the cited works
by the Vaccaris and the Jesuit Wieger.
14. Liu, Art of Chinese Poetry, 12. My translation of Li Shang-yin’s poem is
included in full in my essay “Uma arquitextura do Barroco,” in A operação do texto
(São Paulo: Perspectiva, 1976), where I comment on the “trans-creative” solutions
adopted.
15. Porteus, “Pound and his Chinese Character,” 205.
16. Ibid., 212.17. François Cheng, “Le ‘langage poétique’ chinois,” in La traversée des signes,
[ed. Julia Kristeva et al. (Paris: Éditions du Seuil, 1975)— editors ], 45.
18. Ibid.19. Ibid., 45–46.20. Ibid., 46.21. Ibid., 45 n.4.
22. Ibid., 45.23. To translate this poem, I went back to the original text with its literal ren-
dering given by Wai-Lim Yip: “The Chinese Poem: A Different Mode of Repre-sentation,” Delos 3(1969 ). It was possible to decipher the ideograms by means of
the works cited in note 13above, in addition to Mathews’ Chinese-English Dictio-
nary, 9th ed. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1963). My translation is
published in full in the magazine Poesia em greve (1975).
24. It is worth recalling here the conclusions of the “Urbino Colloquium”
(1976 )on the relations between “text” and “context.” These are said to be relations
of contiguity
, or metonymic relations (selection of certain structural features which
pass from the latter to the former, where they may even perform a different func-tion) rather than of similitude, or metaphoric relations, “from the copy to the orig-
inal” (see T. Todorov, “L ’analyse du récit à Urbino,” Communications 11[1968 ]).
25. Chisolm, Fenollosa, 203.
26. Quoted in ibid., 204.
27.Semiótica e literatura (São Paulo: Perspectiva, 1974), 56.
386 Notes to Pages 312 –20Translation as Creation and Criticism
1. Albrecht Fabri, “Präliminarien zu einer Theorie der Literatur,” Augenblick
(Stuttgart/Darmstadt) 1(March 1958).
2. Max Bense, “Das Existenzproblem der Kunst,” Augenblick (Stuttgart/Darm-
stadt) 1(March 1958).
3. Jean-Paul Sartre, “Qu’est-ce que c’est la littérature?” in Situations II (Paris:
Gallimard, 1951). [In English: What Is Literature? trans. Bernard Frechtman (New
York: Philosophical Library, 1942), 18.— editors ]
4. Paulo Rónai, Escola de tradutores (Rio de Janeiro: Livraria São José, 1956).
5. Charles Morris, Signs, Language and Behavior (New York: Prentice-Hall, 1950).
6. Ezra Pound, Literary Essays (Norfolk: New Directions, 1954), 232.
7. Ibid., 34.
8. Ibid., 34–35.9. Ibid., 75.10. T. S. Eliot, “Euripides and Professor Murray,” Selected Essays (London: Faber
and Faber, 1934), 50.
11. “What is remarkable about Pound’s Chinese translations is that so often they
do contrive to capture the spirit of their originals, even when, as quite often hap-pens, they funk or fumble the letter. [ . . . ] His pseudo-Sinology releases his latentclairvoyance, just as the pseudo-sciences of the ancients sometimes gave them asupernormal insight.” Hugh Gordon Porteus, “Ezra Pound and His Chinese Char-acter: A Radical Examination,” in Ezra Pound, ed. Peter Russell (London: Peter
Nevil Ltd., 1950), 205.
12. Hugh Kenner, introduction to Translations, by Ezra Pound (London: Faber
and Faber, 1953), 11–12.
13. Boris Pasternak, Essai d’autobiographie (Paris: Gallimard, 1958), 55.
14. We thank Professor Boris Schneiderman for his information on Pasternak’s
translations of S hakespear
e.
15. Sílvio Romero, “Manuel Odorico,” História da literatura brasileira, vol. 1
(Rio de Janeiro: H. Garnier, 1902).
16. Manuel Odorico Mendes, Odisséia de Homero, 2d ed. (São Paulo: Atena
Editora, 1957).
17. Manuel Odorico Mendes, A Ilíada de Homero, 2d ed. (São Paulo: Atena Edi-
tora, 1958).
18. Roland Barthes, writing about Michel Butor’s Mobile in Essais critiques
[(Paris: Editions du Seuil, 1964)— editors], calls attention to the fact that the
Homeric enumeration, true “epic catalogues,” as Barthes calls it, may be painted incontemporary colors and so come to give testimony on the “infinite co-possibilityof war and power.” Odorico Mendes was right, then, in censuring the translatorswho omitted these lists from their versions.
19. Pound made two adaptations of this line: “imaginary / Audition of the
phantasmal sea-surge” ( Mauberley), and “he lies by the poluphloisboious sea-coast”
Notes to Pages 320–29 387(Moeurs Contemporaines ). “Pelas praias do mar polissonoras” [“Along the poly-
sonorous beaches of the sea”] is a possible Portuguese translation of this line.
20. João Ribeiro, “Odorico Mendes— Odisséia ,” in Crítica, vol. 1(Rio de Janei-
ro: Ed. Academia Brasileira de Letras, 1952).
21. Pound, Literary Essays, 249.
22. Ibid., 35.
23. “Rhododáctylos Eos” [“The rosy-fingered Dawn”] is Homer’s epithet.
Odorico Mendes has this lovely solution: “a dedirrósea Aurora.”
24. Augusto de Campos, Décio Pignatari, and Haroldo de Campos, Cantares de
Ezra Pound (Rio de Janeiro: Ministério da Educação e Cultura, Serviço de Docu-
mentação, 1960).
25. Augusto de Campos, e. e. cummings: 10 poemas (Rio de Janeiro: Idem, 1960).
26. Augusto de Campos and Haroldo de Campos, Panaroma do Finnegans
Wake (São Paulo: Comissão Estadual de Literatura, 1962).
27. Porteus, “Pound and His Chinese Character,” 205.
Hölderlin’s Red Word
1. Quoted in Wolfgang Schadewaldt, “Hölderlin Übersetzung des Sophokles,”
Antike und Gegenwart: Über die Tragödie (Munich: Deutscher Taschenbuch Verlag,
1966), 115. The Portuguese version by Haroldo de Campos of the quoted phrase is
“Que se passa? T ua fala se turva de vermelho,” which recaptures the turbulence ofthe original metaphor.
2. Schadewaldt, “Hölderlin Übersetzung des Sophokles,” 115.
3. Ibid.4. It is worth noting that although the so-called madness poems must be
counted among Hölderlin’s most beautiful poetic accomplishments, many stillregard them with reserve. Thus, Geneviève Bianquis, in her well-known Frenchtranslations of Hölderlin’s poems, admits having excluded from her selection “theexcessively fragmentary hymns and poems of his madness.” In addition, Jaspers,upon diagnosing the poet’s schizophrenia, objected to the appreciation, which hefeared excessive, of the poems of this phase. Otto Maria Carpeaux, A literatura
alemã (São Paulo: Nova Alexandria, 1994).
5. Ibid., 117.6. Hölderlin, Sämtliche Werke, vol. 5, ed. N. von Hellingrath, Friedrich Seebass,
and Ludwig V. Pigenot (Berlin: Propyläen Verlag, 1923), p. XI.
7. Walter Benjamin, “The Task of the T ranslator,” Illuminations, ed. Hannah
Arendt, trans. Harry Zohn (New York: Harcourt, Brace and World, 1968), 81–82.
8. Bertolt Brecht, Über Lyrik (Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp Verlag, 1964), 93.
In Brecht’s Antigonenmodel, 1948, there is a “prelude” that relates the play to a cur-
rent political situation and that takes place in Berlin in April 1945. In the script
itself, many of Hölderlin’s solutions are preserved, but in a modified form (thus:“du farbst mir / scheint’s ein rotes Wort”).
388 Notes to Pages 330 –459. Schadewaldt, “Hölderlin Übersetzung des Sophokles,” 119–20.
10. Ibid., 125.
11. Ibid.12. Ibid.13. One of Pound’s last translations, published in 1954, was precisely Women of
Trachis, from a text by Sophocles. In his version, Pound attempted to capture the
dynamism of a spoken language, even using slang. However, as in The Cantos, the
passages of oral fluency contrast with moments of “super-poetry” reserved for thetreatment of the “Choruses.” It is interesting to compare Pound’s elliptical andarchaic-like language, the highly worked melopoeia of his “choruses,” with that ofHölderlin in his Sophoclean “choruses.”
14. Hugh Gordon Porteus, “Ezra Pound and his Chinese Character: A Radical
Examination,” in Ezra Pound, ed. Peter Russell (New York: Haskell House, 1968), 205.
15. [Schadewaldt, “Hölderlin Übersetzung des Sophokles.” — editors]
16. Or glimpsing a superb “Lady of azure thought,” where the professional
Sinologist is able to see only a “quiet girl.”
17. Benjamin, Illuminations, 80–81.
18. Ibid., 70.19. Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, West-östlicher Divan, ed. Ernst Bauder (Bre-
men: Carl Schunemann Verlag, 1956), 296.
Eucalypse: The Beautiful Occultation
1. I have numbered each line of the poem to facilitate its analysis. Throughout
the essay, I refer to anaphora (in Latin, repetitio ) in the broadest sense possible. As
I use it, the term means not only the repetition of one or more words in the begin-ning of successive verses but also the reiterative insistence on the same syntacticpatterns, even those involving occasional semantic variation. Cf. F . Lázaro Car-reter, Diccionario de términos filológicos (Madrid: Gredos, 1953); and H. Lausberg,
Elementos de retórica literária (Lisbon: Gulbenkian, 1966).
2. I have also followed Propp’s method to a great extent in Morfologia de Macu-
naíma (São Paulo: Perspectiva, 1973).
3. Although in different ways, Jakobson and Lacan have applied to the dual
concept of “metaphor/metonymy” the Freudian terms Verdichtung (condensation)
and Verschiebung (dislocation). In this regard, see N. Ruwet’s note to the French
translation of “Deux aspects du language et deux types d’aphasie,” in RomanJakobson, Essais de linguistique générale (Paris: Minuit, 1963), 66.
4. The image “cántaros de arriba” is of biblical extraction. See Job 38:37 , with its
reference to “niviê shamáyim.”
5. Hugh Kenner has called attention to this etymology in The Pound Era
(Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1971), 172. In the
Odyssey, Calypso—whose name derives from the same Greek verb and means “the
one that hides”—is the mistress of the island Ogygia. It is she who rescues the ship-
Notes to Pages 345–48 389wrecked Ulysses, keeping him for seven years in her remote and paradisiacal island.
I must remind the reader that, like the dryad in this poem, agent of the process ofeucalypse, Calypso is a beautiful and possessive nymph.
6. Endorsing an idea of Blake’s, Northrop Frye asserts that the Bible is the
“Great Code” of Western literature; see Northrop Frye, The Great Code/The Bible
and Literature (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1982).
7. Jorge Luis Borges, Nueve ensayos dantescos (Madrid: Espasa-Calpe, 1982). [In
English: “Nine Dantesque Essays,” trans. Esther Allen, in Selected Non-fictions:
Jorge Luis Borges, ed. Eliot Weinberger (New York: Viking, 1999), 300–301.— edi-
tors ] See also “Borges/Dante: tradição, tradução, paródia,” a panel discussion
with Emir Rodríguez Monegal, Haroldo de Campos, Irlemar Chiampi, and LeylaPerrone-Moisés, in Tradução e comunicação (São Paulo: Editora Álamo) 1,n o .  1
(December 1981).
8. Note that verses 57–63 articulate a network of words (“absence,” “echoes,”
ghosts”) reminiscent of Paz’s definition of melancholia in Sor Juana Inés de la Cruz
o Las trampas de la fe (Barcelona: Seix Barral, 
1982): “El melancólico no está enam-
orado de sí mismo sino de un objeto ausente” [The melancholic character is notin love with himself, but with an absent object]. In “Il fantasma di Eros,” a chap-ter in Stanze (T urin: Einaudi, 1977), Giorgio Agambem writes of a certain
“epiphany of the unseizable” installed in the space left open when “melancholicintrospection” turns toward an “unreal object.” In Paz’s poem, it is the “lover” who,in the face of the “vanishing” of the evasive beloved, feels surrounded by a “puñadode ecos” (a fistful of echoes) and of “sílabas fantasmas” (ghostly syllables), movingtoward the “centro de la ausencia” (center of absence).
9. Walter Benjamin, Ursprung des deutschen Trauerspiels (Frankfurt: Suhrkamp
Verlag, 1972).
10. In Andrew Marvell’s “To His Coy Mistress,” we find the metaphor of a
“vegetable love” slowly growing throughout the centuries, “vaster than empires.”Despite the fact that Paz, and, in Brazil, Augusto de Campos have producedadmirable translations of this poem, it is João Cabral de Melo Neto, as FranciscoAchcar has reminded me, who, in “História natural” (in Quaderna, 1960),
approaches the passage of the amorous experience through three stages: animal,vegetal, and mineral. He writes:
(pois os gestos revelamo ritmo luminalde planta, que se movemas no mesmo local).
No fim, já não se sabe
se ainda é vegetalou se a planta se fez
390 Notes to Pages 348 –56formação mineral
à força de querer
permanecer tal qual
(for gestures reveal
the luminal rhythmof a tree that movesbut still in place).
At the end, one doesn’t know
if it is still vegetalor whether the tree has becomemineral formation
by wanting to remain as such
In Marvell’s and Cabral’s examples, we are faced with metaphor and simile, respec-
tively; in Paz’s, the process is metamorphic, Ovidian.
11. G. W. F . Hegel, Aesthetik I/II (Vorlesungen über die Aesthetik ) (Stuttgart:
Reclam, 1980). I am referring here to the topic of Naturschönes und Kunstschönes as
discussed in the introduction ( 37–39). Max Bense writes about the modernity of
such a concept in “Die Aktualität der Hegelschen Aesthetik,” in Aesthetik und
Zivilisation (Krefeld and Baden-Baden: Agis Verlag, 1958).
Light: Paradisiacal Writing
1.Ezra Pound, “Cavalcanti—Medievalism,” in Literary Essays (Norfolk: New
Directions, 1954), 161 .
2. T. S. Eliot, “Dante,” in Selected Essays 1917–1932 (New York: Harcourt, Brace
and Company, 1960), 206.
3. Umberto Eco, Il problema estético in Tommaso d’Aquino (Milan: Bompiani, 1970).
4. Ibid.5. Pound, “Cavalcanti—Medievalism,” 189–90.
6. Eliot, “Dante,” 225.
7. Juri Lotman, “Il problema di una tipologia della cultura,” in I sistemi di signi
e lo strutturalismo soviético, ed. U. Eco and R. Faccani (Milan: Bompiani, 1969), 145.
8. Erich Auerbach, Dante, Poet of the Secular World, trans. Ralph Manheim
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1979), 130.
9. Norman O. Brown, Love’s Body (New York: Random House, 1966), 179.
10.Stéphane Mallarmé, “Les dieux antiques,” in Oeuvres complètes, ed. Henri
Mondor and G. Jean-Aubry (Paris: Gallimard, Bibliothèque de la Pléiade, 1945), 1190.
11. Eliot, “Dante,” 228.
12. Ezra Pound, The Spirit of Romance (Norfolk, CT: J. Laughlin, 1952), 150.
391Bibliography of Works by Haroldo de Campos
Poetry
Auto do possesso. São Paulo: Clube de Poesia, 1950. Anthology of poems.
“Antologia de poemas.” In Noigandres (São Paulo) 5(1962 ).
Xadrez de estrelas: Percurso textual, 1949/1974 .São Paulo: Perspectiva, 1976. Partially
translated into Spanish ( Transideraciones. Ed. Eduardo Milán and Manuel Ula-
cia [Mexico: El T ucán de Virginia, 1987]).
Signantia: quasi coelum. São Paulo: Perspectiva, 1979.
Galáxias (1963–1976). São Paulo: Ed. Ex-Libris, 1984. Complete French transla-
tion by Inês Oseki-Dépré ( 1998). Complete English translation by Odile Cis-
neros and Suzanne Jill Levine (forthcoming).
A educação dos cinco sentidos. São Paulo: Brasiliense, 1985. Spanish translation by
Andrés Sánchez Robayna (bilingual edition: La educación de los cinco sentidos.
Barcelona: Àmbit Serveis Editorials, 1990).
Finismundo: a última viagem. Ouro Preto: Tipografia do Fundo de Ouro Preto,
1990. Reprint, Rio de Janeiro: Sette Letras, 1997. T ranslated into Spanish (A. S.
Robayna), French (I. Oseki-Dépré), and Italian ( Baldus [T reviso, 1997]).
Os melhores poemas de Haroldo de Campos. São Paulo: Ed. Global, 1992.2d ed.,
1997. 3d ed., 2000.
Yugen: cuaderno japonés. Tenerife, Canarias: Ed. Revista Syntaxis, 1993. Poems
translated into Spanish by Andrés Sánchez Robayna.
Gatimanhas e felinuras. With Guilherme Mansur. Tipografia do Fundo de Ouro
Preto, 1994. French translation by Inês Oseki-Dépré.
Crisantempo: no espaço curvo nasce um. São Paulo: Perspectiva, 1998.
A máquina do mundo repensada. São Paulo: Ateliê, 2000.
Poetics, Theory, and Criticism
Revisão de Sousândrade. With A. de Campos. São Paulo: Ed. Invenção, 1964 .2d
expanded ed., Rio de Janeiro: Nova Fronteira, 1982. 3d ed., São Paulo: Perspec-
tiva, 2002.
T eoria da poesia concreta. With A. de Campos and D. Pignatari. São Paulo: Ed.
Invenção, 1965. 2d ed., São Paulo: Duas Cidades, 1975. 3d ed., São Paulo:
Brasiliense, 1987.
Metalinguagem. Petrópolis:Vozes, 1967.3d ed., São Paulo: Cultrix, 1976. Expanded
edition: Metalinguagem e outras metas. São Paulo: Perspectiva, 1992.
Oswald de Andrade. Rio de Janeiro: Agir/“Nossos Clássicos,” 1967.
Sousândrade—Poesia. With Augusto de Campos. Rio de Janeiro: Agir/“Nossos
Clássicos,” 1967.3d ed., revised and expanded, 1995.
392 Bibliography of Works by Haroldo de CamposA arte no horizonte do provável. São Paulo: Perspectiva, 1969.4th ed., 1977.
Guimarães Rosa em três dimensões. With Pedro Xisto and A. de Campos. São Paulo,
Comissão Estadual de Literatura, 1970.
Obras completas de Oswald de Andrade. Rio de Janeiro: Civilização Brasileira, 1971
and 1972.Critical introduction to vols. 2and 7.
Morfologia do Macunaíma. São Paulo: Perspectiva, 1973.
A operação do texto. São Paulo: Perspectiva, 1976.
Ideograma. São Paulo: Cultrix, 1977. 3d ed: EDUSP , 1994.
Ruptura dos gêneros na literatura latino-americana. São Paulo: Perspectiva, 1977.
Deus e o diabo no “Fausto” de Goethe. São Paulo: Perspectiva, 1981.
O sequestro do barroco na formação da literatura brasileira: O caso Gregório de Matos.
Bahia: Fundação “Casa de Jorge Amado,” 1989.
Livro de Jó. São Paulo: Giordano/Edições Loyola, 1993. Introduction and critical
edition of Elói Ottoni’s 1852translation of the book of Job.
Três (re)inscrições para Severo Sarduy. São Paulo: Memorial da América Latina, 1995.
O arco-íris branco. Rio de Janeiro: Imago, 1997. Essays on literature and culture.
Os sertões—Duas vezes Euclides. With A. de Campos. Rio de Janeiro: Sette Letras,
1997.
Translation
Cantares de Ezra Pound. With A. de Campos and D.Pignatari. Rio de Janeiro:
MEC/Serviço de Documentação, 1960. Edition published in Portugal: Antolo-
gia poética de Ezra Pound. Lisbon: Ulisséia, 1968. Expanded edition including
work by Mário Faustino and J. L. Grünewald, São Paulo: Hucitec/Ed. da Univ.
de Brasília, 1983. 2d ed. with the title Ezra Pound: Poesia, 1985.
Panaroma do Finnegans Wake de James Joyce. With A. de Campos. São Paulo: Per-
spectiva, 1962. 4th ed., São Paulo: Perspectiva, 2001.
Poemas de Maiakóvski. With A. de Campos and B. Schnaiderman. Rio de Janeiro:
Tempo Brasileiro, 1967. Various editions republished by Perspectiva in São Paulo.
Poesia russa moderna. With A. de Campos and B. Schnaiderman. Rio do Janeiro:
Civilização Brasileira, 1968. Various editions republished in São Paulo by
Brasiliense since 1985.
Traduzir e trovar. With A. de Campos. São Paulo: Papyrus, 1968.
Mallarmé. With A. de Campos and D. Pignatari. São Paulo: Perspectiva, 1974.
Dante: Seis cantos do Paraíso. Rio de Janeiro: Gastão de Holanda, 1976. Limited
edition of 100, illustrated by João Câmara. Regular edition: Rio de Janeiro:
Fontana/Istituto Italiano di Cultura, 1978.
Transblanco. With Octavio Paz. Rio de Janeiro: Guanabara, 1985.2d expanded ed.,
São Paulo: Siciliano, 1994.
Qohélet. São Paulo: Perspectiva, 1990.
Bibliography of Works by Haroldo de Campos 393Bere’shith. São Paulo: Perspectiva, 1993.
Hagoromo de Zeami. Bilingual edition. São Paulo: Estação Liberdade, 1994. Clas-
sical Japanese drama.
Mênis: A ira de Aquiles. Bilingual edition. With an essay by T rajano Vieira. São
Paulo: Nova Alexandria, 1994.
Escrito sobre jade. Ouro Preto: Tipografia do Fundo de Ouro Preto, 1996. Bilin-
gual edition of 22classical Chinese poems.
Pedra e luz na poesia de Dante. Bilingual edition. Rio de Janeiro: Imago, 1998.
A Ilíada de Homero. 2vols. São Paulo: Arx, 2002.
Éden: Um tríptico bíblico. São Paulo: Perspectiva, 2004.
395Index of Poem Titles
The group to which a poem belongs is indicated by italic text enclosed in parentheses.
Act of the Possessed, 7
Alea I—Semantic Variations (A Mock-
Pocket-Epic), 66
and here I begin (from Galáxias ), 122
As in Ovid: Metamorphosis, 141
As It Is, 104
Claustrophobia (from The Disciplines ),
15
Education of the Five Senses, The, 95
Essence of Omega, The, 21
excriptures (from lacunae ), 46
Finismundo: The Last Voyage ,131
Form of Hunger, 35
Goethean Opuscule, 109
Goethean Opuscule II, 113
Gongorine T ribute to Sá de Miranda,
150
Heraclitus Revisited ( 1973), 118
Hunger of Form, 27
Invincible Armada, The, (from The
Disciplines ), 17
Je est un autre: Ad Augustum ,106
Le don du poème, 117
Left-Winged Angel of History, The, 147
Links for a Renga, 146
Mencius: Theorem of White, 108Minima Moralia ,107
Minimal Landscape, 142
1984, Anno Orwelli I,114
Ode (Explicit) in Defense of Poetry on
St. Lukács’s Day, 98
on the jagged crown (from Galáxias ),
128
Paradisiacal Signifiers, 69
Paraphernalia for Hélio Oiticica, 119
passtimes and killtimes (from Galáx-
ias), 126
poemandala (from lacunae ), 44
Poem for Qohelet 1: New Year, Day
One, 143
Poem for Qohelet 2: In Praise of the
Termite, 144
Poem: Theory and Practice, The, (from
The Disciplines ), 13
Poet E
zra Pound Descends to Hell,
The, 151
Portrait of the Artist as an Old Man,
105
Provença: Motz E. L. Son, 116
Revolt of Objects, The, 145“’ rounded by flowers (from Galáxias ),
124
stuttertext (from lacunae ), 62
Tenzone, 115T ristia, 103
Haroldo de Campos ( 1929–2003 ) is renowned worldwide as one of the creators of
concrete poetry. He taught literary theory at the Pontifícia Universidade Católica
in São Paulo for most of his life and published several volumes of poetry and lit-erary theory. He was a prolific translator who introduced the work of many foreignpoets to Brazil, including that of Ezra Pound in the early 1950s.
Antonio Sergio Bessa is director of curatorial and educational programs at theBronx Museum of the Arts in New York. 
Odile Cisneros is an assistant professor in the Department of Modern Languages
and Cultural Studies and the Program in Comparative Literature at the Universityof Alberta in Edmonton, Canada.
Avant-Garde & Modernism Collection
General Editor
Rainer RumoldMarjorie Perloff
Avant-Garde & Modernism Studies
General EditorsMarjorie PerloffRainer Rumold
Consulting Editors
Peter FenvesStephen FosterChristine FroulaFrançoise LionnetRobert von Hallberg
