How to 
expropriate 
money 
from the 
banks 
Displaced Legal Application #1: 
Fractional Reserve
Index
The mandrake 
mechanism I 
Qmunty
Manual  
—Step by step
Enric Duran
Between reality  
and legality
Simona Sarau
Do you owe money  
to the bank? 
If you do not pay,  
you will be free
Col·lectiu Crisis
I don’t believe in  
nothing but I believe  
in everything
Lucio Urtubia05
15
31
45
53
The 
mandrake 
mechanism
 Qmunty
The mandrake mechanism
In the 1940s, there was a comic strip character called Mandrake 
the Magician.  His specialty was creating things out of nothing 
and, when appropriate, to make them disappear back into that 
same void. It is fitting, therefore, that the process to be de -
scribed in this section should be named in his honor. 
When the technique developed by the political and monetary 
scientists to create money is explained, the people think that 
money is created first and then waits for someone to borrow 
it. On the other hand, textbooks on banking often state that 
money is created out of debt. These are misleading because it 
implies that debt exists first and then is converted into money. 
In truth, money is not created until the instant it is borrowed. 
It is the act of borrowing which causes it to spring into exist -
ence. And, incidentally, it is the act of paying off the debt that 
causes it to vanish.
There is no short phrase that perfectly describes that pro -
cess. So, until one is invented along the way, we shall continue 
using the phrase "create money out of nothing" and occasion -
ally add "for the purpose of lending" where necessary to further 
clarify the meaning.
So, let us now...see just how far this money/debt-creation 
process has been carried and how it works. 
The first fact that needs to be considered is that our money 
today has no gold or silver behind it whatsoever. The fraction 
is not 54% nor 15%. It is 0%. It has traveled the path of all pre -
vious fractional money in history and already has degenerated 
into pure fiat money. The fact that most of it is in the form 
of checkbook balances rather than paper currency is a mere 
technicality.
The fact that bankers speak about "reserve ratios" is eye 
wash. The so-called reserves to which they refer are, in fact, 
Treasury bonds and other certificates of debt. Our money is 
pure fiat through and through. 
The second fact that needs to be clearly understood is 
that, in spite of the technical jargon and seemingly compli -
cated procedures, the actual mechanism by which the Federal 
Reserve creates money is quite simple. They do it exactly the Does the bank own the money which, by  
contract, it agrees to give to the debtor  
in order to buy his house?
Can the bank oblige a person who  
cannot repay his mortgage in full to hand  
over his house?
No, because the money  the bank signs 
as lent by contract is actually created at 
the same moment that the mortgage is 
signed . This is obviously illegal as no-one 
can loan something they do not own. As a 
consequence, no-one can be accused of 
owing money if that money did not exist 
when it was lent.
07
The decree appears on the currency notes: "This note is legal 
tender for all debts, public and private." While no individu -
al could refuse to accept such money for debt repayment, 
exchange contracts could easily be composed to thwart its 
use in everyday commerce. However, a forceful explanation 
as to why money is accepted is that the federal government 
requires it as payment for tax liabilities. Anticipation of the 
need to clear this debt creates a demand for 
the pure fiat dollars. 4
Money would vanish without debt 
It is difficult for Americans to come to grips with the fact that 
their total money supply is backed by nothing but debt, and it 
is even more mind boggling to visualize that, if everyone paid 
back all that was borrowed, there would be no money left in 
existence. That's right, there would not be one penny in circu -
lation -- all coins and all paper currency would be returned to 
bank vaults -- and there would be not one dollar in any one's 
checking account. In short, all money would disappear.
Marriner Eccles was the Governor of the Federal Reserve 
System in 1941. On September 30 of that year, Eccles was 
asked to give testimony before the House Committee on 
Banking and Currency. The purpose of the hearing was to ob -
tain information regarding the role of the Federal Reserve in 
creating conditions that led to the depression of the 1930s. 
Congressman Wright Patman, who was Chairman of that com -
mittee, asked how the Fed got the money to purchase two bil -
lion dollars worth of government bonds in 1933. This is the 
exchange that followed.
eccles : We created it. 
patmos : Out of what? 
eccles : Out of the right to issue credit money. 
patmos : And there is nothing behind it, is there, except our 
government's credit? 
eccles : That is what our money system is. If there were no 
debts in our money system, there wouldn't be any money.3. Modern Money Mechanics,  
Federal Reserve Bank of 
Chicago, p. 3.4. Money, Credit and Velocity .  
Review, May, 1982. Vol 64,  
N º 5, p. 25.same way the goldsmiths of old did except, of course, the 
goldsmiths were limited by the need to hold some precious 
metals in reserve, whereas the Fed has no such restriction.
The federal reserve is candid 
The Federal Reserve itself is amazingly frank about this pro -
cess. A booklet published by the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York tells us: "Currency cannot be redeemed, or ex -
changed, for Treasury gold or any other asset used as back -
ing. The question of just what assets 'back' 
Federal Reserve notes has little but book -
keeping significance." 1
Elsewhere in the same publication we are told: "Banks are cre -
ating money based on a borrower's promise to pay (the IOU).
Banks create money by 'monetizing' the private debts of busi -
nesses and individuals. 2
In a booklet entitled Modern Money Mechanics, 
the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago says: “In the United 
States neither paper currency nor deposits have value as 
commodities. Intrinsically, a dollar bill is just a piece of paper. 
Deposits are merely book entries. Coins do have some intrinsic 
value as metal, but generally far less than their face amount”. 
   What, then, makes these instruments (checks, paper money, 
and coins) acceptable at face value in payment of all debts and 
for other monetary uses? Mainly, it is the confidence people have 
that they will be able to exchange such money for other financial 
assets and real goods and services whenever they choose to do 
so. This partly is a matter of law; currency has 
been designated "legal tender" by the govern -
ment — that is, it must be accepted.3
In the fine print of a footnote in a bulletin of the Federal Reserve 
Bank of St. Louis, we find this surprisingly candid explanation:
Modern monetary systems have a fiat base -- literally mo -
ney by decree -- with depository institutions, acting as fi -
duciaries, creating obligations against themselves with the 
fiat base acting in part as reserves. 1. I Bet You Thoght, Fede ral 
Reserve Bank of New York,  
p. 11.
2. Ibid., p. 19.
08 09
The Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago adds: 
Debt —public and private— is here to stay. It plays an 
essential role in economic processes.What is required is 
not the abolition of debt, but its prudent use 
and intelligent management.  6
What’s wrong with a little debt? 
There is a kind of fascinating appeal to this theory. It gives 
those who expound it an aura of intellectualism, the appear -
ance of being able to grasp a complex economic principle that 
is beyond the comprehension of mere mortals. And, for the less 
academically minded, it offers the comfort of at least sounding 
moderate. After all, what's wrong with a little debt, prudently 
used and intelligently managed? The answer is nothing, provid -
ed the debt is based on an honest transaction. There is plenty 
wrong with it if it is based upon fraud.
An honest transaction is one in which a borrower pays an 
agreed upon sum in return for the temporary use of a lender's 
asset. That asset could be anything of tangible value. If it were 
an automobile, for example, then the borrower would pay "rent." 
If it is money, then the rent is called "interest." Either way, the 
concept is the same.
But what are we to think of money that is created by the mere 
stroke of a pen or the click of a computer key? Why should an -
yone collect a rental fee on that? When banks place credits into 
your checking account, they are merely pretending to lend you 
money. In reality, they have nothing to lend. Even the money that 
non-indebted depositors have placed with them was originally 
created out of nothing in response to someone else's loan. So 
what entitles the banks to collect rent on nothing? It is immateri -
al that men everywhere are forced by law to accept these nothing 
certificates in exchange for real goods and services. 
One reason to abolish the system 
Centuries ago, usury was defined as any interest charged for 
a loan. Modern usage has redefined it as excessive interest. 6. Two faces of Debt , 
Federal Reserve Bank of 
Chicago, p. 33. It must be realized that, while money may represent an asset 
to selected individuals, when it is considered as an aggregate 
of the total money supply, it is not an asset at all. A man who 
borrows $1,000 may think that he has increased his financial 
position by that amount but he has not. His $1,000 cash asset 
is offset by his $1,000 loan liability, and his net position is zero. 
Bank accounts are exactly the same on a larger scale. Add 
up all the bank accounts in the nation, and it would be easy 
to assume that all that money represents a gigantic pool of 
assets which support the economy. Yet, every bit of this money 
is owed by someone. Some will owe nothing. Others will owe 
many times what they possess. All added together, the national 
balance is zero. What we think is money is but a grand illusion. 
The reality is debt.
Robert Hemphill was the Credit Manager of the Federal 
Reserve Bank in Atlanta. In the foreword to a book by Irving 
Fisher, entitled 100% Money, Hemphill said this: 
If all the bank loans were paid, no one could have a bank 
deposit, and there would not be a dollar of coin or cur -
rency in circulation. This is a staggering thought. We are 
completely dependent on the commercial banks. Someone 
has to borrow every dollar we have in circulation, cash, or 
credit. If the banks create ample synthetic money we are 
prosperous; if not, we starve. We are absolutely without 
a permanent money system. When one gets a complete 
grasp of the picture, the tragic absurdity of our hopeless 
situation is almost incredible -- but there it is. 
With the knowledge that money in America is based on debt, it 
should not come as a surprise to learn that the Federal Reserve 
System is not the least interested in seeing a reduction in debt 
in this country, regardless of public utterances to the contrary. 
Here is the bottom line from the System's own publications. 
The Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia says:
A large and growing number of analysts, on the other 
hand, now regard the national debt as something useful, 
if not an actual blessing....[They believe] the 
national debt need not be reduced at all.55. The National Debt , 
Federal Reserve Bank of 
Philadelphia, p. 2-11.
10 11
Who creates the money to pay the interest? 
One of the most perplexing questions associated with this pro -
cess is "Where does the money come from to pay the interest?" 
The amount of money put into circulation just isn't enough to 
cover the total debt, including interest. The assumption is that 
anyone out of their debt positions and means that someone 
must always be insolvent. It is as if we could only get out of 
debt by issuing more debt. 
This is a partial truth. It is true that there is not enough mon -
ey created to include the interest, but it is a fallacy that the only 
way to pay it back is to borrow still more. The assumption fails 
to take into account the exchange value of labor. 
It is not necessary that you work directly for the bank. No 
matter where you earn the money, its origin was a bank and its 
ultimate destination is a bank. The loop through which it travels 
can be large or small, but the fact remains all interest is paid 
eventually by human effort. And the significance of that fact is 
even more startling than the assumption that not enough mon -
ey is created to pay back the interest. It is that the total of this 
human effort ultimately is for the benefit of those who create 
fiat money. It is a form of modern serfdom in which the great 
mass of society works as indentured servants to a ruling class 
of financial nobility. Certainly, any amount of interest charged for a pretended loan 
is excessive. The dictionary, therefore, needs a new definition.
usury : the charging  of any interest  
on a loan of fiat money . 
Thomas Edison summed up the immorality of the system when 
he said: 
People who will not turn a shovel of dirt on the project nor 
contribute a pound of materials will collect more money...then 
will the people who will supply all the materials and do all the 
work.
Is that an exaggeration? Let us consider the purchase of 
a 200,000€ home. If the home buyer puts up 50,000€ as a 
down payment, then 150,000€ must be borrowed. If the loan is 
issued at 5% over a 35-year period, at the end of the loan will 
be returned 300,000€. That means he will return the 150,000 
originals plus another 150,000 in interests.
But, did the bank had the 150.000 euros that were requested 
as a loan? It´s evident that if they did it would be fair not only 
giving back the money, but also the interests agreed. But if the 
bank didn´t have them, then what´s the reason to give the mon -
ey back?  why the interests should by paid for something that 
was pretended to be given, when in reality it wasn´t that way?
As we have already shown, every entity monetary exists only 
because it was borrowed by someone; perhaps not you, but 
someone. That means all the money in the entire world are 
earning daily and compounding interest for the banks which 
created them. And what did the banks do to earn this perpetu -
ally flowing river of wealth? Did they lend out their own capital 
obtained through investment of stockholders? Did they lend 
out the hard-earned savings of their depositors? No, neither of 
these were their major source of income. They simply waved 
the magic wand called fiat money.
The flow of such unearned wealth under the guise of in -
terest can only be viewed as usury of the highest magnitude. 
Even if there were no other reasons to abolish the Fed, the fact 
that it is the supreme instrument of usury would be more than 
sufficient by itself.
12 13
Links to consult for more information
http://qmunty.com/blog/2011/01/10/el-mecanismo-de-  
la-mandragora-i/ 
http://qmunty.com/blog/2011/01/14/el-mecanismo-de-  
la-mandragora-ii/
http://qmunty.com/blog/2010/12/27/la-criatura-de-jekyll-  
island-i/
http://qmunty.com/blog/2010/12/29/la-criatura-de-jekyll-  
island-ii/
http://qmunty.com/blog/2010/12/17/el-privilegio-que-oculta-
la-banca-por-la-ruina-que-a-todos-provoca/ 
http://qmunty.com/blog/2010/11/19/posiblemente-una-de-las-
mejores-explicaciones-sobre-la-crisis-i/ 
http://qmunty.com/blog/2010/11/24/posiblemente-una-de-las-
mejores-explicaciones-sobre-la-crisis-ii/ 
http://qmunty.com/blog/2010/11/03/las-4-crisis-conferencia-  
en-la-universidad-publica-la-rimaia-i/
http://qmunty.com/antal-fekete/
*Free translation from the book "The Creature from Jekyll Island" 
chapter 10 ( The Mandrake Mechanism) by Edward Griffin.Manual:
   Step by step
Enric Duran
http://www.derechoderebelion.net/
http://enricduran.cat/
14 15
–Create a telephone account for this purpose only.
– The best clients for banks are wage earners who have 
a fixed contract that has been in effect for at least one 
year. If you do not meet this criteria you will have to cre -
ate an identity, for example an IT technician with a fixed 
contract and a pay slip every month.
– Necessary equipment: computer, printer, photocopier, 
scissors and adhesive tape.
– Select the city in which you will carry out the action, 
taking into account the size of your project: if you ask 
for a lot of loans in a small town it is likely that you will 
meet the same notary on various occasions. 
– In order to initiate the action you will have 2,000 Euros 
which you shall enter as wages in the first month. 
Subsequently you can withdraw and enter each month 
as if it was your wages. I
The necessary requirements
before startingThe most important thing 
is to have courage and 
make the decision to 
want to change your life, 
because having carried 
out the action you will 
have to declare yourself 
bankrupt and turn into a 
defaulter.
17
The loans featuring in the CIRBE are updated monthly but 
with a delay of two months; therefore, if you paid various 
dues now and the debt is less than 6,000 Euros, this would 
not appear in the Bank of Spain’s information base until two 
months later. You may take this into account at the time of 
paying the necessary dues or offer to repay the loan so that 
it does not feature in the report until two 
months later. This lapse which delays infor -
mation from being updated allows room for 
manoeuvre which needs to be kept in mind. 
It works for natural months (for example, 
1st June will show all the information for the 
month of April; so it’s not exactly 60 days). 
Bearing this in mind, you can calculate the time you need in 
order to carry out transactions. Therefore, you need to begin 
to sign loans with the notary at the beginning of the month; 
even though you have already prepared for it, you shall have 
to make up excuses to delay signing. This way, you will have 
the whole month ahead of you to carry out the transactions.
The loans you are requesting on behalf of a company will 
not appear in your personal history. You can create as many 
companies as you like. The important thing is to keep your 
personal history as clean as possible.
If you need to personally attest for a loan requested by a 
company you have created, it is possible that this will feature 
in your personal history (according to proven expertise, it ap -
pears in 25% of cases). Nevertheless, it does not appear as a 
loan but rather an endorsement and never indicates who you 
are endorsing. Therefore, you can always say that you have 
endorsed a friend because they have got no way of checking.
B. Late Payment
The other route is what is popularly known as default blacklists, 
archives which contain information on all debtors in Spain and 
which are run by two companies: Asnef, who run the Equifax 
archive and Experian who run the Badexcug archive.
Obligation to maintain privacy is only exempt if you are a 
defaulter. Not only do bank debts appear on these lists but Advisory note
On many occasions the 
technical questions are 
not what is important 
but rather an adequate 
argument.
There are two ways:
A. C.I.R.B.E.  (Bank of Spain Information and Risks Centre) 
   This is a database of the Bank of Spain where people’s debt 
situation is stored. Every time you ask for a loan or a credit 
card at any private bank, they make you sign a document 
which authorises them to look up information on your finan -
cial situation. We could say that the information that appears 
in the CIRBE is the debt you have admitted to.
Anyone can search your report for a particular reason.
What is interesting about the CIRBE and what will be 
very useful for us to take into account is that loans of less 
than 6,000 Euros are not recorded. Although sometimes 
if the amount of the loan is close to the aforementioned 
quantity, they have to round it up and include it. For exam -
ple, this system allows us to ask for four credits of 5,000 
Euros without any other institutions knowing that we now 
owe 20,000 Euros.II
Information systems
The first thing we need to know, which 
will be highly useful in guiding us and 
determining the rate of our action, is to 
get to know how financial institutions 
inform themselves about our state of 
credit, because the granting of the loans 
we desire depends on it.  
18 19
The financial institutions shall study your application for cred -
it whilst taking into account all of the loans recorded in the 
CIRBE, and they will set them so that the total of monthly dues 
in debt does not exceed 40% of your salary; that is to say that 
if you earn 1,000 Euros you cannot have a total of monthly dues 
exceeding 400 Euros including monthly payment of what you 
are asking for at the moment.
A good time to ask for a loan at any private bank, and for 
them to grant it to you, is three months after you have opened 
an account and deposited your wages. On the other hand, if you 
are seen to have a loan from your institution and you meet the 
deadlines, this could serve as a guarantee for them to trust you 
and grant you another one.
In the case of financial companies, a practically essential 
condition of applying to borrow a large loan amount is that you 
have initially requested a small amount and you are paying it. 
It is usual for them to let some six months pass by between 
granting you the first loan and granting you the second one.
Advice 
If they ask you how much 
you are paying for rent, 
the best thing to say is 
that you are living in 
a family apartment or 
give some other reason 
to substantiate for not 
paying rent, otherwise 
they will take it into 
account in the calcula -
tion of 40%!!!III
Criteria for granting loansalso debts for telephone bills or debts with cer -
tain companies linked to late payment. Therefore, 
if you are the slightest bit in debt, it is best to pay 
up prior to commencing action. This way, they 
will remove it from the default blacklists without 
subsequently making note of it.
It is very important that whilst you are car -
rying out transactions you are well prepared to 
continue paying dues on time thus avoiding in -
clusion in the default blacklists.Curiosity
On many occasions you 
would be surprised at 
the poor management of 
information by financial 
companies. For example, 
it may be that you apply 
for two loans at two com -
panies within the same 
group and that between 
them they are unaware 
of this information. Or 
that a bank is unaware of 
a loan it granted to your 
own company.
20 21
not show in the CIRBE and one with a greater amount which 
is recorded) you can submit the monthly receipt of the one 
with the lowest sum.
4. Tax return
    This document is more difficult to alter because it contains a 
link to a web page on which you can check if the information 
is true or not.
In this case, it is better to say you do not have it and 
explain the reason. One reason may be that in recent years 
you have had a net income of 14,000 Euros 
annually and therefore you were not obliged to 
complete such a form. For example, you could 
say that you have been working in a company 
for one year and a few months; in the first year 
of work on a fixed contract the salary was less 
than what you are earning now but then they 
promoted you and increased your salary to the 
sum displayed in the pay slip now.
5. Working life
It’s not very often that they ask for this docu -
ment but in case they do, the problem may be 
whether you really don’t work as the document 
will reflect that. 
    The best way of creating a new one is by 
going to the Social Security offices and re -
questing one as a matter of urgency. They will 
print one for you in black and white with a la -
ser printer and that way it will be easier for you 
to edit than if they send you one in the post. Once you have 
the original document, add the dates you want and if neces -
sary, correct the days of contribution and print it.
6. Checking of the expenditure you will make
You will need to submit an estimate for the purpose of your 
loan application. In the case of personal loans amounting to 
less than 6,000 Euros, the simplest thing is to use alterations Advice
If you make a mistake 
with any detail, you can 
always blame the mana -
ger and cast doubt on 
his professionalism. 
The banks do not envisa -
ge that you are going to 
alter anything or that it 
is to do with a plan to 
stop paying debts. For 
them, anyone wanting to 
be insolvent for life is 
not an option. In cases 
such as these, you always 
have to use the psycholo -
gy of error.
Note
Whenever it is to do with 
official information, 
you need to obtain real 
documentation to be able 
to copy it.1. Employment contract
They usually ask for it even though it’s not always necessary. 
You can find a template on the internet which you can use to 
make your own contract. It always has to be indefinite! Once 
you do that, you only need a real employment contract then 
in order to scan the seal. Once scanned, alter the date show -
ing when the indefinite contract took effect from and print it 
on to the contract you made earlier. This way you will have 
two prints: one with the employment contract and the other 
one on which you will print the seal in the desired place.
2. Pay slip receipt
You can also create this document on the computer. There 
are many Internet pages with templates of pay slips. You 
need to have the real or scanned seal of the company. This 
has to be real because they can check your tax ID and phone 
the company to check if it is true.
3. Receipt for loans which appear in the CIRBE
    As we saw earlier, in the CIRBE you can find out the overall 
debt you have with an institution but not the monthly due you 
are paying; for this reason, they will ask you for receipts of 
the credits they have seen in the CIRBE.
This gives us room to manoeuvre. You can submit a re -
ceipt with a monthly amount to pay that has been altered in 
such a way that it poses no problem for them to grant you 
the credit you would like; or in case you have two credits 
from the same institution (one with a lesser sum which does IV
Documents required for carrying  
out action and how to obtain them  
if you do not have them
22 23
A. 
Variable No.1: A person with a particular title 
(without endorsements)
1. The first step is, if you don’t have one, obtain a pay slip 
showing the sum you need in relation to the credits you 
would like to ask for. To do that, you need a company or 
collective from whom you can print this pay slip. The person 
in charge of the company must be informed why it is likely 
that they are being called to confirm that you are working 
there although they will never check the salary. If you have 
the option, it is better to give the number of a phone you can 
answer yourself.
The important thing about the parent company is that it 
must have been formed at least a year ago as you need to 
prove that you have a fixed contract, consequently you have 
been working there for some months now.
2.  Open an account at a bank. Deposit your wage into it. At the 
start of every month you can go into the bank in person and 
make the deposit yourself on the pretext of paying in your 
wage; this will save you from having to pay in the monthly wag -
es from another account. Once you have made the deposit you 
can withdraw this money from the account. We will try to keep 
this account free of loans because it will not help us when we 
have to submit a statement at any bank or financial company.
3. Open another account at another bank and deposit your 
wages there as well. It is advisable to obtain a deposit re -
ceipt, because it will be useful for us later on.
     It may be the case that when you deposit your wages, you 
will automatically be offered a credit card. If they give you V
Actionas a means of justification, or alternatively a car if the loan 
is higher. In the case of loans requested by a company, the 
most plausible is to argue that it is to do with investments in 
order to increase the activity of the company.
7. Bank statement  
(in case you ask for a loan at an institution where you do not deposit your salary)
It is recommended that you do not apply for loans at the 
bank where you are pretending to pay your wage into; that 
way you are assured that your bank statement is always 
clean.
    Otherwise, you can always modify it but that is a laborious 
exercise. It will be simpler for you to do it with statements 
which you can download directly from the internet.
24 25
dealer asked you to pay in cash in exchange 
for a discount.
6. You also have the option of requesting loans 
from financial credit establishments. These 
institutions may offer long distance credit but 
not offer current accounts; they expect that 
you have deposited your wages at another in -
stitution. In order to be able to deposit it at a 
financial credit establishment you need to have 
had a bank account for three months. We will 
submit the bank statement that we have main -
tained free from credits. Furthermore, we will indicate to them 
that they charge us from another of our accounts, for which 
they will ask us to submit a previous deposit receipt. This way, 
we will continue to keep clean the first account we opened.
B. 
Variable #2: One person as a company
(without endorsements)
1. Create a company. This is simple because you can create 
single-member limited companies. You must take the follo -
wing steps:
– Request a name and hope that they send you according 
proof that it is available.
–Deposit €3,000.12 in a bank.
– Search the internet for model statutes to create companies 
and adapt them.
– Go to the notary with the deposit receipt, the statutes and 
create the company.
– Go to the Commercial Registry and the Tax Office to process 
the VAT number of the company and register it for business tax.
The total cost is usually some 400 or 500 Euros (remember 
that you will soon have 3,000 Euros available that you depos -
ited). If possible, try not to put single-member in the title of 
the company, although it depends considerably on chance as 
to whether the notary puts it or not.Advice
If any company offers you 
a loan, accept it at that 
time. They will not dis -
trust you because they 
are the ones who have 
offered you advertising. 
You can spend some time 
looking for adverts in 
the press or internet 
to find these types of 
products.one, it is important to use it before you ask for a 
loan; otherwise, within their parameters it will not 
be agreed for you to use the card and ask for a 
loan. One way of using it is to go out with people 
to a restaurant, offer to pay for everyone and then 
later on they can each pay back their own share 
of the bill; that way you can carry on using the 
cards.
4. After three months of paying in the wag -
es you can apply for a loan. Remember that 
depending on the amount of the loan this 
may or may not appear in the CIRBE, there -
fore, it will have an effect on when you can 
ask other institutions for loans. It is recom -
mended to begin with small loans which will 
not feature in the CIRBE in order to contin -
ue having capital. With the capital we obtain 
from some of these loans we will be able to 
continue paying monthly dues from a larg -
er loan and from those we are requesting. 
5. The actions in points three and four can be repeated as many 
times as you like, at different banks, with the aim of request -
ing loans. You will have to make sure that the signature of 
the notary is at the beginning of the month; that way you will 
have two months ahead of you before it is registered in the 
CIRBE.
One strategy is to create groups, for example, with the 
loan for a car. You go to the dealer, ask for an invoice for the 
model of the car you would like and then choose a series of 
banks in order to finance you for it. For example, one bank 
might make out a cheque to you in the name of the dealer, 
which then obliges you to buy the car. Another might only 
ask you for the invoice; another might request you to insure 
the car with your insurer, and another might not ask you 
anything. This way, you can obtain four or five loans for the 
same car. In case they ask you why you are not making an 
instant bank transfer, you always have the option that the Advice
You have to use a little 
psychology in the way in 
which you withdraw the 
money because when you 
ask for a loan it is pos -
sible that they will look 
at the bank statement and 
will see what movements 
you have been making. 
To avoid raising suspi -
cions, you can continue 
to withdraw 200 to 300 
Euros per week in order 
to cover daily expenses, 
then the objective is to 
have an air of normality.
26 27
C. 
Variable #3: Two people
1.  Two friends, each one creates a company (explained in the 
first point of Variable #2 ). Let it run for one year.
2. Each one deposits wages into the other one.
3. Next, we apply the actions in points three, four, five and six of 
Variable #1 , with the advantage in this case being that you 
have the possibility of mutually endorsing them.
D. 
Variable #4: Three people
1. Three friends, one of them creates a company. Let it run for 
one year.
2. The one that has the company makes the pay slips for the 
other two. In this case, whoever endorses you will be your 
supposed work colleague; this way, they person who employs 
you will not have any connection with whoever endorses you.
3. Next, we apply the actions in points three, four, five and six 
of Variable #1 .
E.
Variable #5: Four people
1. Four friends, two of them create a company. Let it run for one 
year.
2. The ones who have the company make the pay slips for the 
other two. This way, there will never be a connection between 
the person who employs you and the one who endorses you.
3. Next, we apply the actions in points three, four, five and six 
of Variable #1 .It is always recommended to create a company in a sector 
you have some knowledge of.
2. In the bank account pretend that there has been company 
activity of nine months to a year because they will ask you 
about its history. You have to continue making movements. 
The most practical thing to do is to create three companies, 
this way you can continue to invoice between them because 
you will not be asked who they belong to. You can also opt to 
make cash movements with varying terms because they will 
neither trace them nor oblige you to depend on third parties. 
Generally, however, the best way to endorse yourself is your 
personal pay slip as an employee of another company. To 
justify this you can argue that the money from the loan you 
are requesting will enable you to spend increasingly more 
time at the company you are setting up, thus reducing the 
hours spent at the other job.
3. Request loans. As a company the simplest thing to do is to 
request them at institutions you are not working with, that 
way you can keep the historical part in order. You can also 
show the balances for all the activity carried out up until 
the last quarter in progress, as well as the company taxes. 
Everything has to tally. The balance has to be with profits, but 
without going too far. Basically, it’s about demonstrating that 
you will repay the loan you are applying for.
Perhaps a branch will deny you the loan because 
the company is still quite young, however this 
does not mean to say that you cannot return to 
this institution: what you should not do is return 
to the same branch but you can go and try at 
another branch of the same institution.
4. The actions in points three, four and six in 
Variable  #1 , explained previously, can be repeat -
ed as many times as you like with the aim of                               
requesting loans.Note
This option allows you 
to request credits with 
endorsements. In the 
event that you endorse 
your friend, the latter 
must present themselves 
as independent; the pay 
slip you have made them 
would not serve for this 
purpose now that they 
would appear to be an em -
ployee of your company.
28 29
VI
Finalising the action
1. There will come a time when you decide to stop the action 
and recover the money. You need to keep withdrawing it 
little by little to avoid arousing suspicion. It is advisable to 
assess which of these accounts will be affected the least 
by this decision and develop it as a base account to make 
transfers to other accounts. For example, it may be that they 
have granted a loan that you did not begin to pay until a year 
and a few months later. You can also make transfers to the 
base account if you still keep it free from loans.
2. After approximately one month, the bank itself will start call -
ing. You can say that the company has gone bankrupt, or 
that you have lost your job. They will keep asking. Another 
option is to change the mobile phone number you gave to 
the banks.
3. A private company hired by the banks for this purpose will 
call you. These companies often pressure you, lying to you, 
threatening you with prison or seizing your parents’ house, 
something which is not true. They only want to frighten you. 
They may even try to pressurise your family. If your family 
know it, they can say that they have nothing to do with it or 
that you will not pay and then they will stop hassling them.
4. Your details will be entered on to the debtors’ list.
5. Firstly, you will receive preliminary letters from them and then 
judicial letters afterwards informing you that if you fail to 
respond, they will seize your property.
6. They seize your property. If they cannot seize anything from 
you, the affair remains in limbo. In order for them to seize 
property from you, you have to be aware that you have mon -
ey in another account, something that the judge does not 
investigate; therefore it is the bank that needs to provide the 
proof. Nevertheless, according to the data protection act, the 
bank cannot access this information, unlike the state, in the 
event that it is the latter with which you have the debts.Between 
reality and 
legality
Simona Sarau
30 31
Credit fraud consists of obtaining or developing a credit by means 
of providing falsified data about an applicant’s solvency; that is to 
say, that if the bank had access to the real financial status of the 
applicant, the loan would have been denied.
What are the concurring elements that are typical of a fraudulent 
offence?
1. Deception
2. Intent to make profit
3. Damage caused
1. Deception
This element is the structure for the offence of fraud. Not 
every deception is considered as an offence; there needs to 
be a background, originator and sufficiency .
Background : there must be a precedent; that is to say, it 
must be proved that you already had the intent to defraud 
prior requesting the bank for a loan.
Originator : whoever causes or makes the vital error about 
the passive subject who is unaware of the real situation you 
have concealed; that is to say, that deception is the reason 
why whoever gave you the credit ultimately granted it to you.
Sufficiency : It must be proportional to obtaining the pro -
posed purpose. The specific circumstances of the victim are 
taken into account -recognised by the perpetrator – which 
may be ignorance, a particular situation, age or intellectual 
deficit. However, these cases are impossible in this environ -
ment, since the victim is a financial institution. In general, pe -
ople who work in such institutions are moderately insightful A 
Credit fraud (Art. 248 of the Penal Code)If you carry out the actions described in the previous chapter, legally 
you could be charged with the following offences:
A) Credit fraud, regulated in article 248  
of the Penal Code. 
B) Falsification of a private document, 
regulated in articles 395 and 396 of the  
Penal Code.
C) Asset stripping or criminal bankruptcy, 
regulated in article 257 et seq. of the  
Penal Code.
D) Organised crime, regulated in article  
282 bis 4 of the Code of Civil Procedure. 
33
injured party failed to act with minimal diligen -
ce required, in accordance with aforementio -
ned commercial or bank usages.  In order for a 
loan claiming goods or solvency to be deemed 
as constituting an offence of fraud, machina -
tions of a certain kind need to be used such 
as the submission of fake deeds or pay slips, or 
documents which do not correspond to reality. 
2. Intent to make profit
In addition to being aware of the deception it 
inflicts on the banker, this subjective element 
requires the person to have the knowledge 
and will to gain financially as a consequence 
of their action, this objective being the motive 
for committing the offence. The required intent 
to make profit by committing fraud is through 
fraudulent conversion of the value of the item 
that constitutes the object of asset disposal.
Asset disposal is the action undertaken by 
the asset holder – for example, the financial 
institution – to extract the asset element from 
its realm; in this case, the quantity of money 
intended for the loan. By doing so, it unlawfully 
enters into the realm of the perpetrator of the 
crime, with the aim of accomplishing a definite 
objective which would be the granting of credit 
to a client.
However, unlawful intent to profit or gain 
is not excluded, even if the financial advan -
tage that the person gains with their actions 
is only a means to satisfy other purposes; for 
example, if whoever carries out fraud shares out the profits 
amongst the poor. Therefore, it is not a requisite for respon -
sibility that whoever carries out the fraud personally pro -
fits from it. What is evaluated in order to determine whether 
there is intent to profit or not is the principle motive; that is 
to say, obtaining a financial advantage despite the ultimate 
aim being different. However, it is frequently the case that 2. Criminal law does not 
have to be incorporated 
into an asset protection 
instrument for those who 
do not protect themsel -
ves. In order for decep -
tion to be criminally 
relevant, it must have 
sufficient body to over -
come the desire of the 
financial undertaking. 
The latter must act with 
diligence coinciding 
with the principle of in -
dividual responsibility 
as a total lack of in -
sight, an act of gulli -
bility or extraordinary 
indolence to realise 
matters, may be the cause 
of the fraud, rather than 
the product of decep -
tion, it is considered 
to be the effect of bla -
meworthy neglect; like a 
lack of diligence.and are obliged to act with a minimum of diligence before 
the defendant. 
The fiction of financial capacity has traditionally been consi -
dered as sufficiently deceptive action, provided 
that it goes beyond exaggerations tolerated in 
the world of finance . We must take into account 
that until now jurisprudence has considered that 
the fiction of solvency is an essential element 
of fraud if it is accompanied by initial intent not 
to repay the loan in the event that it is granted. 
However the aforementioned initial intent is very 
difficult to prove as it usually becomes apparent 
by means of inference or deduction.
To be precise, what defines fraud is the 
knowledge that it will be impossible to make 
compensation. This is the boundary between civil 
liability and criminal liability. Article 1269 of the 
Civil Code states that "intent exists if insidious 
words or machinations by one of the contracting 
parties lead to the other party entering into a contract which 
they otherwise would not have entered into". Therefore, it 
may be argued that there is incidental intent but not volun -
tary intent. Let us remember the assumption of article 1270 
of the Civil Code which is that the defendant is only obliged 
to indemnify damages, insignificant in this case, as the dam -
age caused to a bank for not paying a loan can rarely be 
evaluated provided such damage exists. 
     Therefore, it may be argued that fraud exists if the initial 
intent of one of the contracting parties is to bre -
ach the contract, whereas civil liability for intent 
would only exist if the aforementioned party ini -
tially acted in good faith. 
In order for us to talk of the existence of de-
ception  in credit fraud, conduct must be limited 
by the criteria of patrimonial self protection , 
which, in cases where the victim is a financial 
institution, shall be investigated in accordance 
with trade usages and enable to exclude decep -
tion from fraud in some businesses in which the 1. This is the case of 
solvency exaggerations 
by the applicant for a 
loan: generally, it is 
usual for the credit ins -
titution to anticipate 
it and they do not have 
any criminal relevan -
ce. Jurisprudence has 
applied this criteria 
in order to exclude the 
offence of fraud in ban -
king businesses whereby 
the institution has not 
been minimally diligent. 
Not every deception 
constitutes an offence.
Note
We could always argue 
that despite presenting 
falsified documentation 
our initial intent was to 
pay the loan, however we 
subsequently faced unex -
pected difficulties that 
we were not reckoning on, 
e.g. losing one’s job 
etc.Note
It should be added that 
it is difficult for the 
bank to investigate the 
submission of documents 
in due course to deter -
mine if they were fake as 
it will not want to lose 
more time and money on 
your case.
34 35
This offence is committed when any of the following forms of 
dishonesty occur with a private document:
One: Alteration of any of the essential elements or requisites 
of a document .
Two: Full or partial copying of a document in such a way that 
its authenticity is misleading. 
Three : Interference with the details of a deed by persons 
who do not feature in it, or the attribution to those same 
persons of declarations or statements which are different 
to those originally made. 
Four: Lacking in truthfulness when stating facts.
 
In the case we are concentrating on in this handbook, the sub -
mission of fake pay slips would be an offence of falsification 
of a private document which carries a prison sentence of six 
months to two years, unless there is no previous history, in 
which case a sentence does not have to be served.
Important:
One has to be careful not to re-offend 
until an offence is removed from 
criminal records, the sentence which 
was not served is accrued as follows. 
This way, if the new sentence and the 
one pending amount to more than two 
years, a custodial sentence will have  
to be served . B 
Falsification of a private document
(arts. 395, 396 of the penal code)
 jurisprudence and the doctrine confuse principal motive with 
the ultimate aim.
 
3. Damage caused
To accomplish fraud the victim has to suffer pecuniary loss, 
however this does not exist in this case due to the fact that 
the bank would hardly consider itself as a victim by granting 
an unpaid loan which, nevertheless, has enabled it to b uild up 
some interest which has increased their virtual assets. the da-
mage consists  of a decrease  in assets : if a measurable  decrease  in 
the bank’s assets  cannot  be assessed , even if deception  and intent  
to make a profit  exist, the offence  of fraud  cannot  be considered . 
This is why civil law is always at the forefront of protection 
against fraud. That is to say, criminal law is governed by its 
principle of minimal intervention (which seems to have been 
forgotten recently), since not all legal rights require criminal 
protection. Criminal law has a subsidiary character, it may 
only intervene when other legal systems fail. Therefore, civil 
law leads the way as an instrument for protection of legal 
rights, whereby civil fraud is envisaged without the need to 
resort to fraud, regulated by the Penal Code. 
When is credit fraud considered to have been detected?
Despite various stances of the doctrine (idea of law or diffe -
rent concepts of law supported by the solicitors who take a 
stance on a particular matter), the majority position maintains 
that until repayment of the credit is required, it is impossible 
to assess pecuniary loss. Consequently, an offence cannot be 
attributed at a time when the bank still does not know if it may 
be harmed or not.
In short, credit fraud must be precisely analysed in each case 
in order to know whether or not the guidelines on banking pre -
cautions to which the institution in question was bound by have 
been observed for their asset protection. Thus, the intervention of 
criminal law cannot be allowed in all cases. The extent of decepti -
on determines whether it is regulated by the Civil Code or not sin -
ce the simple exaggeration of financial capacity or the solvency 
of whoever applies for a loan before the manager of a banking 
institution is not always considered to be sufficient deception.
36 37
Organised crime is deemed to be the relationship between 
three or more people in order to permanently or repeatedly 
indulge in behaviour which has the aim, amongst other things, 
of committing offences against property and against socio-
economic order provided for in article 248, amongst others, of 
the Penal Code analysed earlier.D
Organised crime (art. 282 bis 4  
of the code of civil procedure)
A person who is insolvent cannot respond with their goods 
in order to cope with the civil liabilities originating from their 
actions because they have no goods registered in their name. 
Therefore, criminal bankruptcy is the event of deliberately be -
coming insolvent so as not to comply with the obligations you 
previously breached; in other words, failure to pay the loan. 
sometimes , the situation  of a person  who fails to pay cre-
dit to the bank constitutes  behaviour  subsequent  to the 
act of fraud  which  must be considered  as an unpunished  
action ; that is to say, it cannot  be penalised . 
Asset stripping is considered to be an offence if the person 
carries it out to the detriment of their creditors; this is also the 
case, if they undertake any asset disposal or create obligati -
ons which impede or obstruct the effectiveness of a seizure 
or enforcement proceedings which are judicial, extrajudicial or 
administrative and are instigated or expected to be instigated.
     Therefore, it is a matter of proving that insolvency has not 
been caused deliberately although it has occurred; not intended 
by the perpetrator.C
Asset stripping or criminal bankruptcy 
(Art. 257 et seq. of the Penal Code)
38 39
order to determine the sentence 
for whoever applies for the loan by 
furnishing false documents. 
C.  Asset stripping or criminal 
bankruptcy (Art. 257 et seq.  
of the Penal Code)
Imprisonment for a period of one to 
four years and payment of a fine for 
twelve to twenty-four months .
D.  Organised crime
All of those who took part in the crime 
will receive the same fixed penalty as 
that for credit fraud . Sentences
A.  Credit fraud  (Art. 251  
of the Penal Code)
Imprisonment for a period of one to 
six years and payment of a fine for 
six to twelve months.
B.  Falsification of a private document 
(Arts. 395, 396 of the Penal Code)
Imprisonment for a period of six 
months to two years. If there have 
been no previous convictions the 
sentence shall be suspended for 
a maximum of two years. In the 
event that the applicant for a loan is 
not the person who has tampered 
with the document, usage of the 
document whilst in the knowledge 
that it was fake carries a lesser 
sentence than that given to the 
forger. Thus, it will depend on the 
sentence that the forger given in 
41
How to avoid or lessen 
the charge for previous offences
A. Credit fraud (Art. 251 of the Penal Code)
The key element is that deception prior to the granting of 
credit can be proved and this is very difficult to achieve. 
Nevertheless, if dishonesty should emerge in a private do -
cument –as in the case of the pay slips- the intention of 
previous deception shall be considered and it would be much 
easier to apportion a crime of fraud. However, as pointed 
out earlier on, one has to analyse on a case by case basis 
because the intent to make a profit as well as the damage 
caused to a bank are elements that have been greatly dis -
cussed in the doctrine, yet it is still possible to come across 
arguments which demonstrate a lack of some of the ele -
ments required for such an offence. in case it results  from a 
case regulated  by the civil code, the sentence  shall be a financial  
penalty  (equivalent  of a fine) but in your state of insolvency  not-
hing would  happen  because  there  is nothing  to seize.
B. Falsification of a private document (Arts. 395, 396 of the  
Penal Code)
Imprisonment for a period of six months to two years. If 
you have no criminal record you have nothing to answer for. 
However if you do have a criminal record, the penalties incur -
red shall be accumulated and you shall receive a sentence if 
they amount to more than two years 
C. Asset stripping or criminal bankruptcy (Art. 257 et seq.)
 One must be careful when selling one’s assets because 
this may be linked to deception as an element of fraud. If 
at the beginning you continue to pay some dues from the 
credit you have been granted whilst selling or changing 
the name of your goods at the same time, the intention of 
doing it in order to obstruct the obligation you were bound 
by with the bank cannot be proven; on the other hand, if 
you do it at a later stage they may be able to associate it.
D. Organised crime (282 bis.4 Lecrim)
If there are two of you, this crime will never be attributed to 
you; to be considered as such, three or more people need 
to be involved  Bear in mind
In chapter 2 of the Organic Law 10/1995, of 23rd November, 
the penal code envisages the following  reasons  which  exempt  
criminal  liability :
Article 20  
5º. 
Whoever, in a state of necessity, in order to avoid a wrongdoing 
of their own or another party violates a legal right of another 
person or breaches an obligation, whenever the following req -
uisites apply:
1.  The harm caused is no greater than that which they are 
trying to avoid.
2.  The situation of necessity has not been intentionally 
caused by the subject.
3. The person in need does not have any obligation to make 
sacrifices for his office or post.
7º.
Whoever acts in compliance  with an obligation  or in a legitimate  
exercise  of a law, office  or post.
It is fair to say that these causes for exoneration must be 
interpreted by a judge who shall consider which situation is 
likely to apply to causes for exoneration and which does not. 
Jurisprudence and the doctrine shall serve as a guide for in -
terpretation but there may always be a new jurisprudence as 
the needs and actions of society are changing at a rapid rate. 
Both the norms as well as those who interpret them will have 
to adapt to the new situations presenting themselves, obtain -
ing the greatest benefit from society because in each case it 
makes justice definite. Indeed, there is a judicial power that is 
theoretically independent for this.
43
Do you owe 
money to  
the bank?  
If you do  
not pay, you 
will be free
Colectivo Crisis
45
Some answers to demystify the nonpayment of debt
To begin with, it is important to know that debt is only a non 
fulfillment of contract that falls under the civil code. You have 
to forget about its association with being a wrongdoer. You are 
not a wrongdoer. You are free to travel wherever you want, how 
you want and whenever you want.
If you stop paying back loans it will only leave you without 
being able to ask for new ones. The debt may turn out to have 
a lien, or legal claim, on certain property, wages or future goods. 
But all your money or savings cannot be liened. The law has 
foreseen goods and incomes which are unalienable.
 
How much will be liened from my income?
(Also from pension, freelance work, leaves [sick, maternity] and unemployment benefit)
If your salary is under the minimum inter-professional salary 
(SMI) it cannot be liened.
For 2009, the SMI was 624€. Above this amount, it is liened 
according to article 592 of Spanish Civil Procedure Law (LEC), 
which is usually way below what you are paying now to the 
banks:
salary  liened amount  salary after the lien 
700 22,8 677,2 
800 52,8 747, 2  
900 82,8 8 17, 2  
1.000 112,8 8 87, 2  
1.100 142,8 9 57, 2  
1.200 172,8 1.027 ,2 
1.300 213,2 1.086,8 
1.400 263,2 1.136,8 
1.500 313,2 1.186,8 
Even if you have one or 20 debts, no more than what is stated 
here can be liened by any of the creditors of the different debts.
To lien accountsEconomic forces have exerted much pressure 
in making people who do not pay their bank 
debts seem like rejected people within society. 
However, this is only another form of manipula -
tion the economic system has in order to pro -
tect itself from actions that harm it. However, 
defaulters, even if this is due to bad administra -
tion of their money, cease being part of the con -
sumer society and this fact gives them power 
to live another way. In a time of crisis, when 
millions of people are defaulters, if we organise 
ourselves we can become an active part of a 
big social change, which most people see on 
a daily basis as being increasingly necessary. 
Default can be arranged ethically. In the same 
way we consider consumers responsible when 
they have taken a political decision to shop in 
a way that neither harms people nor the planet, 
so a person in debt can decide whom to pay 
according to similar criteria. So first you pay 
back what you owe to your friends and small 
and medium suppliers, without paying the mul -
tinationals nor the banks.
47
To lien a bank account due to a debt with another bank is va -
lid only when the judge executes an order that includes the 
maximum amount that can be liened. Otherwise it has to be 
reported as being an illegal execution.
    If your bank account is blocked without a court order, it will 
be because you have opened an account as an entity who owes 
money. If you forget about this account and open another one 
as different entity who does not have debt, you will not have 
this problem. If someone helps you with this new account, you 
can be added as an authorised person in order to be more 
secure.
Other personal advice
– If you are fed up and cannot handle your situation anymore: 
stop paying on all the cards and debts right away. Prioritize 
your health and the basic needs of your family before paying 
all the bank debt.
– If you are married and one or both of you are going to stop 
paying the debts, it is important you are in a ‘separation of 
property’ regime, because both of your salaries could be lie -
ned and added to the income from which the liened amount is 
calculated. The separation of property can be done by mutual 
agreement in front of a notary and need not cost more than 
150€.
– Before selling or changing the name of the car owner so it 
cannot be liened, check in Transit if it has a domain reserve. 
Cars with domain reserve cannot be sold without canceling 
the debt.
– Do not pay attention to any phone calls or letters that arrive in 
the future, even if they are very threatening.
– If anyone contacts your neighbours you can press charges for 
infringing the law of personal information protection.
– As soon as possible start a new financial life without bank 
loans, credit cards or shopping in installments. We can assure 
you, you will be able to have a good life.Civil court
Before a civil court, a lot of people can have access to free jus -
tice, yet we do not realise this. The maximum monthly income 
for a family to have access to free justice varies between one 
and two thousand euros monthly depending on the area. You 
are not obliged to be present at the civil court, but if you do and 
want to receive support contact people who can help you via 
the website below.
    These issues are part of the frequently asked questions 
and answers on non payment of debt which the Col•lectiu Crisi 
(Crisis Collective) has proposed to public disposition in the 
Comunitat de Moroses section at http://www.17-s.info/moro -
ses. In this link you will find more information and people who 
are willing to help and to allay your doubts.
 
To organise ourselves in cooperatives may be useful in order to 
live without banks and without worrying about our past debts
-To lien a person’s property includes his/her social participation 
in enterprises, but there is one exception. According to diverse 
cooperative laws, the social contribution to a cooperative is 
not alienable.
-A property which is passed to a cooperative where the statu -
tes forbid speculation and profit, is a property for a communal 
good. A tool for the alternatives proposals you will find in the 
next pages.
-For all those people who want to start a “transition process” 
in order to abandon capitalism, but do not feel as sure as to be 
able to live only with trust relations, the legal form of the coope -
rative enables them to start being aware and to link themselves 
to the alternatives, without having to resort to a juridical frame 
of these relations.
-This way, they can be a juridic tool, a key to the transition to 
overcome the system.
 
48 49
Insolvency is a form of immunity  
against being fined.
Since not fulfilling the civil code 
is punishable by fines, whoever 
organizes themselves in order to 
avoid assets being impounded 
becomes a person immune to  
the civil code. (…) 
For those of us who want to change 
this system, actions from organized 
debtors can be a powerful tool for 
change.Be non-submissive
If you want to be free from the  
system, ask for credit and do  
not pay back!
Tired of working 40 hours per week? 
Overwhelmed by the monthly 
mortgage payments? 
Are you sure that capitalism  
is for you?
 
If you decide to quit the illusion of 
private property, if you want to re-
establish the pleasure of sharing, 
if you want to construct a project 
of collective self sufficiency and 
management but lack the money, if 
you want to support a publication… 
make yourself non-submissive to the 
banks.Once you become insolvent, 
problems are finished and you will 
enjoy living off the system.
–Only appropriate for those not yet included in the official debtors’ record . 
51
I don’t 
believe in 
nothing 
but 
I believe in 
everything
Lucio Urtubia
53
A real night of Utopia. 
But, what is utopia?
For me it is making possible everything that is impossible.
A few months ago, I was sat at the table in my house eating 
an unpeeled apple. The peel is what it has and brings all the 
richness; my mother and father have always told me that you 
have to rub it with a clean napkin and that’s all, don’t wash it or 
peel it, neither fruit nor salad, so the taste doesn’t leave you. At 
this point the front door opened and in came two youths and 
a girl asked:  
–Are you Mr. Lucho? 
And without hesitation I replied: 
–Nooooo, I’m Lucio.
The girl said: 
–Sorry, sir. 
The girl was nervous. I’m used to it now, experiencing it today 
and having experienced it, so I took advantage of the moment 
and the situation of the girl’s inferiority I told her: 
– Don’t call me sir, or Lucho; call me as I call myself: Lucio, 
and relax as well.
– Sorry, I’m Catalan and my friend is Cuban. We’ve just 
arrived from Cuba. We are a group of Cuban artists who 
have come to work in Paris and have wanted to get to 
know you for some time.
Without wasting any time I provocatively told them: 
  –You all want to defect.
The girl replied: Barcelona
29th October 2010La Rimaia Free University
Ronda Sant Pau, 12
55
Last Friday, I was on my August holidays at my house in 
Cascante when a happy Núria phoned me. She wanted to see 
me to talk about an artistic project which would deal with bank -
ing ethics and she had also involved Enric Duran in this. She 
told me it was very important. I told her she could come and 
visit me during this time and the next morning she turned up 
at my house. She told me that she spent the night in Tudela 
because she didn’t dare sleep over at my house.
We ate at Restaurante del Lechuguero whilst she explained 
her analytical project about the bank to me, something about 
a misplaced legal application. I didn’t understand any of it. We 
left it that I would go when they hold this big meeting and that 
I would talk as I do every day, communicating my thoughts and 
ideas. The date for this was today, Friday 29th October 2010. 
So now it’s the 29th and I don’t know any more about it other 
than what has been shown, said and experienced. Two visits 
lasting half an hour in order to prepare a talk in Paris. Two 
hours of talk and three or four more hours of it in Cascante. 
That’s all I know from this girl, Núria, in addition to the three 
hour talk that Enric Duran and Antonio Chao had at my house 
in Paris a few months ago. And I go into it and put my faith into 
it without knowing any more than that. Who are we? We don’t 
know each other nor are we nothing and nobody. Once again 
I’ve got to say, like I say everywhere, that one sole encounter 
with somebody can change an individual’s life; and an individ -
ual can change and influence, for better or worse, the life of a 
people, union, group or factory. Just like a book. This is what I 
call the unexplainable , the unthinkable ; I believe it having lived 
through it and in order to live through it. I call it the impossible.
I say it everywhere: I don’t believe in nothing but I believe 
in everything. And I call it Utopia, something that doesn’t exist. 
A youth who doesn’t know me, except for having heard of a 
certain Lucio thousands of kilometres away, has the courage 
to show up at my house because she believes in what she 
has heard and read about me. She also noticed that the door 
of my house was open and in a few hours saw who I am … 
This is impossible; this is the utopia we live in, then noth -
ing. It’s impossible, we call it utopia but we’re living it. This 
is utopia.
***-No. We just want to get to know you, exchange ideas with 
you and invite you to participate in a project. My name 
is Núria, I’m from Girona, and my friend is Cuban, from 
Havana, his name is Levi. I have been interested in your 
home for a long time and well… thank you very much for 
everything you have done. It gives me hope to know there 
are people like you.
And they left. No wine, no coffee, no nothing. I remained alone 
and content in the knowledge that anarchistic ideas were 
known in Cuba.
One hour after leaving, the Catalan girl phoned me and with 
politeness and respect told me: 
– Lucho, I’ve arranged everything so that you can come and 
do a talk at the university where we are. 
They gave me all the details and I told them I would give them 
an answer because I had a lot of things to do. I called my 
friend, Daniel Pinos, a worker at Sorbonne publishing, to ask 
him if he knew anything about a group of Cubans at a certain 
place, I was worried that it was a group of Cuban Stalinists. I 
wanted to know more. Half an hour later, Pinos phoned me and 
told me that it was a whole delegation of Cuban artists invited 
to do a presentation in Paris at a public institution. I stayed 
calm and alright.
A little later on the girl rang me back and we came to an 
agreement.
One hour later, Núria came back to my house to confirm it. An 
hour later, we decided to meet at the university on Saturday and 
that I would give a talk on my experiences of expropriation and 
my life. It was, like we agreed, in one of the large underground 
entrances of the Mitterrand library. It all took place in two days: 
getting to know each other, the meeting and the talk, in which not 
only forty-five Cubans were present, but there were also many 
more people, amongst them my friend Pinos. Everything went very 
well and we said goodbye. Núria told me how much it was, I don’t 
remember exactly but it was an amount around €100. I told her 
I didn’t want any money, I hadn’t even thought about it. I told her 
that whenever I travel I accept payment for travelling expenses, 
but not on this occasion. She insisted upon it however, telling me 
that if I didn’t want it I should give it to friends in prison, which I 
accepted and that’s what I did. We said goodbye and for various 
months I never heard anything from her, still a friend today. 
***
56 57
Then, the incredible began. My friend Núria came to look for 
me to take us to the university. I wanted to go by taxi because 
walking makes me suffer. Furthermore, friends always say it’s 
close, so I told Núria what Quico always told me: "Nano, don’t 
trust anyone."
She laughed and we arrived at the university. It’s a large build -
ing with bourgeois floors. I was expecting a classic, old university 
like The Sorbonne or Salamanca. They also confirmed that the 
conference would be taking place in the garage where Núria and 
her friends had been working for various days in order to hold it. 
I think of all I have experienced and I say to myself, all is fair in 
love and war, now I’m relieved of fear, books, universities, tele -
visions, cinemas, filled cinemas, theatres, filled theatres, houses 
of people and communities, houses of culture, unions, associa -
tions: everything that is incredible for normal people but not for 
the people who have desire and create; not for those dead from 
starvation like me. But like Durruti said: "Homeless even though 
we know how to make homes, because we have the courage to 
make them and we do make them."
The time to enter the university with full floors had arrived; 
the university without columns, neither made of marble or 
stone. To get to the garage you have to take a long and wind -
ing staircase and at that point it reminds me of the staircase 
at the CNT in Rue de Sant Mahrite, an old building with a really 
dangerous staircase, but how marvellous it was to go down it!! 
Many of those who liberated France and Paris were there.
We went down to the garage where a table and four chairs 
had been put in place; in the middle of the garage there was 
another table with projection equipment, fifty chairs in place for 
the public and fifty more in reserve if needed. Núria didn’t think 
many people would come along since it had been decided nei -
ther to promote it nor to inform the media about it in case the 
event was censured seeing as me and Duran would be present 
to discuss how to defraud the bank. 
This Núria… what did she have in mind? What does she 
want? She’s alone, apart from her seven friends. What did she 
say to convince them about the necessity of this project, at 
an abandoned location? People very rarely get involved, either 
when places are new or when they are called by political parties 
or unions. What did she tell her friends in order to convince 
them? And me? And on 29th October, the date of my scheduled trip to 
Barcelona, there was a rail and transport strike in France. I got 
up at four o’clock in the morning nervous and worried for not 
knowing if I would be able to go to Barcelona or not. Having 
washed and shaved, I arrived at Gare du Nord, where I took the 
RER train. By 7 a.m. I was already at Orly. Finally and after a one 
hour delay, we took off destined for Barcelona where I thought 
I would be met by Núria, but she wasn’t there. One of Núria’s 
friends, Ana, was waiting for me. Like all the other friends Núria 
had introduced me to, Ana is a person of great values, worth 
and courage; It’s regrettable we are neither able to or know how 
to use these resources.
Ana and I got a taxi which took us to the Hotel Alba, in calle 
Hospital. As it was 12.30 p.m. and I still hadn’t had breakfast, we 
quickly looked for a bar and found one where they made churros. 
We went in and I ate like a horse: I ate three servings of churros, 
each ration had six churros and each one measured 15 cms., in 
other words I ate almost three metres of churros. Ana ate a ham 
sandwich. Along with the churros I had three coffees with milk 
and felt like new. Ana explained to me that Núria and another 
three friends had spent three days cleaning the garage of the La 
Rimaia Free University. I knew nothing about this university. Ana 
politely explained that La Rimaia had been relocated more than 
once. I didn’t know or understand anything about this university. 
I was accustomed to the universities of Salamanca, Granada, 
Madrid, Oslo, Oxford, The Sorbonne… in which I had never set 
foot in as a builder, they were calling me now to invite me to 
explain how I showed disrespect and how we should show dis -
respect for anything that does not deserve any respect.
After spending a nice and tasty time with Ana, she left to 
finish cleaning the university garage -the utopia- and I left to 
go to the CGT in Vía Laietana to see my friend José, the anar -
cho sindicalist, who everyone called "the one with the white 
hair". We spent an hour or two exchanging views together with 
Manolo, chef and bar manager of the Barcelona CGT restaurant.
***
58 59
listen to this man, very academic, with his explanations of the 
present and the past. And also the future; I don’t know if he’s 
right about that, as I found him to be very pessimistic. But as 
I say, no one has a solution. I realise that I’m a builder, albeit 
it was on the last point that I disagree with this brilliant man 
and he made me think that people like this, with knowledge, 
are not utopian, so I think that to create the impossible, in the 
utopia that doesn’t exist, you’ve got to be ingenious or innocent. 
Every time I take part and experience what I take part in, I don’t 
believe anyone can claim that it’s above anything else. We’re 
different in respect to people like this professor and academ -
ic, who provide us with what they know and what they have 
learned; this gentlemen has worked for it and for that I respect 
him even though I have my doubts about his assertions. What I 
don’t doubt is that we should assert our knowledge; everybody 
has a task, without that we are nothing nor can we assert or 
be anything.
The academic finished and Marta, host and friend of Núria, 
handed over to my friend Duran, who explained to us what he 
did in order to defraud dozens of banks like he had done. It 
seemed good to me because he did it without any brutality, 
which is very important. After explaining to us how he did it, he 
also explained how he used the money, which is the second 
most important thing after obtaining it. He also told us about 
his project –which isn’t just his- about a collective of residenc -
es and about work, something I defended at various libertarian 
meetings, because these are methods of making people ac -
countable; these are the libertarian methods and methods of 
self-management, methods of collectivisation practiced in the 
civil war which worked and of which we can be proud of. Such 
methods are our heritage and for that we should defend what 
the friends of Enric Duran are doing. They are a necessity and 
are the only ones who will provide us with another way of living 
that is fairer and I believe to be better. If we want it, we have 
everything to achieve it with; nobody can stop us if we want it. 
Marta introduced Lucio. And as usual, I’m anything you like, but 
above all I’m a builder. Turning towards my academic friend, I 
said to him:
– Many thanks for your lucidity and richness, you know so 
much and you have had to make great efforts in order to I think you have to be crazy for doing this. Or will that be it, 
like I was saying, utopia? The impossible exists.
I asked Núria how people were going to come if they didn’t 
know about it. To be pleasant, she said to me: 
– If we announce that you’re going to be here, there’ll be 
thousands but the majority would come because their 
bored at home and want to get to know you; you’re used 
to filling places with three hundred, four hundred or five 
hundred people but I think even without help from anyone 
we can get about fifty people here who are genuinely in -
terested in the subject 
In five minutes, those fifty seats were taken; five minutes later 
the other fifty were taken and half an hour after that the ga -
rage was full. According to my reckoning, there were between 
two hundred and thirty and two hundred and fifty people. A lot 
of people couldn’t get in, it was absolutely packed. There are 
places like this, like los gaztetxes, associations, busy districts 
like the Red Rose in Hamburg, Berlin, Cologne, Bologna... all 
of which are a vehicle for our necessary freedom today. I don’t 
believe in nothing, but I believe in everything. Without difficulty, 
without help from anyone, at an abandoned location, a temple 
of libertarian defrauding bandits, some crazy girl who no-one 
knows apart from her four or five friends. Because I believe in 
the unbelievable, because I have lived through it, because noth -
ing is impossible if we want to or are able to pay for it. A little 
experience, in addition to other things, can achieve great things 
and what has been created and carried out by this generous girl 
without any material interest is immense. I believe in existence 
and that one is what one is through what one does. This expe -
rience has been madness by our friend, but I will say that we 
are living normality, and this has been very abnormal for normal 
people. I believe that people of this kind are the ones that really 
create and I think that you have to open your doors to people 
like Núria. My door is open and so too, I believe, are those of 
her friends who have tried to love her and trust in her, what a 
pleasure. The conference began with a speech from a mag -
nificent academic, a connoisseur of everything to do with the 
economy; he is enriching, we followed and absorbed everything 
he knows: he explained about Spain, Europe, the world, agri -
culture, industry and currency. It was an immense pleasure to 
60 61
do that, but with all respect I have to tell you that I thought 
you were going to show us how to screw up the banks. 
This is what we have to learn, how to steal from them and 
treat them with the disrespect they deserve. 
I also said that the things my friend Duran had done were not 
much but if all of us here did something similar, things might 
change. Less preaching but more actions. I congratulated my 
friend Duran, who at any time, just like I also could have been, 
could be tempted into the idiocy of dedicating your life to an -
other way of living, towards what is happiness for some people, 
and what for me is idiocy and desertion.
What is wealth? Anybody can think what they want, and I’m 
not against wealth; it can be good if one knows how to make 
use it, or bad if you don’t know how. As I say: on certain day at 
4:28p.m. you might have no more than fifty francs and then by 
4:45p.m. you’re a millionaire. How? And what for? Everything is 
what one does and one is what one is through what one does. 
For better or worse, we all have wealth and possibilities and it 
all remains to do; nothing is impossible. The United States of 
America has begun manufacturing 64 tonnes of paper to con -
vert it into 64 tonnes of notes, and this is the extent of all the 
governments and the humble and generous people too.
The impossible does not exist. Utopia as well. We’re start -
ing off with little and in accordance with our possibilities but 
we’re starting off just like our friend did. Bringing people with 
all means of information is possible and so is filling an aban -
doned garage without difficulty. This is living and realising the 
unbelievable. I went, I ate and I slept; so too my friend Duran, 
not forgetting the great professor. But the person who made the 
effort for everything, for everyone and without anyone’s help is 
Núria who believes in the unbelievable because she lives the 
impossible and lives the only honourable way there is in itself: 
utopia. She lived it, created it and made it. Without it we’ll slump 
to where we are now which is nowhere. Let’s be selfish and do 
everything possible to achieve the impossible.
62 63
How to expropriate money  
from the banks 
Displaced Legal Application #1: 
Fractional Reserve
Núria Güell
www.nuriaguell.netText
Qmunty
Enric Duran
Simona Sarau
Col·lectiu Crisis
Lucio Urtubia
Design
www.bisdixit.com
Acknowledgements
Marti Peran, Maylin Machado, Tania Bruguera,  
Rosa Pera, Diana Sans,  Bòlit,  Marina Garcés, 
T10, Mauricio Miranda, Daniela Ortiz,  Susana 
Pilar Delahante, La Rimaia, Contre, Lluís Cusco, 
Marlés Carrillo, Jessica Rincón, Carles Mateu, Anna 
Fernàndez, Jordi Rigola,  Eduard Ruz, Toni Ferrer, 
Maria del Mar Ferrer, Marta Moran, Rafa Ruiz, Javier 
Clavero, David Momblan, Lluís Hernández, Josep 
Ruhi, Levi Orta, to my parents and my grandfather. 
This publication was produced thanks to the artist 
creation grant 2009-2010 given by Fundación 
Guasch Coranty of Barcelona.
Licencia Creative Commons, Barcelona, 2013.
cba
by    nc   sa
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
