Post-
Digit al Print
  
The Mutation 
of Publishing 
since 1894
Alessandro Ludovico
OnOmat Opee 77
454878 7890789 ISBN 9789078454878
90000 >In this post-digital age, digital technology is no longer a 
revolutionary phenomenon but a normal part of every-day life. The mutation of music and film into bits and bytes, downloads and streams is now taken for granted. For the world of book and magazine publishing however, this transformation has only just begun.
Still, the vision of this transformation is far from new. 
For more than a century now, avant-garde artists,  activists and technologists have been anticipating the 
development of networked and electronic publishing. 
Although in hindsight the reports of the death of paper were greatly  exaggerated, electronic publishing has now 
certainly become a reality. How will the analog and the digital coexist in the post-digital age of publishing? How will they transition, mix and cross over?
In this book, Alessandro Ludovico re-reads the history 
of media technology, cultural activism and the avant-garde arts as a prehistory of cutting through the so-called  dichotomy between paper and electronics. Ludovico is 
the editor and publisher of Neural, a magazine for critical  
digital culture and media arts. For more than twenty years now, he has been working at the cutting edge (and the outer fringes) of both print publishing and politically engaged digital art.
1Post-
Digit al 
Print
The Mutation 
of Publishing 
since 1894
Alessandro Ludovico
ONOMATOPEE 77
2
3contents
Introduction.  7
Chapter 1 –  The death of paper 
  (which never happened). 15
 
 1.1  Early threats to the printed medium. 15
 1.2  Wires will strangle the sluggish paper. 17
 1.3  The Readies: machine-reading words without pages. 19
 1.4  H.G. Wells declares the newspaper dead: 
  up-to-date news by telephone is the future. 20
 1.5  An attempt by radio to steal newspapers’ 
  loyal customers. 21
 1.6  The ‘cold’ visual power of television vs. 
  the ‘dead’ book and the ‘mosaic’ of the newspaper. 22
 1.7  Computers virtualising paper: 
  the ‘paperless’ propaganda. 24
 1.8  Hypertext, something paper can’t be. 27
 1.9  The death of paper… has yet to happen. 29
Chapter 2 – A history of alternative publishing 
  reflecting the evolution of print. 31
 2.1  Print is liberating. 31
 2.2  The use of print in the 20th century avant-garde. 33
 2.3  The mimeograph or stencil duplicator, 
  enabling underground publishing. 36
 2.4  Fluxus, printed materials circulating 
  within an ‘Eternal Network’ . 38
 2.5  The underground press boom, offset colour 
  dripping and the network (again). 41
 2.6  Photocopying the world, re-appropriating culture. 43
 2.7  The digital revolution, and the peak and fall of zines. 47
 2.8  Intertwining media, a look at the near future. 50
Chapter 3 – The mutation of paper: 
  material paper in immaterial times. 54
 3.1  The mass slaughter of newspapers. 55
 3.1.1  The mass slaughter of periodical print. 58
 3.2  Atomising content: 
  implementing the Apple/iTunes paradigm. 60
4 3.2.1  Automated content: the news follows the reader. 61
 3.3  Preemptive news: 
  the battle for the online attention market. 62
 3.4  Space, physicality, and repeatability of print. 66
 3.4.1 The publishing gesture. 67
 3.5  Print on demand, the balance of 
  power between paper and pixel. 70
 3.5.1 Vanity press, freedom of expression 
  and self-gratification. 72
 3.5.2 The frontiers of POD: 
  customisation and open source 74
 3.6  Independent magazine strategies, 
  teaming up for success. 78
 3.7  The automated digital production trap. 80
 3.8  Print and digital are getting married, 
  and that’s exactly where the real problems start. 82
Chapter 4 –  The end of paper: 
  can anything actually replace the printed page? 83
 4.1  Electronic paper, the basis of electronic publishing. 84
 4.1.1  The Bezos vision: Kindle the world. 85
 4.1.2  Resisting the e-book paradigm. 87
 4.1.3  The iPad paradigm: publishing for the iCustomer. 89
 4.1.4  The turning point: 
  electronic content with the look and feel of print. 93
 4.1.5  Newspapers on-screen and off-screen. 95
 4.2  ‘Reflowability’: mobile style in reading and writing. 97
 4.3  Delivering content, from discs to wireless networks. 98
 4.4  Going digital: vanishing libraries. 102
 4.5  Print becomes a limited-edition object. 106
 4.5.1  Intermediate strategies: 
  using digital media for selling print. 108
 4.6  Post-digital print. 109
 4.7  Print and online: friend or foe? 
  Conceptual differences and similarities 
  between print and blogs. 111
 4.8  Which is more environmentally friendly: 
  print or digital? 115
 4.9  Paper is flesh. Screen is metal. 117
5Chapter 5 – Distributed archives: paper content from the past, 
  paper content for the future. 118
 5.1  The ‘online giants’ and their approach 
  to ‘archiving’ printed materials. 118
 5.2  Preserving independent magazines, 
  a controversial struggle. 126
 5.3  Distributed Archives, 
  the peer-to-peer archive model. 128
 5.3.1  The need for a ‘flowable’ archive form 130
 5.4  The art of the archive: 
  hard-copying the digital database. 131
 5.5  Scrapbooks, grassroots archiving 
  as a new methodology. 135
Chapter 6 – The network: 
  transforming culture, transforming publishing. 138
 
 6.1  The magazine as network node. 138
 6.1.1  Network means distributing, and distribution 
  substantially benefits from the network. 139
 6.1.2  The network as infrastructure: 
  agencies, syndicating, and directories. 141
 6.1.3 The network as a means of political support 
  and sustainable business: 
  the Punti Rossi (‘Red Points’) project. 142
 6.2  Collaboration is better than competition: 
  the Mag.net network. 143
 6.3  The network as a large-scale experiment: 
  the Documenta 12 Magazines project. 145
 6.4  External support networks, assisting publishing 
  gestures from faraway. 147
 6.5  The network: the future starts here. 149
Conclusion Post-digital print: a future scenario 153
 Appendix  Print vs. electrons: 100 differences and 
  similarities between paper and pixel. 159
Afterword  by Florian Cramer 162
6
Newspaper extinction timeline, 2011
7Introduction.
We’ve all heard the news: print is dead. Every year, declining reader-
ship and advertisement sales are forcing hundreds of well-established newspapers and magazines out of business, while employment figures 
within the industry have fallen back to mid-1950s levels.
1 At the same 
time, (independent) bookshops are withering and falling like so many 
autumn leaves. Digital publishing, on the other hand, is now a booming 
business, with traditional publishers embracing every new standard or 
technology in an often desperate effort to impress their sceptical share-holders. And the market for reading devices and platforms is beginning to get very crowded indeed, while digital versions of every imaginable printed material are distributed online with ever-increasing ease and speed. Online news distribution is also clearly spiralling out of control, 
which is why a recent April Fools’ Day hoax by the internationally 
esteemed British newspaper, the Guardian, announcing that it would 
henceforth be publishing its news exclusively through Twitter, could sound even remotely plausible…
And yet, there are still plenty of newsstands and bookshops around, 
well-stocked with a wide variety of printed products. And if you are 
reading these words on paper (which you probably are) then you have, 
for some reason, chosen to go with the ‘old’ medium. Why? Probably because it still comes with the very best ‘interface’ ever designed.
So is print really dead? Is it going to die anytime soon? In this book, 
we shall be examining a particular (and often puzzling) period in the history of print – starting with the moment its death was first an-
nounced (already quite a long time ago, as we shall see) up to the pre-
sent day, as new digital technologies are rapidly transforming both the status and the role of printed materials.
There are many different and often contradictory signals to be con-
sidered here, but it is crucial to see them within a historical perspec-
tive, as well as in the context of the most current developments. We 
shall attempt here to collect and systematise as many of these signals as space allows – examining various technologies, experiments, and visionary works of art, as well as hard facts and figures. The traditional role of print is unmistakeably being threatened by the new digital world; but it is also, paradoxically, being revitalised. Both media share 
a certain number of characteristics, and yet they are fundamentally dif-
ferent – and they also fulfil different needs (for example, digital is built for speed, while print ensures stability).
8The two media are clashing as well, resulting in efforts from both 
sides to discover some ideally balanced publishing ‘nirvana’ , where 
pixels and paper live together in a perfect symbiosis, generating (of 
course) an endless flow of revenue for everyone involved. In an ef-
fort to reach this utopian goal, publishers of all shapes and sizes are currently developing and investing in countless hybrid strategies and products: strange beasts which incorporate, either literally or concep-tually, elements and qualities of both paper and pixels, in an effort to score the highest possible degree of customer satisfaction – and thus 
revenue. But, being hybrids, these strategies and products face an 
uphill struggle to be accepted, let alone embraced – and in order to do so, they must quickly find their own role and niche within the global marketplace.
As they struggle for survival, they must rapidly evolve and adapt to 
an ever-changing media environment. One direct consequence of this 
process, obviously, is that printed publishing will never be the same 
again: it is being deeply transformed by two opposite (even contradic-tory) needs. On one hand, the timeless and immutable printed page is itself increasingly subjected to a variety of real-time updating schemes. On the other hand, having an information carrier which is physically reliable (as well as independent of electrical and data connections) is 
increasingly being recognised as a precious resource by a generation 
which spends much of its days glued to ‘unsteady’ laptops.
The timeless ‘interface’ of the printed page (including its classic 
‘golden ratio’ dimensions and ‘portrait’ or vertical orientation) has finally been adopted by digital publishing; on the other hand, printed 
products increasingly attempt to incorporate ‘digital’ characteristics – 
such as updateability and searchability. And yet, enlightening as it may be to observe such seemingly convergent developments, this is only the first step towards fully understanding this ongoing process.
We shall begin by examining more closely the so-called ‘death of pa-
per’ – something which obviously has yet to happen, and which has in 
fact been announced more than once, starting in the late 19th century (at the time when the first public electricity networks were being de-veloped in urban areas). The first chapter – The death of paper (which never happened) – chronologically analyses seven particularly repre-sentative cases which have occurred since that first defining moment. 
Essentially, any new medium always claims to possess characteristics 
superior to those of printed paper, and thus to be in a position to potentially supplant it. And yet, not a single one of these media has ever managed to seriously threaten print’s dominance of its native 
9market, or its deeply rooted status as a universal medium. Perhaps 
this is all about to change, with the arrival of the newest generation of mobile devices interconnected through wireless networks? Perhaps. 
Nevertheless, the overblown tone in which the death of the paper 
medium is currently being announced, should give us reason to pause and consider more closely the qualities and drawbacks of the currently emerging digital alternatives – and also how print, instead of disap-pearing, may instead adapt and evolve, as it has already done several times before. Historically, the unchangeable, static nature of the print-
ed medium has always been the main justification for declaring it to be 
obsolete. Paradoxically, it is this very immutability of paper which is now increasingly proving to be an advantage rather than a weakness, particularly in the context of an ever-changing (thus ephemeral) digital publishing world. At the same time, there can be no doubt that the role of printed paper within the media landscape will have to be thoroughly 
redefined.
But to help us avoid repeating earlier mistakes, or impulsively embrac-
ing experimental developments whose time has yet to come, the sec-ond chapter – A history of alternative publishing reflecting the evolution of print – offers an analysis of the strategic use of print, by avant-garde 
artistic movements throughout the 20th century, as well as in the 
context of the underground press from the 1950s through the 1980s, and finally in light of the most recent developments in underground publishing (such as the production of technically perfect ‘fakes’ made possible through digital technology). The actions, gestures, and strate-
gies of all of these types of press, while demonstrating how print can 
be put to use as a ‘liberating’ medium, are also intimately connected to contemporaneous technological developments. Such a parallel history of technologies and artistic strategies reveals how cultural and social passions have always found their way into print, using whatever means happened to be available and appropriate at the time – thus signifi-
cantly reflecting and documenting the historical period in which they 
existed. Even now this continues to be the case (although in a more ‘scattered’ way than before, across different cultural scenes and using various combinations of technologies and strategies). As it will hope-fully continue to be in the future.
Whenever some newer and more powerful technology seems ready to 
transform the established rules of any system, then the whole system (in this case, the media landscape) will gradually respond to the chal-lenge. The third chapter – The mutation of paper: material paper in 
10immaterial times – explores the current mutation of the role of printed 
paper as a medium; why paper, an inherently ‘material’ medium, still makes sense in our ‘immaterial’ age. This new role is, of course, still in 
the process of being clearly and comprehensively defined. The undeni-
able impact of digital publishing on the print publishing economy is a key factor in this process, as the established trade mechanisms and money flows which have sustained publishing for centuries are in-creasingly being called into question. At this turning point, with many long-established publishing enterprises facing bankruptcy, publishers 
both large and small struggle to (re)invent, experiment, hybridise, and 
exploit (some might say squeeze the last drops out of ) the unique char-acteristics of print, while integrating new ‘digital’ features – or at least some essence of these features – into the printed page. Furthermore, the rapidly maturing ‘print on demand’ model, besides predictably revolutionising the traditional ‘vanity press’ and self-publishing mar-
kets, has also made possible the publication of many experimental, 
historical, collaborative, updateable, and otherwise non-commercial materials. And there is of course no shortage of (often enlightening) comments by media pundits on all the new and exciting possibilities offered by these endlessly mutating media forms.
This blurring of the boundaries between paper and pixel is the topic of 
the fourth chapter – The end of paper: can anything actually replace the 
printed page? Here we shall critically examine the various electronic devices, strategies, platforms, successes and failures, keeping in mind that the subject we are attempting to dissect is in a state of constant 
flow, often radically redefined by one bold gesture of a single organisa-
tion or even individual. Here our challenge will be to track down and define the elusive thread connecting recent and ongoing developments with that ‘something’ which is destined to become, in the next decade or so, the stable foundation of the new digital publishing. This is, of course, a cultural phenomenon, which is affecting the world of publish-
ing in all its dimensions: from physical distribution, to the changing na-
ture of libraries, to the formulation of new alternative models of selling printed products. The cultural and perceptual shifts involved should not be underestimated; once we have attempted to define these, we shall once again examine how artists are busy envisioning them, con-ceptually as well as practically.
An important future role of paper is certainly the long-term archiv-
ing of information. Thus we must understand not only the properties of paper as an archival medium, but also what the supposed ‘digital 
11archiving’ of printed materials exactly means, and how the two to-
gether are already shaping what some day will become the memory of our contemporary culture. This is the subject of the fifth chapter 
– Distributed archives: paper content from the past, paper content for the 
future. Some of the questions we will be asking are: is paper indeed the 
best container for our collective long-term memory? How could small – often personal – print archives be made available online (if not their entire content, at least their collection references) for the benefit of all those interested? How could specialised archives, which cover a varie-
ty of topics, be shared using distributed and/or peer-to-peer archiving 
models (‘curated’ by individuals and small institutions, instead of ma-jor corporations and bureaucracies)? As we examine the possibilities – and compare various industrial efforts, such as the paradigm-defining Google Books – we must understand not only how paper is likely to be used from now on, but also how the choices we make today will end up 
determining whether publications from the (recent) past are to become 
(or remain) visible or invisible in the near future.
The sixth and final chapter – The network: transforming culture, trans-
forming publishing – focuses on how the network, as a cultural and technological concept, has enabled a strategic transformation, mak -
ing it possible for the first time to imagine and implement credible alternatives to printed paper. Electronic books, newspapers and maga-zines would have been poor alternatives to paper, had they not been updatable and cross-connectable through networks. Paradoxically, the network also offers print publishing its best opportunities for sur-
vival: making it possible for publishers to team up with like-minded 
colleagues, to connect with potential customers, to foster a collective understanding of the unique and complementary role of paper within the new digital reality, and to implement new and sustainable ‘hy-brid’ publishing models. And when artists use networks as a platform for critical reflection and intervention within the global distribution 
structure (thus playing a major role in re-conceptualising it), ‘network -
ing’ also becomes synonymous with the ‘sharing’ of cultural products 
– underexposed or otherwise invisible materials, whether printed or digital. Here, the individual reputation of each (known and shared) cultural product becomes a key factor in the success of a new business model established by the network.
Finally, the Appendix attempts to bring the two worlds (print and digi-
tal) face to face, noting their differences and similarities, and remind-ing us once again of how inseparable the two really are. One hundred 
12keywords and concepts are listed in both their digital and paper incar-
nations. We end with this ‘conceptual slide show’ in an effort to tempo-rarily ‘archive’ the current state of the research process initiated with 
this book, which is certain to be continued elsewhere – understanding 
fully well that print and pixel, cellulose and electricity are finally get-ting married (which is of course where the real problems begin), but also that their vital and dynamic relationship should above all be seen as an important historical opportunity for a new wave of meaningful, creative and independent publishing.
13
14
15chapter 1
The death of paper 
(which never happened).
1.1  early threats to the printed medium.
In our present digital era, the ‘death of paper’ has become a plausible 
concept, widely expected to materialise sooner or later. The ‘digitisa-
tion of everything’ explicitly threatens to supplant every single ‘old’ medium (anything carrying content in one way or another), while claiming to add new qualities, supposedly essential for the contempo-rary world: being mobile, searchable, editable, perhaps shareable. And indeed, all of the ‘old’ media have been radically transformed from 
their previous forms and modalities – as we have seen happen with 
records, radio and video. On the other hand, none of these media ever really disappeared; they ‘merely’ evolved and transformed, according to new technical and industrial requirements.
The printed page, the oldest medium of them all, seems to be the 
last scheduled to undergo this evolutionary process. This transforma-
tion has been endlessly postponed, for various reasons, by the industry 
as well as by the public at large. And so the question may very well be: is printed paper truly doomed? Are we actually going to witness an endless proliferation of display screens taking over our mediascape, causing a gradual but irreversible extinction of the printed page?
It’s never easy to predict the future, but it’s completely useless to 
even attempt to envision it without first properly analysing the past. Looking back in history, we can see that the death of paper has been duly announced at various specific moments in time – in fact, when-ever some ‘new’ medium was busy establishing its popularity, while deeply questioning the previous ‘old’ media in order to justify its 
own existence. In such moments in history, it was believed that paper 
would soon become obsolete.
(Historical note: paper as a medium was first invented by the 
Egyptians around 3500 BC using the papyrus plant, then definitively established in China starting in the 2nd century CE, before it was com-bined with the revolutionary movable type print technology – first in-
troduced, again in China using woodblocks, and later on by Gutenberg 
in Germany in 1455 using lead alloys).
Time and again, the established mass-media role of paper has been 
16called into question by a number of media theorists and marketing 
experts, who attempted in various ways to persuade society at large to get rid of paper, and choose instead some newer and supposedly better 
medium. This ongoing process seems to have originated in the early 
20th century, when the death of paper was predicted – probably for the first time – after centuries of daily use. The development of public electricity networks, which enabled the mass distribution of new and revolutionary media, inspired visions of a radical change in the (still two-dimensional) media landscape, following a fashionable logic of 
inevitable progress which lives on to this day.
The telegraph, introduced in the second half of the 19th century, 
was the first medium to enable the electrical transmission of content across long distances in real time. Despite a very low ‘bandwidth’ of 
just a few characters per second, this instant connection between fara-way places completely changed the way people dealt with information, starting off the ‘electric’ wave of innovation which came to characterise the turn of the century. The journalist Tom Standage, writing in The Economist, went so far as to dub the telegraph “the Victorian Internet”: 
“The telegraph unleashed the greatest revolution in communications 
since the development of the printing press” .
2
After the electric telegraph wire, the next step was the quest for 
what the Italian inventor Innocenzo Manzetti called the “speaking telegraph” ,
3 and soon enough the first telephone networks were be-
ing developed – first locally, then nationally and internationally. The ‘one-to-many’ mode of exclusive communication (introduced by the 
newspapers) was now being challenged at its very core, by the wires 
directly connecting voices between people’s houses – that is, between rich people’s houses, at least for the time being.
White House telegraph 
room, Washington, D.C., ca. 1906 (Peter and Cornelia Weil Typewriter Archives)
171.2  wires will strangle the sluggish paper.
A uniquely futuristic vision of this changing mediascape was elabo-
rated by Octave Uzanne and Albert Robida in their illustrated story 
La fin des livres, originally published in France in 1894 in the collection Contes pour les bibliophiles.
4 Uzanne wrote of a future world of publish-
ing which would no longer rely on the ‘static’ printed page, delivering instead all content through voice (both live and recorded) using a plat-
form which nowadays would best 
be described as ‘on demand’ . This wasn’t radio (wireless transmis-sion had yet to be developed and popularised), neither was it any kind of telephone broadcasting (or, 
as we would say in contemporary 
terms, ‘cable radio’) since it relied on live-through-wires content as well as playback of recorded con-tent (which we would now refer to as online and offline), distributed 
through the then-popular (and 
fragile) cylinder recording medi-um. Robida’s illustrations depicted this future world in a very imaginative and effective manner, while maintaining the distinctive graphic style of the period. The future seemed to be one of wires everywhere, spreading the content of librar-
ies into every home as well as in public spaces.
Uzanne argued that reading causes fatigue and apathy. Words heard 
through the tube, on the other hand, would convey energy, and thus 
the gramophone must inevitably supplant the printed page. The way in which Uzanne imagined this future scenario, anticipates several con-
temporary issues regarding the distribution of content. Watchmakers, 
for example, will have designed reliable miniaturised gramophones (= iPods); the required mobile electricity (still an issue in the 21st cen-tury) is generated by harnessing the user’s physical movements (one of many contemporary ‘green’ proposals for producing clean energy). The libraries have become “phonographoteques” (= podcast reposi-
tories), while bibliophiles are now known as “phonographophiles” (= 
download addicts). Furthermore, in Uzanne’s vision, the author be-comes his own publisher (= customised print on demand), living off the royalties of his works. Finally, city squares and crossroads now feature kiosks where people can insert a coin in order to listen to works of 
One of the illus-
trations from La fin des livres by Octave Uzanne and Albert Robida in Contes 
pour les biblio-philes, 1895
18literature (= digital kiosks) through simple headphones which are so 
cheap even the poor can afford them. One of the most ‘retrofuturistic’ inventions is a more-or-less mobile device, filled with recordings of the 
author’s works, which he can carry with him through the streets. Using 
multiple wire connections, a small neighbourhood can be ‘provided’ with his audio content.
As for the future of the printed page – “It will be abandoned” , 
except perhaps for some limited use in business and private commu-nications (actually, what we see happening nowadays is exactly the 
opposite: since the mid-1990s, personal communication has relied less 
and less on paper, except in a few formal occasions). Also, “the news-paper will go the same way” , since the printed word would no longer be satisfying compared to the new audio medium – and the thrilling experience of hearing the story actually being told.
There’s also a passage on health issues, specifically on the results of 
centuries of reading in poorly-lit conditions. Uzanne notes that, just as eye doctors flourished when journalism was invented, ear specialists will prosper in the future. He concludes: “how happy we will be not to have to read any more; to be able finally to close our eyes” . The daily strain on the eyes from devouring news and essays, stories and novels, could at last be avoided as the ears absorbed the information, much 
faster and almost effortlessly. For Uzanne, the death of print positively 
meant the end of a tyranny – the liberation from a debilitating slavery of the eyes. And so the new medium (catapulting us with its new senso-rial experience into a future of speed and ease) would inevitably prevail against the slow and static printed page (and its dependence on our 
enslaved and exhausted eyes).
Similarly, the French artist Villemard created in 1910 a series of 
postcards showcasing his futuristic vision of life in Paris in the year 
2000.
5 Here the concept of one medium (paper) being replaced by 
One of the postcards 
from the series Villemard 1910 -  en l’an 2000, 1910
19another (audio) is depicted even more explicitly. We see people listen-
ing to their favourite newspaper, in the form of freshly recorded cyl-inder phonographs played on a gramophone; the same medium is also 
used for personal correspondence. Schoolchildren hear their lessons 
through rudimentary headphones hanging from the ceiling and con-nected to a mysterious machine, which the teacher feeds with books, converting their content to audio through some unspecified mechani-cal process (somewhat resembling the grinding of meat). But although the content is converted (into immaterial sounds rather than digital 
bits), the supremacy of the book as the primary repository of knowl-
edge is in itself not challenged.
1.3  the readies: 
 machine-reading words without pages.
In the early decades of the 20th century, the structural constraints of 
the printed page (content fixed immutably in a strictly sequential order of pages) were increasingly being perceived, after a few centuries of established use, as merely a technical limitation – something which would soon and inevitably be overcome. The avant-garde artistic and cultural movements of this period embraced the dramatic acceleration 
of urban daily life – the result of the industrial revolution and the in-
creasing use and availability of electricity. Newly created requirements (speeding up processes, reconfiguring social structures, and finding new attitudes for coming to grips with these changes) affected also the printed page, a cultural symbol of the past as well as the (then) present 
age.
This is the background against which Bob Brown wrote his mani-
festo The Readies in 1930. Declaring that “the written word hasn’t kept 
up with the age” , Brown envisioned a completely new technology for 
speeding up the reading process, using strips of miniaturised text (in-stead of pages) scrolling behind a magnifying glass: “A simple reading 
machine which I can carry or move around, attach to any old electric 
light plug and read hundred thousand word novels in ten minutes if I want to, and I want to.”
Not content with merely conceiving the technology, Brown took 
a first step towards its realisation, by defining a new publishing platform meant to supplant what he called the printed book’s “bot-
tled” text. One year after The Readies, he published Readies for Bob 
Brown’s Machine, featuring texts written specifically for his new read-ing machine by celebrated contemporary poets such as Gertrude Stein, Filippo Tommaso Marinetti and Ezra Pound – in an experimental 
20style reflecting the machine’s structure and motion, using only indis-
pensable words connected by hyphens and discarding the rest (such as articles and conjunctions).
6
The Readies were meant to be more than a new form of writing – 
Brown envisioned a whole new medium, optically demolishing the obsolete pace of words “bottled up” in the printed page, and thus in-
creasing the quantity of information that could be digested per unit of 
time (readers could control the scrolling speed according to their own personal tastes and needs): “Books are antiquated word containers (…) modern word-conveyors are needed now, reading will have to be done by machine” . Impressively prophetic of the speed of the electronic word (“And words perhaps eventually will be recorded directly on 
the palpitating ether”) and of the speed and range (and thus power) of 
electronic media, Brown’s work also questions the relationship, in the established written forms and media, between writer and reader.
The basic technology sounds a lot like microfilm, which was then in 
development, and in fact Brown was in contact with some of the inven-tors working on prototypes. Paradoxically, this was the only form in 
which Brown’s vision would ever be materialised – microfilm, which 
became a way of archiving printed content, celebrating and preserving paper and print rather than attempting to supplant them.
7
1.4  h.g. wells declares the newspaper dead: 
 up-to-date news by telephone is the future.
The English author Herbert George Wells is widely considered one of the spiritual fathers of science fiction (together with Jules Verne); his many works in the genre include such seminal titles as The War of the Worlds and The Time Machine. During the 1930s and 40s Wells appeared in regular radio broadcasts on the BBC, discussing “topics as diverse as world politics, the history of the printing press, the pos-
sibilities of technology and the shape of things to come” .
8 Wells was a 
passionate believer in the essential role of the printing press in bring-
ing knowledge to ordinary people; in a 1940 broadcast9 he discussed 
the importance of print for democracy, and how the ability to read and write enables us all to become “lords and masters of our fate” . 
And yet, only three years later (and just three years before his death), 
during another broadcast
10 he declared the newspaper medium to be 
“dead as mutton” . He denounced the excessive amount of power con-centrated in the hands of an unreliable press and the “prostitution” of 
the journalistic profession, which made it necessary to buy “three or 
four newspapers to find out what is being concealed from us”; he also 
21jokingly advocated mass book burnings in order to rid local libraries 
of low-quality and out-of-date publications. Finally, he predicted that people would soon prefer to receive a constantly updated news sum-
mary through their telephones…
1.5  an attempt by radio to steal newspapers’ 
 loyal customers.
Within a few decades, electricity made possible first the telegraph, 
then the telephone, and finally radio, with its own entirely new model 
of broadcasting. The telegraph and the telephone were both designed to connect two single points at any given distance (in the case of the telegraph, with a slight delay between transmission and reception, but with an archival paper output; in the case of the telephone, in real time, but without any archival record). Radio, on the other hand, enabled 
for the first time an essentially real-time mass-media distribution of 
information, which until then had been the exclusive domain of big newspapers using a completely different medium. But even beyond its dynamic delivery of content, radio created in many listeners a sense of involvement, even a feeling of sensorial immersion: “ ‘I live right inside radio when I listen. I more easily lose myself in radio than in a book,’ 
said a voice from a radio poll.” (Marshall McLuhan, Understanding 
Media, 1964
11)
So it seems that the potential of voice as envisioned by Uzanne was 
realised thanks to radio, “with its power to turn the psyche and society 
into a single echo chamber” (McLuhan, Understanding Media12). But 
here again, the predicted catastrophic consequences for the printed 
page simply did not happen. In the 1940s, in particular (a period when 
radio was more popular than ever and still gaining momentum) news-
papers nevertheless went on increasing their circulation. Customers seemed to enjoy the ritual of buying the morning (and often also the evening) editions from their favourite newsstands. And yet, during this period, the debate continued about how radio news was destined to inevitably supplant newspapers.
Then, in 1945 in Manhattan, a series of events took place which can 
be considered particularly significant in the social history of print. On June 30, a newspaper delivery drivers’ strike broke out in New York, which was to last for 17 days.
13 A documentary funded at the time by 
the newspaper publishers’ association showed what happened when thirteen million New York citizens were suddenly unable to buy their 
favourite newspaper. An early response to this development was that 
the radio stations doubled their news schedules, with programmes 
22every hour, twenty-four hours a day. The whole episode was soon a 
national event, with Mayor Fiorello LaGuardia reading a Dick Tracy comic strip over the radio for the ‘kiddies’ .
On the other hand, many newspaper customers reacted to the strike 
by phoning the newspapers, who reassured them that they were still being published daily, and that people could still obtain a copy by going themselves to the newspapers’ printing presses, which loyal customers started doing. On the first day of the strike, circulation of the Herald 
Tribune plummeted to 15,000 copies, but after a massive word-of-
mouth campaign, circulation was back up to 65,000 copies by the last day of the strike, “by far the greater portion of them in direct over the counter sales. The Tribune readers have taken the time and trouble to come far out of their way to get a copy of their favourite morning newspaper” .
14
Circulation of the New York Times rose from 38,000 on the first 
day of the strike to 210,000 on the final day. Other major newspapers of the period, such as the New York Sun and the New York World 
Telegram, also saw hundreds of customers waiting patiently outside their respective presses, in orderly queues up to 17 blocks long, for as much as two to three hours.
It seems people preferred the physical and delayed enjoyment of the 
printed word above the real-time radio signal, to the extent that thou-sands of customers were ready to spend a great deal of time and energy 
just to obtain their copy, instead of simply switching on the radio and 
waiting for the latest news update to come in through the ether. As the documentary’s narrator says: “Newspapers that can be read and re-read, newspapers in which the public can read all about it, in their own time, at their own convenience” . Near the end of the documentary, the narrator (triumphantly) states: “Once again dramatic proof has been 
given that no other medium can take the place of newspapers in the 
lives of the people.”
15
1.6  the ‘cold’ visual power of television vs. 
 the ‘dead’ book and the ‘mosaic’ of the newspaper.
After the age of radio, the next technology to make its appearance in the media arena was television, with its unique, hypnotic, reality-like video streams. For our society, this was a culmination of the electric revolution that had begun with the telegraph. Television was a new medium in real time, and until the late 20th century it remained the most pervasive and predominant of all media. Marshall McLuhan’s 
23seminal analysis of a new media-innervated world, written in the 
1950s and 1960s, is based upon an analysis of the various (mass) me-dia and their changing roles in a new society which had evolved from 
industrial-physical relationships to an information-media relationship. 
As McLuhan stated:
“The term ‘communication’ has had an extensive use in connection 
with roads and bridges, sea routes, rivers, and canals, even before it became transformed into ‘information movement’ in the electric age. Perhaps there is no more suitable way of defining the character of the 
electric age than by first studying the rise of the idea of transportation 
as communication, and then the transition of the idea from transport to information by means of electricity.”
16
The mass scale achieved by television in the 1960s gave it an unas-
sailable position in all industrialised nations, reflecting the emerging ‘global village’ through an electric (and thus instantaneous) distribu-
tion of information – in striking contrast with the centuries-old model 
of the physical printed page, which seemed unable to compete because of its physical limitations. The shared feeling of ‘global interconnect-edness’ through a real-time video transmission was something the printed page had never been able to provide. At this point in history, as a fascination with speed and progress was transforming people’s 
perception of time and space, the printed medium seemed simply too 
slow to allow information to be simultaneously diffused and consumed.
McLuhan, the most visionary of mass-media theorists, spent his life 
analysing media. His famous division of ‘cold’ and ‘hot’ media assigned to print a very low potential for audience participation: “typography as a hot medium involves the reader much less than did manuscript” , 
while on the other hand “TV as cool media involve(s) the user, as mak -
er and participant, a great deal.”
17 He regarded the book as no longer 
adequate in this new age of speed and electricity, and thus ultimately 
doomed:
“It is the almost total coverage of the globe in time and space that 
has rendered the book an increasingly obsolete form of communi-cation. The slow movement of the eye along lines of type, the slow procession of items organized by the mind to fit into these endless horizontal columns – these procedures can’t stand up to the pressures of instantaneous coverage of the earth.”
18
McLuhan was sharply criticised for his determination to discredit 
the book as a valid form of media. Harry J. Boyle, writing in the Ottawa Citizen, commented: “He was ridiculed for saying that books were 
dead even as he used them to convey his ideas. Actually he never said 
that books were dead but rather that they had been nudged from their 
24central role by other media.”19 Nevertheless, McLuhan had an entirely 
different opinion of newspapers and magazines, noting how they flour-
ished after the arrival of the new TV medium: “One of the unexpected 
effects of TV on the press has been a great increase in the popularity 
of Time and Newsweek. Quite inexplicably to themselves and without any new effort at subscription, their circulations have more than dou-bled since TV.” And even more importantly: “If telegraph shortened the sentence, radio shortened the news story, and TV injected the in-terrogative mood into journalism.”
20
In fact, the new globalisation process was gradually incorporat-
ing print as well, and transforming it once again. Full-page facsimile transmission of international newspapers over long distances, which 
began in the 1960s and was upgraded in the following decades using 
dedicated satellite links, allowed newspapers to overcome the problem of shipping delays by printing remotely in different places at the same time. This new and forced evolution of print, along with its role of reflecting the uncertainty of a rapidly changing world (whether in the pondered style of the book, or the freeze-frame of the newspaper) is ac-
tually what allowed it to survive. Furthermore the stable, archival role 
of the printed page, and its potential for endless and exact duplication (qualities dismissed by McLuhan) were powerful features, especially in contrast with the volatility of the upcoming electronic media. Print never failed to reach its faithful audience, whether in the closed and portable form of a book, or in the ‘mosaic’
21 and dynamic form of a 
newspaper or magazine.
1.7  computers virtualising paper: 
 the ‘paperless’ propaganda.
At some point in history, someone may well have asked: What’s wrong 
with paper?. It’s no accident that this is the title of the second chapter of a book by Abigail J. Sellen and Richard H. R. Harper called The Myth 
of the Paperless Office,
22 about paper and its place in office life. From the 
very beginning, paper has always played a predominant role in the of-
fice. Historically, even Thomas Alva Edison, attempting to envision a 
practical use for his early experiments in recording on cylinders, saw 
them as a ‘paper-reducing’ (as opposed to ‘paper-replacing’) medium. The cylinders, wrapped in their thin aluminium foils, would contain spoken letters and memos to be shipped to their recipients, thus reduc-ing paper use and speeding up the writing and typing process.
23
Vannevar Bush, in the context of his complex Memex system, 
also imagined microfilm (used as the first alternative medium for 
25‘virtualising’ paper) as a means of mass storage and retrieval, reduc-
ing space and making data searchable using computers and cameras. And the limits of paper were also addressed in the early decades of 
computer science by J.C.R. Licklider in his famous book Libraries of 
the Future, published in 1965. Licklider sketched a futuristic impres-sion of computer-based technologies (including pen input and speech recognition) combined in order to make information easily searchable, and to overcome the inescapable limitations of paper, mainly its size and weight.
24
We can trace the actual expression ‘paperless office’ back to an ar-
ticle titled The Office of the Future, published in Business Week in June 
1975.25 The second section of the article is titled The Paperless Office. 
Besides predicting how computing giants (IBM and Xerox) would dominate the office market until the end of the century, this section 
looks into electronic methods of managing information which were 
expected to reduce, progressively but drastically, the amount of paper used in the working environment. The section begins with a quote 
Fujitsu 
ScanSnap ad, 2007
26from George E. Pake, then head of Xerox Corp.’s Palo Alto Research 
Center (PARC):
“(…) in 1995… I’ll be able to call up documents from my files on 
the screen… I can get my mail or any messages. I don’t know how much hard copy (printed paper) I’ll want in this world.”
Starting in the early 1980s (the beginning of the age of personal 
information) this ‘paperless’ research-and-development mantra would 
increasingly become a propaganda buzzword aimed at creating a 
large target market for selling information technology (IT). Marketing 
departments actively promoted a vision of massive magnetic archiv-ing systems, destined to replace the huge amounts of messy paper, effectively de-cluttering the desktop once and for all. This meant a definitive shift towards systems of digital documents, existing only in windows on computer screens.
But every IT user sooner or later experiences some substantial 
data failure – and this unavoidable ‘IT error’ paradigm effectively undermines any possible faith in an entirely digital model. It was also a historical miscalculation to consider this ‘virtualisation’ process solely from a perspective of digital production, instead of attempting to understand how to enhance well-established paper-based dynamics. 
What all the propaganda aimed to evoke – the eradication of the jungle 
of paper from the clean and orderly industrial interface – was thus un-dermined by the instability of the new technology, as well as people’s familiarity with paper-based communication methodologies.
Sellen and Harper deconstruct the ‘paperless’ propaganda, stating 
that: “We have heard stories of paperless offices, but we have never 
seen one. (…) For example in one organization, managers banned the 
use of personal filing cabinets, only to find that people resorted to us-ing their car or home offices to store their paper files.” In fact, it should be noted that ‘paperless’ has remained a recurring propaganda theme ever since – promising to not only get rid of unwanted stacks of paper, 
but also (and perhaps more fundamentally) to reclaim physical space.
But the types of interaction made possible by paper are not yet 
available through new technologies (nor vice-versa, for that matter). 
There is still no electronic device which reproduces all the character-istics of paper: being lightweight, foldable, manipulable according to various reading activities, easily shareable with a small group of people 
interacting with each other simultaneously using a single medium, and 
being able to easily contain very different types of content, all instantly generated by hand, or juxtaposed with prepared (reproduced) content. 
27In fact, it seems much easier to digitally simulate the limitations of 
paper than its strengths – and this is unlikely to change any time soon.
For example, the ‘readability’ of paper seems very important to us: 
most people still choose to print a long document and read it on paper, rather than read it on a screen. So not only did the paperless office fail to happen, but the production and use of paper, both personal and work-related, and generally speaking the printed medium, have actu-ally increased in volume. Paradoxically, paper has even significantly contributed to spreading the culture and consciousness of the new 
media. Paper is persistent, as is the ink printed upon it. Printed paper 
stays around for a very long time, and its content doesn’t change at the click of a button. Furthermore, we have the experience of a few thou-sand years of practice in reading externally illuminated paper. Since the 1990s, paper documents, rather than simply being supplanted by their electronic alter egos, are instead finding new ways to interact 
with them. So again: what’s wrong with paper?
1.8  hypertext, something paper can’t be.
The way we deal with reading and writing practices has in fact been 
literally revolutionised, not so much by a new medium, but rather by 
a new concept implemented within a new medium. It’s not the com-
puter itself which has forever changed the linearity of text – it’s the possibility, through software, of creating in the abstract digital space a functional, entirely new text structure: the hypertext. Starting in the mid-1980s, the arrival of offline hypertexts signalled a radical change, 
which was to have a profound effect on the concept of the literary 
work. In fact, the hypertext enabled the realisation of an essential new characteristic: non-linearity of text. The consequence of this was a existential threat to the integrity of the sequential work, as it had been presented for centuries in books. And even though literature is still the main field for experimentation and innovation in print, the arrival of 
the hypertext enabled, perhaps for the very first time, a characteristic 
which could not effectively be reproduced in print.
Robert Coover clearly and authoritatively described this phenom-
enon in his seminal essay The End of Books: “Print documents may be read in hyperspace, but hypertext does not translate into print” ,
26 and 
so the endlessly deep narrative space made possible by the hypertext seemed destined to supplant the finite, sequential and closed format 
of books, eventually making them altogether obsolete. According to 
Coover, the ‘superior’ form of the hypertext brings “true freedom from the tyranny of the line” – particularly so in the case of narrative-based 
28text. When the boundless cultural space of the ‘hypertextual’ global 
Web is finally opened up, will the printed page by comparison start to look like so much yellowed paper?
The acclaimed Spanish author Jorge Luis Borges imagined such 
a dizzyingly endless text, in his 1975 short story The Book of Sand: a book with no beginning or end, its pages numbered, apparently uniquely but following no discernible pattern, so that the reader can never find the first or last page (the book was purchased from a book -
seller who acquired it in exchange for a handful of rupees and a Bible, 
from an owner who did not know how to read).
27
In his essential 1994 book Hyper/Text/Theory, George P. Landow 
said of the hypertext phenomenon: “It promises (or threatens) to 
produce effects on our culture, particularly on our literature, educa-
tion, criticism and scholarship, just as radical as those produced by 
Gutenberg’s movable type.”28 The digital technology then begins to 
radically alter the way in which we read, as the Brazilian media artist Giselle Beiguelman explored in a 1999 online artwork called O Livro 
depois do Livro (‘The Book after the Book’). The different roles assumed 
by the machine (‘reader’ in the case of browser software, ‘writer’ in text-generating software, and ‘interface’ between reader and text) are here theoretically and functionally integrated. In Beiguelman’s own words: “From screen to screen, the letter migrates, de-contextualises itself, making of language an aesthetic problem.”
29
And yet, despite its widespread use and incontestably tremendous 
potential (an early hypertext system for the authoring of technical manuals was appropriately called PaperKiller
30), the hypertext has not 
yet succeeded in supplanting the ‘traditional’ text. The development of various ‘wiki’ platforms has dramatically expanded the hypertext’s 
possibilities for collective authorship and the compilation of resources. 
It’s clear that the hyperlink is now definitely embedded in our culture – on the other hand, the concept and implementation of hyperlinks are extremely computer-specific and unrelated to any established proce-dure used in traditional writing and publishing. We’re nowhere close to hypertexts replacing the printed page in the way Robert Coover 
envisioned: “Indeed, the very proliferation of books and other print-
based media, so prevalent in this forest-harvesting, paper-wasting age, is held to be a sign of its feverish moribundity, the last futile gasp of a once vital form before it finally passes away forever, dead as God.”
31
And yet, less than two decades later, books and magazines (whether 
traditional or in some mutated form) still abound; the most dramatic effect of the hypertext seems to be the way it enables the development 
of extraordinary new resources, with profound repercussions on a 
29number of specific types of publishing. In this sense Katherine Hayles 
seems to have forecast much more accurately the future development of trends which were already emerging as she was working on her 
book Writing Machines: “A print encyclopedia qualifies as a hypertext 
because it has multiple reading paths, a system of extensive cross-ref-
erences that serve as a linking mechanism, and chunked text in entries separated typographically from one another.”
32
If this sounds like the perfect background for the development 
of Wikipedia, it should be noted that Wikipedia itself has recently implemented a new functionality for generating traditional ‘printed 
page’ layouts for its entries.
33 (On the other hand, the makers of the 
Encyclopedia Britannica announced in 2012 that they would be dis-
continuing their expensive and bulky print edition, after 244 years 
– though Encyclopedia Britannica, Inc is still very much in business, 
specifically in the fields of educational publishing and online educa-tional tools.
34)
1.9  the death of paper… has yet to happen.
So the death of paper – in retrospect, one of the most unfortunate and embarrassing prophecies of the information age – has obviously not happened. Various kinds of printed pages are still being produced in huge quantities, and globally distributed, on a mass scale as well as on a very personal level. Nevertheless, the role of the printed page has 
radically mutated, from being a prevalent medium in its own right, to 
being a complementary medium, sometimes used as a static repository of electronic content.
The printed page has become more valuable, less expendable. This 
is because the duplication processes associated with paper are still limited and costly, and take up both space and time. Making a physi-
cal copy of a book involves either reproducing it page by page – or 
printing it from a digital file, again page by page. The result is a stack of paper occupying a significant physical space, and space seems to have become one of the most valuable resources in our consumption-oriented age.
Electricity, radio, TV, computers and the World Wide Web have 
all affected, transformed and revolutionised the printed medium in various ways; still, our attachment to the particular characteristics of paper remains more or less intact. Nevertheless, networks are radi-cally changing the way paper is produced and consumed. Editors, for example, must now select their printed content much more carefully, 
because of the huge amount of free content available online.
30Actually, paper and pixel seem to have become complementary to 
each other; print is increasingly the medium of choice for preserving 
the ‘quintessence’ of the Web. The editor of printed material is the cu-
rator, the human filter, the one who decides what should be saved on a 
stable medium, and what should be left as a message in a bottle tossed into the sea of the Internet. So the printed page, with its sense of un-hurried conclusiveness, allows to the reader to pause, to reflect, to take notes, without having to rely on electricity. And paper is also being used to preserve a substantial part of the digital culture, independently 
of hardware or software, describing the new media from the technical 
perspective of an old medium.
31chapter 2
 
A history of alternative publishing 
reflecting the evolution of print.
2.1  print is liberating.
As André Breton, one of the founders of the 1920s Surrealist art move-
ment, famously declared: “One publishes to find comrades!”35 This 
short statement brilliantly embodies the spirit of early avant-garde 
publishing, as well as that of independent publishing later in the 20th 
century. Strictly speaking, the main concern here is neither commer-
cial success, nor the aesthetic purity of the printed experiment, nor even the archiving of works (at least not yet). Rather, this kind of pub-lishing is all about fostering and spreading ideas among like-minded people, through the ‘viral’ communication model so often applied by the alternative press.
But when did this ‘alternative’ concept come into existence? 
Actually, it predates even Gutenberg, going at least all the way back to when the ‘Biblia Pauperum’ were being printed in woodcut. These 
were single-sheet illustrations of passages from the Bible, rendered 
in a style which today would best be described as comic strips, in an attempt to reduce the complexity of the original text into something more ‘popular’ , a phenomenon which was mostly ignored by the edu-cated elite of the time.
36
Later, Gutenberg’s movable type print itself turned out to be the 
(Left to right) 
André Breton, René Hilsum, Louis Aragon and Paul Eluard, with Dada #3, circa 1920
32‘media technology’ invention 
which facilitated the spread of the Protestant Reformation.
37 
By making the original text of the Bible accessible to anybody 
with a printed copy, it became 
possible for individuals to de-cide for themselves the mean-ing of the scriptures, based on their own reading. This new practice was called ‘self-salva-
tion’ (and in a way, the spread 
of Gutenberg’s printing press also meant the beginning of self-publishing).
Another case in point is the body of work of the Ranters, a radical 
group which flourished during the second half of the 17th century, 
with heretical views on religion (if Jesus is in everyone, who needs the 
Church?), politics (expropriation of the rich and collective ownership of property) and sex (preaching an ideal of free love). Such an extremist rebel group (which counted a few thousand followers in London alone) could easily self-publish and distribute its pamphlets. Though such publications were banned and burned, 
it was much more difficult to destroy an 
entire printed edition than had been the case with manuscripts, because of the sheer number of copies as well as their widespread distribution – and so some 
copies survived, a few even to this day.
38
The two major political revolutions 
of the 18th century were both preceded 
by a frenzy of intellectual self-publishing 
activity, including a few ‘underground’ 
bestsellers. In the case of the French Revolution, many of the countless pam-phlets produced were sponsored by printers, based on their potential com-mercial success. And at the beginning 
of the American Revolution, in 1776, Thomas Paine became famous 
for (anonymously) publishing a uniquely popular pamphlet (with a circulation of hundreds of thousands of copies) titled Common Sense, 
which provided the intellectual spark for the uprising. Paine was 
Example of a 
‘Biblia Pauperum’ woodcut, 1470
The Ranters Ranting, a newssheet about the Ranters, 1650
33a prolific pamphleteer, as well as an early independent publisher. 
During the same period, it should be noted, the eminent British poet William Blake self-published all his works, including his now-famous 
masterpieces. But independent publishing, from the late 18th century 
onwards, was still mostly a medium used for spreading the kind of dis-sident political ideas which would eventually inspire the Mexican and Russian revolutions in the early 20th century – just as a multitude of new and extraordinary artistic and cultural movements was beginning to emerge.
2.2  the use of print in the 20th century avant-garde.
In the early 20th century, the introduction of electricity was rapidly 
transforming urban daily life as well as the media landscape. And so the various emerging avant-garde art movements envisioned a brave new 
world, driven not only by electricity itself, but also by industry and the 
new upcoming media, all of which were seen as tools for conceptually revolutionising the existing order.
The first art movement to attempt this transformation was Italian 
Futurism, with its hostility towards the perceived mawkishness of Romanticism, and its own eagerness to force a radical break with 
the past. The Futurists’ bold, iconoclastic statements (to which they 
owed much of their original fame and cultural impact) were distrib-uted through various channels, including of course printed media. Filippo Tommaso Marinetti was in fact quite fond of print, particularly magazines. In 1905 he was editor in chief of Poesia, the international 
Thomas Paine’s 
 pamphlet Common 
Sense, 1792
34journal of the Futurist movement,39 produced with the support of a 
sympathetic printer – until Marinetti cancelled the project a few years 
later and went on to collaborate with the Florentine editor Giovanni 
Papini (who also worked closely with other Futurists). The resulting 
Lacerba magazine, printed in 1914, featured a re-thinking of typo-graphical composition, beginning a process (with Marinetti’s famous work Parole in Libertà) of pushing to the very limit the possibilities of 
black-and-white letterpress printing. The use of markedly contrasting font sizes, as well as a creatively graphical positioning of text elements 
(diagonally, forming visual patterns, etc) all helped to produce a new 
kind of typography, which aimed to express not only a rich variety of visual forms but also powerful emotions.
40
A few years later Marinetti would be a key contributor to the defini-
tive journal promoting Futurism as a cultural movement (including its unfortunate political involvement with Fascism). L’Italia futurista, 
published from 1916 to 1918, was important from a media perspec-tive for its publication of photographic sequences of the Teatro sintetico 
futurista (‘Futurist Synthetic Theatre’) performances.
41 Marinetti also 
used print to produce propaganda leaflets: his Manifesto was printed on a two-sided leaflet, as was his response to an anonymous knife at-
tack on the Boccioni painting La Risata during an exhibition. Also, in 
1910 he climbed the Clock Tower in Venice to drop leaflets (fiercely condemning the city’s Romantic rhetoric and cultural policy) upon the crowd below.
42
In a more or less parallel development, the Dadaist movement 
from the very beginning produced various journals in different cities (Zurich, Berlin, Cologne, Amsterdam, Paris, New York, Tbilisi), which 
shared the distinctive Dadaist principles, while also reflecting local 
sensibilities. They may be seen as ancestors of the later ‘zines’: both are characterised by the same ephemeral nature (often going out of circula-tion after a single issue), and both challenge the graphic and journalis-tic conventions of their time, embracing instead the sheer pleasure of expressing ideas in print, in a way that reflects these ideas in content as 
well as graphic form. The now rare and collectable Dadaist magazine 
Dada, for example, published and designed by Tristan Tzara, which made its debut in July 1917, was printed on letterpress, stretching contemporary technical possibilities to the limit in order to reflect the Dadaists’ radical approach towards interpreting and transforming con-temporary society.
The Dadaists attempted to exploit the experimental possibilities 
of the printing machine, through a playful use of font sizes and by creatively integrating lines acting as content separators or as purely 
35graphic elements. Later on, even collages and photomontages were 
created manually and reproduced mechanically, definitively breaking through the rigid grid-based order of the published page, and enter-
ing the field of artistic re-appropriation and re-contextualisation of 
content. Most of the Dadaist magazines were produced through the patronage of sympathetic printers, who helped get around censorship problems and generally promoted self-publishing in a way that made these printed products affordable to artists.
The Surrealist movement used print as well, most notably to 
produce a small number of magazines which embodied in various forms the Surrealists’ playful social satire. The first was La Révolution Surréaliste, published from 1924 to 1929. Its first issue, edited by André Breton, was designed to closely resemble the conservative scientific review La Nature, thus deceiving the reader into an unex-pected encounter with the Surrealists’ typically scandalous content. 
Documents, a later journal edited by Georges Bataille from 1929 to 
1930, featured original cover art, harsh juxtapositions of pictures and text, and generally speaking a more extreme approach (compared to Breton’s ‘mainstream’ Surrealism, and especially compared to the art-dealer-sponsored luxurious Minotaure magazine, published from 1933 to 1939). In a way, all these magazines, even as they called into 
question the printed medium, also reflected upon this very medium 
(by emphasising its graphical space and the challenges inevitably posed by its technical limitations) – just as they questioned and reflected upon the historical era of transformation of which they were very much a part.
Another contemporary master in this context was El Lissitzky, with 
the fascinating and visionary techniques he applied to graphic space. In his Prounen series of drawings from the early 1920s, he created complex, purely abstract three-dimensional spaces (using only ink and paper) which now may seem like a precursor of computer graphics and their endlessly programmable possibilities. His abstract conceptions 
literally broke through the constraints of the printed page, reformulat-
ing the concept of space within a single sheet of paper. He also rede-fined the book, a popular but nevertheless iconic object, as a different kind of space: “In contrast to the old monumental art (the book) itself goes to the people, and does not stand like a cathedral in one place waiting for someone to approach… (The book is the) monument of the 
future.”
43 Lissitzky considered the book as a dynamic object, a “unity 
of acoustics and optics” that required the viewer’s active involvement.
An even more amazing prediction was formulated in the conclu-
sion of his Topography of Typography statement, published in 1923 in 
36Kurt Schwitters’ Merz magazine (see also chapter 4.4). Here Lissitzky 
speculated on different levels about the new characteristics of what he defined as “the book space” , which would definitively break with pre-
vious conventions – and he ends with a climactic definition in capital 
letters: “THE ELECTRO-LIBRARY” , championing a future vision of books more ‘optical’ and sensorial than physical, and combining this vision with the core technology of the time: electricity.
2.3  the mimeograph or stencil duplicator, 
 enabling underground publishing.
So even the exhilarating spirit of the early avant-garde could not do 
away with traditional printing. The avant-garde struggled with the es-tablished technology of printing, and it did so with an admirably inno-vative approach. But the following decades would see the appearance 
of new technologies and devices which were to change forever the very 
concept of print.
One of the most important of these devices is undeniably the sten-
cil duplicator, also known as the mimeograph machine or ‘mimeo’ . 
Thomas Alva Edison patented a device for ‘autographic printing’ in 
1876, the first step of a process that led in 1887 to the production and 
marketing of the mimeograph. After a slow start, this revolutionary technology was appropriated in the 1930s by left-wing radical groups (not without some ideological controversy, as this effectively meant replacing unionised print workers with a cheap, lightweight machine). Significantly, the radical trade unionists of the Industrial Workers 
of the World (IWW) embraced the mimeo stencil, declaring it to be 
the IWW’s unionised printing facility. So even more than artists, it was political activists and dissidents (such as the exiled Trotsky, who printed his political ‘zine’ Byulleten Oppositzii in this way) who found in 
Autographic printing, a 
mimeograph precursor invented by Thomas Alva Edison, 1876
37the mimeograph the ideal medium for fostering freedom of expression 
and ideas, particularly during the years before and immediately after the Second World War. The mimeograph turned out to be the ideal 
clandestine printing device. It was lightweight and compact enough 
to be easily moved from place to place, thus avoiding confiscation and censorship, while also being suitable for producing a reasonable amount of copies.
44
In subsequent years, the mimeograph would give rise to the first 
major waves of alternative print publishing, in two very different con-texts, reflecting the upcoming geopolitical dichotomy of the period 
(U.S.A. vs. U.S.S.R.). By now, the mimeograph was being marketed 
to offices (circulars, newsletters), schools (classroom materials) and churches (bulletins). The key selling point was that it allowed short-run productions to be made cheaply, quickly and with reasonable print quality.
But such a device was also very interesting to those wishing to cre-
ate printed productions outside of mainstream print infrastructures. And so in the U.S.A. the mimeograph was used by a generation of science-fiction enthusiasts to produce a multitude of ‘fanzines’ (as the term was soon coined) with a peak of production in the 1950s. Despite the fragile and easily corrupted stencils, the often messy printed re-sults and ink-stained hands, this device was essentially the first ‘per-
sonal printer’ . The crude aesthetic of the SF fanzines and their limited 
A woman using a 
mimeograph machine, 1930
38circulation were characteristic 
of a scattered but prolific scene, genuinely more interested in 
discussing the latest produc-
tions, than in the possible socio-cultural implications of a criti-cal glance into possible future developments of their chosen medium. Nevertheless, an ex-
tensive scene was established 
here, with its own distinctive characteristics – for example, a readiness to simply swap is-sues with each other, without anyone seeming to worry too 
much about who was getting the better deal. (It should also be noted in passing that Beatitude, the first ‘zine’ of the Beat movement, was also printed using the mimeograph.)
45
During the same period, on the other side of the globe, in the post-
Stalinist U.S.S.R. (and other countries with a similar socio-economic system), the same medium was being used for a completely different 
purpose: clandestinely copying, sharing and distributing dissident 
literature or other media suppressed by the government. This kind of underground printed production was called ‘Samizdat’ (a contrac-tion of ‘self-publication’ in Russian). Often no more than a few copies were made at a time, and those who received a copy were expected to make more copies. When there was no mimeograph machine at hand, 
copies were made by handwriting or typing. Within the Soviet bloc, 
Poland and Czechoslovakia were the most active Samizdat-producing countries. In Poland, especially, alongside the hundreds of small indi-vidual publishers, several large underground publishing houses also flourished, with supplies either smuggled in from abroad or stolen from official publishing houses.
46 The perceived threat of the Samizdat 
phenomenon for Communist regimes was so great that the Romanian dictator Nicolae Ceausescu went so far as to forbid the possession of 
unmonitored typewriters by Romanian citizens.
2.4  fluxus, printed materials circulating 
 within an ‘eternal network’ .
Another art movement, arguably one of the most influential to 
our current communication-driven mediascape, based much of its 
ODD issue #9, 
a U.S. science-fiction fanzine, 1951
39multi-directional strategy on printed materials. In the early 1960s, 
George Maciunas founded his Fluxus movement, with its legendary event scores, performances and ‘Fluxus boxes’ filled with organised 
collections of games, concepts, plastic objects and miscellaneous print-
ed materials. In these carefully designed objects, produced in limited editions that were in fact quite cheap to make, the printed components (brochures, leaflets, flip books, maps, playing cards, etc) were always an integral part of the concept.
47
Soon, the ‘Fluxus newsletters’ were being published to facilitate 
communication and the exchange of ideas within the network of Fluxus artists spread across three continents. Maciunas also collected 
various newspaper cuttings of Fluxus-related articles into a ‘newspa-
per roll’ to be displayed as a kind of advertisement in public spaces.
But the most consistent effort in print by Maciunas and his as-
sociates was certainly the Fluxus Newspaper. The earliest issues were basically anthologies of Fluxus artists from various countries; the fourth issue, however, featured a Fluxus Symphony Orchestra in Fluxus 
Concert poster, meant to be torn apart as a way of promoting the event; 
the fifth issue contained a catalogue of Fluxus editions, also meant to be torn apart; and for the seventh issue, Maciunas asked artists to contribute “events related to the paper page” , which were printed as two separate editions: as a regular newspaper, and on card stock.
48 The 
magazines were shipped in parcels to Fluxus members in various cit-ies, who personally formed a distribution infrastructure parallel to the 
European Mail-Order Fluxshop already set up in Amsterdam.
Another radical Fluxus approach to print was to sell cheaply-made 
art books at prices usually associated with prestigious collector’s edi-
tions. Several Fluxus publishing houses were founded, of which Dick Higgins’ Something Else Press was probably the most well-known, pioneering the artist’s book movement with book editions running 
anywhere between 1,500 to 5,000 copies and sold at standard book -
shop prices.
49
Several of the countless Fluxus artworks dealt with the subject 
of money, specifically banknotes, which are probably the most pre-
cious (and the most trusted) of all printed materials. Banknotes may 
also be considered as limited-edition ‘original prints’ – a concept 
which is essentially nonsense anyway, since print was invented for potentially endless serial production. Artistic imitation of banknotes is a recurring theme in art, but the Japanese Fluxus artist Genpei Akasegawa took the idea quite literally, while pushing the aforemen-tioned ‘original print’ conceptual nonsense to its logical conclusion. 
In 1963 he commissioned a print run of 1,000 Yen banknote replicas, 
40which he proceeded to use in his announcements and performances. 
Unfortunately, the following year he was arrested and convicted of currency counterfeiting. He then went on to create a series of zero-yen 
banknotes, as a comment on the absurdity of his trial.
50
Finally, the Fluxus movement was also the first to properly formu-
late the seminal concept of the network. The ‘Eternal Network’ was 
a radical idea, enabling practices which would transform the working 
methods of many artists: an “ongoing, global artistic network in which 
each participating artist realizes that s/he is part of a wider network. It is a model of creative activity with no borders between artist and audience, with both working on a common creation.” (Chuck Welch, Eternal Network: A Mail Art Anthology )
51
The Eternal Network was initiated by Fluxus artists Robert Filliou 
and George Brecht, who introduced the concept in April 1968 in a poster mailed to several correspondents. This can be seen as one of the 
earliest conceptual models of an international network of artists work -
ing together through postal communication – a forerunner of what a 
few years later would become the Mail Art network.
The influence of Fluxus on underground print was not long in wait-
ing. For example, Aspen, an experimental “multimedia magazine of the arts” published by Phyllis Johnson from 1965 to 1971 and designed 
by various contributing artists, featured “culture along with play”: 
each issue came in a customised box filled with booklets, phonograph recordings, posters, postcards – one issue even included a reel of Super 8 film. Johnson herself was later quoted as saying: “We wanted to get away from the bound magazine format, which is really quite restrictive.”
52
Advertisement for 
Aspen magazine, 1967
412.5  the underground press boom, 
 offset colour dripping and the network (again).
In the mid-1960s, new countercultural and revolutionary movements 
were emerging which would give rise to a further transformation of alternative print, spawning countless new magazines by the end of the decade. Probably the first important sign of things to come was the Greenwich Village Voice, founded in 1955 in a two-bedroom apartment in New York, and positioning itself from the start in fierce opposition 
to the ‘bourgeois’ culture of the glossy New Yorker magazine. For al-
most a decade, the Village Voice would remain the one and only point of 
reference for the radical cultural critique it embodied.
Then in September 1966, all the way on the other end of the coun-
try, the first issue of the San Francisco Oracle was published, giving a legitimate and superlative voice to the Haight-Ashbury countercul-
ture, while once again revolutionising print design. Affordable offset 
printing had gradually improved to the point where it could now effec-tively reproduce the psychedelic aesthetic, originally produced using silkscreen printing. The Oracle was designed by Allen Cohen and his staff, who tormented the printers with endless requests for special col-ours, until the printers finally gave up and left the presses in the hands 
of Cohen and his associates so they could do it their own way. They 
soon started filling the various inkwells of the printing presses without paying too much attention to where any particular colour went, result-ing in rainbows of colours splashed and blended all across the pages.
53
The Oracle (which peaked at a print run of 150,000 copies) epito-
mised the idea that a magazine could be more than simply a handful of paper conveying literary and political information. By doing away 
with the traditional ‘static’ typographical structure, headlines could be 
designed rather than composed, and texts were no longer laid out as blocks of letters, but were allowed to penetrate the illustrations spread across multiple pages. Thus the magazine became an object to behold, an image to experience – in one word, a ‘trip’ .
54 This use of colour 
broke with the established modalities of information transmission, and the result, besides being a popular success, was also a masterly reflec-
tion of the aesthetic and the spirit of the times, soon to be imitated by 
countless other underground magazines. Once again, this new alterna-tive publishing scene was able to survive through the support of a few sympathetic printers. And soon enough, the first printing cooperatives were being set up.
The geographical on-the-road ‘trip’ of the 1960s generation was 
also reflected in publishing, the best example of which is probably 
42Other Scenes, a bi-weekly publication edited by John Wilcock in what-
ever world city he happened to be at the moment, and then distributed globally.
55
Another powerful concept (and one foreseen by Fluxus) to emerge 
during this period was the idea of a ‘network’ of magazines. In its cooperative form, this concept was brought into practice by the 
Underground Press Syndicate, a network of counterculture newspa-
pers and magazines founded in 1967 by several early underground publishers. The common agreement was that any member of the net-work was allowed to reprint, free of charge, the contents of any other member, and that any publication could join the network later on, provided they agreed to the same terms. The result was a widespread 
distribution of countercultural articles, stories and comics, as well as 
a treasure trove of content immediately available to even the small-est startup publication. At the time it was founded, the Underground Press Syndicate brought together 62 of the approximately 150 publi-cations then considered as underground press.
Another remarkable effort was the Liberation News Service, a left-
wing alternative news service which published news bulletins from 1967 to 1981, rapidly growing from a single mimeographed sheet 
distributed to ten newspapers, to a complete publication featuring 20 
pages of articles and photographs, and mailed twice a week to almost 800 subscribers. Through its contacts with worldwide Western radical groups as well as Third World liberation forces, the Liberation News Service was able to draw attention to a new global perspective by documenting important facts which were either totally ignored or else 
poorly documented by the mainstream press.
Cover of Liberation 
News Service #275, 1970
43By 1969, virtually every sizeable city or college town in North 
America had at least one underground newspaper. And yet, by 1973 
most of them had already gone out of circulation. Still, one new pub-
lication was fostering the development of networks as well as the 
spreading of information. The Whole Earth Catalog, published by Stewart Brand regularly between 1968 and 1972, and occasionally afterwards, embraced a mission of promoting “access to tools” . Brand, in his own words, wanted everyone to be able to “find his own inspira-tion, shape his own environment, and share his adventure with who-
ever is interested” .
56 
While remaining, strictly speaking, a catalogue (listing a huge va-
riety of ‘tools’ including maps, professional journals, courses, classes, specialised utensils, even early synthesisers and personal computers), 
the Whole Earth Catalog ’s editorial selection was very sophisticated, 
resulting in something between a curatorial work and a list of re-sources. Furthermore, the listings were continually revised according to the experiences and suggestions of users as well as the staff. Thus the level of interaction and involvement between publisher and users/
readers was unusually high; this ‘tool’ was a networked one, used for 
unveiling and sharing important information, and allowing people to change their relationship with their personal and social environments. The Whole Earth Catalog ’s farewell statement in 1974 was prophetic 
for future generations of underground publishers: “Stay hungry, stay foolish.”
2.6  photocopying the world, 
 re-appropriating culture.
After the mimeograph stencil, the next technology destined to revolu-
tionise underground print was xerography, also known as photocopy-
ing. This was first marketed by Xerox in the 1960s for use in offices 
(although the basic principle of ‘electrostatic printing’ had been de-scribed as far back as the 18th century). Later, in the 1970s, the tech-nology gradually became available to the general public, through coin-operated machines or in specialised copy shops. A black-and-white 
copy of any original could now be created cheaply and instantaneously, 
opening up endless new possibilities for small-print productions.
Photocopying made its appearance just before the beginning of the 
mid-1970s Punk cultural revolution, which quickly and wholeheart-edly embraced this new medium, for its particular aesthetic qualities as well as its properties as a means of communication. Publishing a 
zine, or printing a flyer, was now easier than ever. Punk zines became 
44an integral element of the Punk culture, making full use of the me-
dium’s black-and-white aesthetic, and with a playful attitude towards the photocopying process itself (for example, the shades and contrasts 
obtained by re-copying a copy, the ability to ‘photograph’ objects 
placed directly upon the scanning window, and the strange effects that could be created by moving the original during the scanning process) – which would also inspire the later Copy Art movement.
Photocopying proved essential to Punk culture for a number of rea-
sons: it guaranteed individual freedom of expression, it encouraged a 
do-it-yourself attitude, and it was cheap and accessible. Furthermore, 
the freedom to sample and juxtapose images led to the production of collages that enabled the Punk zinester to re-appropriate media in new and liberating ways – techniques which remain in use in various forms to this day. Also, publications such as Maximumrocknroll’s Book Your Own Fuckin’ Life contained extensive lists of contacts, essential for the 
survival of nomadic Punk bands, once again exploring the concept of 
building networks within a ‘scene’ (see also chapter 6.1.2).
More or less simultaneously with this boom of Punk performance-
related publishing, another art movement also started producing printed works using mainly photocopies, but from a rather different perspective. The Mail Art movement was grounded in a similar do-
it-yourself practice and freedom of expression, suitable to its radical 
critique of the art world (no curators, no critics, everybody can be an artist, everybody can create an exhibition simply by collecting works by other artists sent through the mail). Mail Art was based on a re-markable yet underestimated infrastructure: the global postal system. 
As John Held Jr. pointed out: “Bolstered by international treaties, the 
postal system was one of the only available means of communication between artists separated by divergent political systems.”
57
The first such publication was the famous New York Correspondence 
School Weekly Breeder, a zine from the late 1960s distributed to vari-ous Mail Art participants, confirming once again the central role of 
the ‘network’ concept. Mail Art zines were by nature meant to be 
exchanged between participants, in a spirit of ‘everybody can be their own editor’ . The creative use of this network generated some very original printed products. One memorable strategy was that initiated by the Mail Art zine Cabaret Voltaire, edited by Steve Hitchcock in the late 1970s: for issue #3 he sent to a number of Mail artists a ‘drawing 
test’ , an image consisting of just a few sketchy lines, with instructions 
encouraging the artist to complete the drawing. The subsequent is-sue was a collection of the drawings that were sent in, signed with the postal addresses of the respective artists.
58
45Another specific sub-genre within Mail Art zines were the ‘assem-
blies’: “The publisher invites contributions and from a few people and 
each of them sends multiple copies of their work to cover the number 
of copies in that edition. Each zine copy is then collated and bound 
making (it) unique, and personalized.” (Christopher Becker, writing in Factsheet Five
59)
For example, the zine X Ray assembled 226 copies of each issue 
(usually sold out), while the single-sheet Braincell brought together 
donated stickers and stamps, using a cheap multicolour home-pub-lishing technique called Print Gocco.
60 From 1970 to 1982, Richard 
Kostelanetz’s Assembling Press published the annual Assemblings fea-turing “otherwise unpublishable” art and literature: rather than mak -
ing a selection from submitted material, Kostelanetz (and a few other co-editors) asked contributors to send in 1,000 copies of anything they 
Clockwise from top left
Sniffin’ Glue, an 
 archetypal Punk zine, 
issue #12, 1977 
New York 
Correspondence School Weekly Breeder, issue #7, 1972
An example of Copy Art 
by Knut Hoffmeister, 1982
Xerox 9700 
advertisement, 1977

46wished to publish, and then assembled the unpredictable visual and 
written content into books.61
One of the leading Mail Art magazines, Arte Postale!, edited by 
Vittore Baroni, featured theme issues, such as the ‘game issue’ in which each page was dedicated to a game invented by a different author – in 
order to play the game, the page had to be cut, folded, or otherwise ma-
nipulated, all according to the author’s rules, so that ‘playing’ the mag-azine also involved disassembling it (and thus somehow destroying it).
The self-awareness of this extensive network (predating the 
Internet) was sustained by a few publications featuring almost exclu-sively project announcements, of which Global Mail was by far the 
most relevant. As its publisher Ashley Parker Owens stated: “There’s not a single place for the mail art or the networked collaboration. (…) Beyond the projects and exhibitions (…) the true meaning (…) is the exchange between individuals. The secret is in this kind of positive energy.”
Another approach to photocopied publication was the one taken by 
a particular wing of the Autonomist political movement. The ‘Creative Autonomism’ movement, which flourished in Italy during the 1977 nationwide wave of university student sit-ins, generated almost a hun-dred different Dadaist and Surrealist-influenced political zines, featur-ing subversive (often bordering on illegal) content. Some of the most interesting products of this prolific underground scene were the vari-
ous ‘fakes’ , a specific sub-genre within underground publishing: clever 
parodies by creative individuals ‘hijacking’ established (large or small) publications by mimicking their graphic style and typeface. One of the most celebrated was the Il Male series of campaigns, which featured outrageous yet somehow plausible journalistic ‘scoops’ , designed to re-
semble the front pages of major newspapers and displayed near news-
stands, regularly triggering a wave of public anger, shock or disbelief.
In Poland as well, a fake of the newspaper Trybuna Ludu was pro-
duced and distributed during Pope John Paul II (Karol Wojtyla)’s visit to his homeland in 1979, with the banner headline Government Resigns, Wojtyla Crowned King. In France, a fake Le Monde Diplomatique was 
anonymously distributed to a number of subscribers, featuring satirical 
comments on the Rote Armee Fraktion’s Stammheim Prison blood-bath.
62 These ‘fakers’ were all applying in a new way Karl Marx’s often-
quoted statement that “It is the first duty of the press to undermine the foundations of the existing political system.”
63
Photocopying was also a cheap and easy medium for activist print 
campaigns, attempting to expand these into an urban territory which was being conceptually remapped starting in the late 1970s. Bambina 
47Precoce, a fanzine edited by Tommaso Tozzi from 1984 to 1986, was 
posted on walls in the streets of Florence (in the city centre as well as the outskirts), thus exploring an innovative form of distribution. It 
might also be regarded as a performance in print: one issue was de-
signed as fake street names in A3 format, while another took the form of a tourist-guide map of graffiti to be found in the city.
64
Finally, it should be mentioned in passing that (at least) two other 
technologies were used marginally during this same period in order to print zines. Architecture students used a technique called heliography, 
which produced zines in long scroll-like sheets – somewhat similar to 
fax zines, which were sent using facsimile (fax) machines. In both these cases, circulation was limited, and copies were transmitted straight to the readers’ machines, often through a pyramidal distribution scheme using a small number of ‘nodes’ and sub-nodes that faxed the zine to a restricted number of readers.
2.7  the digital revolution, 
 and the peak and fall of zines.
But the most important development to revolutionise print was surely 
the explosion of digital technology. Starting in the late 1980s, any-
one could purchase Desktop Publishing (DTP) software in computer 
shops; from now on, simply owning a personal computer and a printer meant potentially having all the means of production in one’s own home. Amateurs (often referred to as the ‘bedroom generation’) could now produce printed materials in their own personal environment. At the same time, new digital storage media were being introduced, such 
as the floppy disk, which was cheap and compact and could carry a rea-
sonable amount of data.
One of the very first periodical publications to make use of comput-
er-related storage media was Between C & D, a New York quarterly 
Meet the Press, Apple 
desktop publishing  advertisement, 1985
48literary magazine edited by Joel Rose and Catherine Texier and pub-
lished between 1983 and 1990; contributors included Kathy Acker and Dennis Cooper. The magazine (tagline: “Sex. Drugs. Danger. 
Violence. Computers.”) was printed on computer paper and sold in a 
plastic bag. The limited-run editions were collected by New York gal-leries and libraries, while back issues could be purchased on computer disks.
65
A number of zines started enhancing their printed editions with 
a floppy disk featuring ‘bonus’ content. One of the more concep-tual applications was created by the Italian literary and Mail Art zine 
Adenoidi, adding a floppy disk containing colour pictures – which 
were also printed in black-and-white inside the paper zine itself, with the missing colours indicated by text captions with arrows pointing to the corresponding fields. More and more publications were designed as ‘interactive’ magazines, experimenting with various media such as the emerging CD-ROM. One trend was to reproduce as faithfully as 
possible the conventions and standards of print, while adding ‘bonus’ 
animated or audio content. Blender magazine (and its close competi-tor, Launch) was one of the very first to do this, in 1994 – publishing a 
CD-ROM magazine with original pop music-oriented content, includ-ing advertisements.
Various ‘interactive’ CD-ROM magazines were also produced 
which focused on experimental interfaces, such as the seminal (and almost impossible to navigate) Blam!, which was in fact more a purely 
digital product than a normal ‘publication’ . Yet another genre was de-fined by the emerging profession of digital designers, as exemplified by the mixed-digital-media Gas Book, a publication showcasing multime-
dia and electronic music talents within a single package consisting of a book, a CD-ROM, an audio CD, stickers and a T-shirt.
Probably also as a result of the arrival of digital media, the early 
Launch, 
commercial for CD-ROM magazine, issue #20, 1998
491990s saw an unprecedented peak in the production of zines, culmi-
nating in the phenomenal Factsheet Five, the ‘mother of all zines’ which for almost twenty years served as “the connecting tissue holding to-
gether a mutant media beast” (Gareth Branwyn, Jamming the Media
66). 
Founded by Mike Gunderloy in 1982 (in 1987, he was also running a 
zine Bulletin Board System (BBS), one of the first associated with an 
underground publication), Factsheet Five reviewed more than a thou-
sand zines in each issue. By 1990 Gunderloy quit, since he could no longer cope with the huge workload. Eventually Seth Friedman, an active figure in the zine community, stepped up to take his place, and was very successful in dealing with a rapidly growing and increasingly productive international scene.
By the late 1990s, the number of zines had exploded to an estimated 
50,000, covering all kinds of social and personal themes. The zine scene featured well-attended meetings, professional distributors and dedicated sections in public libraries. As Gunderloy said in the intro-duction to his book The World of Zines: “The zine world is in fact a net-
work of networks” .
67 But the economic crisis of the mid-1990s took its 
toll on the paper zines: increases in postage rates and bankruptcies of some of the major zine distributors (most notably Desert Moon) forced 
the zines towards a much more cautious publishing policy.
Furthermore, by the late 1990s the mediascape was – once again – 
being completely reshaped. Already in 1995, just as the World Wide 
Web was about to take off, John Markoff wrote in the New York Times: “Anyone with a modem is potentially a global pamphleteer.”
68 In the 
first decade of the 21st century, most zines stopped publishing on pa-per, choosing instead for a web-based platform. This too would soon 
be superseded by a new (and controversial) phenomenon, the (literally) 
millions of blogs and the ensuing ‘blogosphere’ – to mention here in passing a complex and diverse phenomenon which we shall analyse more in depth in chapter 4.
Blam!, experimental 
CD-ROM magazine, 
issue #3, 1998
50Only science fiction could predict what might come next: and indeed, 
a fascinating vision of the relationship between paper and pixel was formulated by the science-fiction author William Gibson, an absolute 
master of twisting today’s reality into tomorrow’s possibility. His story 
Agrippa, written in 1992, was an electronic poem, sold as an expensive 
limited-edition work in a decorated case and with a 3.5” floppy disk 
containing the entire text. The software was designed to let the user turn the pages on the screen by clicking a computer mouse. But the pages, once turned, were immediately deleted from the disk. Also, the printed book was treated with photosensitive chemicals, so that the 
words and images gradually faded as the book was exposed to light. So 
once the book was read, it was gone forever. This work can be under-stood as a reflection on our faith in paper, as well as a representation of the instability of electrons – and it certainly sheds a light on the uncer-tain future of publishing in both paper and electronic media, while pre-
dicting how the two are destined to become increasingly intertwined.
2.8  intertwining media, a look at the near future.
“Zines are purely libertarian” , declared Stephen Schwartz in his 
History of Zines.
69 This is a definition which can be expanded to include 
any of the best underground publishing productions. Yet we may ask, does it still hold true in the current digital era? What does it mean to 
create an ‘alternative publication’ within this new environment? The 
basic requirements remain the same: to challenge the prevailing me-dium, to formulate a new original aesthetic based on the new medium’s qualities, and to generate content which is relevant to the contempo-rary situation. The trailblazing ‘intermedia’ concept formulated in the mid-1960s by Fluxus artist Dick Higgins seems to have now become 
the norm; and while independent publishers in the 21st century are in-
creasingly apprehensive about their future survival, they will certainly 
A screenshot from 
William Gibson’s electronic book Agrippa, 1992 
51use offset printing, photocopies, print on demand, PDF files, blogs, or 
whatever combination of media happens to be most useful for their current project.
On the other hand, while our trust in print remains more or less 
intact, we increasingly perceive printed media as being too slow in de-livering content, compared to the ‘live’ digital media which can be con-stantly updated minute-by-minute. This is true especially in the case of the news, which is increasingly seen as being completely ‘disembodied’ . A clear sign of this is the desperate trend of online platforms attempt-
ing to speculate on ongoing news developments, by constantly an-
ticipating what may be going on, or what is about to happen very soon – often using a vague and elusive tone designed to trick the reader into trusting that all the developments mentioned in the news have already actually taken place (see chapter 3.3).
The artwork Newstweek
70 (the name is a twist on the well-known 
Newsweek magazine) playfully yet disturbingly challenges our blind trust in easily modifiable online 
content such as news. Artists Julian 
Oliver and Danja Vasiliev built a miniature electronic device resem-bling a laptop charger which, once plugged in, accesses local wireless networks (in a café, for example) 
and makes it possible for the art-
ists to edit in real time the content shown on other people’s internet browsers, including news stories published on the websites of popu-lar newspapers. So an unsuspecting user might find himself suddenly 
reading outrageous headlines (such as Milk and Hormones: Why Your 
Son Has Breasts or Thomas Pynchon to Wed Lady Gaga). One journal-ist, who personally experienced the effects of the device on one of her articles, had to call the newspaper before realising she was the only one reading the seamlessly modified content.
One of the most significant alternative projects of the new millen-
nium was surely the amazing campaign by the activist duo The Yes Men (in collaboration with Steve Lambert and The Anti-Advertising Agency, and anonymously sponsored), which took place in New York City on November 12, 2008.
71 The campaign involved printing and 
distributing several thousand copies of a fake New York Times Special Edition set in the near future (July 4, 2009) and featuring only positive 
news, perhaps briefly plausible after Barack Obama’s election as U.S. 
Flyer of 
Newstweek  by 
Julian Oliver and Danja Vasiliev, 2011
52
Cover page 
of New York 
Times Special Edition by The Yes Men,  
Steve Lambert, The Anti-Advertising Agency, 2008
53President. The fake special edition copied the ‘look and feel’ of the real 
New York Times in painstaking detail (including the usual advertise-ments), and succeeded in fooling a significant portion of the general 
public who picked up a copy early in the morning (a large network of 
volunteers, organised through the Internet, distributed the publication on the streets, all apparently without any legal repercussions).The fact that a newspaper, the most visibly endangered of all contem-porary media, was the chosen medium for this campaign demonstrates on one hand the ongoing trust of the public in printed media such as 
newspapers (as well as our endless appetite for news); on the other 
hand, the same printed media are also clearly in a process of profound mutation, which is causing a major shift in their relationship with the public. The need to be kept up-to-date, previously catered to by the morning newspapers, is now being serviced through the Web and the even more addictive RSS web feeds, constantly updated from hun-
dreds of sources. And consequently the ‘unified’ but ever-changing 
newspaper increasingly aims to fulfil our need to know ‘what will hap-pen now’ , by attempting to announce rather than narrate reality, while continuing to sell the feeling of being part of a community.
The Yes Men’s fake but historic New York Times sheds a light on the 
future of publishing: here a ‘forecast’ content was printed and present-
ed as reality, ironically demonstrating how the ‘real’ news is increas-
ingly turning into a ‘virtual reality’: a vast, crowded, ever-changing and immersive space, endlessly navigable in different hyperlinked direc-tions and dimensions.
But in order to understand the impact of this fake print object as a 
conceptual and activist campaign, we must first understand how our current perception of the news is derived from this virtual news space which we navigate every day. We trust it – because it is printed, and because of the way it is printed. And so the fake New York Times is also a perfect illustration of the philosopher Franco ‘Bifo’ Berardi’s state-ment on the cover of his 1977 A/Traverso zine: “false information that 
produces real events” .
72
Clearly, print is mutating profoundly as a result of its (final?) hybrid-
isation with digital technology – as the last of all traditional media to 
undergo this process (after music, radio, and TV). And we can assume 
that this mutation will be neither easy nor straightforward.
54Chapter 3
The mutation 
of paper: 
material paper 
in immaterial times.
To quote the Slovenian artist Vuk Ćosić (one of the pioneers of net.
art), an essential question may well be: Is a hard copy obsolete?73 This 
was the title of an essay which Ćosić published in the late 1990s on the subject of networked art – a title which itself provocatively questions 
the human attachment to the tangible, in contrast with the develop-
ment of various new communication strategies in networked environ-ments. A decade later, we can say with certainty that print has not (yet) become obsolete. But it does seem to be in a period of profound mutation, mainly because of how the electronic screen is already taking over several of the functions of paper. This transitional phase has been 
predicted ever since the early days of the Web, and was described as 
being in effect the “Late Age of Print” by Jay David Bolter in his book Writing Space.
74
Whenever it seems that a newer, more powerful technology is about 
to change the established rules of a system, then that entire system tends to gradually produce a counter-reaction. In the 1940s for exam-
ple, when the introduction of the first facsimile machine prototypes 
was sending waves of apprehension throughout the newspaper indus-try, the Canadian Royal Commission on National Development in the Arts, Letters and Sciences wrote in a report to its members:
“The vigorous brief of the Canadian Daily Newspapers Association 
was devoted entirely to a discussion of the consequences to the present newspaper business if the new device of facsimile broad-
casting should become, as seems possible, an effective and popular 
rival to newspapers as we know them… this development will attract newcomers to the newspaper field, and that the facsimile reader will be able in his home to dial any one of several newspa-
pers just as now he tunes his receiving set to radio programmes.”
75
But this time around, the development of networked digital media 
is happening faster than most observers had predicted.
553.1  the mass slaughter of newspapers.
In 1981 in the San Francisco Bay Area, two newspapers (the San 
Francisco Chronicle and the San Francisco Examiner) experimented 
with making their (text) content available for download by modem, 
and advertised this new service in full-page ads; of the estimated two to three thousand home-computer users in the Bay Area, more than 500 sent in the coupon requesting more information. Participating users were especially enthusiastic about the possibility of copy-pasting news 
content. In a KRON-TV news report on this experiment, the reporter 
Steve Newman imagined the future: “A day will come when we’ll get all of our newspapers and magazines by home computers. But that’s a few years off.” The news anchorwoman concluded: “But it takes over two hours to receive the entire text of a newspaper over the phone, and with an hourly charge of five dollars the new ‘tele-paper’ would not 
be much competition for the 20 cents street edition” .
76 Which goes to 
show just how radically the economics of the ‘tele-paper’ have changed 
since then (and particularly since the mid-00s).
In February 2007, Arthur Sulzberger Jr., publisher of the New York 
Times, announced: “I really don’t know whether we’ll be printing the Times in five years, and you know what? I don’t care either.”
77 This 
statement was more or less instantly quoted (and endlessly repeated) by online news media platforms of every kind, seeing here a sign from 
God that their dream of many years was finally materialising. But what 
Sulzberger was actually saying was that within five years, the New York Times would be ready to switch to a digital-only business model.
And yet just one year later, the plummeting of circulation and ads 
sales, combined with the economic crisis, would force a number of historically significant mid-sized U.S. newspapers (some of which 
had been publishing for more than 
a century) to stop printing – in some cases switching to a web-only format. These included the Seattle Post-Intelligencer,
78 the Christian 
Science Monitor,79 the Capital 
Times,80 the Ann Arbor News,81 the 
Rocky Mountain News,82 and the 
Tucson Citizen.83 Others have cut 
down the number of editions to only a few days each week, or re-
sorted to a free-distribution busi-
ness model (such as the Evening 
A street ad about 
the London Evening Standard going free, 2011
56Standard in the U.K.84) in order to maintain their circulation figures. 
And a number of iconic world newspapers, such as the New York Times 
and the San Francisco Chronicle, are barely surviving, chronically seek -
ing injections of new capital to help them survive beyond their current print-based business model. And the vultures are quickly circling in. Marc Andreessen (founder of Netscape, and now on the board of both EBay and Facebook) publicly assessed the situation in these harsh terms: “You talk to any smart investor who controls any amount of money… There is no value in these stock prices attributable to print 
anymore at all. It’s gone.”
85
According to Jimmy Wales, co-founder and figurehead of 
Wikipedia: “It isn’t that reading is going out of style – quite the oppo-
site. It isn’t that people don’t care about quality – quite the opposite. 
The death of the traditional magazine has come about because people 
are demanding more information, of better quality, and faster.”86 And 
Philip Meyer, in his book The Vanishing Newspaper makes the plausible prediction, based on statistics of newspaper readership in America 
from the 1960s to the present day, that if the current trend continues, 
newspaper readership in U.S. will be exactly zero by the first quarter of 2043.
87
The idea of the newspaper as an ‘endangered species’ was also 
the concept of an art exhibition titled The Last Newspaper,88 held at 
the New Museum in New York in October 2010 and co-curated by Richard Flood and Benjamin Godsill. The exhibition featured artworks 
which have examined, questioned, and made use of newspapers since 
the 1960s; here the newspaper comes across as an object and a me-dium whose aesthetic status seems to belong to some undefined past, rather than to the present.
And what does Google, which enjoys a near-monopoly of the online 
search market, have to say about the problems currently facing news-
papers? Eric Schmidt, Google’s CEO, replied in an interview:
“We have a mechanism that enhances online subscriptions, but 
part of the reason it doesn’t take off is that the culture of the Internet is that information wants to be free… We’d like to help 
them better monetize their customer base… I wish I had a brilliant 
idea, but I don’t. These little things help, but they don’t fundamen-tally solve the problem.”
89
Meanwhile, Google’s current business model of cashing in (through 
its online services such as Google News) on free news published by oth-
er sites, is increasingly being called into question by traditional editors. 
57Robert Thomson, an editor of the Wall Street Journal, indignantly 
characterised such content aggregators as “parasites or tech tape-worms in the intestines of the Internet” .
90 But it’s clear that the price 
of information has dropped. As Clay Shirky, Assistant Arts Professor at New York University’s graduate Interactive Telecommunications 
Program, anticipated in 1995:
“The price of information has not only gone into free fall in the last 
few years, it is still in free fall now, it will continue to fall long before it hits bottom, and when it does whole categories of currently lucra-
tive businesses will be either transfigured unrecognizably or com-
pletely wiped out, and there is nothing anyone can do about it.”
91
Which is why a brilliant 2009 April 
Fools’ Day announcement, explaining 
that the highly respected British news-
paper, the Guardian, had decided to 
switch entirely to Twitter, could sound even remotely plausible.
What then can save the newspapers? 
The German advertising creative direc-tor Marc Schwieger shocked an audi-
ence at a major newspaper conference 
by telling them openly that they should concentrate their efforts on becom-ing the medium that prints “yester-day’s news” . He also believes that, if the Apple/iTunes paradigm is indeed going to become the new standard, 
then newspapers can learn a valuable survival lesson from the music 
industry: how to compensate for the loss of traditional sources of in-come (CD sales, print circulation) by focusing on ‘special’ and ‘quality’ products (in the case of the music industry, live concerts). For printed newspapers, the equivalent of the ‘unique experience’ of the live con-cert is probably the thick weekend edition – longer articles and more 
sophisticated content, focusing less on real-time news and more on 
analysis, comment and reflection.
The problem of immediate obsolescence (news becomes ‘old’ as 
soon as it is printed) is of course nothing new. Interestingly, the very same problem also applies to printed publications dealing with 
Internet resources, referencing web addresses which may very well 
be ‘dead’ by the time the book is published. But for newspapers, this is quickly becoming a flaw of historical proportions, increasingly 
Screenshot of the Guardian’s April Fool’s Day 
article Twitter switch for Guardian, after 188 
years of ink, 2009
58undermining what has been their main role for generations. This shift 
was eloquently expressed in Old News,92 an art installation by Michael 
Mandiberg. Every morning, the artist arrived at the gallery space with a stack of (fresh) copies of the New York Times, with the words “Old 
News” cut out by laser in huge letters. The pile of now-unreadable 
newspapers steadily grew, symbolically demonstrating the worthless-ness of stacks of unsold or unread copies.
3.1.1  The mass slaughter of periodical print.
Wikipedia founder Jimmy Wales asserts that “There still is value in the 
paper form-factor and there still is value in carefully selected ‘best of’ content, delivered on a per-issue or subscription basis.”
93 And what of 
all the other forms of periodical print? As the saying goes, “if Athens cries, Sparta does not laugh” . In the course of 2009, for example, a 
number of popular glossy magazines such as PC Magazine, Playgirl, 
Arena, Vibe, Blender, Urb and Play published their final issues (though 
Playgirl and Vibe have since been resurrected as quarterly or bi-month-
ly publications).
One rather peculiar phenomenon, apparently restricted to fash-
ion magazines, is the ‘digital shoplifting’ of copyrighted images. This 
‘social networking’ practice, at one point quite popular in Japan,
94 in-
volves mostly young women taking photos (using their mobile phones 
in bookshops) of the latest fashion trends in glossy magazines, and 
sharing the images with their friends through the MMS mobile phone 
messaging service. The Japanese Magazine Publishers Association (JMPA) condemned the practice as ‘information theft’ , but bookshop owners replied that there was no way their staff could tell the differ-ence between customers taking pictures, and those simply chatting on their phones.
Michael Mandiberg, 
Old News , 2009
59But commercial magazines have already started pursuing differ-
ent strategies – such as selling digital PDF versions (at about half the 
price of the paper editions), distributed through new platforms and 
services, of which Zinio is one of the most successful. At first, publish-
ers agreed to give away the PDF files for free, in exchange for personal data obtained through registration. Later, the services began selling the magazines, in both downloadable PDF format and web-based view. An important early characteristic of these services was that they allowed their customers to share the web-based digital editions with 
as many friends as they wished – presumably as a strategy to increase 
readership. Needless to say, many people simply shared the cheap PDF files through their own websites, or made them available on peer-to-peer networks. Eventually, the commercial digital magazine services all started restricting access through strictly unshareable web-based or mobile app-based interfaces.
Independent magazines are not doing so well either. A prophetic 
1995 issue of Factsheet Five reminds us of how independent publishers in all likelihood became concerned about the Web and its consequenc-
es for publishing, long before the mainstream industry did. Factsheet 
Five dedicated this issue to the Web and its impact on the zine world; the cover story was titled Paper or Plastic?, and the front-page illustra-tion depicted a large muscular man with a monitor-shaped face, kick -
ing sand on a skinny man with a magazine-shaped face. The skinny guy is complaining: “Hey! Quit kicking silicon in our faces, you big 
cyberbully!” while his girlfriend is thinking: “Oh, when will Charlie get 
online?” The cartoon perfectly illustrates a sense of impending doom within the traditional zine world, threatened in its very existence by a younger and stronger ‘silicon’ bully.
Left
The historical Paper or Plastic? cover of Factsheet Five, issue #56, 1995
Right
The Revenge of Print issue (#55) of Punk Planet, May & June 2003
60Less than a decade later, the financial viability of the U.S. underground 
press was dealt a severe blow with the bankruptcy of two of the major zine distributors. One of these, Desert Moon, which once distributed 
almost 700 zines, finally closed down in 2004.
95 This was followed, 
quite predictably, by a mass slaughter of independent magazines and 
small publishing houses, who understood too late the epochal change 
they were facing. In hindsight, those who were able to survive were 
those who best understood (and best responded to) the new online me-dia, and who quickly evolved towards a smarter editing model focusing on more sophisticated content. Still, many of the well-established and professionally produced zines which managed to survive the original onslaught (such as Herbivore or the famous Punk Planet) eventually 
went out of circulation.
3.2  atomising content: 
 implementing the apple/itunes paradigm.
Marissa Mayer, Google’s vice-president of search products and user 
experience, stated during a U.S. Senate hearing:
“The atomic unit of consumption for existing media is almost al-
ways disrupted by emerging media. (…) The structure of the Web has caused the atomic unit of consumption for news to migrate 
from the full newspaper to the individual article. As with music 
and video, many people still consume physical newspapers in their original full-length format. But with online news, a reader is much more likely to arrive at a single article.”
Which is exactly what the Apple/iTunes model has done to the mu-
sic industry, introducing a new paradigm of selling tracks instead of al-
bums, and thus atomising content instead of gathering it into a greater 
whole. But buying a magazine or a newspaper means subsidising all of 
its content developers, whereas atomising its content means dropping the less popular sections – which introduces the risk of an entirely populist editing process.
96
Nevertheless, this atomising process is consistent with the trend of 
‘customisation’ , another buzzword in the marketing of online content. While breaking down the integrity of a single editorial product intro-
duces scalability of content and price, it also means narrowing the au-
dience. When done on a large scale, this also introduces the possibility of profiling readers in order to present them with customised adver-tisements. Which was precisely the purpose of Mine, an experimental 
61service by Time, Inc. (discontinued after 6 issues). Mine was a free 
magazine based on reader preferences, compiled using content select-ed from the publisher’s various titles (Time, Sports Illustrated, InStyle, 
Money, Travel+Leisure, etc) and featuring advertisements fine-tuned to 
the selected content.
97
Done on a smaller scale, this atomising process introduces a danger-
ous trend of paying journalists per article – a cutthroat ‘journalist-on-demand’ model, entirely focused on the stressful short-term deadlines 
characteristic of the flow of content on the Web. Another aspect of this 
cultural shift is that the function of content filter is moved away from the publisher (who would have previously dismissed such an idea by saying: “you’re not the publisher, I am”) and handed over to the user – which in turn means that the identity of the publisher is altered from being a reference, to being a brand. Thus the ‘editorial authority’ of es-
tablished publishers risks becoming merely embodied in a brand name, 
rather than in sophisticated editorial products.
3.2.1  Automated content: the news follows the reader.
The news is everywhere these days: recurring snippets of local, na-
tional and world news, constantly being delivered to mobile devices, 
computers of every size and shape, and (increasingly) on large display screens in public places. Usually this news consists of aggregations of items from a few reliable sources, and broadcast to a large number of recipients. These fragments of interpreted reality are part of an end-less flow – disconnected from each other, and lacking context. It’s a 
bit like junk food: consuming too much of it and nothing else will end 
up dulling our senses, making us gradually lose the ability to appreciate better, more refined flavours. But such a ‘bite-and-run’ attitude seems an inevitable reality of our hectic modern times.
Echoing the more famous Chatroulette, Daniel Vydra’s New York 
Times Roulette
98 is a website which redirects the reader to a random 
news item published by the New York Times within the last 24 hours. 
Waiting for a news article with unpredictable content caters to the 
same addiction as waiting for any fresh news item, leaving the news 
junkie suspended in a limbo of ‘what will happen now?’ Alternately, the project News at Seven
99 has developed a news-generating algorithm 
which automatically produces journalistic text. The website StatSheet has been testing the system using sports statistics; the ‘imitation’ is 
considered successful when at least 90 per cent of readers believe the 
text was created by a human writer.
The Intelligent Information Laboratory of Northwestern Uni ver  sity’s   
62McCormick School of Engineering (in collaboration with the Medill 
School of Journalism) has developed Stats Monkey, which generates 
a news item on a baseball game using “statistical models to figure out 
what the news is in the story” and “a library of narrative arcs that de-
scribe the main dynamics of baseball games” .100 And a company called 
Narrative Science101 provides to a few major clients similar software 
for automatically generating short news reports and updates, mainly for online publishing (and in a way that is apparently devised to obtain 
higher rankings from Google’s search algorithm).
Of course, the presence of non-stop, omnipresent news does not 
mean that all news is equal. Readers are usually interested in following 
a small number of ongoing stories. News services cover a wide range of topics, so that there’s always something in there for everyone. From December 2009 to February 2010, Google Labs (in collaboration with 
the New York Times and the Washington Post) conducted an experi-
ment called Living Stories, as part of an ongoing effort to develop a way 
of presenting news specifically for the online environment. The naviga-tion was designed to make it easy to follow specific news stories, inte-grating content from different sources and presenting it chronologi-cally and by type of media. The New York Times went one step further 
with its Shifd project: participating users had an RFID tracking device 
implanted in their mobile phone, computer and television, which then 
followed their reading and watching behaviour. A news story read halfway on the phone, could then be picked up by the computer when the user turned it on; or the TV could be programmed to play related videos. Are the news going to start following us, anticipating our tastes 
and moods? Certainly, the very nature of the news is becoming increas-
ingly ephemeral – an endless stream of short news items all competing (often desperately) for our attention.
How fleeting news can become a fixed artefact, even a fetish, is the 
theme (as well as the tangible output) of News Knitter,
102 an artwork by 
Ebru Kurbak and Mahir Mustafa Yavuz featuring software which anal-yses and filters a 24-hour live news feed, and converts this information 
into “a unique visual pattern for a knitted sweater” . The final output is 
then executed by an automated knitting machine; each sweater is the artefact of one particular day.
3.3  preemptive news: 
 the battle for the online attention market.
The news is, of course, a crucial element in the ongoing mutation of 
periodical publishing. And the atomisation of content is based on a 
63new conception of the news: no longer as the indivisible product of a 
broader perspective delivered through a periodical publication, but as a single autonomous element of information that can be freely and 
readily combined with other elements.
Criminal ‘phishing’ fraud schemes using e-mail spam are often 
based on grabbing the victim’s attention with a fake but plausible news 
headline. In August 2008, private e-mail accounts around the world were flooded with a new type of spam using such fake news. The mes-sage subjects were cleverly formulated in gossip-column style, creating sudden and unexpected new combinations between various celebri-ties and sensational events, such as: Barack Obama Selects Angelina 
Jolie as VP, Britney Spears Out of Hospital and Fighting for Palestinian 
Cause and msnbc.com – BREAKING NEWS: [audio] Catholic Church 
Condemns Metrosexuality. Such stories, if true, would have fit in per-fectly with the other items of any news service – but also with our collective imagination as a whole. And setting aside for a moment the 
spammers’ intentions, the headlines can also be seen as a playful guess-
ing game: who knows what kind of incredible ‘breaking news’ might happen in the next few hours?
103 While The Yes Men playfully ex-
perimented with this kind of news forecasting in their New York Times 
Special Edition, the hard reality is that online newspapers are locked in 
a constant struggle to be the first to bring the latest news – sometimes 
stretching reality in order to publish new headlines quickly, and ad-justing these later on as more information becomes available. This is what I would call ‘preemptive news’: information in a transitional state between rumour and actual news, but too important to wait for proper verification, and thus published – as a valuable card in the metaphori-
cal poker game against the online competition.
This ‘preemptive news’ process was demonstrated quite effec-
tively in The Quick Brown,
104 an artwork by Jonathan Puckey, a graphic 
designer based in Amsterdam. Puckey wrote software which regu-
larly checks the Fox News website, taking note of any changes in the 
Screenshot of fake 
breaking news headlines sent as e-mail spam, 2008
64headlines. A text that has been deleted is marked in red strikethrough; 
black inverted text is used to highlight a text or story that has been added; and red text indicates a story that has been removed from the 
list of headlines. Antoine Schmitt pursued a similar approach for his 
artwork Time Slip
105 – a ‘news ticker’ displaying actual news headlines, 
but in the future tense (“the NASDAQ will drop 4.3 points today”), giving us a sense of seeing into the future, as we sometimes wish we 
could do – except that in this case, the future in question has already 
happened.
The transfiguration of information in the digital environment af-
fects in various ways the very nature of publishing. As the Australian theorist Andrew Murphie wrote in his essay Ghosted Publics, “pub-lishing is no longer a question of ‘readership’ but of resonance” . And furthermore:
“Only lazy, old media add up the numbers of individuals who 
look at what they publish, and leave their audience research at that. More astute contemporary publishing focuses on resonance 
and the shifting of forces within unacknowledged collectives and 
Screenshot of 
Jonathan Puckey’s The Quick Brown, 2007-2010
Screenshot of Antoine 
Schmitt’s Time Slip, 2008
65technical networks. The blogger Larval Subjects advises us to 
think ‘about rain drops in a pond’ , as ‘the waves these drops pro-duce converge and diverge with one another producing additional 
patterns’ .”
106
One thing the printed medium by nature cannot be used for (con-
sidering for now only the news) is the real-time aggregation, searching 
and comparing of news stories, performed by networked computers, 
and viewed on networked screens. A good example of this is Marcus 
Weskamp’s online artwork Newsmap,107 a powerful visual representa-
tion of the news mediascape. Using data from Google News, the site’s 
mapping technique divides the screen into columns (topics) in which 
the size of each article’s headline is in direct proportion to its popular-
ity – a visual representation of the viral character of online news, be-having here as a kind of digital life form, which reproduces according to a specific ‘survival of the fittest’ ecology of access.
Another online artwork dealing with these aspects of the online in-
formation environment is Falling Times
108 by Michael Bielicky, Kamila 
Screenshot 
of Marcus Weskamp’s Newsmap, 2004
Michael Bielicky, Kamila B. Richter and Dirk Reinbold, Falling Times, 2007
66B. Richter and Dirk Reinbold, which uses falling pictograms of various 
sizes, each of which links to a different news story. In this case, the un-stoppable flow of (filtered) news stories (each summarised in a headline 
and a few keywords) must be quickly ‘grabbed’ (clicked) in order to 
be read at all. The ‘game’ of trying to intercept news, relevant to the player’s personal interests, but continuously falling in a downpour of content, is revealed here to be an essential aspect of living in a crowded and polluted world of ‘infotainment’ . Again, the concept of preemptive news, speculating on the public imagination, is an important part of 
this game.
3.4  space, physicality, and repeatability of print.
So does print still make sense, in a society which is by now almost en-
tirely networked as well as screen-based? Print does have a number of 
unique characteristics which are yet to be superseded by anything else. 
The first of these characteristics is the way print uses space. The space taken up by printed materials, whether in the shape of document fold-ers, stacks of printed pages on a table, or a library of shelves filled with books, is real and physical. This is entirely different from something existing only on a screen, since it relates directly to our physical space, 
and to a sensorial perception developed over (at least) thousands of 
years.
When everything is reduced to the display screen, some kind of 
‘simulation’ of space becomes necessary, since everything now must fit within these few inches. Also, in order to make the simulation under-
standable and/or realistic, any system for finding one’s way (‘navigat-
ing’) within this virtual space should include a consistent interface, al-lowing for multiple perspectives and levels of viewing. Unfortunately, there has never been a clear standard for implementing this. The dif-ferent strategies, symbols (icons, pictograms) and navigational struc-tures of various competing systems have not yet succeeded in present-
ing readers of virtual printed content with a set of standards that they 
can easily become accustomed to. The result is that a so-called ‘clean’ virtual reading space remains more unfamiliar than the ‘messy’ physi-cal one.
Another important characteristic of paper is the ‘repeatability’ of 
traditional print. Reading a magazine or a book means being part of 
a community of customers all reading exactly the same content, so 
they can all share a single reference. As Marshall McLuhan noted in Understanding Media: “Repeatability is the core of the mechanical principle that has dominated our world, especially since the Gutenberg 
67technology. The message of the print and of typography is primarily 
that of repeatability.”109
Theoretically, a digital file represents the very essence of repeat-
ability, since it can be endlessly copied from one machine to another. In practice however, the slightest change in the file’s content, or even 
in the technical protocol or features of the machine on which it is be-
ing rendered (for example, automatic adjustments or replacements of fonts, margins or colours) are enough to undermine the document’s consistency and suddenly turn it into a quite different object.
And finally, a newspaper or magazine can be folded for convenient 
transport, can be dropped down the stairs without disastrous conse-
quences, can be cut up for clippings, can be re-used for many differ-
ent purposes. Do all these features suddenly become obsolete, simply because the ethereal nature of the online environment does not include them? Perhaps. But hundreds of years of reading and handling habits can’t be discarded just like that.
3.4.1  The publishing gesture.
Another intrinsic characteristic of print, besides its tactile quality, is 
the persistence of its physical presence. The act of leaving documents on a desk physically and visually ‘saves’ a work in progress. Also, de-livering paper documents by hand can become an occasion for social 
interaction. Such physical properties constitute the unique added 
value of paper – that which Abigail J. Sellen and Richard H. R. Harper, authors of The Myth of the Paperless Office (see chapter 1.7) called its “tangibility factor” .
110 And so paper may be seen as a conceptual ‘con-
ductor’ , able to transfer the metaphorical ‘energy’ it contains, through the gestural act of passing the printed product from one person to the 
next.
The Dutch art curator Nat Muller wrote on this subject:
“In this context we view the act of publishing as a gesture that ac-
commodates the political, the artistic, and in some cases, the defi-ant… A gesture is something preceding the action, and therefore 
signifies motion and agency of the most expressive and potent 
kind, precisely because it is so wrought with intentionality.”
111
And George P. Landow noted in his groundbreaking (1994) book 
Hyper/Text/Theory that “movement from the tactile to the digital is 
the primary fact about the contemporary world” .112 But the more we 
become surrounded by digital and volatile screen-based content, the 
68more this ‘tactility’ becomes a vibrant and pleasurable experience – 
and something that once again physically links individuals, as a kind of temporary neural connection.
Franco ‘Bifo’ Berardi proposed and tested a possible countermeas-
ure against widespread indifference towards politics, distributing his own magazine about the Italian ‘Telestreet’ pirate TV movement by handing out copies like political leaflets to potentially suitable re-cipients. A similar ‘gestural practice’ was applied by Fran Ilich with his Zapatista-inspired pamphlet sab0t, distributed as an easily download-
able PDF file, then locally printed in various Mexican cities and re-dis-
tributed in the streets – a physical gesture of distributing the content straight into the hands of the readers.
113
The attraction of physical print may be considered an ‘instinctive’ 
one. The power of paper to trigger such human instincts is the focus of Pamphlet,
114 a 2006 computer art installation by Helmut Smits 
consisting of a laptop, software, and a printer placed at the edge of 
a window. Visitors can type a 
message on the laptop, and by 
pressing ‘send’ , a pamphlet is instantly printed and dropped by the printer from the 10th floor. The falling of the paper, and the resulting ‘pamphlet’ on 
the street, symbolise the rela-
tively short distance between 
personal production and pub-lic consumption of a printed product. The installation also shows how the traditional pa-
rameters of the printed product 
have been disrupted: the fallen printed sheet superficially cre-ates the same fascination as a newspaper, making it possible for someone to pick up and 
read something that was print-
ed very recently. But the per-sonal and arbitrary content of the production (and the almost instantaneous production time) 
give the final printed product 
an entirely different value.
The three phases 
of Helmut Smits’ Pamphlet, 2006
69And while we’re on the subject of 
gestures, it’s worth mentioning an experiment organised by the Dutch 
TAG  magazine, designed to take 
place at public events. Half per-
formance, half ‘proof of concept’ , this experiment consisted of set-ting up a temporary editorial office to produce an instant, collabora-
tive, open magazine. This perfor-
mance was first carried out during the 2009 Transmediale festival – where it lasted nearly a week, with several visitors contributing to the process, coordinated by a small number of professional editors and 
graphic designers. The magazine was then printed using laser print-
ers and stitched together at a nearby tailor’s shop. The performance was carried out again during the 2009 PRINT/pixel conference in Rotterdam,
115 this time in collaboration with teachers and students 
of the Willem de Kooning Academy’s Minor Programme in Editorial Design. The contributors not only sat in front of computer screens 
(collecting and restructuring the posts of a committed full-time blog-
ger) but also worked directly with printed paper: passed around by hand, proofread and checked, duplicated and assembled into a single definitive entity to be locally distributed by hand.
It should also be noted that the ‘gesture’ we have discussed here 
is not only essential to the traditional distribution of printed prod-
ucts, but also to new collective practices, or ‘social networks’ directly 
involved in the free exchange of second-hand books saved from the 
trash. BookCrossing,
116 for ex-
ample, is a significant popular phenomenon, counting more 
than 700,000 members, who 
leave books in public spaces and then inform the community of where they can be picked up. Here the ‘gesture’ , and the phe-nomenon of a reader physically 
holding a copy, can become a 
mental connection, which can trigger a wide variety of other gestures in return.
Cover of TAG  
magazine print 
performance  during PRINT/pixel 
conference, 2009
Books sealed in envelopes for BookCrossing readers in Leipzig, Germany, 2009
703.5  print on demand, the balance of power 
 between paper and pixel.
Print has specific qualities which remain as of yet undisputed. Holding 
a printed object in one’s own hands, or seeing it on a bookshelf, re-mains an essential experience in (at least some parts of ) our cultural environment. And the ‘balance of power’ between print and digital (if we still assume the end result to be some kind of printed product) seems now to lie with one technology which, more than any other, is 
allowing the printed page to survive the ‘digitisation of everything’: 
print on demand.
During the late 1990s, most of the ‘prepress’ services (small busi-
nesses which helped customers convert their often messy digital files into plates suitable for offset printing) started mutating into today’s digital printing services. Increasingly, digital printing machines were 
replacing offset printing for short print runs; this was made possi-
ble by the rapidly falling prices of high-speed laser printers (the first commercially available laser printer, introduced in 1977, was the Xerox 9700;
117 such machines were originally marketed to large office 
departments, enabling them to quickly print high-quality structured documents). Within just a few years, dedicated digital book-printing 
facilities were set up across the world, and the technology is now being 
seriously considered by publishers, particularly since the onset of the current economic crisis.
Print on demand (POD) is an extremely simple concept: the cus-
tomer produces a PDF file of a magazine or book, and the POD service charges the customer a fee (there are cheaper and more expensive 
services, depending on the quantity and quality of services provided) 
to prepare and adjust the files for the production chain of a high-reso-lution, large-format, continuous digital copier. The customer can order any number of copies (even a single one) and the product is typically delivered within a week or so.
In addition to the actual printing, the POD firm may offer some im-
portant additional services:
1.  The firm can arrange to sell the publications online through its 
 own infrastructure, paying the author or publisher monthly 
 percentages on sales.
2.  POD firms, especially the major ones, can provide detailed 
 information about their publications to online outlets world-
 wide, in order to generate orders. This is what Simon 
71 Worthington (founder of Mute magazine, which at some point 
 switched to POD) refers to as “the bookspace” .
3.  POD firms usually operate several facilities on different conti-
 nents, each printing only for nearby countries, thus saving 
 substantially on shipping costs as well as on CO2 emissions 
 (and somehow reminiscent of the 1970s, when major interna-
 tional newspapers were wired overseas using large facsimile 
 machines so they could be printed locally the very same day).
4.  Publications are not required to generate continuous interest 
 or sales, but may remain in the online catalogue indefinitely at 
 no extra cost, simply waiting to be printed upon request.
5.  The cost of producing the first copy is very low, depending on 
 the specific package of services provided to the author or pub-
 lisher, but can be as little as 10 to 20 euros for a regular book.
The major publishers in this field (Lulu, Lightning Source, Author 
Solutions) now already carry hundreds of thousands of titles in their 
ever-expanding catalogues. Amazon, the largest online bookshop, has 
already set up a subsidiary company called Create Space, as a part of 
their ‘Advantage Program’ , in order to include authors and publishers “of all sizes” in their platform.
118
Besides books, and of course photographs, print on demand is also 
being used for office reports and other business-related publications. The ‘Virtual Printer’ is a service that allows customers to send a PDF 
of (for example) an office report, which is then printed and bound in 
the desired number of copies, and delivered to either a FedEx cou-rier store or the customer’s address.
119 Meanwhile, businesses such as 
Hewlett-Packard claim to be in the process of transforming themselves from a printer company to a printing company, focused on “Print 2.0… 
that embraces the Web as a channel to make printing more accessible, 
customizable and less expensive” .
120
There are also independent ventures such as Crowdbooks121 which 
publishes photo-books using the Kickstarter model: donating to a project we like, usually getting something back, proportional to the 
amount of the donation. The publisher offers a preview of a book pro-
ject, which interested people can fund by buying copies in advance or simply donating money for the publication. If enough funds are gener-ated, the book is published, distributed and promoted.
Finally, one new product that could significantly change the ways 
72books are sold is the Espresso Book Machine, which can quickly print 
a single copy of any book from a digital PDF file. The machine can pro-cess a 300-page book (including cover and glue binding) in a few min-
utes, which seems to support the American manufacturer’s definition 
of its product as an “ATM for books” . It costs 175,000 U.S. dollars, a price which should drop sharply as more units are sold, offering small and independent bookshops an opportunity to remain competitive.
122
3.5.1  Vanity press, freedom of expression and self-gratification.
Print on demand changes one fundamental rule of publishing: it is no 
longer necessary to invest a (small) starting capital. Anyone can easily 
raise the nominal charge (typically much less than 100 euros) required to publish a book or magazine. Furthermore, the only technical knowl-edge required is the ability to properly generate a PDF file (you can also spend a few hundred euros more, and have the POD firm generate it for you). The PDF file is then sent to the POD facility, and within a 
few days the book is ready and can be instantly offered for sale online.
This opens several possibilities, which have already started to have 
an impact on various (online) businesses and communities. One of 
these is ‘vanity press’ – a term traditionally used to describe a type of publisher whose business model consists of making a profit by publish-ing books at the author’s expense. With the new possibilities of POD, 
countless new vanity press publishers are now offering their services at 
bargain-bottom prices.
The vanity press phenomenon is in itself far from new: the March 
25, 1893 issue of the Newark Daily Advocate newspaper (from Newark, Ohio, USA) featured a series of predictions of what the world Espresso Book 
Machine, 2008

73might look like after 100 years, by 1993. The journalist Nym Crinkle 
wrote:
“Every person of fairly good education and of restless mind writes 
a book. As a rule, it is a superficial book, but it swells the bulk and it indicated the cerebral unrest that is trying to express itself. We 
have arrived at a condition in which more books are printed than 
the world can read.”
Furthermore, by 1993 “there will not be so many books printed, 
but there will be more said. That seems to me to be inevitable.”123 
Unfortunately, it seems that we have instead reverted to a situation 
comparable to 1893, when there was almost no need to limit or filter 
the production of content.
Clay Shirky, writing on the social and economic effects of Internet, 
spoke of blogs in terms that may just as well apply to vanity press: 
“The Gutenberg revolution is over… It’s going from a world of ‘fil-ter, then publish’ … to ‘publish, then filter.’”
124 And this applies even 
more to POD ‘vanity publishing’ . The original publishing paradigm, with editors carefully selecting, editing and proofing content before it 
could be printed, is being superseded by what Shirky defines as “mass 
amateurization” . This in turn is having a significant impact on the more commercial POD efforts, since the self-gratification of seeing a book with one’s own name on the cover is an attractive prospect for many potential customers. Meanwhile, the mass media are publicising this development as a social phenomenon, presenting it as some new 
promised land for would-be writers. This is quite similar to the mirage 
of what the Internet was supposed to mean for musicians: anyone can publish their work, and who knows, if it turns out to be outstanding (the classic American Dream rhet-oric), then you too can become a literary star.
125
On the other hand, experimen-
tal books can now be published without having to spend large 
sums of money. A nice example 
is My Life in Tweets by James 
Bridle – a collection of all the au-thor’s posts on Twitter during two years, as a sort of intimate trav-elogue. Here the printed book is 
an innovative hybrid of something 
A copy of James Bridle’s My Life in Tweets, 2009
74momentary (a Twitter post) and something which is meant to remain (a 
diary) in a perfectly classic graphic format.126 Perhaps inspired by this 
book’s success, various services appealing to the Twitter microblog-ger’s ‘vanity’ have cropped up, such as Bookapp’s Tweetbook
127 which 
makes it possible to print one’s tweets in a standard book format, and Tweetghetto
128 which uses the tweets to generate a poster which can 
then be purchased for display.
An individual’s ‘virtual identity’ (the collection of posts and other 
activities on social networking sites such as Twitter and Facebook) is by nature ephemeral – unless of course it is printed. And so, as part of a promotional strategy for the French telecommunications company Bouygues Télécom, the DDB Paris ad agency invented a new kind of printed product: an offline copy of a Facebook profile. Participants could order a book of their own profile, covering a specified timeframe 
and including profiles of up to ten of their friends. The campaign was a 
huge success: 1,000 books were requested within one hour.
129
Finally, taking the concept of vanity press to the limit, Fiona 
Banner’s Book 1 of 1130 is a conceptual artwork which “questions the 
currency of the multiple or limited edi-tion” . Each of her ‘books’ is a single-
page, single-copy publication “printed 
on reflective mirror card” and “regis-tered under its own individual title” and ISBN number. Each single copy of the edition is thus an official publication in its own right, meeting all the admin-
istrative requirements (which, interest-
ingly, do not include text content). The result is an imaginary printed space, reduced to a single, almost empty page which reflects both (metaphorically) the 
author’s intention and (literally) the reader’s face in its mirror cover.
3.5.2  The frontiers of POD: customisation and open source.
Of course, print on demand is a medium suitable for all kinds of busi-
ness models besides vanity press. In fact, several established publish-ers have started releasing their out-of-print back catalogues in POD. 
Also, the University of Michigan’s Shapiro Library has purchased an 
Espresso Book Machine specifically for the purpose of printing such titles.
Another possibility, still under development, is to customise the 
Fiona Banner, 
Book 1 of 1, 2009
75printed content for each individual customer. Various web-to-POD 
technologies are currently being developed to allow customers to select their own content – which, in the case of books, amounts to 
individual readers compiling their own publication. Such a level of 
customisation will undoubtedly signify a major shift in the role of the editor, since it effectively does away with the traditional publishing model of printing thousands of copies of the exact same content. While this obviously means more freedom for the reader, it also introduces a new problem for writers, who can no longer be sure their content is 
reaching every customer.
Some experiments with this kind of mass customisation have al-
ready been conducted in recent years. In June 2004, all 40,000 sub-
scribers of the monthly libertarian magazine Reason found on the cov-er a digitally printed satellite photo of their own neighbourhood – with 
their own location marked by a red circle. The magazine also included 
several advertisements customised to each particular recipient.
131 A 
similar approach was further explored by Wired magazine for their July 2007 issue; 5,000 subscribers were given the option of receiving 
their own customised cover of Wired, featuring their own photo on the 
cover. The experiment was sponsored by Xerox and produced using their iGen3 digital printing machine.
132
Combining print on demand with software to generate potentially 
infinite permutations of content is already being applied outside the field of experimental self-publishing, in the mainstream publishing 
business. Already in 2007, the English publishing house Faber & Faber 
commissioned the designer Karsten Schmidt to participate in the de-velopment of a software system for generating complete, print-ready 
Left
Customised issue of Reason maga-
zine, June 2004
Right
Customised issue of Wired magazine, 
July 2007
76book covers for its new Faber Finds back catalogue imprint. The as-
signment was to create a ‘design machine’ flexible enough to generate a very large (theoretically infinite) number of unique designs – one for 
each book published in the imprint. The design itself, developed by 
the Canadian typographer Marian Bantjes, consists of a collection of shapes which are ‘parameterised’ and broken down into smaller ele-ments, which in turn became micro-templates, thus forming a ‘vocabu-lary’ of shapes. The software generates a new cover every second, then judges whether the design is valid or should be discarded.
133
Software has a long history of producing questionable results – 
particularly when these results are meant to be passed off as the work of a human. The Bachelor Machine,
134 an artwork by Per-Oskar Leu, 
presents us with a perfect machine-made fake as well as a historical paradox, an “impossible event”: “A book signing by Franz Kafka, 85 
years after his death. Since none of Kafka’s novels were published dur-
ing his lifetime, this book signing was his first.” The signing makes use 
of “autopen technology and facsimile first editions” of Kafka’s famous novel The Trial. And the entire process of generating and producing a 
book, combined with a POD scheme, is incorporated in Peter Bichsel 
Karsten Schmidt’s 
generated Faber & 
Faber covers, 2008
Per-Oskar Leu, 
The Bachelor Machine, 2009
77and Martin Fuchs’ Written Images135 project: a “generative book that 
presents programmed images by various artists” , all individually cal-
culated immediately before they are printed, making each single book 
unique and literally unrepeatable.
Finally, Philip M. Parker came up with a rather clever and very orig-
inal approach to POD. He has generated 200,000 books (which can all 
be purchased through Amazon, making him “the most published au-thor in the history of the planet”). Each of these books is in fact a com-pilation of content which can be readily accessed through the Internet. 
Parker’s contribution was to design the software for collecting the 
(freely available) information (which spans a wide range of genres and subjects – most of the titles are scientific publications) and compiling the results into books (usually around 150 pages thick) which can then be then printed using POD – in effect automating the entire process. He states that “My goal isn’t to have the computer write sentences, 
but to do the repetitive tasks that are too costly to do otherwise.” Since 
there is no investment to be recovered, each book ‘breaks even’ as soon as the first copy is sold.
136
Software (which is clearly a defining element of POD) makes it sim-
ple to alter the content of a publication at any point during the produc-tion process – even between the production of individual copies. And 
this customisation can go much further than merely adding or deleting 
bits of content. The POD process actually makes it possible to continu-ously update the content – thus bringing a defining aspect of online publishing back to the printed medium.
In other words, the latest edition can be continuously kept up-to-
date – by its author and publisher, and potentially also by an open 
community of readers/users/contributors. FLOSS Manuals
137 is a pub-
lishing effort founded by the artist Adam Hyde, focusing on free and 
open-source software (including tools used to create this software) as 
well as the community which uses these applications and tools. The ed-
iting scheme is almost entirely open, so that anyone can contribute to a manual, adding content or helping fix errors, and being credited for their contributions. The FLOSS (‘Free/Libre/Open Source Software’) paradigm, with its culture of openness, is here brilliantly applied to the field of technical manuals. The constantly updated books can be down-
loaded for free or purchased as cheap POD editions; alternately, single 
chapters from any of the manuals can be reassembled at will, and then downloaded or ordered in POD (Hyde has since pushed this concept even further, developing an online platform made entirely of free software for online collaborative authoring and publishing of books, called Booki
138).
78Using FLOSS software for publishing ensures that tools can be collec-
tively developed and shared, and are guaranteed to remain open and unrestricted by patents. The Open Source Publishing consortium (ini-
tiated by a few members of the Brussels-based collective Constant)
139 is 
a major effort in this direction, supporting an organic and systematic 
use of FLOSS software for publishing. POD is of course the most obvi-
ous and natural medium for FLOSS-based publishing. Having open 
tools which are collectively developed and shared, implicitly guaran-tees fair access to the means of publishing, thus promoting freedom of expression.
Clearly, POD has the potential to make available in print enormous 
quantities of otherwise unpublished or forgotten information. POD 
seems destined to occupy a position very much similar to that of pho-
tocopying in the 1980s and 1990s: a chance to print and distribute content cheaply, in a format which is physically stable, easy to use, and pleasant to the senses. Which is still very much what paper is all about.
3.6  independent magazine strategies, 
 teaming up for success.
Besides newspapers, the most ‘endangered’ printed products are 
surely the magazines. They suffer from a general lack of visibility as well as a lack of sales outlets willing to stock them because of the small profit margins involved. Independent magazines continue to cater to 
various medium-to-large-sized niche markets, but paradoxically they 
have become less visible and harder to find, largely as a result of the increased quantity of printed products all competing for our attention. This has given rise to various collective promotional or business strate-gies, some carefully planned, others more spontaneous.
The biennial ‘Colophon’ magazine symposium
140 in Luxembourg 
(one of the largest events of its kind) brings together nearly 700 inde-pendent publishers to discuss current matters and to introduce poten-
tial advertisers to relevant magazines. The symposium, a sort of col-
lective awareness rite for a very fragmented cultural sector, combines workshops, exhibitions focusing on a number of representative maga-zines, and the publication of a catalogue surveying almost 2,000 titles.
Bringing magazines together can be a powerful promotional ges-
ture. The Magazine Library in Tokyo
141 is a sort of temporary exhibi-
tion of magazines from around the world, organised for a few days in a specific venue such as a club or museum. The magazines manage 
to draw a large audience by capitalising on their massive collective 
presence. Visitors can browse the various publications and possibly 
79purchase a subscription to one or more titles which have caught their 
fancy. Interestingly, the promotional material is usually out of stock before the last day of the exhibition.
This is similar to the business model of Mag Nation,
142 a chain of 
shops based in Australia and New Zealand which stocks only maga-zines (and claims to carry nearly 4,000 titles). Here potential custom-
ers can read all the magazines for free, before hopefully making a 
purchase. Additional services include refreshments and snacks as well as free Wi-Fi Internet. The collective presence of so many magazines, and the possibility to read them for free in a pleasant and unhurried environment, creates a situation which ends up generating sales.
Another interesting strategy is that implemented by Steve Watson’s 
Stack Magazines,
143 focusing on a phenomenon he calls “life editing”: 
a selection of hand-picked cultural magazines are distributed to sub-scribers, with a fixed fee of 3 pounds per copy. Watson claims that the 
seemingly endless choice of magazines usually presented to potential 
customers only leaves them bewildered: “it’s easy not to see the wood for the trees” . Watson says that “life editing is about bridging the gap between what customers like to have and what they spend their time doing” . Of course the element of trust is absolutely essential here: “People have to feel that they can trust the selection I’m making.” But 
isn’t this exactly what the good-old alternative bookshops had always 
been doing?
A successful strategy can also be a very minimal one: Abe’s Penny, 
created by the sisters Anna and Tess Knoebel,
144 is a “micro-publi-
cation” consisting of four postcards per volume, which subscribers receive once every week for a month. Each postcard features an image 
and a few lines of text; the full set of four postcards constitutes a com-
plete story. (It’s worth noting that the name Abe’s Penny is inspired on 
the ‘penny press’ phenomenon: these were early 19th century news-papers sold at minimal prices, making a profit through sheer volume of sales. These publications, which featured extensive coverage of lit-erature and theatre, were also known to maintain rather low standards 
regarding what was then generally considered to be ‘good taste’).
Perhaps some day Google will end up absorbing the entire print 
sector, buying the rights to millions of printed products, selling them 
to readers through some pay-per-read model, and paying the publish-ers a small percentage. Until then however, different strategies are being deployed to counteract the steady decline of sales or advertis-
ing revenues. For example, the Amsterdam Weekly, a free English-
language cultural newspaper from Amsterdam, recently launched an imaginative fundraising campaign: each page of the upcoming issue 
80was divided into blocks which were sold to donators, readers, etc, for 
5 euros each.145 Only sold blocks were printed; if not enough blocks 
were sold, readers would receive a newspaper with blank spaces, de-void of content. This is an emblematic (perhaps even desperate) case 
of a social call-to-arms intended to support a publisher in dire straits; 
yet it also underscores the essential social role of the printed medium, 
in a way that is quite different from pre-programmed ‘social network’ 
schemes. In fact, the former triggers a connection based on shared in-terests between publisher and reader, while the latter is merely based on a (highly predictable) proximity between ‘content providers’ and ‘six degrees of separation’ chains (i.e. everyone knows everyone else in 
the world through no more than six ‘friends of friends’) which connect 
people’s abstract profiles based merely on similarities, leaving no room for randomness or complexity.
Returning to the subject of survival strategies: magazines will some-
times cultivate their own particular ‘ethic’ which can be a very impor-tant part of maintaining a viable business. For example, Bitch, the most 
well-known feminist zine, posted a video online in late 2008 in order 
to raise 40,000 dollars needed to publish the next issue, and ended up quickly raising enough money to print the subsequent one as well.
146
3.7  the automated digital production trap.
Typographic production was radically transformed in the mid-1980s, 
thanks to the Apple Macintosh and its first laser PostScript printer. 
This, combined with various software applications (and later on, with 
Amsterdam Weekly 
imaginative fundraising campaign, 2008
81affordable scanners), gave designers and pre-press technicians all the 
basic tools required to make the definitive switch towards digital pro-duction. By now, every single aspect of the offset printing process has 
been taken over by digital technologies – except the final mechanical 
step involving the actual printing machine. For example, the halftone simulation of colours and shades, and elimination of unwanted visual noise artefacts (moiré), is increasingly done using a complex digital calculation process known as ‘stochastic screening’ – something which simply can’t be done through an analogue or mechanical process, be-
cause of the huge amount of calculations required.
The next obvious ‘missing link’ towards a frightening (or promising) 
science-fiction-like ‘total automatisation’ is of course human creativity. 
Looking at two software tools that may be seen as prototypes of this ‘machine will replace creative people’ approach, N Gen
147 is the more 
serious one, defined by its creators as a “rapid prototyping graphic design engine that generates saveable graphic files from the user’s own 
text content filtered through n Gen’s Design Modules” . The software 
generates satisfactory, though predictably anonymous, post-modern (mostly 1990s style) layouts, which cannot be distinguished from simi-lar human-generated designs. Though this tool cannot replace design-ers for anything more than low-complexity jobs, the mere fact of its existence may inspire these designers to broaden their attitude toward 
producing more innovative combinations of form and content, instead 
of always sticking to the same old rules.
Another tool worth mentioning is Adrian Ward’s Signwave Auto-
Illustrator,
148 formally described as “a (…) semi-autonomous, gen-
erative software artwork and a fully functional vector graphic design application (…)” The author invites users to “discover how easy it is 
to produce complex designs in an exciting and challenging environ-
ment that questions how contemporary software should behave” . But the tool in this case actually comes with a healthy dose of irony, often degenerating in unpredictable behaviour and sarcastic error messages, playfully exposing the user’s dream of passing the workload on to the machine and the consequent frustration of trying to get it to work 
properly.
Another milestone in unpredictable digital intervention in printed 
production is FontFont Beowolf,
149 a PostScript font designed to 
change the shapes of characters during printing (and a quite extraor-
dinary piece of PostScript language programming). Just as any other 
PostScript font, it consists of two components: one for screen display, 
the other for printer rasterising. In this case however, the ‘nodes’ used to describe the letters are instructed to move around slightly at 
82random. The types released by FontFont feature three levels of ran-
domness, allowing the nodes to move within a small, medium, and large radius, in order to generate unpredictable printed results in the 
context of a heavily computed, digitally-supported production.
3.8  print and digital are getting married, 
 and that’s exactly where the real problems start.
The business model of traditional periodical print is still based on sell-
ing copies as well as advertisements. The free distribution model, on 
the other hand, though entirely dependent on advertisers, also brings greater flexibility to try out innovative distribution models – includ-ing experiments such as combining a free newspaper with a morn-ing coffee, or handing out a free fashion magazine at a fashion store. Nevertheless, the independent press, in its many incarnations, is 
nowhere near dead. Various digital technologies are being widely de-
ployed in order to support production, sales and visibility.
During the past few decades, print and digital have progressed from 
flirting, to dating, to being engaged. And now they’re finally getting married – which is exactly where the real problems start.
83chapter 4
The end of paper: 
can anything actually replace 
the printed page?
In 1894 Octave Uzanne and Albert Robida declared in La fin des livres 
(see chapter 1.2): “Books must disappear, or they will ruin us. In the whole world there are eighty to a hundred thousand books published 
each year, and at a thousand copies each this is more than one hundred 
million specimens, of which the majority contain only trash and er-rors.”
150 More than a century later, a strikingly similar rhetoric is being 
used in order to promote electronic books, by discrediting the ‘obso-lete’ printed medium. But can anything ever actually ‘kill’ the printed 
page? If so, it will have to comprehensively emulate print’s intuitive 
‘user-friendly’ interface; it should also weigh about the same, and enjoy a continuous and seamless connection for downloading new content. That fatal bullet may indeed be on its way – but it’s clearly following a slow (and potentially long) trajectory.
One of the loftiest promises of the emerging e-book market, is the 
amount of space it will end up saving us (see chapter 3.4). In a nutshell, the propaganda mantra suggests that consumers will have more space in which to store more goods – a perfect, endless cycle of consump-tion. In fact, printed materials are one of the few consumer objects that generally do not expire or become obsolete, meaning they can’t be quickly ‘consumed’ and discarded, but just sit there taking up space, 
for years or even decades. And so, the magical process of digitisation is 
supposed to free up all this precious space, which seems to be in such tragically short supply in the Western world.
But will this eventual obsolescence of paper really liberate our 
shelves of all their printed content? Actually, if we observe what has happened in the case of music, we can see that vinyl records have not 
been comprehensively discarded; more than three decades after the 
launch of the compact disc, they are still very much there – and still taking up precious space. In fact, many record shops still have vinyl sections; there are various magazines focusing on ‘vinyl culture’; and a substantial number of releases are still (or again) being pressed in lim-
ited vinyl editions. Which begs the question: could printed paper some 
day become the ‘vinyl’ of publishing?
844.1  electronic paper, 
 the basis of electronic publishing.
The first e-book, unsurprisingly, was a product of the usual early 
hacker spirit. Michael Hart, then a student at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, used his mainframe computer time (during the 
night of the Fourth of July, 1971) to retype on a Teletype machine the 
text from a copy of the U.S. Declaration of Independence which he had been given at a grocery store. He then sent an e-mail to another 100 or so Arpanet users to tell them where they could download the e-text (Hart would eventually go on to found Project Gutenberg, which aims 
to eventually make available 1 million free e-books
151).
In the late 1990s, a new technology was announced which was sup-
posed to eventually replace paper: ‘electronic paper’ or ‘e-paper’ , a display consisting not of illuminated pixels, but of electrically charged 
micro-spheres (or pixels without light) that can be made to turn either 
black or white according to the polarity of the charge. This technology 
was first developed at Xerox Corp.’s Palo Alto Research Center (PARC) 
A vision of the book 
reader of the future (from Everyday Science 
and Mechanics magazine, 1935)
Gyricon electric 
paper and printer, 2000
85during the 1970s by Nick Sheridon. The first electronic paper, called 
Gyricon,152 was made of polyethylene spheres with negatively charged 
black plastic on one side and positively charged white plastic on the other; the spheres were embedded in a transparent silicone sheet, 
with each sphere suspended in a bubble of oil, allowing them to rotate 
freely, displaying either their black or white side.
153
After years of producing poorly-designed and cumbersome elec-
tronic book readers, the industry in 2008 finally started delivering on its promise of an electronic technology for reading printed content on 
a mobile device. Though it’s too early to tell whether or not this will 
actually transform the way people read, there are some strong reasons to see how it might: besides the obvious thrill of a new gadget, there’s the attraction of all the space that can be saved as well as the ability to access our entire collection of reading materials in the course of our ur-ban nomadic movements (‘always available’ is another key catchphrase 
in the marketing of e-books).
In 2008 and 2009 each of the important players in the field (Sony, 
Amazon, Barnes & Noble) announced and/or launched its own model 
featuring its own appealing characteristics: a miniature keyboard, a double screen to resemble an open book or magazine,
154 and so on. 
Besides the product itself, consumers often find themselves invol-untarily buying into the associated propaganda (for example, the 
promise/threat of driving the newspaper industry out of business). 
The marketing team for Amazon’s Kindle e-book reader has already calculated – and loudly proclaimed – that printing and delivering the New York Times over a period of a year costs twice as much as sending each subscriber a free Kindle device.
155 Furthermore, if we consider 
on one hand the massive book-scanning programmes currently being conducted (such as Google Books), and on the other hand the potential 
availability of almost everything currently being produced in elec-
tronic form, then the prospects for the immediate future start to seem very appealing (or tantalising) indeed. But does anyone out there have a truly strategic vision of how best to proceed, in a way that both pre-serves and enhances all the valuable idiosyncrasies of print?
4.1.1  The Bezos vision: Kindle the world.
The most serious effort in producing a e-book reader focusing on the 
reading experience itself, rather than on a bunch of (arguably useless) IT-centric features, must surely be Amazon’s Kindle. This is largely due to the fact that the Kindle was not conceived by a hardware manu-
facturer, but rather by a giant online retailer of content (still generally 
86perceived to be the world’s leading ‘virtual’ bookshop). At the press 
launch for the Kindle, Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos declared that “books are the last bastion of analog” – thus implicitly declaring an all-out war 
on this metaphorical bastion.
Interviewing Bezos for Newsweek magazine,
156 the computer-culture 
journalist and author Steven Levy spiced up his questions with a few 
of his own remarkable insights, such as: “(the book) is a more reliable 
storage device than a hard disk drive, and it sports a killer user inter-
face… And, it is instant-on and requires no batteries.” Bezos, during 
the aforementioned press launch had stated that, on the contrary, 
“short-form reading has been digitized, beginning with the early Web. 
But long-form reading really hasn’t.” He also boasted: “If you’re going 
to do something like this, you have to be as good as the book in a lot of respects.” As far as he was concerned, the Kindle was in fact designed to “project an aura of bookishness” .
The Kindle is silent, lightweight (a mere 10 ounces or 290 grammes) 
and only slightly larger than a standard paperback. The user can 
change the font size at will (a godsend for older readers). The device 
can contain a few hundred books, it allows the user to search within the text, and it can navigate the Internet: virtual goods can be purchased through wireless mobile broadband, leading Bezos to claim: “This isn’t a device, it’s a service.” He then went on to describe his vision: “The vision is that you should be able to get any book – not just any book 
Jeff Bezos on the 
cover of Newsweek , 
November 26, 2007 
87in print, but any book that’s ever been in print – on this device in less 
than a minute.”
In his seminal interview with Bezos, Levy also quoted a (somewhat 
unfortunate) prediction by fiction writer Annie Proulx, who stated in 1994: “Nobody is going to sit down and read a novel on a twitchy lit-tle screen. Ever.” Bezos understood that the challenge for any reading device will be whether it allows the reader to focus on the words and ideas, rather than on the technology: “The key feature of a book is that it disappears.” Of course, he claimed that his Kindle indeed achieves 
this transcendence of physical medium, and concluded (somewhat 
triumphantly): “It’s so ambitious to take something as highly evolved as the book and improve on it. And maybe even change the way people read.” And perhaps he will indeed. As Marshall McLuhan once wrote: “All the new media are art forms which have the power of imposing, like poetry, their own assumptions.”
157
4.1.2 Resisting the e-book paradigm.
There are several good reasons why a substantial proportion of read-
ers (and not merely the nostalgic and conservative among them) will 
continue to resist the e-book paradigm – especially when it comes to accepting e-books as a replacement for ‘real’ books. First of all, there are the technical limitations of the e-paper technology: not only must e-books be externally illuminated (just like real books) but there is a noticeable delay in turning pages, so that browsing through an e-book 
is not such a quick and simple process as flipping through the pages of 
a physical book. And, as novelist Justine Musk noted: how does one get an author to sign an e-book?
158 Of course, the answer is usually: you 
can’t – although in October 2010 President Obama used the touch-screen of an iPad owned by one of his fans to give him an autograph.
159 
Furthermore, the typical display resolution is still limited to black and white only. And obviously, just as any other electronic device, e-books 
are easily damaged by water or by being dropped, and must be regu-
larly recharged in order to be of any use at all.
But there are even more serious concerns, at least for the time be-
ing. One of these is that the e-book (and e-magazine) publishing model creates a forced marriage between the user and the publisher, and that once married (once the e-content has been purchased) there’s really no 
simple way to separate. For example, Amazon uses its own proprietary 
(.AZW) file format for the Kindle, instead of the universal PDF and EPUB standards (native PDF support was added as an extra feature in second-generation Kindle models, while EPUB can only be converted 
88using a free program called KindleGen). And what happens when cus-
tomers wish to resell or lend their books? Such a simple thing in the real world, but not in the digital one. Green Apple Books has produced 
a series of humorous web videos
160 about the practical problems of us-
ing the Kindle, one of which depicts customers discovering the perils 
of the ‘first sale doctrine’ business model: customers are not allowed to 
resell or lend content which they have bought, a restriction enforced 
through various DRM (Digital Rights Management) copy protection schemes. Interestingly, publishers brave enough to do without DRM are usually rewarded by a boost in sales; for example O’Reilly, which registered a 104% increase.
161
Unfortunately, Richard Stallman’s radical statement about e-books 
now sounds rather less pessimistic than it once did: “Using encryption and watermarking systems, publishers hope to connect every copy 
of a book with a known person, and prevent anyone else from read-
ing it.”
162 Worse still (and in case anyone still needs convincing that 
customer profiling is here to stay), every single e-book or e-magazine purchase is tracked and registered, just like anything else on any net-
work. Exactly what this might mean, was made painfully clear in July 
2009. Customers who had previously purchased the George Orwell novels 1984 and Animal Farm on their Kindle, one day discovered that 
the files had simply vanished from their devices without a trace.
163 It 
turned out that the publisher had reconsidered the desirability of an electronic edition, after which Amazon quietly located and deleted 
the files from every single Kindle – in effect, taking back the book. 
Jeff Bezos later apologised for this,
164 but the news (and a host of angry 
comments) was already all over the blogosphere. Cory Doctorow for example wrote:
“They gave everybody back their copies and promised they would 
never do it again – unless they had a court order. I’ve worked as a bookseller, and no bookseller has ever had to make a promise at the 
cash register: ‘Here’s your books. I promise I won’t come to your 
house and take them away again – unless I have a court order.’”
165
And of course, there is one feature of paper books that no e-book 
can convey (at least not yet): their smell. The master perfumer Felix 
Buccellato was once commissioned by the artists Kate Ericson and 
Mel Ziegler to create a scent based on his personal interpretation of 
the smell of old books stored at the National Archives in Washington, D.C.
166 Designer Tobias Wong, on the other hand, commercially 
marketed (in a limited edition of 1,000) his The Times Of New York 
89candle,167 which mimics the aroma of black ink on newsprint; a poetic 
tribute to the illustrious newspaper (nicknamed the ‘Grey Lady’) as 
well as an ironic commentary on the fate of printed media in general. 
In 2009, the writers of the TV sitcom The Office168 introduced a ficti-
tious product featuring the fragrance of old books. Apparently cashing 
in on the notion that e-book devices will leave us feeling we’ve lost something essential, they proudly present ‘ Smell of Books™’
169 spray 
cans, to help e-book customers feel more comfortable with their new devices. The product is ironically guaranteed to be “compatible with 
a wide range of e-reading devices and e-book formats and is 100% 
DRM-compatible.” And addressing a more general concern, “If you’ve been hesitant to jump on the e-book bandwagon, you’re not alone…”
4.1.3  The iPad paradigm: publishing for the iCustomer.
“Reading means approaching something that 
is just coming into being.”
Italo Calvino, If On a Winter’s Night a Traveller170
Apple, it seems, has pulled it off once again. While its iPad is being mar-
keted as “a magical and revolutionary product” , a unique multipurpose device, even a complete computer in itself, it is also the cornerstone of 
Apple’s integrated strategy for selling (and buying) digital books and 
magazines. Clearly, several key factors were considered and carefully planned in order to assure a successful product launch in a new market (as was done previously with the iPod/iTunes combination):
–  A spectacularly designed mobile device (the iPad itself ) which 
 can easily contain enough files to host an individual’s entire 
 personal collection of digital publications.
Left
The Times Of New York candle, 2011
Right
Screenshot of ‘Smell of Books™’ website homepage, 2009
90– A well-organised online platform for quickly, efficiently and 
 officially selling commercial products (iBookstore/Newsstand), 
 thereby immediately securing the cooperation of all major 
 content providers.
–  Locally-run software to handle products purchased online 
 (the same iBooks/iBookstore/Newsstand) as well as digital 
 materials already owned by the user.
– Compliance with existing file standards (PDF when layout is 
 important, EPUB for reflowable text) so that content can be 
 easily accessed, shared and digitised/converted/produced.
– Making digitised materials ‘transmittable’: the multimedia files 
 are small enough to be transmitted on the Internet within a 
 reasonable amount of time (in the case of print, this has already 
 been the case for several years).
– On the more recent models, the device’s screen resolution is 
 nearly indistinguishable from that of printed paper, thus 
 eliminating for the first time another crucial difference 
 between pixel and print.
Using a tablet computer as a medium for reading digital print prod-
ucts is much more than a mere cosmetic enhancement; it is what po-
tentially makes the iPad the next Sony Walkman. Yet the tablet’s basic 
premise is in itself nothing new (a computer roughly the size of a sheet 
of paper, consisting of only a screen and some kind of interface – be-fore the touchscreen, there was the stylus). Apple itself commissioned a tablet prototype in 1989 from a company called Smart Design; the concept and the design of this prototype is a good example of the com-puter aesthetics of the period. The device used a solid-state memory 
card for long-term storage; as Tom Dair (co-founder and president of 
Smart Design) recalled recently, “we thought that someday, catalogs and magazines would arrive in the (snail) mail in the memory card for-mat for viewing on such a device.”
171
A few years later, in 1992, the Knight Ridder newspaper chain 
founded the Information Design Lab in Boulder, Colorado, in order to explore the future of news. The journalist and newspaper designer 
Roger Fidler, who was leading the research lab, believed that the tra-
ditional horizontal computer screen was unsuitable for reading news-papers; and so the ‘tablet newspaper’ (tablet prototypes were currently 
91under development throughout the computer industry) should feature 
a vertical screen, as well as a completely new interface (thus avoiding any preconceived computer conventions).
172 News would be updated in 
real time through a wireless connection to the host newspaper and pos-sibly even read out loud by celebrity voices (something which Octave 
Uzanne and Albert Robida
173 would have been proud of; see chapter 
1.2). Peggy Bair, the Information Design Lab’s applications manager, 
declared that “We accept it may be 20 years before as many people 
subscribe to an electronic news service as they do to other forms. 
Already, 60% of newspaper costs are in manufacture and delivery.”174
So after nearly two decades we now have the iPad, the realisation 
of a concept incorporating several elements of Fidler’s vision. Aside 
from the embedded platforms (iBooks and whatever else may come in 
the future) and the predictable multitude of ‘clones’ , this is clearly an 
attempt by Apple to establish a new category of device (the simplest of computers, specifically designed for accessing media) while supplant-ing a previously established category (the e-book reader). For the first time, books and magazines are regarded here as completely equivalent to video and music. Meanwhile, the basic physical gestures of reading, 
which are of course a fundamental part of the ‘interface’ of printed 
An example of an 
eye-tracking device, software interface and visualisation used for a newspaper project.
92books and magazines, are being called into question, and thus forced 
to ‘evolve’ (for better or worse). In the case of the iPad, the gestures are all virtual – there is no actual physical interaction involved (unless 
one considers the greasy fingerprints left on the touch screen), but the 
gestures of turning pages or zooming in and out are very close to the real thing indeed. And having the digital content stored inside such a ‘magical’ device designed to be used by one single person, makes it more personal than ever before.
The next challenge is not the accurate digital representation of es-
tablished printed formats (indeed, this seems by now to be taken for 
granted), but the integration of audio and video, and ‘extra’ content 
in general, within these traditional formats. Various ‘prototypes’ are 
currently being introduced (for example, by the lifestyle magazine VIV) in which the traditional layout (pictures and columns of text) is just one of many ways of presenting information, used increasingly as a quiet interlude between exciting animations. The visual power of these 
clever juxtapositions of still and moving images in a lifestyle magazine 
is showcased in VIV’s own iPad demo video:
175 trendy fast-cutting, 
computer-generated imagery and spectacular camera work, all build-ing up to the final shot, a classic (static) magazine cover.
176
Meanwhile, Sports Illustrated (a Time, Inc. publication) is pursuing a 
different approach: integrating videos and picture galleries within the magazine’s ‘pages’ while allowing access to extra ‘pop-up’ statistics.
177 
The magazine then becomes a hybrid object: not a completely new medium, but rather an expanded one. It seems essential that the reader 
should still somehow feel, and recognise, the experience of reading a 
magazine, possibly with a few added surprises. New habits are then quickly and easily formed, leading to rapid acceptance of the hybrid. The formats of magazine and newspaper then serve as ‘archetypes’ for hosting content, based on the broad perception that they have been around forever and still work fine.
Ironically, it is precisely this archetypal acceptance of the ‘good 
Knight Ridder’s 
Roger Fidler with a tablet newspaper reader mock-up and video of the prototype, 1993
93old’ magazine format which makes it a prime medium for introducing 
futuristic technologies, which might otherwise meet with suspicion or even resistance – for instance, eye-tracking technologies (imple-
mented using a webcam) that analyse a customer’s reading behaviour, 
and integrate this data into digital publications featuring ‘smart text’ or ‘Text 2.0’ content, which is able to respond to the process of being ‘physically’ read. Apple itself is reported to have already purchased such technology from a Swedish firm.
178
And so, one likely scenario is that cheap paperbacks, newspapers 
and other disposable printed products will live on as cheaply priced, self-replicating networked files (featuring enhanced, interactive and 
connected content) – while physical print, with its tangible material 
value, will increasingly become a medium for physically preserving val-uable content for the future. Which of course leaves open the question of what exactly is valuable and to whom – or how to “find the line in the sand to define when content should be printed or digitized” (Craig Mod, Books in the Age of the iPad
179). But it also represents the struggle 
between the static and the dynamic, between concentration and fasci-nation, between being absorbed in oneself and being bombarded with 
outside information. It is, in other words, the struggle between screen 
and print.
4.1.4  The turning point: 
 electronic content with the look and feel of print.
“What has spurred this new wave of hope is the fact that 
technologies are beginning to look and feel more paper-like.”
Abigail J. Sellen and Richard H. R. Harper,  The Myth of the Paperless Office, 2002180
“In the first decades of the Gutenberg revolution, printing presses, 
as McLuhan long ago pointed out, poured forth a flood of manuscripts in 
print form. In a similar manner, one can expect that in the first stages of 
hypertext publishing, printed books will provide both its 
raw material and much of its stylistics.”
George P. Landow, Hyper/Text/Theory, 1994181
One major (and somewhat unexpected) turning point in the way print-
like content is experienced on a screen, is that instead of (re)inventing some new interface (which had been the norm in the 1990s, as well as 
during at least the first half of the 2000s decade), publishers and soft-
ware developers started to realise that the original book interface was simply the best one after all.
94These have always been two more or less separate worlds: on one 
hand, web content developers all eager to design their own unique new 
interface (with catastrophic consequences for usability); on the other 
hand, graphic designers whose suspicions in dealing with the Web and 
its inherent graphic instability can best be understood in the context of false claims by the software industry that its products could actually be used to automate print-to-web publishing. Or, to quote a popular joke among graphic designers: “the net was not developed by publishing houses” .
Then in the late 2000s, in a remarkable turn of events, the rows of 
icons and the clumsy animated mechanisms meant to (re)animate the on-screen simulation of paper started to disappear, and the classic paperback interface was resurrected in all its powerful historical sim-plicity. The most striking example is Wikipedia, where each entry can be formatted into a standard encyclopedia design, generating a single 
printable PDF file.
182 There’s even an advanced option which makes it 
possible to assemble, preview and print Wikipedia content in a classic 
‘perfect bound’ book style, including automatically generated indexes, 
tables of contents, etc. The resulting book can be purchased through 
PediaPress.183
This kind of simple, classic appearance can in fact be applied to al-
most any web page by using an experimental (and free) browser ‘book -
marklet’ called Readability, developed by Arc90.184 This tool not only 
discards all advertisements and CSS (web page formatting) trimmings, but effectively strips a web page of all content except its main text, 
and “re-formats its layout, size, and margins, creating a newspaper or 
novel-like page for easier text digestion.” A somewhat similar software application, Readefine by Anirudh Sasikumar,
185 follows a more sophis-
ticated approach, applying a rigorous multi-column newspaper grid layout (while preserving hyperlink functionality) to web pages, RSS 
feeds, plain text and HTML files. Interestingly, this also happens to be 
the general look-and-feel of most of the content recently produced for 
e-book readers.
Taking the effort to combine 
print and digital characteristics to its ultimate material conclusion, 
Traumgedanken (‘Thoughts on 
Dreams’), an experimental design book by Maria Fischer,
186 is a “col-
lection of literary, philosophical, psychological and scientifical (sic) 
texts which provide an insight into 
Traumgedanken, book by Maria Fischer, 2010
95different dream theories.” In the process of writing about dreams, with 
all their apparently scattered but interconnected elements and possible interpretations, the designer came up with a solution which is very 
much a physical transposition of the hyperlink: she connected key-
words and passages across the book using threads of various colours, creating a unique prototype of a physically interlinked text.
4.1.5  Newspapers on-screen and off-screen.
“Electric circuitry does not support the extension of visual modalities 
in any degree approaching the visual power of the printed word.”
Marshall McLuhan, The Gutenberg Galaxy, 1962187
The newspaper remains the most familiar, effective and established 
format for delivering news. In the late 1970s, Sarah Charlesworth produced a series of artworks called Modern History,
188 in which she re-
placed all the columns of text and headlines on the front pages of vari-ous newspapers with blank space, leaving only the newspaper logo and 
the pictures. The result is still instantly recognisable as a newspaper, 
confirming (and reinforcing) its status as an iconic standard for graphi-cally organising information.
And so it is surely no accident that Google Labs has released (in 
partnership with a few major newspaper publishers, and sharing with them the revenues generated through context-sensitive ads) a news 
tool called Google Fast Flip which gives a ‘print look’ to its very popu-
lar Google News service.
189
Having a literally freshly printed newspaper (or some equivalent, 
digital or otherwise) has always been a highly valued resource, if not necessarily a luxury. In 1936 in the United States various prototypes 
of the Newspaper via Radio Facsimile
190 started offering condensed 
versions of newspapers (a few pages long) sent through radio waves 
and printed on facsimile paper by a special printer integrated in the 
radio receiver. The technology was developed to enable distribution 
of national newspapers to potentially every household across this huge country, something otherwise impossible at the time through tradi-tional methods of printing and distribution. Though the medium was doomed from the start by enormous technical limitations (slowness, poor reproduction of images, small paper sizes), most major news-
papers offered a facsimile edition, such as the New York Times which 
published its first four-page facsimile on February 16th, 1948.
It’s interesting to note how, in our post-digital era, similar concepts 
are still being developed: the Little Printer, for example, is (as the 
96
name suggests) a cute little printer that can print a set of headlines 
from news sources and various other content (including personal mes-sages) on a single strip of thermal paper from a mobile device.
191
For the rapidly growing e-publishing industry, newspapers consti-
tute a key element in the effort to get readers to trust the new devices and platforms. For example, in order to familiarise customers with the 
experience of reading a newspaper on a screen, Sharp Corporation 
in 2009 offered Japanese buyers of its Aquos TV sets the possibility to download and view the first five pages of the newspaper Mainichi Shimbun on their TV screens, using the remote control to navigate and zoom in and out. The user can even have the TV read the main articles out loud using a speech synthesis function.
192
In the opposite direction (from virtual to print) a wide spectrum of 
hybrid solutions are available for rendering online news and articles in a newspaper-like format: for example, the barebones FeedJournal
193 
which collects users’ favourite RSS reader flows and presents them in a newsletter form; the more flexible Page2Pub technology developed 
by the Rochester Institute of Technology’s Open Publishing Lab; The 
Printed Blog, which collects and prints interesting local content from blogs; and theblogpaper
194 which generates a newspaper based on user-
generated (and user-rated) news, articles and photographs.
Clockwise from 
top left
Little Printer 
prototype by Berg Cloud, 2012
A Japanese 
newspaper displayed on Aquos TV, 2009
theblogpaper, 
magazine with texts from blogs, 20 September 2009
Newspaper 
via Radio Facsimile, Popular Science magazine, May 1939.
97The appeal of these ‘take-away’ paper products is of course the same 
as that of newspapers – which are, interestingly, starting to expand 
their own role and nature by offering downloadable and printable 
last-minute editions, customised to one key factor: the precise time at 
which they were updated. Such editions are meant to be read offline, and thus to be consumed at a relatively unhurried pace (in contrast with the hectic, overstretched production schedules characteristic of any news service). All these developments should be understood in the context of a response to a broader need: to bring virtual, real-time 
online content ‘off-screen’ , into some form of physical existence, as an 
object to consume and interact with in the real world.
4.2  ‘reflowability’: 
 mobile style in reading and writing.
Reading text on a small screen has gradually become an accepted 
practice – especially for the younger generation, for whom it is simply a fact of life. This leads us to another seminal concept in electronic publishing, ‘reflowability’: optimising the text display for each dif-ferent device. In other words, publishers (and authors) are forced to surrender at least some (often a great deal of ) control regarding the 
formatting and layout of their content. The writer and designer Craig 
Mod, in his essay Books in the Age of the iPad defined this as “Formless 
Content” .
195
EPUB (short for ‘electronic publication’) is the open-source stand-
ard for reflowable content, based on the XML and CSS web-design standards.
196 Reflowable content, in its most radical form, has al-
ready met with commercial success in recent years in Japan. The ubiquity of mobile phones, combined with 
the huge number of commuting workers and 
students, has created a 10-billion-yen mar-ket for an entirely new literary genre called ‘keitai shousetsu’ (‘mobile phone novels’).
197 
In 2007, five of the ten best-selling titles in Japan were ‘keitai’ novels, including the num-
ber one title, If You by ‘Rin’ (who doesn’t use 
her family name when signing a text on her mobile phone). If You sold 400,000 (physical) copies after a publisher noticed the success her chapters were having online. Meanwhile, another popular title, Love Sky by ‘Mika’ , is 
reported to have reached a total audience of 
The author ‘Rin’ with her mobile phone 
and a copy of her novel If You, 2008
98twenty million readers. Incidentally, these young writers can usually 
write much faster with their thumbs on a mobile phone than by using a normal computer keyboard.
198
This is a relatively new phenomenon: the loss (or rather the insta-
bility) of formatting and layout, which are sacrificed to the current requirements and specifications of the new digital media. Even the 
first-generation ‘e-zines’ were designed with some sort of formatting 
in mind, including the creative use of the standard ASCII character set in order to insert some rudimentary graphic elements (known as ‘ASCII art’). The result was a visually less anonymous product, often enhancing the content within the constraints of such a low-tech format (various examples can be admired in the ‘electronic texts archives’
199). 
This heritage was also touched upon by Fang-Yu ‘Frank’ Lin in his artwork From the Great Beyond
200 which allows a user to navigate the 
Internet using a “custom robotic typewriter” , resulting in an output of only text and ASCII art.
Will ‘reflowability’ soon make predefined formatting and layout 
altogether obsolete? Whatever the case, this is clearly another example of the forced simplification of an old medium by a new (electronic) one. The loss of a predefined layout is not perceived as an actual loss of con-tent, but rather a requirement for rendering the content as ‘naked’ so that it may later be dynamically ‘dressed up’ at will – a typical digitisa-
tion process. In this case, losing part of the content, its original layout, 
means making the rest of the content portable, and in the end possibly universal.
4.3  delivering content, 
 from discs to wireless networks.
The early 1990s saw the first serious attempts to create and distribute 
a popular non-physical magazine – the earliest CD-ROM magazines (see chapter 2.7). The novelty thrill and the charm of the new visual in-terface soon gave way to a growing disenchantment, which had mostly to do with the medium’s most serious shortcoming: its slowness. In a 
comprehensive 1994 review of the major CD-ROM titles of the pe-
riod, the magazine Entertainment Weekly squarely dismissed the new medium: a (physical) “magazine is disposable, portable, malleable…” whereas “imagine having to wait five seconds before turning each page of Entertainment Weekly”.
201
Next came the ‘webzines’ , whose growth would parallel the ever-ex-
panding bandwidth of the Internet. Early webzines were usually organ-ised as repositories of content, often structured following a print-based 
99model of periodically publishing new (digital) ‘issues’ – while also 
experimenting with newer formats, which were soon to evolve into what we now know as ‘blogs’ . Following years of anything-goes techni-
cal standards (or lack thereof ) for digital publishing, the PDF (Portable 
Document Format) standard was finally established as the mutual interface format between print and online media. The consequences of PDF for print are somehow similar to the impact of MP3 on music – except that everything is happening much more slowly, since it is extremely time-consuming to scan and convert a printed document, 
and even more so to convert the resulting series of scanned images into 
a multi-page layout of pictures and searchable text.
The current mainstream publishing practice of giving away content 
for free, was anticipated by an underground scene of designers produc-ing a substantial number of free electronic magazines (downloadable or viewable on a web page). These PDF-zines (one of the most popular 
repositories is called ‘PDF mags’
202) were created to showcase creative 
skills and emphasise affinities between various groups of designers, 
and generally to function as a breeding ground for aesthetic experi-
ments and content that was either too controversial or simply of no 
commercial value for mainstream magazines. It’s important to note that these publications are in no way interactive: they do not exploit any characteristic of the electronic medium, besides its possibilities of infinite duplication and distribution. Predictably, the makers of these PDF magazines followed the graphic and production standards of the 
paper medium, creating a sort of never-born paper product, tossed out 
for free on online communication channels already overflowing with free content.
But magazines in PDF form also have their own particular mar-
kets and forms of distribution. ‘Online newsstands’ such as Issuu
203 
and Mstand204 use their own rendering software and interface to 
carry a remarkable number of titles, but without allowing the user to actually download and save any files. Exact Editions
205 on the other 
hand is clearly designed to sell digital magazine subscriptions, which usually feature access to the entire back-issue catalogue in digital 
form, as a promotional ‘bonus’ content to the printed version. And 
NewspaperDirect combines print on demand with PDF file distribu-tion, offering customised delivery of an impressive selection of com-mercial newspapers and magazines to specific locations (such as hotels) as well as online access to the same publications (the front page is free, the full content is not).
But once the bull is out of the pen (once the content has been dig-
itised) there’s really no way to force it back in. A quick glance through 
100the ‘e-books’ subcategory on a peer-to-peer BitTorrent tracker website 
such as The Pirate Bay206 shows recent issues of major magazines as 
easily downloadable PDF files. The perfect quality of the files (which could not be achieved by scanning the printed pages) and the instan-
taneous and regular timing of the upload postings, all seem to suggest 
that it must be the publishers themselves who are ‘leaking’ the files – presumably in an effort to increase reader loyalty and circulation, and thus (hopefully) boost advertising revenues. The same strategy can also be used in order to kick-start a new magazine or newspaper: for ex-ample, in 2009 perfect PDF copies of the latest issues of the left-wing 
Italian paper Il Fatto Quotidiano were anonymously posted every single 
day on BitTorrent networks, to be ‘illegally’ downloaded for free.
The contradiction of having online sales portals often just a few 
mouse clicks away from websites where the same content can be down-loaded for free, was explored (and exploited) in the artwork Pirates of the Amazon,
207 by a group of graduate students in media design at the 
Piet Zwart Institute in Rotterdam (who for obvious reasons decided to remain anonymous). They developed a Firefox browser add-on which 
inserted a ‘download 4 free’ button whenever the user visited the 
Amazon website, linking many of the products available there to corre-sponding illegal BitTorrent downloads on the Pirate Bay tracker web-site. One day after the release, Amazon’s legal department contacted 
the creators, demanding they take their tool offline. They immediately 
complied – but the story had already generated plenty of interesting reactions and debates throughout the media worldwide.
PDF, previously a proprietary format of Adobe Systems 
Incorporated, was officially released as an open standard on July 
1, 2008, and published by the International Organization for 
Amazon interface after 
installing the Pirates of the Amazon Firefox plug-in, 2008
101Standardization as ISO 32000-1:2008.208 Although the PDF format 
is now widely accepted as the universal standard for publishing (and 
reading) electronic magazines and books, online businesses wishing to 
maintain control over their published content tend to use their own 
proprietary formats (such as Amazon with its Kindle platform). Adobe itself developed (and eventually discontinued) a ‘virtual print’ version of its popular Flash format called FlashPaper, for converting any print-able document into online-ready Flash content, which can then be read as an online book.
209 Meanwhile, the document-sharing website Scribd 
is promoting its own ‘iPaper’ format.210 But does it really make sense to 
have all these different formats? Perhaps for a paranoid industry (and a few individuals) it does; for the rest of us, it probably does not.
In fact, it seems that the collective ‘need’ (be it real or fabricated) is 
now to digitise everything in sight, for better or for worse. But beyond ‘going paperless’ merely for the sake of going paperless, there is actual-ly an added value here: mainly, having searchable references on-screen.
There are scanners specifically optimised for books, such as 
Plustek’s OpticBook 3600, which makes it easier to obtain a flat image 
of an opened book using “some kind of ‘shadow elimination element’ 
to correct for the distortion and shadow cast by the hump of the book at the spine” .
211 There is also software which enables a camera or mo-
bile phone to act as a scanner (such as BookDrive212 and Qipit213); or 
hardware solutions, such as a cardboard frame called ScanDock214 that 
assists in using an iPhone to photographically ‘scan’ printed materials.
But of course, the fastest solution for digitising printed content is 
simply to pay someone else to do it. There are a variety of online ser-vices, such as 1dollarscan.com which charges 1 U.S. dollar for every 100 pages, and requires the customer to send the original book by post, returning a PDF file with editable text. To speed up the process, the book’s spine is cut off, and after scanning the paper is discarded for recycling (though the customer is given the option of reclaiming the 
book’s remains).
215
Even handwriting (the oldest medium for conveying information 
using paper) can be converted into digital (ASCII) text using a draw-
ing tablet and handwriting recognition tools,216 which nowadays are 
built into all the major computer operating systems: Windows Vista/7, Mac OS X (‘Inkwell’) and Linux (‘CellWriter’). Conversely, a person’s 
handwriting can be transformed into a font for as little as 9 U.S. dol-
lars, using online services such as Fontifier.
217 All of this leads of course 
to an endless production of digital content, for which there seems to be an equally insatiable appetite. And as designers experiment with 
every kind of digital medium (such as the limited-edition USB sticks 
102published by mimoZine218), information 
is becoming an increasingly cheap and 
fleeting commodity.
Returning to the subject of newspa-
pers: it seems that instead of us look -
ing for news, the news is increasingly finding us, mainly through online me-dia. In a study by Jure Leskovec, Lars Backstrom and Jon Kleinberg from 
Cornell and Stanford Universities, titled 
Meme-tracking and the Dynamics of the 
News Cycle,
219 it was shown that online 
newspapers post their news about two hours after the blogs do, in an increasingly rapid information environment – which makes designer 
Scott Walker’s digital newsstand prototype seem increasingly relevant 
(he modified an old newspaper street vending box to deliver every morning the latest (digital) headlines to his living room).
220
The next step is obviously to have everything delivered in digital 
format, available anywhere, anytime. The ubiquitous Internet and 3G mobile network (or whatever happens to be the dominant global 
network) should then guarantee a better distribution (faster and 
more widespread, yet more personalised) than that of the historical newsstands. This personal and universal (digital) delivery of content previously available only through print, is what might finally convince hyperactive Western consumers to abandon paper altogether, at least for certain applications.
And when sooner or later our overstressed eyes need to take a 
break, something like WordFlashReader
221 may provide some relief, by 
flashing each word of the text or book in sequence on the screen (while pausing for punctuation)…
4.4  going digital: vanishing libraries.
Besides individual customers, an important market segment for e-
books is the library. Libraries worldwide are suffering from a chronic lack of space (due to the inevitable physical limits encountered after 
collecting books and magazines/journals for so many years) com-
bined with budget cuts (due to both the current economic crisis, and a broader trend of questioning the libraries’ central role as a repository of cultural heritage). And so ‘going digital’ seems to offer libraries a way to solve these problems – while also breaking out of their physical boundaries.
mimoZine magazine on USB key, 2008
Amazon interface after 
installing the Pirates of the Amazon Firefox plug-in, 2008
103In 1928, El Lissitzky described 
his grand vision for the libraries of 
the future in his essay Topography 
of Typography: “The printed 
page transcends space and time. The printed page, the infinity of the book, must be transcended. THE ELECTRO-LIBRARY.”
222 
The very finite space of librar-ies on one hand, and the end-
lessly expanding amount of ideas 
and evolving thoughts that can be found within their walls on the other hand, have prompted engineers to devise various strat-egies for circumventing such 
constraints – powerful new ap-
proaches for storing and retriev-ing knowledge. Furthermore, li-braries are meant to be dynamic, to continually acquire new titles, to expand – which brings us back to the perennial problem of space.
The late 1930s saw the development of various innovative tech-
nologies combining microphotography (photographic reduction of the original printed pages) with devices for re-enlarging any part of the pages at will. One early ‘canned library’
223 was the Optigraph, which 
displayed pages on an illuminated screen, with a handle for scrolling through the content. The basic concept is strikingly similar to that of 
the ‘bookwheel’
224 invented by the Italian military engineer Agostino 
Ramelli all the way back in 1588: a simple mechanical device based on 
a wooden wheel which allowed a reader to access a selection of heavy 
books with a minimum of move-
ment and effort.
In his 1945 book The Scholar 
and the Future of the Research Library, the publisher and inven-tor Fremont Rider calculated that 
the volume of the content of li-
braries doubled once every six-teen years. He proposed to drasti-cally reduce this volume using mi-crofilm, more specifically his own 
An article describing ‘canned libraries’ published in 
Inventions, August 1936
A microfilm reader
104‘Microcard’ invention; and indeed by the 1960s the use of microfilm 
had become a near-universal policy.
In 1959, a Chicago Sunday Tribune supplement on futuristic de-
velopments titled ‘...Closer than we Think!’ envisioned the use of mi-crofilm in private houses, with their content projected on the ceilings of living rooms; eventually “an electronic voice may accompany the 
visual passage” .
225 A few years later, in 1963, Arnold B. Barach, in his 
book 1975: And the Changes To Come, imagined the world a bit more 
than a decade later, describing a system which he called the ‘Reference 
Finder’:
“Every 60 seconds, day and night, approximately 2,000 pages of 
books, newspapers, or reports are published somewhere in the world; and the output is increasing by leaps and bounds. Libraries 
will ultimately be forced to use computers such as this for locating 
documents and references, since it will be so difficult otherwise to keep up with the printed material. This pioneering installation is at the Center for Documentation and Communication Research at 
Western Reserve University.”
226
But breaking out of the libraries’ physical boundaries also means 
bringing the libraries to those who need them. Based on the concept 
of the ‘bookmobile’ (a mobile library in service since 1857 in a circle 
of eight villages in Cumbria, England227), the Internet Bookmobile228 
is an experiment set up by Internet Archive founder Brewster Kahle. 
Since 2002, the Bookmobile has been physically spreading electronic 
texts using print-on-demand technology – while gathering widespread 
public acclaim. Kahle uses simple technology (computer, printer, bind-ing machine) stored inside a van, touring through various U.S. cities and parking outside of schools, parks, museums and farmers’ markets.
A vision of a future 
‘electronic home library’ (From Chicago Sunday Tribune, February 1, 1959, page 10)
105A few libraries have recently decided to embrace a completely 
digital model. Boston’s Cushing Academy library, for example, spent 
500,000 U.S. dollars ‘going paperless’ ,229 getting rid of all its books 
and purchasing instead flat-screen TVs and laptops, as well as e-book readers by Amazon and Sony. Also, more and more libraries are adopt-
ing a ‘digital lending’ system for their e-books. By 2009, the number 
of ‘digital checkouts’ had already grown to more than one million. Paradoxically, most e-book titles are still treated as if they were ‘real’ books: each title can only be checked out by one customer at a time, while other potential borrowers are put on a waiting list. Two to three weeks after being borrowed, the e-book automatically expires from 
the reader’s account. The software used is usually the popular Adobe 
Digital Editions. This is all very much in line with the wishes of sev-eral major publishing houses (others, such as Macmillan and Simon & Schuster, simply do not allow their e-books to be offered in public libraries).
230
Still, there seems to be a long way to go before anything can defi-
nitely replace paper. In one experiment, 50 Princeton University stu-dents were given a free Kindle e-book reader in exchange for their 
precious feedback. The consensus was that although the device is very 
portable and lightweight for the amount of content it can carry, it can’t be compared to paper when it comes to things like bookmarks, high-lights, post-it notes, torn-out pages, and other well-established learn-ing aids.
231
Libraries, and particularly their traditional physical structure (aisles 
of shelves filled with sorted books) have also turned out to be an in-spiration for artists. Jeff Goldenson’s Stack View
232 applies the Google 
Street View model to the world of the library. Goldenson sends book trolleys equipped with cameras through the aisles of various libraries, 
photographically capturing the browsing experience and then allowing 
users to remotely ‘navigate’ the bookshelves.
Finally, libraries are still the place where our collective memory 
stores the printed relics of its ancient knowledge. If antique books symbolise the way in which we preserve culture, then print-on-demand machines symbolise how we can now produce culture at will 
(though mostly in poor quality, at least for the time being). These are 
the underlying themes of the Robotlab group’s project bios [bible],
233 an 
industrial robot that writes out the Bible line-by-line, in high-precision calligraphy on scrolls of paper – thus preserving (somewhat per-
versely) the ‘lost art’ of early manual book production, in this case im-
plemented using an advanced robotic ‘monk’ . But in order to produce such a ‘valuable’ classic output, even a machine needs a substantial 
106amount of time: in this case, it takes a full seven months to produce just 
one complete copy.
4.5  print becomes a limited-edition object.
If e-books are indeed going to become increasingly widespread, gradu-
ally supplanting traditional print, then printed books may well end up becoming rare – and thus valuable – objects. Art books and ‘limited editions’ have long embodied this paradigm of value-through-scarcity 
in print. Such editions deliberately enhance the ‘physicality’ of each 
single printed object, by introducing some element impossible to re-produce mechanically, making each copy somehow unique (and thus potentially a collectable object). This strategy has been widely applied in underground networks as well as in the world of top-price artists and wealthy collectors.
One of the most lavish (or kitsch, depending on one’s taste) luxury 
editions to be produced in the era of electronic media was a book on the famous Italian sculptor Antonio Canova, commissioned in 2009 by the Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi and featuring a 25-kg white Carrara marble cover. This book was a gift for the G8 leaders meeting in Italy, and was valued at 460 euros – though the first copy 
was valued at more than twice that amount, so that its recipient, the 
Canadian Prime Minister, was required to donate it to a museum since its value exceeded the limit fixed by Canadian federal law for gifts re-ceived by Members of Parliament.
234
In a similar vein, and clearly operating under the assumption that 
money shouldn’t be a problem, the spectacular fashion magazine 
Robotlab, bios [bible], 
2007
107Visionaire produces each new is-
sue using an entirely different format, adapted to the require-
ments of its content: from in-
novative techniques in cutting, folding and binding paper of dif-ferent types and shapes, to an ‘electric’ issue showcasing 365 artworks – one each day for a 
year, starting at the moment the 
‘magazine’ is plugged in. A sin-gle copy of Visionaire costs 250 U.S. dollars.
235 Clearly, the value 
resides not only in the finished product, but also in the ‘research and development’ costs of the pro-
duction process.
The designer/illustrator Louise Naunton Morgan has developed 
a somehow similar concept into a series of print-inspired artworks: 
thehumanprinter.
236 As a counter-measure to the proliferation of ma-
chine-made artefacts that surround us every day, Morgan creates hand-painted (one might say hand-printed) originals based on colour 
halftone dot patterns generated using a computer.
Such efforts to expand (visibly and palpably) the enhanced possi-
bilities of the printed medium clearly demonstrate that, besides merely 
serving to preserve the ‘quintessence’ of the Web (see chapter 1.9), 
Louise Naunton Morgan, 
thehumanprinter, 
2008
The various elements of the magazine Visionaire 5.7, 2010
108print can still be used to create something no other medium can – a 
precious object, something to preserve, to instinctively trust (because we can hold it in our hands), and to unhurriedly enjoy rather than rap-
idly consume. Which brings us back to the idea of scarcity: if print in-
deed ends up becoming marginalised by an overwhelming abundance of electronic content, it should still retain some special role, most likely as an (increasingly precious) limited-edition object.
4.5.1.  Intermediate strategies: using digital media for selling print.
One of the main unsolved dilemmas for writers is finding a digital 
production and distribution strategy that won’t end up putting them out of business. Science-fiction author Cory Doctorow is also an inde-pendent literary entrepreneur – a master in developing and showcas-ing original (and successful) strategies that combine free distribution 
of digital copies with sales of printed books. His recent short-story 
collection With a Little Help (featuring mostly material previously 
published in various magazines) was produced experimentally (and independently of traditional publishers) in a variety of formats priced anywhere from 0 to 10,000 U.S. dollars. The book was available for free in various e-book formats: plain text, HTML, PDF (formatted for 
two-column printout in portrait orienta-tion) and EPUB. It was also available as an audiobook (again, for free) voiced by professional actors and featuring a new introduction and afterword as ‘supple-
mentary material’ . Donations were ac-
cepted, though not actively solicited.
The book is also available as a print-
on-demand trade paperback for 16 dol-lars through Lulu.com, and furthermore as a premium hardcover edition (for 250 
dollars, in a limited print run of 250 
copies) designed and produced by book 
artisans working closely with Doctorow himself, and featuring an embossed cover in comic-book style, an SD memory card contain-ing the complete text in e-book and audiobook versions, and unique end-papers created using paper ephemera. At the very top of the price 
range was the commission of a new story, for 10,000 dollars, which 
was immediately purchased by Mark Shuttleworth, the South African tech millionaire behind the Ubuntu Linux project. Doctorow also of-fered advertising space inside the print-on-demand edition (either “a 
Cover of Cory 
Doctorow’s book With a Little Help, 2010
109half-page, or 500 pixels square, or five lines of text”) on a time-limited 
basis (“in month-long increments”) after which the ads are removed from the downloads and print templates. Finally, in a fashionable 
public-private partnership, the author set up a donation programme: 
librarians, teachers, and generally speaking anyone working in a “wor-thy” institution, were encouraged to sign up for free copies; “public-spirited readers” could then purchase a copy for anyone on the online donation list.
237
This multi-layered experimental strategy actually turned out to 
be financially profitable, paving the way for other authors interested in discovering new publishing and sales strategies. And of course 
Doctorow is not alone in pioneering this new (and somewhat peril-
ous) frontier of hybrid print/digital possibilities. Another successful author, Paulo Coelho, actively encouraged the free sharing of his books (including The Alchemist and The Witch of Portobello) through the 
BitTorrent tracker website The Pirate Bay, uploading the files himself and discussing the experiment on his Pirate Coelho blog. The author 
subsequently enjoyed a huge increase in sales, with The Alchemist 
jumping to #6 on the New York Times Best Seller list.
238 And almost si-
multaneously with Doctorow’s experiment, Dan Brown’s best-selling novel The Lost Symbol (with one million copies sold on its first day) was 
posted as a high-quality PDF file on peer-to-peer networks just hours after its official release. Peaking at more than 1,000 ‘seeders’ (people sharing the entire file), an unusually high amount for an e-book, the book ended up being downloaded tens of thousands of times.
239 And so 
the inevitable digital editions and their widespread duplication (result-ing, in any case, in increased readership) are already being used as a 
means to trigger sales of printed books; and the strategy is proving to 
be quite effective, particularly for established writers.
4.6  post-digital print.
In his recent book Remix, Lawrence Lessig defined the contemporary 
role of text: “Text is today’s Latin. It is through text that we elites com-
municate (look at you, reading this book). For the masses, however, most information is gathered through other forms of media: TV, film, music, and music video. These forms of ‘writing’ are the vernacular of today.”
240 Not only are text and print historically and intimately connect-
ed, but a text once printed somehow gains an aura of being ‘real’ and per-manent (‘scripta manent’ as the Romans used to say) even if, in the digital 
era, everything outside the digital environment is starting to be perceived 
as outdated or irrelevant – particularly by the younger generation.
110A wonderful illustration of this relationship between text and print 
(and of the ‘authority’ of the printed word) is Wordperhect,241 created 
by Tomoko Takahashi – a parody of a word processor, featuring an 
idiosyncratic hand-drawn interface, a set of functioning but strangely 
altered tools, and page templates such as receipt and silver paper from a 
cigarette box which all somehow ‘humanise’ the software. This shrink -
ing of the distance between digital tool and physical reality is also one of the themes of Evelien Lohbeck’s video Noteboek,
242 in which a 
traditional paper notebook opens up to become a notebook computer (including various peripheral devices such as a printer and a scanner). 
Lohbeck playfully and surrealistically juxtaposes various meta-medi-
um objects (handwritten notes, software interfaces, digital hardware) to achieve a stunning (yet stunningly simple) digital-inside-the-physi-cal-and-vice-versa conceptual effect.
Our instinctive ‘trust’ in printed information (including electronic 
information which has been printed out) was once again put to the test 
by Tim Devin in 2006 in his Email Flyer Project.
243 He printed the final 
message of a fictional e-mail exchange between a woman named ‘Sue’ 
and her now-former boyfriend ‘Jay’ , and distributed the print-out as a 
flyer on car windshields in six different U.S. cities; soon he was receiv-
ing dozens of replies by people who had picked it up. Undoubtedly, 
merely ‘spamming’ out the message electronically would have pro-
duced a very different reaction. On another level, the work is also 
about accidentally encountering a narrative and believing it to be true, since it is filtered (one single message) and printed out, and found on a lonely windshield where paper is usually posted anonymously.
Finally, the MIT Media Lab’s Fluid Interfaces Group is 
Tim Devin, 
Email Flyer Project, 2006
111experimenting with a very different kind of e-paper: Marcelo Coelho 
and Pattie Maes, in collaboration with Joanna Berzowska and Lyndl Hall, are creating what they call “Pulp-Based Computing” .
244 This con-
sists of “integrating electrically active inks and fibers during the paper-making process” , creating sensors and actuators that behave, look, and 
feel like paper.
Clearly, traditional print is increasingly being called into question – 
but is this really a direct consequence of the ongoing development of 
digital technologies? Or has the digital revolution merely exposed the printed medium’s own basic vulnerability? Whatever the case, the fu-ture of the traditional print/publishing model (the act of applying ink 
to cellulose, massively and at some fixed location – as opposed to sim-
ply switching the temporary state of some magnetic storage, perhaps halfway across the world) seems more uncertain that ever.
4.7  print and online: friend or foe? 
 conceptual differences and similarities 
 between print and blogs.
There are currently hundreds of thousands of individuals writing and 
publishing in the ‘blogosphere’ . From early blogging platforms such as LiveJournal (founded in March 1999 by Brad Fitzpatrick) to contem-porary content management systems (such as the currently popular 
Wordpress), the blog has imposed a radical turn on the way information 
is being produced and consumed online, empowering individuals while confronting readers with a massive increase in the amount of poten-tially interesting information (as well as uninteresting noise). Arguably, the blog platform is already past its peak – at least, as a candidate to 
supplant traditional news and information platforms, which actually 
seem to be in a process of regaining the (digital) initiative. Only time will tell.
A blog (‘web log’) is usually defined as a regularly updated website, 
mostly produced by one single person, and usually reflecting this per-son’s perspective on a chosen topic or topics. This approach may be 
traced back to the pre-Internet world of the zines, more specifically 
the ‘perzines’ or personal zines. Gareth Branwyn, in his 1997 book Jamming the Media offered the following definition: “Personal zines (perzines) shamelessly flaunt their makers. They detail the lives of their publishers through intimate stories, anecdotes, comics, pho-tos, and pieces about them written by others. A perzine is like an 
elaborate letter from a friend (that you happen not to know).”
245 The 
perzines remained a marginal segment of the zine world, with a few 
112exceptions such as Pete Jordan’s iconic and autobiographically-titled 
Dishwasher,246 which resonated and connected with a sizeable com-
munity of colleagues throughout the U.S. – all touring the country and sharing tips and tricks about their otherwise unexciting work. His fame 
soon spread well beyond this circle of colleagues, eventually culminat-
ing in a book about his life.
A few important similarities and differences between blogs and (non-
fiction) print:
Production
– Blogs have low production costs and can be read for free. They 
usually have one editor (who is the writer, or one of the writers, of 
the blog) or a very small number of editors. Distribution is cheap 
(through Internet hosting) – distribution costs are directly pro-
portional to the blog’s popularity. Published content can always be altered or corrected later on.
– Print has high production costs, must usually be paid for in order 
to be read (an exception is free newspapers or other publications whose business model depends entirely on advertisement rather 
than sales). It usually requires professional editors and often con-
tributors. Distribution is paid for by the publisher. The content once printed cannot be changed.
Access
– The availability of blogs depends on access to the Internet and to 
electricity. Blogs are searchable.
– Print is always available, but not searchable.
Aesthetics
– Blogs, like most other screen-based content, are mostly read on 
a backlit medium. They usually aim for a tone of inspired spon-taneity. The graphic appearance of previously published content 
can be entirely (and almost instantaneously) changed anytime af-
ter publication. Blogs involve only the sense of sight, and perhaps also to some degree hearing (starting with the mouse clicks), and usually consist of short texts and possibly reader comments.
– Print is externally illuminated. It usually aims for a more 
thoughtful and less spontaneous tone. Its content is fixed forever in its original graphic design. Print involves sight, touch, smell, 
and hearing, and printed texts are usually longer than those 
posted online.
113Functionality
– Blogs are published according to a ‘real-time’ production model, 
more or less instantaneously, as soon as they have been written. 
They are usually not published according to a fixed schedule, but 
whenever they happen to be updated; being updated actively and 
frequently tends to increase the blog’s reputation. Blogs are usually not meant to be printed. One can quickly and easily find out who has referred to a particular blog online.
– Print is never a ‘real-time’ production – the very nature of the 
printing process requires at least a minimal production period. Print usually refers to events that took place within a certain range 
of time before publication. It is usually published according to a 
schedule (which may also be flexible). If needed, a printed publica-tion could conceivably be converted into a blog format. Finding out where any given text has been referred to in another printed 
publication can be extremely time-consuming (if not impossible).
As mentioned above, paper involves most of our senses, mainly 
sight, touch, and smell. Touch tells us something about the type of 
information we’re reading as we turn the pages: rough for plain text 
books or photocopies, smooth for magazines or illustrated books. 
The smell of the paper can tell us how old the information is: inky for recently printed texts, mouldy or dusty for older ones. The colour of the pages also gives us an indication of their age: yellowed paper is vis-ibly old (though this degenerative process may take several decades). Electronic visual media, on the other hand, are perceived exclusively 
through the sense of sight. Only the particular technology employed 
can help us guess the age (and perhaps also to some degree the nature) of the information: for example, the resolution and colour depth (i.e. number of colours) of digital images, or more generally the influence of technological limitations on the graphic design.
Another essential consideration is the extent to which we can 
use our photographic memory to retrieve information. Photographic memory of a printed paper object is straightforward as well as static: we can remember the layout of a specific page in a magazine, as well as the physical space (such as a particular bookshelf ) where we stored the magazine – and we can connect these memories to other memories from the same period.
But photographic memory doesn’t work well with a display screen, 
which is dynamic, in a state of constant change. More importantly, the screen itself remains the same physical space – only its content changes. When attempting to remember where we saw some particular screen 
114content, we might refer to its URL web address or to a hyperlink that 
brought us there; but unless we have somehow saved this information, there’s not much more that we can do to help ourselves remember.
Another important consideration is the lighting. In most electronic 
media, the screen is backlit. Marshall McLuhan speculated (rather ap-propriately, during a TV interview) that this characteristic in particular induces a near-mystical reverence in the spectator, much like that of the stained glass windows of medieval churches. Also, the backlit screen shines directly on the retina, strongly stimulating the sense of 
sight. Paper, on the other hand, is indirectly illuminated by the natural 
lighting of the environment, and is thus much less strenuous on the eyesight.
Returning to the subject of blogs, a few particular cases stand out, 
and among these the story of Boing Boing is truly unique. Originally Boing Boing was a printed zine, founded by Mark Frauenfelder and his 
girlfriend Carla Sinclair in 1988. The zine was quite successful in the 
U.S. and abroad, but was hit hard by the early 1990s bankruptcy of the big independent zine distributors, and eventually stopped publishing in printed form. In the meantime Frauenfelder had been hired as an associate editor of Wired magazine: he was with the magazine from its very beginning, and was closely involved with its first experimental 
online presence, called Hot Wired.
In 1995 he revived Boing Boing in a new online incarnation, pio-
neering many of the defining features of what would soon be known as 
blogging. The online Boing Boing was hugely popular, ranked among the 2500 most visited websites worldwide.
247 Frauenfelder’s career 
then led him back to print, founding Make, a (paper) magazine focus-
ing on DIY (do-it-yourself ) and DIWO (do-it-with-others) projects 
such as building tools and machines, and modifying electronic hard-
ware – an excellent example of how a printed publication can become an important resource for an active online community. Frauenfelder remains a blog contributor and editor for Boing Boing, and seems to thrive in this ongoing duality between print and pixel, which con-stantly evolves along with the technological possibilities of publishing.
But the relationship between bloggers and print technologies is not 
always such a harmonious one. The queen of art blogs, Régine Debatty (editor of we-make-money-not-art.com), while declaring herself a heart-felt and passionate fan of print, also admits to feeling intimidated by the medium’s immutability. Debatty is the archetypal independent blogger/editor, headlining her own internationally acclaimed online 
publishing platform (which she manages with a high degree of profes-
sional and artistic integrity, as well as a distinct personal style). Her 
115own popular (and excellently written) dai-
ly posts are but the most visible part of an intricate process involving a vast personal 
network, and seamlessly integrating vari-
ous newer and older media.
248
In all likelihood, the nature of the blog 
has forced a fundamental and historic evolution of the publishing process (and 
even the writing process): these have be-
come dynamic activities, shaped by an ongoing interactive dialogue between authors, editors and readers – whether directly (through reader comments) or in-directly (through private e-mail). But, as 
with every evolution, while something had been gained, something else 
has been lost: penmanship, little doodles, quick notes, obscure or pure-ly decorative marks, all of which contribute to deciphering the ‘mood’ of what was scribbled on paper. We have gained, instead, accuracy and heterogeneity, thanks to online (or offline) dictionary software. There is also another radical change to consider, which can be read between 
the lines: publishing on paper, compared to publishing online, is a 
stronger ‘gesture’ , one which creates the sense of an intimate (and defi-nitely physical) space between the writer and reader.
4.8  which is more environmentally friendly: 
 print or digital?
Environmental concerns have always been an important issue, at least 
for the more conscientious individuals and organisations operating within the digital realm. In the early 1990s, when e-mail first started being used on a massive scale for personal communication, e-mail mes-
sages often featured catchphrases such as: “No trees were harmed in 
the sending of this message” . Similarly, early e-zines regularly stated that “No trees were harmed in the creation of this magazine” , and there are still plenty of web pages claiming (rather mystifyingly) that “No electrons were harmed in making this webpage” . The O’Reilly publishing house currently uses the slogan “save a tree, go digital” to 
incite customers to buy digital editions, while Press Display, an online 
shop for e-magazines, proclaims in banner-headline letters: “No recy-cling required” .
But is digital technology actually helping publishers to reduce 
their carbon footprint? It seems the increased amount of printable 
Régine Debatty, editor of the blog 
we-make-money-not-art.com
116content actually (perhaps even predictably) causes more pages to be 
printed. Paul Smith, a lab researcher at Xerox, said that “our studies were showing us that 45 per cent of all office printing is for ‘one-time 
use’ , like reading an e-mail.” Smith is part of a project team currently 
developing an experimental printing technology: self-erasing, reusable paper which selectively changes colour when it absorbs certain wave-lengths of light, and then gradually turns blank again. In its current version, the paper self-erases after about 16-24 hours and can be re-used again and again. The technology, which is not expected to become 
available for a few more years, is said to reduce the amount of energy 
required to print a single page from over 200 kJ to just 1 kJ. The paper itself is expected to cost the same as regular paper.
249
The artist Nathalie Jeremijenko wished to stigmatise the careless 
use of paper in the office: her artwork Stump250 is a printer queue soft-
ware virus that counts the number of pages used by the printer. When the equivalent of a whole tree has been consumed, the software auto-
matically prints out a “slice of tree” . Collecting these print-outs and 
stacking them up into a growing ‘stump’ creates a tangible representa-tion of the patch of forest consumed by the printer and its user.
One slang expression for ‘going to print’ is ‘from online to dead 
tree’ – which is something of a gross generalisation, since the envi-ronmental impact of ‘staying online’ is far from negligible, as we shall 
see further on in this section. Whatever the case, in December 2010 
the international non-governmental organisation WWF (World Wide Fund For Nature) launched a new WWF file format – nearly identical to the popular PDF format except for one interesting catch: the file cannot be printed. Meant as a symbolic act of resistance to unneces-sary printing, the format is perfectly readable on display screens and 
integrates seamlessly with all popular operating systems.
251
There are also subtler ways to approach the problem, such as the 
open-source Ecofont252 which essentially inserts tiny gaps in the type-
face, saving a substantial amount of toner without compromising read-
ability. Pencil Printer,253 a concept design by Hoyoung Lee, Seunghwa 
Jeong and Jin-young Yoon introduces a printer that uses actual pencils to print out documents, which can then be corrected (or even com-
pletely erased, thus recycled) using a common pencil eraser. And 
there are even printed products that incorporate organic materials, such as Recycled Ideas’ Herb Seed or ‘plantable paper’ greeting cards, 
which are filled with seeds,
254 or Inhabitat’s laser-cut leaves as business 
cards.255
Despite all these practices and their underlying assumptions, it’s not 
quite clear whether digital media are actually succeeding in producing 
117a smaller carbon footprint than print. For example, anyone advocating 
the use of ‘electronic form reports’ to replace printed reports should include in their carbon footprint calculation not only the amount of 
paper saved, but also the amount of electrical consumption required to 
keep the servers permanently online: “Jonathan Koomey of Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory in California has calculated that the data centres that drive the internet already consume one per cent of global electricity capacity, and that their consumption is growing at seventeen per cent per year.”
256 Clearly, the longer we spend looking 
at any given information (and the more complex the information), the greater the advantages of paper and print. Barney Cox, writing in Eye 
magazine, went even further, proposing a ‘Slow Information’ move-ment (echoing the ‘Slow Food’ one), better for our eyes as well as for our planet.
257
4.9  paper is flesh. screen is metal.
The duality (whether mutually exclusive or complementary) between 
paper and screen can be summarised in a cyberpunk metaphor: paper 
is flesh, screen is metal. What we’re dealing with here is a transitional medium, with constantly mutating hybrid characteristics. Paper and pixel complement each other, even as they compete with one another. They need each other to survive, though they both may have good reasons for ‘feeling superior’ to the other. Digital media relies on the 
long experience of print in the fields of layout and content manage-
ment. And print has much to gain from digital media’s atomisation of content, with its endless possibilities of indexing and searching. Flesh and metal will thus merge as in a cyberpunk film, hopefully spawning useful new models for carrying and spreading unprecedented amounts of information and culture.
118chapter 5
Distributed archives: paper content 
from the past, paper content for the future.
“All forms of knowledge achieved stability and permanence, 
not because paper was more durable than papyrus but simply 
because there were many copies.”
James Gleick, The Information: A History, a Theory, a Flood, 2011258
The Internet (not unlike a human being) is particularly fond of its own 
historical period; it is much less interested in anything that took place before its own birth. Online, one can easily find news, documents, 
historical information and other cultural artefacts produced since the 
mid-1990s, but the farther one goes back in time before that, the less information there is to be found. The sense of history on the Web is rather like the flow of a river: always looking ahead to some promised estuary, rather than remembering when and where its own waters originated – let alone what might have happened before that. And so, 
even though the late 1990s and 2000s are well covered online, beyond 
that there’s a tangible historical vacuum, which becomes evident the moment one wishes to seriously research anything less familiar than the obvious ‘cultural classics’ .
The ‘online giants’ (Google, Amazon, Microsoft, etc) are of course 
well aware of this cultural gap. They also realise that, in order to 
firmly establish the Internet’s reputation as a trusted and universal 
medium, traditional media will have to be incorporated within the on-line structure, which means allowing people to access that which they have always trusted the most: printed materials. But digitising large quantities of print is an enormous task, and so there are massive efforts underway for archiving printed content and making it available online. 
Perhaps this is indeed the final phase of the passage from the printed 
to the digital form; or perhaps the question should really be: can such a process be properly described as ‘archiving’ in the first place?
5.1  the ‘online giants’ and their approach 
 to ‘archiving’ printed materials.
These two conceptual elements (on one hand the chronological bias 
of the Web, and on the other hand the online ‘archiving’ of previously 
119unavailable printed content, making it indexable and searchable) have 
inspired the aforementioned ‘online giants’ to look upon the heritage of printed knowledge as a potentially valuable resource: one that could 
be transformed from another (yet) uncharted online territory, into a 
new major source of income and market share.
Amazon, for example, has used online archiving to boost and ex-
pand its core business: selling books. It has done this by asking publish-ers to ‘consign’ to Amazon the content of their books in digital form, so that Amazon in turn can allow potential customers to search the text. 
This ‘Search Inside the Book’ feature, introduced in late 2003, has 
since proven to be a ‘killer application’ for the marketing and selling of books. It is also being used extensively by researchers and academics worldwide. The feature allows potential customers to search a book’s entire text, generating search results in a Google-like interface, includ-ing details on where exactly the search term occurs in the book: the 
page number and the text immediately preceding and following the 
search term (in other words, its context). Access to the text is carefully guarded and limited, never giving a substantial part of it away, but rather allowing the customer to sample just enough of it to get a better idea of its contents. In the end, this method turns out to be even more enlightening (and enticing) than simply flipping through the book in a 
bookshop, eventually reinforcing the need to buy and own the book.
Such an advertising model of ‘extreme teasing’ operates on the very 
thin boundary between giving customers an illusion of accessing the 
whole content for free, and getting them to actually purchase and own the book. This is a key concept in the transition from printed text to its 
digital form, and especially the public perception of how desirable such 
a transition really is. As James Rifkin wrote in his book The age of ac-cess: “The physical container becomes secondary to the unique services contained in it… Books and journals on library shelves are giving prec-edence to access to services via the Internet.”
259 While Amazon is busy 
extracting ‘teasing’ content from books it wishes to sell, other ‘online giants’ are more preoccupied with gathering vast amounts of valuable 
and ‘new’ content in order to attract users (and to keep them coming 
back for more), in much the same way as the manufacturing industry is fuelled by the endless need to create new products or new versions of existing products. Likewise, online platforms are locked in an endless competition for market share, in order to attract more advertisers and sell more advertising space.
The supreme example of this paradigm is of course Google, with its 
text advertisements on every search page. Google’s strategy regard-ing printed materials is to incorporate previously printed content 
120within its own products (such as 
Google Books and Google News). Both these efforts were realised 
through huge investments, calcu-
lated to dominate their respective markets from the moment they were launched (as is usually the case with any Google service). After four years of work (most books are scanned us-
ing specialised scanning devices at a 
rate of 1,000 pages per hour), with 
an initial investment of five million 
U.S. dollars and in collaboration with no less than 20,000 publishing partners (including several major libraries), Google Books claimed by 2010 to have scanned 10 million books, with 1 million of these 
available in their full version. And Google continues to announce and 
develop new ventures and partnerships, such as the digital archiving of another 1 million public-domain books from the Italian national librar-ies of Rome and Florence.
In 2008 Google also purchased twenty million digitised historical 
newspaper pages from a Canadian company, PaperofRecord.com.
260 
And as if that weren’t enough, Google is also seeking to gain control of the rights to books known as ‘orphan works’ which have essentially 
been abandoned by their authors and publishers (though such titles 
are still under copyright, the copyright holders are either unknown or cannot be found). But when a book featured in Google Books is still protected by copyright, the impression (made by the cover and the bibliographic data) of accessing an ‘archive’ soon turns out to be quite illusory: as soon as the user attempts to read further within any 
particular book, most of the content turns out to be unavailable (“not 
shown in this preview”). Nevertheless, these projects will probably end up reinforcing the general impression of Google as a ‘force for good’ , preserving valuable resources for the benefit of humanity (as it previ-ously did in retrieving and archiving the complete historical Usenet newsgroups). And of course, doing so in the field of printed publishing 
will certainly bestow upon Google more prestige and cultural authority 
than ever before, further cementing its position as the ‘universal data-base’ and first point of reference. In the end, this centralised collection of news and culture produced over several generations will be search-able through Google’s proprietary interface. Content which is globally relevant will be globally sold (through advertisements), yet centrally 
managed and controlled.
A female hand, probably turning pages, scanned by  
 accident and found in a Google Books file, 2008
121But we’re not yet used to searching such an enormous and hetero-
geneous amount of content, which we previously experienced through 
a very different medium. What will, for example, be the ‘page ranking’ 
of archived news? How will news, articles and chapters be internally 
ranked as first or last in response to a query? There are no incoming or outgoing links here, only Google’s internal (and undisclosed) policies and methods, so once again it will be Google’s decision, based on its own business convenience, strategy, and (one can only hope) vision.
As Google’s own Nikesh Arora (President of Global Sales Operations 
and Business Development) stated quite plainly: the goal of Google’s founders is “to create a universal library” .
261 Marin Šarić (one of 
Google’s top engineers and an initiator of the Google Books project, who eventually left the company after almost five years) revealed that 
Google considers ‘worldwide culture’ to include about 150 million 
books (the final scanning goal), and that by 2030 everything ever writ-ten will be online.
262
But rather than the dream of some contemporary ‘Library of 
Alexandria’ , this goal seems more like an unprecedented business op-portunity: selling advertisements to be displayed whenever someone 
reads a book selected from Google’s vast online library, in the already-
classic Google style: benevolent and fatherly. However, Google’s ap-proach raises two serious concerns. First of all, access to this vast body of global culture is controlled and regulated by Google, a private mul-tinational business, instead of by a non-profit international institution such as UNESCO (which, incidentally, is running its own World Digital 
Library project, featuring a comparatively small number of digitised 
treasures
263). Secondly, Google tends to focus on acquiring the most 
‘universal’ (i.e. popular) types of culture, disregarding entire sectors of crucial, though less popular, printed productions. The acquisition and 
digitisation of this unprecedented amount of content, conducted with 
all the speed and efficiency of a huge corporation, is thus destined to become yet another ‘gold mine’ for selling context-sensitive web ads, and of course another endless temptation for our intellectual curiosity.
Let us consider the rival project: the Internet Archive’s Texts 
Collection which in 2011 reached the figure of approximately three mil-
lion books,
264 digitised in eighteen scanning centres in five countries. 
The project was originally funded with a grant of one million U.S. 
dollars by Microsoft. Eventually Microsoft pulled out of the project, 
leaving the Internet Archive all the scanning equipment and public-
domain files. Soon enough, people started downloading public-domain books from Google Books and uploading them to the Internet Archive text collection.
122A company called reCAPTCHA has developed another method 
for helping the Internet Archive effort, specifically its proofreading 
task: a variation of the widespread CAPTCHA system. CAPTCHA is a 
challenge/response system that allows Internet servers to distinguish 
a human user from a software ‘bot’ (an automated program, usu-ally designed to generate spam) by asking the user to correctly type a displayed (and visually distorted) word. ReCAPTCHA uses a similar system, but adds a second word, one which was not conclusively rec-ognised by the OCR (optical character recognition) software used to 
digitise books for the Internet Archive. When three human users have 
identified a word in the same way, the word is officially ‘recognised’ and inserted in the text.
265
So the Internet Archive relies not only on public and private fund-
ing, but also on the support of individual or collective initiatives. Significantly, in May 2007 the U.S. State of California officially rec-
ognised the Internet Archive as a library, eligible for federal and state 
funding: for the first time, a library has been defined not as a physical building serving a geographically defined public, but as an abstracted digital space serving a huge worldwide community.
266
But besides ‘merely’ digitising every book ever published, the 
Internet Archive also aims (in contrast with Google) to create a physical archive for the long-term preservation of the original printed 
books, the “authentic and original version that can be used as a refer-
ence in the future.”
267 The plan and strategy, published in great detail 
online, is to keep one copy of every book and media acquired, until eventually the archive includes a physical and digital version of every 
work ever published. The books are to be catalogued and boxed, and 
stored in shipping containers modified to maintain controlled ideal environments of 10-15 degrees Celsius and 30% relative humidity.
268
Internet Archive 
containers designed to preserve physical books after they have been digitised, 2011
123The Internet Archive has also set up another project called The 
Open Library, which aims to create an online database of every book 
ever published (featuring bibliographic details, summaries and tables 
of contents, all entered by users) – something of an open-source ver-
sion of WorldCat, the worldwide database integrating the catalogues of more than ten thousand libraries, totalling 150 million records. The final piece of the Internet Archive puzzle is the Open Content Alliance, a collaborative effort of public institutions and corporations whose stated goal is to “build a permanent archive of multilingual digitized 
text and multimedia material” .
The Internet Archive’s founder Brewster Kahle describes his vision 
as follows:
“Most societies place importance on preserving artifacts of their 
culture and heritage. Without such artifacts, civilization has no memory and no mechanism to learn from its successes and failures. 
Our culture now produces more and more artifacts in digital form. 
The Archive’s mission is to help preserve those artifacts and create an Internet library for researchers, historians, and scholars.”
On a smaller and more focused scale, various independent efforts 
appear to be following a similar approach. For example, the library 
of the University of Pennsylvania (sponsored by Kirtas Technologies, 
a scanning and digitisation business), is scanning its 200,000 public-
domain titles, and selling copies through a print-on-demand service. The Emory University is also digitising and uploading public-domain titles (beginning with those selected by its librarians), so that schol-ars can access the texts online for free – or order a print-on-demand edition, the proceedings of which are used to cover the costs of the 
digitising programme.
269 Furthermore, there are several independent 
and peer-to-peer efforts designed to collectively share high-quality 
scans of books, such as the popular Gigapedia.com (recently renamed 
Library.nu) which hosts some 420,000 books in searchable and freely 
downloadable form.270 And even the Holy Grail of theoretical and phil-
osophical texts – the galaxy of academic papers and books produced since the 19th century – is being digitised in an apparently collective 
process and posted on the subversive website AAAAARG.ORG.
271 On 
the other end of the spectrum, we find digital archives being sold as a 
‘product’ , such as the The Playboy Cover to Cover Hard Drive which 
collects all 650 issues of Playboy magazine up until 2010: 56 years, 
100,000 pages, on a single custom-designed hard disk, for $299.95.272
All these initiatives produce readable scanned images of book or 
124magazine pages, as well as searchable OCR-generated text, both of 
which can be accessed through formats such as PDF as well as online viewing. But the question remains: does any of this really qualify as 
‘archiving’? In purely technical terms it probably does. On the other 
hand, we must also take into account the intrinsically unsteady nature of digital data: there is still no long-term (or even medium-term) pres-ervation technology for digital data that guarantees data integrity for even as little as 50 years in ideal conditions. And conditions are often far from ideal; data can easily become corrupted for any of a number of 
reasons. The media itself might be damaged (de-magnetised, de-lay-
ered, scratched, broken, etc) or exposed to environmental factors (sun, heat, electromagnetic interference, humidity, bacteria, smoke, etc); or the hardware or software required to read, decode, or decompress the data may no longer be available for whatever reason. Likewise, the data may become inaccessible (though not actually lost) if some essential 
network node is ‘down’ , or if any of the network’s various technologies 
is malfunctioning and no longer being maintained.
Meanwhile, the durable printed copies can still be found in librar-
ies worldwide, where nothing short of some catastrophic physical ac-cident can ‘delete’ them. The oldest surviving printed copy of a book (the Diamond Sutra) was block-printed more than 1,100 years ago, 
in 868 CE; the earliest known preserved writings, on clay tablets, are several thousand years old. One rare case of a new medium developed specifically for extremely long-term data storage is the Rosetta Disk:
“Inspired by the historic Rosetta Stone, the Rosetta Disk is in-
tended to be ‘a durable archive of human languages’ (…) Made of nickel alloy (with a 2,000 year life expectancy), the physical Disk is 
three inches across, and micro-etched with over 13,000 pages of 
language documentation, covering over 1,500 languages.”
273
On the other hand, the collective memory of contemporary soci-
ety is extremely vulnerable, preserved on magnetic hard disks with 
The Playboy Cover 
to Cover Hard Drive which collects all 650 issues of Playboy Magazine, 100,000 pages, on a single custom-designed hard disk, 2010
125ever-increasing storage densities 
(now over 200 gigabits per square inch). The only reasonably effec-
tive (short-term) strategy is to keep 
multiple backup copies in different physical locations – something only large corporations such as Google can afford to do on an industrial scale.
274 And although a digital copy 
can be deleted within a second, multiplying access to scanned docu-
ments by spreading copies (stored 
on different computers and at dif-ferent locations) can possibly help to preserve them in our collective memory. Seen from the perspective of such (unfortunately very realis-tic) doomsday scenarios, the digitising of printed sources should not be considered as ‘archiving’ in any real sense, but merely as a method of 
‘accessing’ the content (‘access’ is in itself a superlative buzzword, and 
of course the sheer thrill of being able to remotely access important printed content is certainly a major incentive for these huge ongoing ‘archiving’ efforts).
All good intentions aside though, we would do well to remember the 
vision expressed by the famous Argentine author and librarian Jorge 
Luis Borges, an undisputed literary master, in his timeless short story 
The Library of Babel.
275 This fictitious library is in fact a complete (and 
inhabited) universe: a seemingly endless grid of interlocking hexagonal rooms all filled with bookshelves. The narrator describes how “like 
all men of the Library, I have travelled in my youth; I have wandered 
in search of a book, perhaps the catalogue of catalogues.” This library universe described by Borges illustrates the utopia of a finite index of the whole of human knowledge; as a compass, or a directory, of everything ever written and published. It also reminds us of the spiral-ling vastness of language in all its infinite variations. The utopia of a 
library of libraries is, in fact, disturbingly similar to the utopian vision 
propagated by the previously mentioned ‘online giants’ . Is it feasible (or even desirable) to definitively organise the whole of human knowl-edge (in its most traditional and extensive form: the printed word) in an ordered, searchable and indexable form? In Borges’ short story, this vision turns out to be unmanageable, requiring an effort that stretches 
out into infinity: indeed, a library of Babel. Since it carries every single 
conceivable book (given a finite amount of letters, the number of books of finite length is not infinite), the library theoretically contains the 
Rosetta Disk micro-etched with over 13,000 pages of 
language documentation, 2009
126solution to every imaginable problem – the only catch is that there’s 
no way to find it, making the whole library in fact useless: “the certi-tude that some shelf in some hexagon held precious books and that 
these precious books were inaccessible, seemed almost intolerable.”
276 
Perhaps this a frustration that we in our ‘age of information’ can some-
how identify with.
5.2  preserving independent magazines, 
 a controversial struggle.
The desire to resurrect printed texts that have been lost or forgotten is 
as old as printing technology itself. As Marshall McLuhan once noted:
“Indeed the first two centuries of printing from movable types 
were motivated much more by the desire to see ancient and medi-eval books than by the need to read and write new ones. Until 1700 
much more than 50 per cent of all printed books were ancient or 
medieval.”
277
Paper has always been perceived as a stable extension of human 
memory, ‘platform-independent’ though physically limited. Following 
the major efforts by libraries to preserve books and magazines using 
microfilm technology (beginning in the mid-20th century), today’s 
countless (personal) initiatives for preserving out-of-print or otherwise lost books and magazines make use of home scanners, OCR software and the PDF standard. The resurrection of forgotten or hard-to-find materials from the past stems from a widespread need to reconstruct, to reassemble, even to somehow re-enact the original publishing ges-
ture; a need which obviously goes much deeper than the mere thrill 
of exploiting new technological possibilities. Nevertheless, the tools and methods used in this process of resurrection are in themselves significant.
One of the most celebrated underground press ‘resurrections’ was 
that of Radical Software. All eleven issues of this magazine (originally 
printed in the 1970s) were scanned, OCR-converted and reassembled 
in PDF format, and made available online for free; a significant re-source for researchers and scholars of media culture worldwide. The whole process was funded by the Langlois Foundation – which focused its efforts on this one particular magazine, as it was considered to be probably the first media art magazine ever published. Several other 
magazines, particularly older ones, have been the subject of similar on-
line ‘resurrections’ . For example, all issues of L=A=N=G=U=A=G=E, 
127one of the most important magazines for experimental poetry, pub-
lished in the U.S. in the 1970s, are now available online in the form of scanned images and PDF files (neither of which are searchable as 
text).
278
A different approach was chosen for Photostatic Retrograde, a maga-
zine published from 1983 to 1998 which focused on photocopying 
(xerography) as the source of a particular visual language. Every single 
issue, starting with the ones most recently published, was converted 
to a (searchable) PDF file and made available online for free.279 When 
the original lay-out (whether in the form of digital files or analogue 
materials) was no longer available, it was reconstructed from scratch. 
In this case, the act of archiving and preservation required a complete 
re-creation of the original printing plates (this time in a virtual, digital form) – resulting in a copy which was, paradoxically, ‘better’ than (or at least technically superior to) the original.
Traditional archiving can be defined as the preservation for histori-
cal memory of original materials, in a condition that is as historically 
accurate as possible. And so Jeff Rothenberg, digital data preservation 
expert for Rand Corporation, may well be right when he predicts that books in the future will no longer be considered as we know them to-day, but rather as ‘art objects’ .
280 Small publishers tend to regard the 
Web as a sort of global bookshop where they (often desperately) hope to attract customers. But these publishers’ greatest asset is often their 
own history: their best and most successful books. Arguably their time 
and efforts would be better spent, not on producing unfocused blogs or unused internet forums, but on making their past treasures avail-able and searchable online (or, at very least, a comprehensive refer-ence to these old and out-of-print treasures: bibliographic references, 
Left
Cover of Radical Software, Volume I, Number 5, Spring 1972
Right
Cover of Photostatic Retrograde, issue #1, August 1983

128cover images, tables of contents and summaries, etc). Besides increas-
ing their own visibility (and thus attracting customers), such an archiv-ing effort would also allow these publishers to support and preserve 
their own cultural context – the ‘scene’ which they previously played 
such an important role in describing and defining.
5.3  distributed archives, 
 the peer-to-peer archive model.
Often the only places where out-of-print or small-press books and 
magazines can still be found, are in private collections: little cornu-copias of specialised knowledge, and clearly an important part of the history of their various cultural environments. Yet such collections are mostly unavailable online, simply because there is still no suitable platform to facilitate the necessary ‘archiving’ (or more accurately, ‘ac-
cessing’) process.
Within any literary, artistic or musical movement or ‘subculture’ , 
there are usually a small number of readily identifiable individuals 
(journalists, historians, collectors, obsessive fans) or small institu-tions who have spent years assembling impressive collections, which subsequently just sit there collecting dust somewhere in a room (or a 
few rooms). Though the precious heritage is (individually) preserved, 
it remains invisible to the rest of the scene, and of course the rest of the world. But such content could also be shared, making it a publically available common resource, which in turn could significantly increase a publisher’s online presence, not to mention its place in history. So 
besides preserving the material in the physical sense, collectors can 
also help increase its public presence, by sharing online as much of its content as technically and legally possible.
Using open-source and do-it-yourself (DIY) book scanning tech-
nology, developed in recent years by a small, scattered community of tinkering inventors and open-source programmers,
281 it is now rela-
tively easy to quickly scan entire books, extract (OCR) their text, and make it available online (Google of course uses industrial technology 
for its Google Books programme). It is interesting to note that this 
community consistently applies an open-source methodology to the entire technical process – sharing not only the software, but also detailed hardware building instructions as well as the overall meth-odology. This represents a technological tipping point, since these machines, once built and distributed, will substantially speed up the 
process of digitising entire series of books or complete collections of 
independent magazines.
129The resulting repositories and databases, covering a wide variety of 
topics, could be made collectively searchable using simple (and free) 
software, which periodically surveys and indexes the content of each 
archive and makes it easily accessible through a dedicated search en-
gine. The result: independent ‘islands’ of archived culture, gradually emerging and growing all across the Internet – all created by individu-als sharing a passion, wishing to share information, and contributing to making accessible important content, currently unavailable on the Web. In other words, a collective memory, in much the same way as 
peer-to-peer networks have proven to be: combining the stability of 
our ‘static’ printed culture with the ephemeral (and thus dynamic) properties of digitisation.
Where institutions are characterised by a top-down approach 
(which usually makes their various databases incompatible, and thus difficult to integrate), the distributed archive follows a bottom-up 
model. Casting aside the museum and its monument-oriented outlook, 
a large number of culturally proactive individuals could all assume responsibility for their ‘own’ bit of culture, before eventually passing it on to another concerned party. Such an undertaking requires per-manent ‘seeders’ (to return to the peer-to-peer parallel), individuals responsible for keeping the content available at all times. ‘Seeding’ , in 
peer-to-peer terminology, means that in order to ‘own’ something, one 
has to share it (and whether the actual content itself is made available, or merely a reference to it, the mechanism remains much the same).
This of course is something entirely different from the whole ‘nos-
talgia’ industry. Building such archives of references, and digitising 
One of the many 
 different models of the 
open-source project DIY Book Scanner, 2010 
130small and independent publications (while respecting the wishes of the 
original publishers and authors) would make it possible to reconnect fragments that were lost over time – and would allow precious texts, 
lent and never returned, to resurface. And so ‘distributed archives’ , 
maintained through a peer-to-peer model, would constitute a commu-nity-based, free and shared model of preserving culture, as opposed to both the centralised bureaucratic public institution on one hand, and the equally centralised, quick and efficient commercial corporation on the other.
5.3.1. The need for a ‘flowable’ archive form
Wikipedia is now clearly the largest single global effort for sharing 
knowledge – but from a general, non-specialist, perspective, leaving plenty of gaps to be filled by countless specialised, independent (but 
networked) online archives of previously printed content. Meanwhile, 
access to such archives is increasingly becoming the norm among scholars, who need to efficiently and comprehensively search through huge quantities of information. Libraries increasingly prefer online magazine subscriptions to printed ones – simply because they’re run-ning out of space to store all the back issues. And the new online servic-
es that sell digital subscriptions to printed publications, often demand 
from publishers at least a minimum online back catalogue archive, in order to establish the publisher’s online presence (as well as their own).
Online archiving has also had a major impact on the online presence 
of various newspapers – such as the New York Times, which famously 
archived every single one of its 13 million published articles, mak -
ing them all available online for free (in plain text format), or for a fee 
(including photos, graphs, etc).
282 Here again, the keyword is access: 
the availability of a large amount of sources and data offers a broader perspective on any given phenomenon.
The online presence of small publishers is still largely inadequate, 
and does not at all present a clear picture of either their historical production, or the cultural context they are currently a part of. This is because such publishers have generally regarded the Web as merely a sales tool, rather than a platform which might enable them to expand the cultural presence they already enjoy in the real ‘offline’ world. 
What is needed here is a paradigm shift: independent publishers 
should consider the Web not merely in terms of sales, but also in terms of archive-building, exposure and sharing. In this context, personal and independent online archives must be considered as independent virtual ‘servers’ , potentially interconnected and collectively searchable. 
131The presence of such archives could slightly tip the balance between 
net and paper in an online economy, with a positive effect on the vis-ibility and availability of printed history.
So what exactly is the value of digital archiving, other than some ex-
panded version (again, mainly in terms of access) of ‘old-fashioned’ mi-crofilm archiving? In the case of digitally generated content, it means that a reproduction can actually be identical to its ‘original’ . Geoffrey Batchen wrote in his 2006 essay The Art of Archiving:
“The archive is no longer a matter of discrete objects (files, books, 
art works, etc.) stored and retrieved in specific places (libraries, museums, etc.). Now the archive is also a continuous stream of 
data, without geography or container, continuously transmitted 
and therefore without temporal restriction (always available in the here and now).”
283
After more than fifteen years of using the Web, we have grown ac-
customed to typing in search terms and almost instantly having the 
resulting texts delivered to our screen – to the point where such in-
stant accessibility has become a prerequisite for considering any text 
as a quotable source, or as usable ‘content’ . But ‘searchability’ , despite all its obvious benefits, is no replacement for our own photographic memory, and our innate human ability for making connections be-tween various sources. A typical bibliography at the end of a book is in fact much more sophisticated than even the most ingenious ‘advanced 
search’ , since it is the result of a thoughtful and time-consuming effort 
of searching and making connections – a process which is fundamen-tally different from the mere linking of items through search terms or similar queries by other users, which relies only on direct, explicit links. But our brain is of course much more subtle and sophisticated than that; the associations (or ‘links’) it is able to make are based on the 
abstraction of experience, sometimes even on sheer instinct. And such 
processes are notoriously difficult to codify in universal algorithms. As Marshall McLuhan stated in Understanding Media: “Plainly, to store is 
to expedite, since what is stored is also more accessible than what has to be gathered.”
284
5.4  the art of the archive: 
 hard-copying the digital database.
Conceptually, an archive can be considered as a substantial quantity of raw material (data) to which further transformations may be applied. 
132Art, and more specifically media art, often deals with archives and 
their intriguing content (data which is connected yet heterogeneous) – still, the attitude of artists, when referring to paper archives, seems 
to be to approach them from a retrospective point of view. An artist 
referring to an archive will usually depict its traditional, physical form, which is undoubtedly still the one we’re most familiar with, even after a few decades of computers and databases.
For example, Cody Trepte’s installation 1 Year of Archived Email
285 
consists of stacks of a few thousand punched cards (the oldest com-puter storage medium), on which an entire year of personal e-mail has 
been archived. The artist chose here a hybrid representation: the e-
mail messages are indeed ‘archived’ (stored on punched cards, in much 
the same way as if they had been recorded on a modern magnetic or 
optical computer storage medium such as floppy or hard disk, CD or DVD). But they are also in a certain sense ‘printed’ , since they are vis-ibly reproduced on paper (though the cards are not in any normal sense readable by humans; the digital encoding is designed to be deciphered by a machine). The artist in his statement tells us how computers “have 
become machines for remembering”; it is also interesting to note that 
punched cards are actually the most durable form of computer stor-age. The installation also contains some manually written (and almost equally cryptic) indexes: for example, the exact date and time each e-mail message was sent or received, which uniquely identifies each mes-
sage, while the content of the messages themselves remains unreadable 
– in plain view, yet inaccessible. As with other conceptually similar artworks, we are shown here what happens when the sheer amount of data involved – which was made invisible inside the computer’s hard disk – suddenly reveals its full spatial dimension.
A similar approach was chosen by Tim Schwartz for his installation 
Card Catalog:
286 a single drawer, more than 2 metres long, filled with 
index cards cataloguing all of the 7,390 songs on the artist’s iPod, one card for each song. In this case the data is human-readable, though it is 
Left
Cody Trepte, 1 Year of Archived Email, 2005
Right
Tim Schwartz, Card Catalog, 2008
133not a representation of the actual content (there are no scores or other 
musical data) but merely of its complete index. Here too, the author reflects on the notion of space (both real and virtual): the paper cata-
logue is incomparably larger than the actual musical content of the tiny 
MP3 player. Significantly, the installation was constructed as a classic wooden 19th century-style filing card cabinet with a brass knob, re-minding us that the paper catalogues we have been using for centuries in old libraries can still serve to represent knowledge in a universally recognisable format – while on the other hand, the actual workings of 
something like a hard disk are still completely invisible and arcane to 
most of us. This aspect was further emphasised by ordering the cards chronologically, according to the history of the artist’s listening selec-tions, thus creating an even closer correspondence between the invis-ible data and its paper index.
This physical imbalance between digital content and its physical 
(printed) representation is also a theme of two other artworks: Rob Matthews’ Wikipedia,
287 a 5,000-page book collecting articles featured 
on Wikipedia, and Mike Bouchet’s Almost Every City in the World,288 
a 30,000-page “list of almost every city, town, village, or named liv-
ing location in the world” . In the first case, the question we are invited 
to reflect upon is mostly one of scale: the content which was invisibly registered on magnetic memory becomes excessively abundant once it 
Clockwise starting left
Rob Matthews, 
Wikipedia, 2009
Mike Bouchet, Almost 
Every City in the World, 2005
A detail of the Amazon 
Noir installation, 2008
134is rendered physically. In the second case, we are confronted with the 
problem of completeness within a single standard format (the book). Both works in their own way deal with the notion of printing out a da-
tabase as a means of somehow ‘archiving’ it.
Another artwork about books in their archived form is Amazon 
Noir, which I developed in collaboration with the Italian artist Paolo 
Cirio and the Austrian artist couple Ubermorgen. Our plan was to ex-plore the boundaries of copyrighting text, and to examine the intrinsic technological paradox of protecting an electronic text from unauthor-
ised copying. As mentioned earlier, Amazon features a powerful and 
attractive marketing tool called ‘Search Inside the Book’ which allows potential customers to search the entire text of a book; Amazon Noir merely exploited this mechanism by stretching it to its own logical conclusion. Paolo Cirio designed software to obtain the entire text and then automatically save it as a PDF file – once we had established the 
first sentence of the text, the software then used the last words of this 
sentence as a search term for retrieving the first words of the next sen-tence. By reiterating this process (a total of 2,000 to 3,000 queries for an average book) and automatically reconstructing the fragments, the software ended up collecting the entire text.
In order to better visualise the process, we created an installation: 
two overhead projectors displaying the project’s logo and a diagram of the internal workings of our software, and a medical incubator con-taining one of the ‘stolen’ (and digitally reprinted) books. The book we chose to ‘steal’ was (of course) Steal This Book, the 1970s countercul-ture classic by the American activist Abbie Hoffman. In a sense, we 
literally ‘re-incarnated’ the book in a new, mutated physical form. But 
we also put up a warning sign near the incubator:
“The book inside the incubator is the physical embodiment of 
a complex Amazon.com hacking action. It has been obtained exploiting the Amazon ‘Search Inside The Book’ tool. Take care 
because it’s an illegitimate and premature son born from the rela-
tionship between Amazon and Copyright. It’s illegitimate because it’s an unauthorized print of a copyright-protected book. And it’s premature because the gestation of this relationship’s outcome is 
far from being mature.”
Our installation demonstrated a networked and digital process – 
but without actually displaying any digital technology. As for the book 
itself, it was effectively metamorphosed twice: the first time when 
Amazon disembodied (digitised) the book in order to make it available 
135(in fragments) on its own servers; and the second time when we stole 
this digitised version and re-incarnated the book, in a form as close as possible to the original. In fact, Amazon has similarly disembodied 
a substantial amount of the books it sells, resulting in a very sizeable 
database indeed. And in a way, it is clearly understood that the entire content is in fact freely available, just a few mysterious mouse-clicks away. So Amazon is hosting a cornucopia of texts, an astonishing amount of knowledge, a compelling body of culture – all of it infinitely put on hold for marketing reasons.
We asked ourselves: what’s the difference between digitally scan-
ning the text of a book we already own, and obtaining it through Amazon Noir? In strictly conceptual terms, there is no difference at all, other then the amount of time we spent on the project. We wished to set up our own Amazon, definitively circumventing the confusion of endless purchase-inducing stimuli. So we stole the hidden and dis-
jointed connections between the sentences of a text, to reveal them for 
our own amusement and edification; we stole the digital implemen-tation of synaptic connections between memories (both human and electronic) created by a giant online retailer in order to amuse and se-duce us into compulsive consumption; we were thieves of memory (in a McLuhanian sense), stealing for the right to remember, the right to 
independently and freely construct our own physical memory.
5.5  scrapbooks, grassroots archiving
 as a new methodology.
Scrapbooking is a method of preserving personal history by collecting 
printed clippings, photos, cherished memorabilia and other artefacts in blank books or notebooks. Though its exact origins are uncertain, scrapbooking is probably as old as print itself. The earliest references to the phenomenon are from 15th-century England, where ‘com-monplace books’ were a popular way of compiling information such 
as recipes, letters, poems, etc. Then in the 19th century (particularly 
in the U.S.) a different kind of scrapbook made its appearance, owing to the novelty of newspapers and magazines which were suddenly very widespread and much cheaper than books. The timeless problem of stacks of paper taking up precious space could be deftly solved by clip-ping out what was worth keeping, and compiling personal selections 
of what today might be referred to as ‘press reviews’ , to be saved and 
sometimes even re-circulated – “occasionally privately printed and circulated among friends” , as Ellen Gruber Garvey noted in her essay Scissoring and Scrapbooks.
289
136Although the author Mark Twain marketed his patented pre-glued 
scrapbooks, most scrapbook practitioners would use old or otherwise 
uninteresting books (such as free annual reports) as the physical basis 
for their collections of clippings.290 According to Garvey, scrapbooks 
stem from the “desire to mark the path of one’s own reading” . The 
limited space of the scrapbook allows only a finite (and thus necessar-
ily rigorous) selection from many available sources, resulting in a new 
composition: a repository of personally relevant content.
We could also consider this phenomenon as an early (and analogue) 
version of the current trend of ‘personal authoring’ made possible by the Internet and its stockpile of free authoring tools for web pages, blogs, social networks, etc. For most of the 20th century (with the 
notable exception of its last few years, when the digital era began) 
scrapbooks were used by fans to collect and preserve personal archives of clippings and photos of their favourite movie stars and pop idols: they were, in other words, repositories for the personal conservation of ‘scraps’ of memory. All of this was done in a state of blissful igno-rance of the constraints of copyright – freely re-assembling clippings 
from a variety of sources and recombining them into new collections. 
(Incidentally, this phenomenon should not be confused with the some-what related concept of diaries, which usually deal with strictly per-sonal themes and sources rather than outside ones.)
To quote once again Ellen Gruber Garvey: “all media, old or new, 
are experienced as renewable resources” .
291 And so, given a software 
tool that would enable us to cut out ‘clippings’ from electronic media 
A 19th-century 
scrapbook
137and present them in a somehow ‘traditional’ way (clipping out exactly 
what we need without losing any of its technical or layout attributes), we would be able to filter the overwhelming quantities of information 
in an established manner and compile the result into (for example) 
PDF files. This would be fundamentally different from a collection of web bookmarks, which are in a sense much like physical bookmarks: they merely refer to the content, except (and this is a fundamental dif-ference) that web bookmarks can be ‘disconnected’ and lost at any mo-ment if the reference location happens to change or disappear. Digital 
scrapbooks, on the other hand, would enable users to compile entire 
books from clippings (by the way, there is software such as Evernote which allows the user to make ‘web clippings’ , but only in a propri-etary format which can’t be shared, exported or incorporated in other publications).
And using print-on-demand technology, one could (again) pro-
duce real, physical scrapbooks, which would also be more or less in-stantly shareable. Such personal archives, the result of the individual sampling of content, could be connected to form a global archive of digital sources, collectively filtered by human passions and interests – a sort of cut-and-paste ‘mashup’ bootleg remixes. Imagine a scrap-book, filled with all the sources (‘clippings’) used in writing a book 
such as the one you’re reading now, and presented independently of 
the medium in which they were originally published. Once the thorny issue of copyrights had somehow been settled (or circumvented, or blissfully ignored), such a scrapbook could then become the ideal starting point for anyone else wishing to continue and expand upon 
the original research.
138chapter 6
The network: 
transforming culture, 
transforming publishing.
A printed work of non-fiction, especially one which is part of a series 
(as are newspapers and magazines, as well as many books), is usually not meant to be an omni-comprehensive entity; it refers to external 
content, for example through quotes or bibliographical references. It 
can thus be seen as a ‘node’ within a broader network of cultural con-tent; it may be a starting or ending point, though usually it will be one of many intermediary points on a longer path. Such connections have of course always existed; what the hypertext structure (on which most digital media is still based) adds to this, is not so much a new model, 
as rather an exponential increase in scope and speed. Furthermore, 
the network transforms the traditional paradigm of lone publishers (whether mainstream or independent), all locked in competition with one another as they create and distribute their products and try to get them sold. A fundamental re-conception of production and distribu-tion schemes is necessary, in order to solve the dilemma of the publish-
er’s relationship with the digital dimension. And this can best be done 
by adopting a characteristically digital strategy: that of the network.
6.1  the magazine as network node.
The most inspiring success stories of any ‘underground culture’ were 
never the accomplishments of any single prominent person or indi-
vidual magazine, but of several of them together ‘covering’ a new scene and its flourishing culture. On a personal note, I have always consid-ered Neural (the magazine which I have been editing since 1993) to 
be a single node within a larger network of productions, all delivering 
content on the same topic (in this case, digital culture). When I first 
started, I was fascinated by the emerging Internet, with its scattered yet interconnected structure; and I wondered just how this structure may become a model for other cultural efforts. In this early period, dig-ital information and communication networks had just begun shifting towards the kind of real-time interaction which was already the norm 
in ‘real-world’ social structures: the active and reciprocal connection of 
139various nodes collectively spread-
ing information.
I soon realised that even in 
the ‘horizontal’ and egalitarian Internet culture of those early days, some nodes would always be ‘more equal’ than others; a collectively implemented process distinguishes important nodes 
from not-so-important ones, on 
the basis of their reputation. As Mathieu O’Neil pointed out in his book Cyberchiefs, the Internet may well be “a stateless sys-tem” ,
292 yet communities which 
have managed to produce out-standing results need to ensure 
quality control, which can only be done by establishing some form 
of authority. In such contexts, the distribution of authority becomes synonymous with what O’Neil calls “the distribution of charisma”
293 
– stripped (largely through the pioneering efforts of hacker groups) of the rigid hierarchies of more traditional meritocratic systems.
But developing charisma and building up reputation require time 
and effort, and in networked communication systems there is simply no excuse for poor quality; this gradually transforms the way a maga-zine is compiled and distributed. In the case of my own Neural maga-zine, the sheer challenge of putting together a new issue, with the best quality we can manage within the time and budget available, remains 
a powerful motivation for doing so in the first place. News of what is 
or isn’t worth the time and effort (and in many cases, the money) of looking into spreads very fast online, and there are always plenty of alternatives when any given product no longer lives up to past expecta-tions. In other words, the ‘quality ecosystem’ has been profoundly and permanently transformed by the rise of the Internet.
6.1.1  Network means distributing, and distribution substantially 
 benefits from the network.
An important aspect of every publisher’s mission is to spread its 
content. But setting up a distribution infrastructure, outside of the 
usual commercial channels, can be a major challenge. In England in 
the 1830s, the radical press in order to survive systematically evaded 
First issue of Neural magazine, November 1993
140the exorbitant stamp bonds and duties (designed to limit publishing 
to “men of some respectability and property”294), relying instead on 
trusted ‘underground’ printers and running a well-organised inde-pendent distribution network, even establishing a collective fund for 
the families of those imprisoned for selling illegal ‘unstamped’ news-
papers. The authorities responded by arresting unauthorised printers, intercepting paper supplies, and jailing retailers. From 1830 to 1836, a total of 1,130 cases of selling unstamped newspapers were prosecuted in London. In spite of this massive repression, the radical press flour-ished: total readership was estimated to be two million, well above that 
of the ‘respectable’ stamped press. Eventually the liberal Whig Party 
government reformed the policy, on one hand granting authorities even broader repressive powers, on the other hand reducing the stamp duty by 75% in order to make bootlegging less attractive, ultimately leading to increased freedom of press.
295
Similarly well-organised infrastructures were set up by radical trade 
unionists in the West shortly before the Second World War, as well as by underground writers and political dissidents in the U.S.S.R. during 
the 1950s (see chapter 2.3). Such self-organised networks were able 
to grow and function without any access to sophisticated network technology; still, they functioned according to certain essential prin-ciples and structures characteristic of the network, including the ele-ment of reputation-based hierarchy. It is also interesting to note that Dadaist magazines were haphazardly distributed, whereas the Fluxus 
movement used its internal network as an efficient infrastructure for 
distribution.
The small and medium-sized underground media distributors which 
first emerged during the 1970s, gave rise in the 1980s and 1990s to a galaxy of mail-order initiatives capable of bringing their published con-tent to a vast public, which lived mostly on the margins of mainstream 
society and could thus best be reached using the postal system (another 
functioning network). This concept in turn would prove fundamental to establishing the Mail Art movement, which was able to set up a global distribution system using nothing but active participants (net-work nodes) and the pre-existing postal system. Finally, heliographed fanzines such as the Italian publication Insekten Sekte were distributed 
using an unusual ‘copyleft’ model: after the initial print run, the origi-
nal plates were passed on to other individuals who could print as many copies as they wished (and even sell them) without any obligation to the original publishers.
296
In all of the above cases, the key concept of the network proved to 
be a crucial distribution practice, which made it possible to navigate 
141(and survive) the perilous seas of the marketplace through the devel-
opment of alternative strategies. And if the Internet has taught us anything at all, it’s that there is no fixed limit to the combined power of 
many single (yet mutually supportive) nodes.
6.1.2  The network as infrastructure: 
 agencies, syndicating, and directories.
The Associated Press was founded in 1846, when a group of news-
papers decided to invest jointly in a new medium (the telegraph) in 
order to speed up the collection and distribution of information.
297 
The Underground Press Syndicate (see chapter 2.5) was conceived in a similar fashion, but adding to this the novel idea of free syndication 
of the content of some 60 magazines; this network model proved to 
be a success, because each node (magazine) contributed to spreading news otherwise censored or ignored by the mainstream media. In this case, every single node had the same rights and duties as any other; this absence of pre-constituted hierarchy in turn attracted more nodes, all of which were then better positioned to accomplish their mission of 
radical communication. A similar role was fulfilled by the Liberation 
News Service (see chapter 2.5). Being part of such a network gave each member access to the circulation and readership of every other mem-ber, thus multiplying the scale on which any given publication was able to distribute its information.
Another similar model of mutual support consists of collectively 
compiling lists of resources and distributing them within a specific community. The Punk scene spawned at least two excellent examples of such collections of resources, which inspired countless individuals and organisations. The first of these was arguably influenced by the earlier Whole Earth Catalog (featuring information on little-known yet 
essential resources necessary for living outside of mainstream society): 
in 1992, the Anarcho-Punk collective Profane Existence and the Punk 
zine Maximumrocknroll together published the first edition of Book 
Your Own Fuckin’ Life, a directory of bands, distributors, venues and private houses where “touring bands or travelling punks could sleep and sometimes eat for free” ,
298 enabling an entire generation of Punk 
bands to travel, find their way in the world, and meet like-minded individuals.
In the same period, the ‘riot grrrl’ movement was emerging in 
the U.S. with popular bands such as Bikini Kill encouraging young women to form their own band, share skills and publish zines. The resulting wave of personal and often explicitly feminist zines was 
142readily embraced by the ongoing Punk movement, with its tradition 
of political engagement. Within a few years the Grrrl Zine Network299 
managed to compile a resource-rich list of almost 1,000 zines and dis-tributors from thirty countries, fostering contact between like-minded 
individuals and groups. In addition to this painstaking compiling of 
resources, the Grrrl Zine Network also facilitated zine workshops in community venues and non-profit organisations, aiming to empower teenage girls through the self-production of zines and artists’ books. The network enabled a scattered scene of small, loosely organised publishing efforts to share their resources and methods, which espe-
cially for small players would make a crucial difference. Enjoying such 
mutual support helped all members develop their own unique qualities while remaining aware of the efforts of their peers.
6.1.3  The network as a means of political support and sustainable 
 business: the Punti Rossi (‘Red Points’) project.
In the 1970s in Italy, a diverse and dynamic left-wing political scene 
brought about a period of intensive underground publishing activity (see chapter 2.6), as well as a new realisation among small publishers of politically-oriented material of the need to work together, in order to increase readership opportunities and to gain individual status through 
exposure to the wider audience of a network. Early efforts such as 
the Lega degli editori democratici (‘League of Democratic Publishers’) 
and the Editoria Militante (‘Militant Publishing’) groups quickly col-lapsed, all good intentions notwithstanding. The turbulent year 1977, when most of the country’s universities were taken over by massive 
student sit-ins, saw a peak of publishing activity (including countless 
short-lived periodicals) as well as new collaborative efforts between independent publishers (see also chapter 2.6).
Bookshops, which often functioned as meeting points for a lively 
community, began to envision a different role for themselves, acting also as ad-hoc publishers or distributors; and from all these develop-
ments a new, fluid cooperative structure began to emerge. A few dozen 
bookshops, united in the Punti Rossi (‘Red Points’) organisation,
300 
agreed to set up collective distribution and storage facilities, and to ex-change (rather than buy and sell) publications amongst each other, thus 
avoiding the need to invest in costly opening inventories, while also 
ensuring a better, more focused and more widespread distribution. Each month, revenues after sales were centrally calculated, then lo-cally distributed among publishers using the aforementioned collective facilities. This had the additional benefit of freeing publishers from the 
143typical pressures by distributors (who demanded continuity of produc-
tion, a minimum amount of titles, etc). Participating bookshops were able to carry a wide assortment of titles, increasing their reputation as 
valuable points of reference and fulfilling an important social function 
within their respective local communities. The organisation lasted for four years, holding well-attended annual national conventions.
6.2  collaboration is better than competition: 
 the mag.net network.
Any network relies on the collective strength of its nodes; each single 
node, though potentially weak when isolated, is important (even vital) for the entire network – in other words, there’s safety in numbers. And the entire network is much stronger than the sum of its single nodes. A network is also different from an association or a society; it implies that 
the exchange between nodes should be mutually beneficial.
Returning to my own experience with the magazine Neural, it has 
always been my conviction that no single magazine (especially an in-
dependent one) could exhaustively cover the subject of digital culture. A network of magazines, on the other hand, would allow for a richer and more interesting debate, while also helping to avoid the proletar-
ian infighting sadly typical of so many subcultures. And so, when I was 
invited to attend an international meeting of independent publishers exploring digital culture through the printed medium, I enthusiasti-cally accepted. In May 2002, in Seville (Spain), we founded, after a few days of discussions, the ‘Mag.net - Electronic Cultural Publishers’ 
network.
301 Its founding members were Simon Worthington (Mute, 
London); Mercedes Bunz and Sascha Kösch (both De:Bug, Berlin); 
Fran Ilich (Undo, Mexico); Alessandro Ludovico (Neural, Bari, Italy); 
Georg Schöllhammer (Springerin, Vienna); Ieva Auzina (RIXC and 
The three 
Mag.net readers (‘experiences in electronic cultural publishing’), 2005, 2007, 2008
144Acoustic Space, Riga); Slavo Krekovic (3/4 Revue, Bratislava); Kristian 
Lukic (KUDA Media Center, Novi Sad); Vladan Sir (Umelec, Prague); 
Joanne Richardson (Subsol and Balkon, Romania); Carme Ortiz and 
Mar Villaespesa (Think Publishing, Spain); Miren Eraso (Zehar, San 
Sebastian, and Think Publishing); Claudia Castelo (Flirt, Lisbon); Malcolm Dickson (Streetlevel and Variant, Glasgow, U.K.); Pedro Jimenez (Cafeína, Seville); Julian Ruesga (Parabólica, Seville).
302
In our first year, after setting up a mailing list and initiating a num-
ber of internal discussions, we quickly learned an essential lesson, which allowed us to avert an early failure: not everything should be 
decided collectively. Members of a network can become over-critical 
of each other, while themselves failing to assume the responsibility of accomplishing the necessary tasks. And so we failed in several areas. We did not succeed in implementing a functioning ‘collective subscrip-tion’ (which in an experimental version had already attracted new cus-tomers) due to differences in publication frequencies and a general lack 
of coordination. We missed important funding application deadlines. 
We never even got started on the collective online shop, a planned software portal for displaying and selling all our products, including software for automatically administering sales revenues (while leaving it to each member to dispatch their respective orders).
But once we dropped the ‘everything should be done collectively’ 
approach, things started to work out. We established and maintained informal rules regarding the syndication of content, and the commis-sioning of content from each other. But perhaps our greatest success was in the sharing of knowledge: we met in person several times, and took turns giving workshops from which everyone learned, on topics such as Internet retail payment, print on demand, library subscrip-
tions, etc. We were able to share our resources: sales outlets, distribu-
tors, printing and print-on-demand facilities, organisational practices and successful strategies (such as how to attract new subscribers).
Last but not least, a number of us, after meeting up for this spe-
cific purpose, were able to publish three readers on the relationship 
between offline and online publishing. There is still much to be done: 
for example, setting up a structure for collectively selling advertising space in all publications at once, which would allow us all to reap the benefits of our total readership figures (something which has already been done on the Web, for example by Culture Pundits and Federated Media). Hopefully someone will assume the task of doing this at some 
point in the future.
1456.3  the network as a large-scale experiment: 
 the documenta 12 magazines project.
Perhaps inspired by the Mag.net blueprint, one of its members, 
Georg Schöllhammer (curator and founder of Springerin magazine) in 2005 conceived (and was appointed curator of ) the Documenta 12 Magazines project, which brought together independent art magazines 
from around the world during the 12th edition of the vast Documenta art exhibition and programme.
303 His original project was to set up a 
“collective worldwide editorial project” , “publishing and discussing contributions – essays, interviews, photo reportage, features, inter-
ventions from artists and articles of fiction” creating “a network… that 
aims to explore and discuss topics of current interest and relevance (not only) to the Documenta 12 (three main topics): ‘Is modernity our antiquity?’ , ‘What is bare life?’ and ‘What is to be done?’”
In the months preceding the Documenta event, three ‘magazines’ 
were to be published, featuring content selected and discussed by 
Top
View of the Documenta 12 Magazines project exhibition, Kassel, Germany, 2007
Bottom
A screenshot of the col -
laborative open-source editing platform used for the Documenta 12 Magazines project, 2007
146the editors through an online platform. This same platform would 
also be used to preserve all project-related content produced by all participating magazines, and to make this content accessible to the 
public; a sort of ‘journal of journals’ . And as if that weren’t enough, the 
first draft of the project also envisioned how users would be allowed to compile their own ‘magazines’ by selecting content (possibly even available in several languages) and submitting it to a print-on-demand web interface.
The huge project started with a few ‘regional editors’ (closely coor-
dinated by Schöllhammer and each assigned their own vast geographi-cal area) organising trans-regional meetings in Hong Kong, New Delhi, São Paulo and Cairo. These meetings helped increase the visibility of independent art magazines in parts of the world where independent publishers cannot easily meet. Several of them wished to go further: to discuss subjects beyond the scope of Documenta topics, and to 
organise a meeting of all involved parties at some point during the 
Documenta event itself.
Then, apparently, Documenta curators Roger M. Buergel and Ruth 
Noack stepped in and assumed control of the project. The ‘maga-zine’ as originally envisioned was downgraded to three large-format books, featuring content selected by Buergel and Noack themselves, 
instead of by the magazine editors. Furthermore, the online content 
was no longer available to the public (though it remained accessible internally to the editors). The French magazine Multitudes decided to contribute in a different way, hijacking and twisting the three original questions into something arguably more relevant: “Is modernity (y)
our aftermath,” “Is bare life your apocalyptic political dimension,” and 
“What is to be done after the D12 Bildung Programme?”
304) Multitudes 
then set up a website featuring answers to these questions by several well-known artists. Schöllhammer himself stated that whatever the 
outcome, his vision had been “to create a field of open conflict and 
open controversy” .
305 An event such as Documenta, with its week-long 
programmes of conferences and lectures, is of course also an excellent opportunity to meet colleagues who happen to live on the other side 
of the world (even though one ends up meeting only a few colleagues 
at any given event); and many new projects and ideas are the result of such encounters.
Perhaps the last word on the lack of visibility and participation 
of the many publications involved was by Patricia Canetti, editor of Canal Contemporâneo (Brazil). She created a Wikipedia entry on all 
participating magazines, with links to their respective websites, en-
couraging them to edit and add content in order to re-appropriate this 
147promising but unrealised community.306 In the end though, the full po-
tential of this large-scale experiment (a collective, collaborative editing 
process involving possibly dozens of professional editors) was mostly 
squandered. In all fairness, it must also be noted that the tool (still ac-
cessible online) was never used in any way other than that requested by the Documenta organisation; another missed opportunity, in spite of the numerous chances to do so, as well as the obvious creative re-sources of the community of editors. Hopefully, since it was developed as an open-source tool, it will become publicly available sooner or later.
6.4  external support networks, assisting publishing 
 gestures from faraway.
Publishing cannot exist without distribution. And distribution means 
bringing content/objects to remote locations, where they can be no-
ticed and hopefully enjoyed. But actually being able to deliver the 
content/objects to any desired location is still the most important difference between commercial and independent publishing. Various projects have developed different strategies for overcoming this obsta-cle. Mute’s More is More is one of the most promising: “A web-based 
system for distributing independent media for sale at local outlets and 
events. Members can also input contact information about their local 
area; bookstores, meetings, gatherings, and share this with everybody to help build the distribution network further.”
307 Even more impor-
tantly, More is More suggests the shipping of goods could be done 
using a “community courier service” accessing a collective database of 
relevant venues: empty space in the luggage of people going to events 
(such as festivals or conferences) can be used for shipping products free of cost, up to the weight limit set by the airline (usually 20 kg). Thus a voluntary distribution and support infrastructure, a ‘parasitical’ dis-tribution of printed underground cultural objects, can be set up quite simply, by making good use of space systematically wasted during 
travelling.
External support was also es-
sential for the success of Tim 
Devin’s  i left this here for you to 
read project.
308 Every month or 
so he produced a magazine, in no more than 50 copies, which 
was then distributed in 25 cit-
ies across the U.S. and Canada by a network of volunteers. The 
Tim Devin, i left this here for you to read, 2008
148copies were left in public spaces, on a park bench or a bus seat, free for 
whoever happened to find them. The magazine included short articles, images and objects small enough “to be stapled or taped to a page” . 
Here the product seeks and finds the audience, instead of the other 
way round; and this unexpected encounter adds an emotional element which potentially fascinates the reader. Not so much an ‘objet trouvé’ as a message in a bottle, tossed into the waves of the endless means of urban communication, looking for its reader/owner and hoping to be fully enjoyed; a model of random communication and chance encoun-
tering of information, and strikingly similar to that which takes place 
every day all across the Internet.
The artist Sal Randolph pursued a similar strategy for his Free 
Words Project.
309 He printed 3,000 copies of his book Free Words, 
2,500 of which have since been placed on the shelves of bookshops and libraries by a worldwide network of volunteers; the book is clearly 
labelled as ‘free’ . The text of Free Words is a list of 13,000 words; the 
copyright page declares that “No Rights are Reserved” , meaning the text is in the public domain. In much the same spirit, but using the rather different medium of bookmarks (in the traditional, pre-Internet sense of the word), NamelessleTTer
310 is a “collaborative art bookmark -
ing project, where bookmarks are made and stashed inside of library books, books in stores, etc.”
Leaving unexpected goods in shops is a practice known as ‘shop-
dropping’ , and its unwritten etiquette dictates that the goods in question should clearly and explicitly be works of art. In this spirit, the London-based street artist Decapitator (who has gained a certain notoriety with his headless advertisement-parody artworks) ‘dropped’ copies of a modified Rolling Stone magazine (featuring a beheaded 
Shakira) inside the Barnes & Noble bookshop on New York City’s 
Union Square.
311
The original and 
the ‘limited-edition decapitated’ Rolling 
Stone magazine by Decapitator, 2009
149The Canadian Institute for Infinitely Small Things applied an ac-
tivist approach to the same strategy of infiltration with their New 
American Dictionary: Security/Fear Edition, leaving 40 copies of this 
book in libraries and bookshops in the city of Vancouver. The dic-
tionary catalogues 67 American English terms related to fear and security which are either new or have taken on a new meaning in the post-9/11 era (Islamofascist, Freedom Fries, Friendly Fire, Regime Change, Smart Bomb, etc). The book was published through the print-on-demand service Lulu, making it automatically available for sale on 
Amazon.com.
All of these ‘external support networks’ showcase the possibilities of 
collectively infiltrating a distribution system. The effort of one single publisher is amplified, triggering a spectacular domino effect (each 
node of the network is able to find a way around another safeguard of the distribution infrastructure). In effect, such a network acts as a single complex organism. The network thus established is then able to perform a greater symbolic gesture, for which all nodes are equally responsible. It’s a subversive form of distribution, but planned and fo-
cused in such a way as to multiply the effort of every single node.
6.5  the network: the future starts here.
If globalisation has meant the end of feudal markets, the network 
model (and particularly the Internet) has brought something more 
than merely new possibilities for passively receiving new broadcasted 
media, or feeding ‘social network’ platforms that capitalise on the ag-gregation of user’s content; it has provided the infrastructure, as well as the inspiration, for setting up countless independent sub-networks, 
Institute for Infinitely 
Small Things, New 
American Dictionary: Security/Fear Edition, 2007
150which make it possible for us to accomplish several independent tasks 
simultaneously.
Looking back at both ancient and recent history, we can see that the 
network is the most efficient and manageable structure for the support and distribution of publishing efforts. And so in publishing, we should consider not only networks of readers (whether they are discussing books on the extensive readme.cc online forum, or trading them with-out profit at BookMooch.com), but also networks of publishers and other active producers – promoting and distributing the result of their 
efforts using the opportunities only such a network can offer; involving 
readers, not merely as passive consumers, but as partners; and allow-ing digital products to freely circulate, creating a positive feedback loop (or ‘virtuous circle’) which in turn makes possible a new publish-ing experience.
In other words, the particular role of publishers within any cultural 
network (or even the entire network of human culture) is best fulfilled through free and open connection to other ‘nodes’ within that net-work. This is how we can generate meaning, and indeed bring some light, to the global network which we are now all a part of.
151
152
153conclusion
Post-digital print:
a future scenario
There is no one-way street from analogue to digital; rather, there are 
transitions between the two, in both directions. Digital is the paradigm for content and quantity of information; analogue is the paradigm 
for usability and interfacing. The recent history of video and music 
provides a good example, since the use of digital technology for these types of content is much more advanced than it is for publishing. In the case of video, the medium (whether VHS or DVD) is merely a car-rier, since the content is always ultimately displayed on screens. The same is true for music, where cassettes, vinyl records and CDs are only 
intermediate carriers; the actual listening always happened through 
speakers (and increasingly through headphones). In both cases, the for-mat changed without dramatically affecting the watching or listening experience. Sometimes the experience was improved by changes in the media technology (with HD video); sometimes it was almost impercep-tibly worsened (with the loss of frequencies in MP3s).
Print, however, is a very different case, since the medium – the 
printed page – is more than just a carrier for things to be shown on some display; it is also the display itself. Changing it consequently changes people’s experience, with all the (physical) habits, rituals and cultural conventions involved. E-publishing therefore still has a long way to go before it reaches the level of sophistication which printed 
pages have achieved over the course of a few centuries.
But as more and more content moves from print to digital, we seem 
to be approaching an inevitable turning point, where publishers soon 
will be releasing more electronic publications than printed materials. A key factor in this development is that e-publishing is gradually becom-
ing just as simple and accessible as traditional publishing – not only for 
producers, but also, thanks to new interfaces, habits and conventions, for consumers as well. However, the real power of digital publishing lies not so much in its integration of multiple media, but in its superior networking capabilities. Even if it were possible to write some spectac-ular software to automatically transform e-books into another media 
standard (for instance, an animation of book or magazine pages being 
turned) or vice-versa, this would be far less interesting for users than 
154new and sophisticated forms of connectivity – not only to related con-
tent hosted elsewhere, but also to other humans willing to share their knowledge online. To this end, digital publishing will have to establish 
universal interoperability standards and product identities that don’t 
lock customers into the closed worlds of one particular application or service.
Traditional print publishing, on the other hand, is increasingly 
presenting its products as valuable objects and collector’s items, by exploiting the physical and tactile qualities of paper. It thus acts as a 
counterpart to the digital world, while looking for ways to cope with 
a gradually shrinking customer base – particularly in its traditional sectors such as newspaper production and distribution (where costs are becoming unsustainable) or paper encyclopaedias (which have al-ready become vintage status symbols rather than practical information tools). A number of products will thus need to be re-invented in order 
to still make sense in print.
At the time of writing, the development towards print as a valuable 
object can best be observed in the contemporary do-it-yourself book 
and zine scene. Until the late 1990s, this scene was mostly focused on radical politics and social engagement; the contemporary scene how-ever is more fascinated with the collection of visual-symbolic informa-
tion into carefully crafted paper objects. Despite its loyalty to print, 
this new generation of DIY publishers has created offline networks for print production and distribution which, in their bottom-up structure and peer-to-peer ethic, very much resemble Internet communities. At the same time, the work they create is meant to remain offline and not 
be digitised, thus requiring a physical exchange between publisher, 
distributor and reader. This ethic is squarely opposed to the so-called ‘go all digital’ philosophy
312 which advocates a completely digital life, 
getting rid of as much physical belongings as possible, and relying only on a laptop and a mobile phone filled with digitised materials.
For sure, the DIY print publishing ethic is closely related to the (of-
ten dormant) bottom-up social dynamics of the Internet. But as it cur-rently stands, it still lacks one crucial aspect (besides production and sharing): it does not include mechanisms able to initiate social or media processes which could potentially bring the printed content to an-other level – what I would call the ‘processual’ level. In the past, print 
activism (using pamphlets, avant-garde magazines, Punk zines, etc) 
was deployed for spreading new ideas meant to induce new creative, technological and – by implication – social and political processes. The future of post-digital print may also involve new processes, such as remote printing, networked real-time distribution, and on-demand 
155customisation of printed materials – all processes with (as of yet) unex-
plored social and political potential.
Conversely, digital networking technologies could make better use 
of print. Those who advocate and develop these new technologies should perhaps become more aware of print’s cultural significance. Many readers will continue to choose print products above electronic publications, possibly leading to a demand for networked (perhaps even portable) printers allowing individuals to print materials at any location, anywhere in the world. Combined with personal binding 
devices (however primitive), such personal ‘book machines’ would al-
low readers to ‘teleport’ print publications to and from any location. Furthermore, resistance to the ubiquitous and non-stop surveillance of the Internet may well take a more radical turn: individuals and groups could make a political statement out of going completely offline and working in isolation as neo-analogue media practitioners.
If print increasingly becomes a valuable or collectable object, and 
digital publishing indeed continues to grow as expected, the two will nevertheless cross paths frequently, potentially generating new hybrid forms. Currently, the main constraint on the development of such hybrids is the publishing industry’s focus on entertainment. What we see, as a result, are up-to-date printable PDF files on one hand, and 
on the other hand online news aggregators (such as Flipboard
313 and 
Pulse314) which gather various sources within one application with a 
slick unified interface and layout. But these are merely the products of 
‘industrial’ customisation – the consumer product ‘choice’ of combin-
ing existing features and extras, where the actual customising is almost 
irrelevant. Currently, the industry’s main post-digital print entertain-ment effort is the QR code – those black-and-white pixellated square images which, when read with the proper mobile phone app, give the reader access to some sort of content (almost always a video or web page). This kind of technology could be used much more creatively, as 
a means of enriching the process of content generation. For example, 
printed books and magazines could include such codes as a means of providing new updates each time they are scanned – and these up-dates could in turn be made printable or otherwise preservable. Digital publications might then send customised updates to personal printers, using information from different sources closely related to the publica-
tion’s content. This could potentially open up new cultural pathways 
and create unexpected juxtapositions.
Martin Fuchs and Peter Bichsel’s book Written Images is an example 
of the first ‘baby steps’ of such a hybrid post-digital print publishing strategy. Though it’s still a traditional book, each copy is individually 
156computer-generated, thus disrupting the fixed ‘serial’ nature of print. 
Furthermore, the project was financed through a networked model (using Kickstarter, a very successful ‘crowdfunding’ platform), specu-
lating on the enthusiasm of its future customers (and in this case, col-
lectors). In other words, this book is a comprehensive example of post-digital print, through a combination of several elements: print as a limited-edition object; networked crowdfunding; computer-processed information; hybridisation of print and digital – all in one single medi-um, a traditional book. On the other hand, this hybrid is still limited in 
several respects: its process is complete as soon as it has been acquired 
by the reader; there is no further community process or networked activity involved; once purchased, it will remain forever a traditional book on a shelf. And so, there is still plenty of room for exploration in developing future hybrid publishing projects.
When we are no longer able to categorise publications as either a 
‘print publication’ or an ‘e-publication’ (or a print publication with some electronic enhancement), then the first true hybrids will have arrived. It may be worth envisioning a kind of ‘print sampling’ , com-parable to sampling in music and video, where customised content (either anthologies or new works) can be created from past works. Such a ‘remix’ publishing strategy could create new cultural opportunities, 
and open up new ‘processual’ publishing practices. We can already see 
this happening to some extent, in contemporary zine and DIY art book publishing, as well as underground e-book websites.
Since software is a prerequisite for any digital technology (and is 
also being used for the creation of most analogue works today), its 
‘processual’ nature should be reflected in the structure and dynamics 
of future publishing: enabling local and remote participation, and also connecting publishing to real-life actions. The younger ‘digital native’ generation has no compunction in irreverently sampling, remixing and ‘mashing up’ traditional and social media (as several adventurous small organisations, born out of the current financial crisis and the ‘Occupy’ 
movement, have already demonstrated). Print is, unsurprisingly, an 
important component of this ‘mashup’ , because of its acknowledged historical importance as well as its particular material characteristics. And so this new generation of publishers, able to make use of various new and old media without the burden of ideological affiliation to any particular one of them, will surely be in a position to develop new and 
truly hybrid publications, by creatively combining the best standards 
and interfaces of both digital and print.
157
158
159Appendix
Print
vs.
electrons
100 differences and similarities 
between paper and pixel.
 
 production
 
1 Screen colour consistency Cross-browser consistency 
2 300 dpi 72 dpi 
3 A(x), (e.g. A4) (x)GA (e.g. XVGA) 
4 Snap to grid CSS constraints 
5 Postscript I/O error Error 404 
6 Ethernet Wi-Fi 
7 Glowing ink Flash (Adobe) 
8 Image not found Can’t connect to server 
9 Magnifying glass Magnifying icon 
10 Moiré Excessive JPEG compression 
11 nth colour Custom programming 
12 Pantone Optimised palette 
13 Stock photography Google images 
14 Proofreading Debugging 
15 Test print Draft version 
16 Higher resolution Anti-aliasing 
17 Page layout software Content management system 
18 Spines Partial browser incompatibility 
19 Optimising for print Optimising for search 
20 Cutting Screen format 
21 Recycled paper White text on black screen
22 Hollow punch Layers 
23 PDF logo JPEG logo 
24 Advertising space Banner 
25 Paid promotional flyer Pop-up window 
26 Ink Brilliance 
27 Full-colour insert Picture gallery 
28 Imposition Sorting with tags 
29 Binding Website structure 
160 structure (internal) 
30 Colour addition Colour subtraction 
31 Centerfold Background image 
32 Contrast Brightness 
33 Dot Pixel 
34 TIFF JPEG 
35 PDF (fixed layout) EPUB (reflowability) 
36 vector graphics Bitmap 
37 front cover Home page 
38 externally illuminated Backlit 
39 local link Remote link 
40 paper weight Download time 
41 Plastification Use of 3D/shadows 
42 RAM kbps 
43 Best viewed in bright light Best viewed in dim light 
44 Fire damage File corruption 
45 Fibres Waves 
46 Turns yellow Reveals its pixel matrix 
47 Consumed in local time Consumed in global time 
48 Slow replication Instant replication 
49 Hardcover Paid access 
50 Paperback Free access 
51 Static Cinematic 
 structure (external) 
52 Printer Sysadmin 
53 Barcode WHOIS 
54 ISSN Online ISSN 
55 Local storage backup Remote server backup 
56 Back catalogue  Internal search engines/ 
57 Optimised distribution  Optimised server configuration  
58 Stocks Link on the home page 
59 Second (nth) edition Database rebuilt 
60 Headquarters Hosting 
61 Shipping strike No connection 
 evaluation 
62 Readership Unique visits 
63 Certified distribution Guaranteed bandwidth 
64 Distributor list Access logs 
65 Referenced by other media Incoming links 
66 Low copy/user ratio High copy/user ratio 
67 Promotional copies RSS 
   
archive.org  
161 real and virtual space 
68 Bookshelf Database 
69 Shelf space Web host storage space 
 
 conventions 
70 Table of contents Menu 
71 Promotional T-shirt Textual link 
72 Handwritten font Pixel font 
73 Captions Alt text tag 
74 News department Blog 
75 Page format Scrolling 
76 Print Save 
77 Bibliography Hyperlinks 
78 Name Domain name 
79 Paper bookmark Browser bookmark 
80 Page numbering Posting date 
81 Clippings Cache 
82 Import dialogue window Online form 
  
consumption 
83 Reader User 
84 Subscriber Registered user 
85 Subscription Push technology 
86 Reproduction prohibited Digital rights management 
87 Syndication Creative commons 
88 Freebie Free download 
89 Shipping Spamming 
90 Cover price Password-protected access 
91 Dust Dust 
  
gestures  
92 Flipping through Clicking 
93 Smell of ink Sound of mouse clicks 
94 Photocopying Copy/paste 
95 Annotating Comments 
96 Underlining Underlining 
97 Fingerprint on coating Fingerprint on screen 
98 Folding Scaling 
99 Locally read Remotely read 
100 Handing over Forwarding
162Afterword
 
by florian cramer
The American composer Kim Cascone, writing in the winter 2000 
issue of Computer Music Journal, coined the term ‘post-digital’ to describe a certain type of electronic music which made playful use of 
technical digital glitches and was cheaply produced on laptop comput-
ers.
[i] But what does ‘post-digital’ really mean in an age of digitisation 
– and as a description of a music which had in fact been digitally pro-duced? Though Cascone’s article confused media with tools, and pro-
moted a false conflation of ‘digital’ with ‘high tech’ , his main argument 
for a ‘post-digital’ media age still holds: “Because the revolutionary period of the digital information age has surely passed. The tendrils of digital technology have in some way touched everyone” .
[ii] In a post-dig-
ital age, the question of whether or not something is digital is no longer really important – just as the ubiquity of print, soon after Gutenberg, 
rendered obsolete all debates (besides historical ones) about the ‘print 
revolution’ .
However, for many (if not most) people, the ‘digital information age’ 
did not become a fact of their everyday life until it moved from office computers to their smartphones. As an electronic musician, Cascone was about a decade ahead of his time. Music – with its historical (even 
ancient) ties to mathematics and computation, and its pioneering use 
of electronic media (from radio to MP3) – has always been the first art form to adapt to new information technologies. For the world of book and magazine publishing, however, the old-school ‘revolution-ary period’ of the ‘digital information age’ is not yet over – in fact, it has only just begun. And so were are stuck, at the time of writing, in 
fruitless debates about the Web, e-readers and tablet computers – and 
the perceived or real threat of these technologies to the field of book, magazine and newspaper publishing.
One reason why this debate is so difficult to penetrate, is that it 
has become heavily ideological. In one camp, we have the usual web, network-culture and new-media evangelists; on the other side, peo-
ple (usually from a fine-art or graphic-design background) who feel 
passionately about the tangible, material qualities of print. In reality, we are seeing a boom in zines, artists’ books and artists’ bookshops, quite comparable to the contemporary boom in Internet communities. And it would be wrong to dismiss this development as merely another 
163‘retro’ trend.[iii] The zine and artists’ book communities themselves are 
networked via blogs and Internet forums. Perhaps more significantly, 
they use print as a form of social networking which is not controlled 
by Google, Twitter or Facebook. These communities are thus an avant-
garde of a new post-digital print culture – a culture in which the false dichotomy of ‘print’ versus ‘electronic’ (which has haunted us since McLuhan) is suspended.
This false opposition has been further amplified through the com-
mon conflations of ‘print’ , ‘book’ and ‘writing’ . In his 1975 manifesto 
The New Art of Making Books, the Mexican-Dutch intermedia artist 
Ulises Carrión clarified that a “writer, contrary to the popular opinion, does not write books. A writer writes texts” .
[iv] Against a narrowly liter-
ary notion of the book, he comprehensively defined it as “a space-time sequence” that may “contain any (written) language, not only literary 
language, or even any other system of signs” .
[v] Carrión of course was 
making his case for the post-Fluxus medium of non-literary artists’ 
books – or, to use his own, and much better, term, ‘bookworks’ – 
which he sold in his bookshop ‘Other Books & So’ on Amsterdam’s 
Herengracht. His notion of books was abstract rather than material – a definition consistent with the early 20th century philosopher Ernst Cassirer’s concept of the ‘symbolic form’ . And it is precisely such a symbolic form which is able to migrate, more or less painlessly, to an electronic medium (such as the e-book) – just as the ‘symbolic form’ of 
the music track or album has migrated back and forth between vinyl, 
cassette, CD, MP3, and Internet streaming.
Print, however, is not a symbolic form, but a medium in the most 
literal sense of the word; a physical carrier of information. Today’s artists’ books differ from those of Carrión’s time in their shift from the linguistic to the tangible, from the symbolic form to the core 
medium,
[vi] or from bookworks to printworks. This is the definition of 
print which we have been using for the purposes of the present book.
Besides being a rich account of the history of experimental publish-
ing in parallel to that of modern art, this book also is a (covert) piece 
of personal storytelling. For more than twenty years, Alessandro Ludovico has been working at the cutting edge (and the outer fringes) of both print publishing and Internet community activism. Neural, the magazine which he edits, publishes and distributes, began as an Italian-language popular cultural glossy magazine focusing on cyber-
punk culture, but gradually morphed into the major international news 
and information source on critical, counter-cultural and activist new-media arts which it is today. Neural has participated in collaborative efforts such as the Documenta 12 Magazines project (see chapter 6.3). 
164Still – and despite its subject matter and reader demographic – Neural 
magazine has never become an electronic publication, which is some-thing of a statement in itself.
Since the early 20th century, Italy has been a real-life test laboratory 
for social and political developments which sooner or later hit the rest of the Western world. During Neural magazine’s first two decades, Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi personally embodied an unprec-edented monopoly complex of mass media, publishing and politics, resulting in a sharp dichotomy between corporate and independent 
media. For Italy’s artists, there is a similar gap between the contempo-
rary-art-friendly but extremely commercial North of the country, and the conservative South where the official art system is all about cultural heritage. There, contemporary arts – including media experimental-ism – have always been counter-cultural more or less by definition and, without any supporting institutions, have resorted to exhibiting and 
performing in squatted ‘social centres’ . In such a cultural climate, print 
and the Internet could be equally embraced as independent do-it-your-self media. They did not stand (as was the case in Northern Europe and North America) for two separate cultures and art communities.
In this book, Alessandro Ludovico re-reads the history of the avant-
garde arts as a prehistory of cutting through these dichotomies. He 
shows how contemporary forms of networked publishing – using 
whichever medium or technology – were in fact prefigured by 20th and 21st century artists and their media experiments. Thus, his conclusion that ‘print is liberating’ is not a question of pitching one medium against another. His concept of media as a liberating force 
is also strongly informed by computer-hacker culture. In 2008, a col-
laboration with a group of artists (including the young hacker-artist Paolo Cirio and the Austrian artist couple Ubermorgen) resulted in the project Amazon Noir – The Big Book Crime (see chapter 5.4), a small 
software application that took advantage of Amazon.com’s ‘Search Inside the Book’ feature in order to extract complete copyrighted 
books from the website. Amazon Noir is about communality, very 
much in the same way as print and paper are. In one case, file sharing; 
in the other case, the physical social sharing of paper between people in one room. But either of these notions of sharing would be reductive when considered separately from the other: file sharing would then boil down to cybernetic feedback loops; paper sharing would mean no 
more than a romanticism of local physical exchange. Separately, each 
of these two paradigms sums up the limitations and frustrations one can experience when spending time either at a hacktivist event or in an artists’ bookshop.
165In his 1980 article Bookworks Revisited, Ulises Carrión described 
two extremes in contemporary artists’ books, which anticipated simi-
lar extremes for file sharing and printmaking: the de-materialised book 
aesthetics of conceptual art versus the material overkill of sculptural 
book objects such as Dieter Rot’s Literaturwurst (‘Literature Sausage’), a mass of torn-out magazine pages stuffed into a transparent plastic foil casing. Neither of them qualified, from Carrión’s critical perspective, as a ‘bookwork’ . Rot dissolved the symbolic form of the book and made it extrinsic to the object, turning it into something which no longer lent 
itself to reading – and which did not qualify as an object “in which the 
book form is intrinsic to the work” , the definition of bookworks which Carrión had taken over (and twisted) from the curator and MOMA librarian Clive Phillpot.
[vii] Conceptual art books, on the other hand, 
lacked artistic engagement with the book form itself: “A comic book” , writes Carrión, “or a newspaper, creates richer and more varied and 
changing conditions for reading than Art & Language publications” . 
He thus considered them “plain book[s]” just like conventional novels and non-fiction.
[viii]
If we projected Carrión’s notion of the bookwork upon the concept 
of post-digital print, then neither purely visual-tactile printmaking, nor a mere website or text file would ‘qualify’ . In positive terms, post-
digital print would need to include networked community sharing 
which is both local/tangible and global/digital; the union of the two opposites of formation and in-formation. Alessandro’s 2006-2008 project Mag.net, a network of ‘electronic cultural publishers’ , sought to combine these two modes of sharing through hybrid electronic and print-on-demand publishing.
The present book is another such hybrid. It will be published partly 
as a traditional offset print book, partly through print on demand, and partly as an e-book distributed through various underground and over-ground publishing channels – including pirate electronic libraries such as AAAAARG.ORG, and artist-run bookshops.
This book was developed and written as part of a practice-oriented 
research project at the Hogeschool Rotterdam called ‘Communication in a Digital Age’ , featuring conferences and research papers, bringing together (graduate) students with professionals in the arts, design and media, and organising various events and activities within as well as outside the school. All of which is deeply connected to the narrative of this book – we at the Hogeschool are, in other words, also working to 
develop non-traditional, hybrid practices of research and education, 
similar to those which Alessandro develops in the publishing world.
The book’s references feature extensive web links, some of which I 
166fear may already have expired by the time you are reading these words. 
I believe this shouldn’t be seen as a deficiency, but rather as an invita-tion to use this book as a resource, and to complement it with your own 
findings.
And so, an experimental hypothesis for this publication might be: if 
print is indeed liberating, then start by sharing this book.
[i]  Kim Cascone, ‘The Aesthetics of Failure: “Post-Digital” Tendencies in 
 Contemporary Computer Music’ , in Computer Music Journal, 24:4, 2000, pp. 12-18
[ii]  ibid.
[iii]  An exemplary critique of contemporary retro culture focusing on pop music: 
 Simon Reynolds, Retromania. Pop Culture’s Addiction to Its Own Past, 
 Faber & Faber, 2011
[iv]  Facsimile reprint in: Guy Schraenen (ed.), Ulises Carrión, 
 We have won! Haven’t we?, Museum Fodor & Museum Weserburg, 1992, p. 53
[v]  ibid.
[vi]  and thus from metaphysics to ontology.
[vii] Ulises Carrión, ‘Bookworks Revisited’ , reprinted in: James Langdon (ed.), 
 Book, Eastside Projects, 2010, no pagination
[viii] ibid.
167
168
169(Endnotes)
All web links accessed on March 30, 2012
1 http:/ /www.businessinsider.com/chart-of-the-day-workers-
 employed-in-news-paper-publishing-2009-12
2 Standage, T. (1998) The Victorian Internet, Phoenix
3 http:/ /en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Innocenzo_Manzetti
4 Uzanne, O. and Robida, A. (1895) ‘La fin des livres’ in Contes pour les biblio-
 philes, Ancienne Maison Quantin; http:/ /www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/28205 ‘Villemard 1910 - En L’An 2000’; http:/ /www.flickr.com/photos/
 amphalon/3368395546/in/set-72157615623434624/
6 http:/ /www.nytimes.com/2010/04/11/books/review/
 Schuessler-t.html?pagewanted=all7 Saper, C. (2009) Bob Brown’s The Readies, Rice University Press
8 http:/ /www.bbc.co.uk/archive/hg_wells/9 http:/ /www.bbc.co.uk/archive/hg_wells/12407.shtml10 http:/ /www.bbc.co.uk/archive/hg_wells/12409.shtml
11 McLuhan, M. (1964) Understanding Media, McGraw-Hill, p. 400
12 ibid.
13 17 Days: The Story of Newspaper History in the Making (1945), 
 Prelinger Archives; http:/ /www.archive.org/details/17DaysTh1945
14 ibid.15 ibid.
16 McLuhan, Understanding Media, p. 89
17 ibid., p. 179
18 McLuhan, M. (1955) ‘New Media As Political Forms’ in Explorations 3
19 http:/ /projects.chass.utoronto.ca/mcluhan-studies/v1_iss1/1_1art5.htm
20 McLuhan, Understanding Media, p. 237
21 ibid.
22 Sellen, A.J. and Harper, R.H.R. (2002) The Myth of the Paperless Office, 
 The MIT Press
23 Norman, D.A. (1998) The Invisible Computer, The MIT Press
24 Licklider, J.C.R. (1965) Libraries of the future, The MIT Press
25 http:/ /www.businessweek.com/technology/content/may2008/
 tc20080526_547942.htm
26 Coover, R. (1992) ‘The End of Books’ in The New York Times Book Review, 
 June 21 1992, pp. 23-25
27 Borges, J. L. (1977) The Book of Sand, Plume
28 Landow, G.P. (1994) Hyper/Text/Theory, The Johns Hopkins University Press
29 http:/ /www.desvirtual.com/thebook/english/
30 http:/ /www.paperkiller.com
31 Coover, op. cit.
32 Hayles, N.K. (2002) Writing Machines, The MIT Press
33 http:/ /en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Help:Books34 http:/ /www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/mar/13/
 encyclopedia-britannica-halts-print-publication35 Branwyn, G. (1997) Jamming The Media, Chronicle Books
17036 http:/ /en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Biblia_pauperum
37 http:/ /historymedren.about.com/library/text/bltxtgermany10.htm
38 Schwartz, S. (1996) ‘History of Zines’ in Vale, V., Zines! Volume I, V Search
39 http:/ /cronologia.leonardo.it/storia/biografie/marinet2.htm
40 Müller-Brockmann, J. (1971) A History of Visual Communication, 
 Hastings House Publishers
41 http:/ /it.wikipedia.org/wiki/L%27Italia_futurista42 Echaurren, P. (1997) Volantini Italiani, AAA
43 Lissitzky, E. (1990) El Lissitzky, 1890-1941: Architect, Painter, Photographer, 
 Typographer, Municipal Van Abbemuseum44 Schwartz, op. cit.
45 Schwartz, op. cit.
46 http:/ /en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polish_underground_press47 Hendricks, J. (1988) Fluxus Codex, Abrams Inc
48 ibid.49 ibid.50 Kataoka, M. (2007) All About Laughter, Mori Art Museum
51 Welch, C. (1995) Eternal Network: A Mail Art Anthology, 
 University of Calgary Press
52 http:/ /www.ubu.com/aspen/
53 Cohen, A. (1991) The San Francisco Oracle (Facsimile Edition), Regent Press
54 Pivano, F. (1972) Beat Hippie Yippie, Arcana
55 Hollstein, W. (1971) Underground, Sansoni
56 Brand, S. (1969) Whole Earth Catalog: Fall 1969, Portola Institute
57 Held, J. Jr. (1998) ‘From Dada to DIY: The history of Alternative Art 
 Culture in the 20th Century’ in Factsheet Five #63
58 Baroni, V. (1997) Arte Postale: Guida al network della corrispondenza creativa,
 AAA Edizioni
59 Becker, C. (1998) ‘The Art of Zines’ in Factsheet Five #63
60 http:/ /en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gocco
61 http:/ /www.richardkostelanetz.com/invent/assembling.php62 Alferj, P. and Mazzone, G. (1979) I Fiori di Gutenberg, Arcana
63 Marx, K., in Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 221, February 1849
64 http:/ /www.tommasotozzi.it/index.php?title=Bambina_Precoce_%281984%2965 http:/ /en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Between_C_&_D
66 Branwyn, op. cit.
67 Gunderloy, M. (1992) The World of Zines, Penguin
68 Markoff, J. (1995) ‘If Medium Is the Message, the Message Is the Web’ 
 in New York Times, November 20, 1995, p. A1
69 Schwartz, op. cit.
70 http:/ /newstweek.com/71 http:/ /nytimes-se.com/
72 Berardi, F. (1977) A/Traverso
73 Ćosić, V. (2001) Net.art per se, MGLC
74 Bolter, J. D. (2001) Writing Space: Computers, Hypertext, 
 and the Remediation of Print, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates
75 Royal Commission on National Development in the Arts, Letters and Sciences, 
 1949-1951, Chapter V, Section 7
76 http:/ /www.youtube.com/watch?v=5WCTn4FljUQ&feature=player_embedded77 http:/ /www.observer.com/2007/02/
 emtimesem-sulzberger-newspaper-will-be-around-for-a-long-time/
17178 http:/ /www.seattlepi.com/business/article/Seattle-P-I-to-publish-last-
 edition-Tuesday-1302597.php
79 http:/ /www.businessweek.com/bwdaily/dnflash/content/oct2008/
 db20081028_224442.htm80 http:/ /www.channel3000.com/news/15244670/detail.html
81 http:/ /www.mlive.com/news/ann-arbor/index.ssf/2009/03/
 ann_arbor_news_to_close_in_jul.html82 http:/ /www.msnbc.msn.com/id/29412240/ns/business-us_business/t/
 rocky-mountain-news-publishes-final-edition/
83 http:/ /tucsoncitizen.com/morgue/2009/02/20/110550-citizen-likely-to- close-march-21-no-buyer-stepping-up/
84 http:/ /www.psfk.com/2009/10/evening-standard-goes-free.html
85 http:/ /www.mondaynote.com/2010/03/14/euthanazing-the-paper-not-yet/86 http:/ /jimmywales.com/2009/10/21/is-the-magazine-dead/
87 Meyer, P. (2004) The Vanishing Newspaper: Saving Journalism in 
 the Information Age, University of Missouri Press
88 http:/ /www.newmuseum.org/exhibitions/428/89 http:/ /www.theregister.co.uk/2009/02/12/google_buys_defunct_paper_mill/
90 http:/ /www.theaustralian.com.au/business/media/ google-dubbed-internet-parasite/story-e6frg996-1225696931547
91 http:/ /www.shirky.com/writings/information_price.html
92 http:/ /vimeo.com/372341293 http:/ /jimmywales.com/2009/10/21/is-the-magazine-dead/
94 http:/ /news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/asia-pacific/3031716.stm
95 http:/ /www.indyweek.com/indyweek/deserted-moon/Content?oid=119493796 http:/ /newsosaur.blogspot.com/2009/05/finally-someone-makes-
 hyperlocal-pay.html
97 http:/ /www.timeinc.com/pressroom/detail.php?id=releases/03182009.php98 http:/ /nytimes-roulette.appspot.com/
99 http:/ /www.guardian.co.uk/media/pda/2010/mar/30/
 digital-media-algorithms-reporting-journalism100 http:/ /infolab.northwestern.edu/projects/stats-monkey/
101 http:/ /www.narrativescience.com
102 http:/ /casualdata.com/newsknitter/103 http:/ /www.thespoof.com/news/spoof.cfm?headline=s4i28539
104 http:/ /thequickbrown.com
105 http:/ /turbulence.org/blog/2008/11/25/time-slip-by-antoine-schmitt/106 Murphie, A. (2008) ‘Ghosted Publics’ in The Mag.net reader 3 - 
 Processual Publishing. Actual Gestures, OpenMute
107 http:/ /newsmap.jp108 http:/ /www.fallingtimes.info
109 McLuhan, Understanding Media, p. 173
110 Sellen and Harper, op. cit., pp. 101, 201
111 Muller, N. and Ludovico, A. (2008) ‘Of Process and Gestures: A Publishing Act’ 
 in The Mag.net reader 3 - Processual Publishing. Actual Gestures, OpenMute, p. 6
112 Landow, op. cit.
113 Ilich, F. and Sollfrank, C. ‘Another Culture is Possible – not Impossible!’ in The 
 Mag.net reader 3 - Processual Publishing. Actual Gestures, OpenMute, p. 72
114 http:/ /helmutsmits.nl/public-spaces/pamphlet
115 http:/ /www.wdka.nl/news.asp?articleid=
 810&lng=en#u3peq4H3IEUCAl28T7Ve0PE4-0
172116 http:/ /www.bookcrossing.com/
117 http:/ /everything2.com/title/Xerox%25209700
118 http:/ /advantage.amazon.com/gp/vendor/public/join
119 http:/ /www.fedex.com/us/office/online-printing.html?OMD157&site= FederatedMedia&value1=EyeBlasterDisplay
120 http:/ /computerworld.co.nz/news.nsf/spec/
 7267B4A516A99D3FCC25755E00826F31121 http:/ /www.crowdbooks.com/
122 http:/ /en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Espresso_Book_Machine
123 http:/ /www.scribd.com/doc/15576150/1893-March-25-Newark-Daily- Advocate-Newark-OH-Pa-Leo-Future
124 http:/ /artsbeat.blogs.nytimes.com/2009/03/12/
 gutenberg-is-dead-long-live-gutenberg/?hp125 http:/ /us.cnn.com/2009/TECH/04/06/print.on.demand.publishing/index.html
126 http:/ /booktwo.org/notebook/vanity-press-plus-the-tweetbook/127 http:/ /bookapp.com/tb/connect.php128 http:/ /www.betternouveau.com/tweetghetto/poster/
129 http:/ /vimeo.com/16889815
130 http:/ /www.fionabanner.com/vanitypress/book11/index.htm131 http:/ /www.nytimes.com/2004/04/05/business/05reason.html
132 http:/ /www.nytimes.com/2007/06/25/business/media/25adco.html
133 http:/ /postspectacular.com/process/20080711 faberfindslaunch
134 http:/ /www.friezefoundation.org/commissions/detail/per_oskar_leu/
135 http:/ /writtenimages.net/
136 http:/ /www.nytimes.com/2008/04/14/business/media/14link.html137 http:/ /en.flossmanuals.net
138 http:/ /www.booki.cc/
139 http:/ /ospublish.constantvzw.org/140 http:/ /blog.welovecolophon.com/
141 http:/ /www.magazinelibrary.jp
142 http:/ /www.magnation.com143 http:/ /www.stackmagazines.com
144 http:/ /newsgrist.typepad.com/underbelly/2009/05/
 abes-penny-a-new-micropublication.html145 http:/ /issuu.com/amsterdamweekly/docs/amsterdamweekly_issue13_27march
146 http:/ /bitchmagazine.org/post/bitchs-fate-is-in-your-hands
147 http:/ /www.theremediproject.com/projects/issue10/movengen/148 http:/ /swai.signwave.co.uk
149 http:/ /www.letterror.com/foundry/beowolf/
150 Uzanne and Robida, op. cit.
151 http:/ /www.economist.com/node/21530075
152 http:/ /www2.parc.com/hsl/projects/gyricon/
153 http:/ /en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Electronic_paper154 http:/ /www.i4u.com/30269/
 asus-dual-panel-concept-notebook-suddenly-dual-page-ebook-reader
155 http:/ /articles.businessinsider.com/2009-01-30/ tech/30068072_1_amazon-kindle-delivery-costs-open-letter
156 http:/ /www.thedailybeast.com/newsweek/2007/11/17/
 the-future-of-reading.html157 Carpenter, E. S. (1960) Marshall McLuhan, Explorations in Communication: 
 an Anthology, Beacon Press, p. 182
173158 http:/ /venturebeat.com/2010/04/30/tablets-book-marketing/
159 http:/ /techcrunch.com/2010/10/22/obama-signing-ipad/?utm_
 source=feedburner&utm_medium=feed&utm_campaign=Feed%3A+
 Techcrunch+%28TechCrunch%29160 http:/ /www.youtube.com/watch?v=pzSzKAtf JNg&feature=player_embedded
161 http:/ /radar.oreilly.com/2010/01/2009-oreilly-ebook-revenue-
 up-104-percent.html162 Stallman, R.M., ‘Can freedom withstand e-books?’ in Communications 
 of the ACM, March 2001
163 http:/ /boingboing.net/2009/07/17/amazon-zaps-purchase.html,  http:/ /boingboing.net/2009/07/23/jeff-bezoss-kindle-a.html
164 http:/ /boingboing.net/2009/07/23/bezos-apologizes-for.html
165 http:/ /www.theglobeandmail.com/news/arts/ meet-publishers-enemy-no-1-cory-doctorow/article1362457/
166 Desai D. D., Hamlin J. C. and Mattson, R. (2010) History as Art, Art as History: 
 Contemporary Art and Social Studies Education, Routledge
167 http:/ /www.observer.com/2011/06/ new-york-times-candle-brings-you-the-sweet-scent-of-ink/
168 http:/ /theoffice.wikia.com/wiki/The_Injury169 http:/ /smellofbooks.com
170 Calvino, I. (1981) If On a Winter’s Night a Traveller, Harvest
171 http:/ /gizmodo.com/5504896/there-was-another-iPad-20-year-ago
172 http:/ /www.youtube.com/watch?v=JBEtPQDQNcI
173 Uzanne and Robida, op. cit.
174 http:/ /www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2010/apr/11/
 ipad-rusbridger-future-of-the-press
175 http:/ /vimeo.com/10253564
176 http:/ /www.guardian.co.uk/media/pda/2010/mar/19/magazines-ipad177 http:/ /www.youtube.com/watch?v=ntyXvLnxyXk&feature=player_embedded
178 http:/ /www.psfk.com/2010/03/eye-tracking-technology-may-revolutionize-
 the-written-word.html179 Mod, C., ‘Books in the Age of the iPad’; http:/ /craigmod.com/journal/
 iPad_and_books/180 Sellen and Harper, op. cit., p. 8
181 Landow, op. cit., pp. 1-48
182 http:/ /en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Help:Books183 http:/ /pediapress.com184 http:/ /www.readability.com/
185 http:/ /readefine.anirudhsasikumar.net/desktop.html
186 http:/ /www.maria-fischer.com/en/traumgedanken_en.html187 McLuhan, M. (1962) The Gutenberg Galaxy, University of Toronto Press, p. 1
188 http:/ /www.sarahcharlesworth.net/series.php?album_id=34189 http:/ /googleblog.blogspot.com/2009/09/ read-news-fast-with-google-fast-flip.html
190 http:/ /cultureandcommunication.org/deadmedia/index.php/
 Newspaper_via_Radio_Facsimile191 http:/ /bergcloud.com/littleprinter/
192 http:/ /techon.nikkeibp.co.jp/english/NEWS_EN/20090930/175812/
193 http:/ /www.feedjournal.com194 http:/ /www.theblogpaper.co.uk
195 http:/ /craigmod.com/journal/ipad_and_books/
174196 http:/ /en.wikipedia.org/wiki/EPUB
197 http:/ /www.economist.com/node/9231860?story_id=9231860
198 http:/ /www.nytimes.com/2008/01/20/world/asia/20japan.html
199 http:/ /web.archive.org/web/20080212081200/ http:/ /www.etext.org/index.shtml
200 http:/ /a.parsons.edu/~linf/projects/beyond/statement.html
201 http:/ /www.ew.com/ew/article/0,,304389,00.html202 http:/ /www.pdf-mags.com
203 http:/ /issuu.com
204 http:/ /www.mstand.com/205 http:/ /www.exacteditions.com/
206 http:/ /thepiratebay.org/browse/601/0/7
207 http:/ /pirates-of-the-amazon.com208 http:/ /en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portable_Document_Format
209 http:/ /en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FlashPaper
210 http:/ /www.scribd.com211 http:/ /plustek.com/usa/products/opticbook-series/
212 http:/ /www.atiz.com/
213 http:/ /www.qipit.com214 http:/ /www.ponoko.com/design-your-own/products/scandock-2703
215 http:/ /1dollarscan.com
216 http:/ /en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Handwriting_recognition217 http:/ /www.fontifier.com
218 http:/ /blog.mimoco.com/?cat=19
219 http:/ /www.cs.cornell.edu/home/kleinber/kdd09-quotes.pdf220 http:/ /www.designondeadline.com/digitalnewsstand/index.html
221 http:/ /wordflashreader.sourceforge.net
222 Lissitzky-Küppers, S. (1968) El Lissitzky: life, letters, texts, 
 Thames and Hudson, p. 355
223 http:/ /blog.modernmechanix.com/2008/12/02/ canned-libraries-open-new-vistas-to-readers/224 http:/ /en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bookwheel
225 Chicago Sunday Tribune, February 1, 1959, p. 10
226 http:/ /derrickbostrom.com/bostrom/2008/02/12/1975-and-the-changes-to-
 come/; http:/ /aphelis.net/libraries-forced-use-computers-barach-1962/
227 http:/ /en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bookmobile228 http:/ /www.archive.org/texts/bookmobile.php229 http:/ /www.boston.com/news/local/massachusetts/
 articles/2009/09/04/a_library_without_the_books/?page=full
230 http:/ /www.nytimes.com/2009/10/15/books/15libraries.html?_r=2&hp231 http:/ /www.dailyprincetonian.com/2009/09/28/23918/
232 http:/ /www.buildingways.com/work.html
233 http:/ /www.robotlab.de/bios/bible_engl.htm234 http:/ /www.corriere.it/politica/09_settembre_07/libro_canada_
 berlusconi_38ca792a-9bd8-11de-88f0-00144f02aabc.shtml
235 http:/ /www.visionaireworld.com236 http:/ /www.thehumanprinter.org
237 http:/ /www.publishersweekly.com/pw/by-topic/columns-and-blogs/
 cory-Doctorow/article/15883-Doctorow-s-project-with-a-little-help.html238 http:/ /torrentfreak.com/best-selling-author-turns-piracy-into-profit-080512/
239 http:/ /torrentfreak.com/dan-browns-the-lost-symbol-bestseller-on-bittorrent-090917/
175240 Lessig, L. (2008) Remix. Making Art and Commerce Thrive in the 
 Hybrid Economy, Bloomsbury
241 http:/ /wordperhect.net/
242 http:/ /vimeo.com/4116727243 http:/ /timdevin.com/emailflyerproject.html
244 http:/ /web.media.mit.edu/~marcelo/paper/index.html
245 Branwyn, op. cit.
246 http:/ /web.archive.org/web/20081019212050/
 http:/ /www.dishwasherpete.com/
247 http:/ /www.alexa.com/siteinfo/boingboing.net248 The Mag.net reader 3 - Processual Publishing. Actual Gestures, OpenMute
249 http:/ /www.xerox.com/innovation/news-stories/erasable-paper/enus.html250 http:/ /www.nyu.edu/projects/xdesign/mainmenu/archive_stump.html251 http:/ /www.saveaswwf.com/en/
252 http:/ /www.ecofont.eu
253  http:/ /www.yankodesign.com/2010/02/23/pencil-printer-part-two/
254 http:/ /www.etsy.com/shop/recycledideas?section_id=5477960
255 http:/ /inhabitat.com/laser-cut-leaves-are-natures-unique-business-cards/
256 Graham-Rowe, D., ‘Repackaging Data could Double Internet Speed’ in 
 New Scientist #2676, October 4, 2008
257 Cox, B., ‘Foot Prints’ in Eye 70/08
258 Gleick, J. (2011) The Information: A History, a Theory, a Flood, Pantheon
259 Rifkin, J. (2001) The Age of Access: The New Culture of Hypercapitalism,
 Where all of Life is a Paid-For Experience, Tarcher, pp. 76-93, 100
260 http:/ /searchenginewatch.com/article/2053117/Google-Buys-Digital- Historical-Newspaper-Archives-from-PaperofRecord.com
261 http:/ /online.wsj.com/article/
 SB10001424052748703701004575113511364939130.html262 http:/ /www.zimo.co/2011/04/08/live-share-conference-beograd-day-2/
263 http:/ /www.wdl.org/en/
264 http:/ /blog.archive.org/2011/09/17/3-million-texts-for-free/265 http:/ /www.smartmobs.com/2007/05/25/
 humans-helping-out-book-scanners/
266 http:/ /www.post-gazette.com/pg/07175/796164-96.stm267 http:/ /blog.archive.org/2011/06/06/
 why-preserve-books-the-new-physical-archive-of-the-internet-archive/
268 ibid.269 http:/ /www.libraryjournal.com/article/CA6639703.html
270 http:/ /en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Library.nu
271 http:/ /aaaaarg.org272 http:/ /www.playboyarchive.com
273 http:/ /rosettaproject.org/
274 Simonite, T. and Le Page, M., ‘Digital doomsday: the end of knowledge’ in 
 New Scientist #2745, February 2, 2010
275 Borges, J. L. (1962) The Library of Babel, Grove Press
276 ibid.277 McLuhan, Understanding Media
278 http:/ /english.utah.edu/eclipse/projects/LANGUAGE/language.html279 http:/ /psrf.detritus.net/280 Rifkin, op. cit.
281 http:/ /www.diybookscanner.org/
176282 http:/ /www.nytimes.com/ref/membercenter/nytarchive.html
283 Batchen, G. (2006) ‘The Art of Archiving’ in Nicolau, R. Fotografia na Arte: 
 De Ferramenta a Paradigma (Art and Photography), Serralves Museum of 
 Contemporary Art/Público, pp. 138-141
284 McLuhan, Understanding Media
285 http:/ /www.codytrepte.com/1-year-of-archived-email/286 http:/ /www.timschwartz.org/card-catalog/287 http:/ /www.rob-matthews.com/index.php?/project/wikipedia/
288 http:/ /www.galerie-vallois.com/artistes/mike-bouchet.html++/image/
 bouchet_25_almost_every_city_book.jpg/289 Garvey, E.G. (2004) ‘Scissorizing and Scrapbooks: Nineteenth-Century 
 Reading, Remaking, and Recirculating’ , in Gitelman L. and Pingree G.B., 
 New Media, 1740-1915, The MIT Press
290 ibid.
291 ibid.
292 O’Neil, M. (2009) Cyberchiefs: Autonomy and Authority in Online Tribes, 
 Pluto Press
293 ibid.294 Curran, J. and Seaton, J. (1997) Power Without Responsibility: 
 the Press and Broadcasting in Britain, Routledge, p. 8
295 ibid, p. 12
296 http:/ /stampamusicale.altervista.org/Insekten%20sekte/index.htm297 http:/ /en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Associated_Press
298 http:/ /en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Profane_Existence
299 http:/ /www.grrrlzines.net300 Alferj and Mazzone, op. cit., pp. 29-38
301 http:/ /magnet-ecp.org/302 Eraso, M., Ludovico, A. and Krekovic, S. (2006) The Mag.net Reader, 
 experiences in electronic cultural publishing, Arteleku-Diputación 
 Foral de Gipuzkoa
303 http:/ /web.archive.org/web/20100123215024/ http:/ /magazines.documenta.de/frontend/
304 http:/ /transform.eipcp.net/correspondence/1184160172
305 http:/ /archiv.documenta.de/1389.html?&L=1306 http:/ /en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Documenta_12_magazines
307 http:/ /www.moreismore.net/
308 http:/ /timdevin.com/ileftthishereforyoutoread-news.html309 http:/ /freewords.org/fwabout.html
310 http:/ /www.coolhunting.com/culture/namelessletter.php
311 http:/ /www.psfk.com/2009/11/pics-decapitator-x-rolling-stone.html312 http:/ /techland.time.com/2011/04/20/are-you-ready-to-go-all-digital/
313 http:/ /flipboard.com/
314 http:/ /www.pulse.me/
177
178
179(Subject index) 
1dollarscan.com, 101 
3/4 Revue (magazine), 144
— A
A/Traverso (zine), 53
AAAAARG.ORG, 123, 165
Abe’s Penny (Knoebel), 79
Acoustic Space (magazine), 144
Adenoidi (zine), 48
Agrippa (Gibson), 50
Almost Every City in the World 
(Bouchet), 133
Amazon Noir - The Big Book Crime (Ubermorgen, Cirio, Ludovico),   
133-135, 164
Amazon, Amazon.com, 71, 77, 
 85-88, 100-101, 105, 118-119, 
 133-135, 149, 164
Amsterdam Weekly (magazine),   
79-80
Anarcho-Punk, 141
Ann Arbor News (newspaper), 55
Arc90, 94
Arena (magazine), 58
Arte Postale! (zine), 46
artist’s book, books, 39, 162-165
ASCII, ASCII Art, 98, 101
Aspen (magazine), 40
Assembling Press, 45
Assemblings (Kostelanetz), 45
Associated Press, 141
Author Solutions, 71
autographic printing, 36
Autonomist (movement), 46
— B
Balkon (magazine), 144
Bambina Precoce (zine), 46-47
Barnes & Noble, 85, 148
BBC, 20Beat (movement), 38
Beatitude (zine), 38
Between C & D (zine), 47
Biblia Pauperum, 31-32
Bikini Kill, 141
bios [bible] (Robotlab), 105-106
Bitch (magazine), 80
Blam! (CD-ROM magazine), 48-49
Blender (magazine), 48, 58
Boing Boing (magazine), 114
Book 1 of 1 (Banner), 74
book space, 36
bookspace,  71
Book Your Own Fuckin’ Life (zine), 
44, 141
BookCrossing, 69
BookDrive (software), 101
Booki (software), 77
BookMooch.com, 150
bookwheel, 103
bookworks, 163, 165
Bouygues Télécom, 74
Braincell (zine), 45
Business Week (magazine), 25
Byulleten Oppositzii (zine), 36
— C
Cabaret Voltaire (zine), 44
Cafeína (zine), 144
Canadian Royal Commission on National Development in the Arts, Letters and Sciences, 
54
Canal Contemporâneo (online magazine), 
146
Capital Times (newspaper), 55
Card Catalog (Schwartz), 132
CellWriter (software), 101
Chatroulette, 61
Chicago Sunday Tribune (newspaper), 
104
Christian Science Monitor (newspaper), 
55
180Colophon (symposium), 78
Common Sense, 33
Constant, 78
copy art, 44-45
Cornell University, 102
Create Space, 71
Creative Autonomism, 46
Crowdbooks, 71
Culture Pundits, 144
Cushing Academy, 105
custom robotic typewriter,  98
cyberpunk, 117
— D
Dada (magazine), 31, 34
Dadaist, 34-35, 46, 140
DDB Paris, 74
De:Bug (magazine), 143
Desert Moon, 49, 60
Diamond Sutra, 124
Dishwasher (zine), 112
DIWO (Do it with others), 114
DIY Book Scanner, 128-129
DIY (Do it yourself ), 114, 128-129,  
 154, 156
Documenta, 145-147, 163
Documenta 12 Magazines, 
 145-147, 163
Documents (journal), 35
DRM (Digital Rights Management), 
88-89
— E
e-book, 83-85, 87-89, 91, 94, 100,  
 105-106, 108-109, 153, 156, 
 163, 165
e-magazine, 87-88, 115
e-paper, electronic paper, 84-85, 
 87, 111
e-readers, 162
e-text, 84
e-zines, 98, 115EBay, 56
Ecofont, 116
Editoria Militante (group), 142
electronic texts archives,  98
Email Flyer Project (Devin), 110
Emory University, 123
Encyclopedia Britannica,  29
Entertainment Weekly (magazine),  
 98
EPUB, 87, 90, 97, 108, 160
Espresso Book Machine, 72, 74
Eternal Network, 38, 40
European Mail-Order Fluxshop, 39
Evening Standard (newspaper), 55
Evernote (software), 137
Everyday Science and Mechanics,   
84
Exact Editions, 99
Eye (magazine), 117
— F
Faber & Faber, 75-76
Faber Finds, 76
Facebook, 56, 74, 163 
Factsheet Five (zine), 45, 49, 59
Falling Times (Bielicky, Richter, Reinbold), 
65
Fascism, 34
Federated Media, 144
FedEx, 71
FeedJournal (magazine), 96
Firefox, 100
Flash (software), 101, 159
FlashPaper, 101
Flipboard (software),  155
Flirt (magazine), 144
FLOSS Manuals, 77
FLOSS, Free/Libre/Open Source Software,
 77
Fluid Interfaces Group, 110
Fluxus, 38-40, 42, 50, 140, 163
Fluxus Newspaper (journal), 39
181Fluxus Symphony Orchestra 
in Fluxus Concert, 39
FontFont, 81-82
Fontifier (software), 101
Fox News, 63
Free Words (Randolph), 148
From the Great Beyond (Lin), 98
Futurism, 33-34
— G
Gas Book (CD-ROM magazine), 48
Gigapedia.com, 123
Global Mail (zine), 46
Google, 11, 56, 60, 62, 65, 79, 85, 95, 
 105, 118-121, 122, 125, 128, 163
Google Books, 11, 85, 120-121, 128
Google Fast Flip, 95
Google Labs, 62, 95
Google News, 56, 65, 95, 120
Google Street View, 105
Green Apple Books, 88
Grrrl Zine Network, 142
Guardian (newspaper), 7, 57
Gyricon, 85
— H
heliography, 47
Herald Tribune (newspaper), 22
Herb Seed (Recycled Ideas), 116
Herbivore (zine), 60
Hewlett-Packard, 71
Hogeschool Rotterdam, 165
Hot Wired, 114
— I
i left this here for you to read (Devin), 
147
IBM, 25
iBooks, 90-91
iBookstore, 90
If You (Rin), 97
Il Fatto Quotidiano (newspaper), 100Il Male (magazine), 46
Industrial Workers of the World (IWW), 
36
Information Design Lab, 90-91
Inhabitat, 116
Inkwell (software), 101
Insekten Sekte (zine), 140
Institute for Infinitely Small Things, 
149
InStyle (magazine), 61
Intelligent Information Laboratory, 
61
Interactive Telecommunications Program, 
57
International Organization for Standardization, 
101
Internet Archive, 104, 121-123
Internet Bookmobile, 104
iPad, 87, 89-93, 97
iPaper, 101
iPhone, 101
iPod, 17, 89, 132
Issuu, 99
iTunes, 57, 60, 89
— J
Japanese Magazine Publishers Association (JMPA), 
58
— K
keitai, keitai shousetsu, 97
Kickstarter, 71, 156
Kindle, 85-88, 101, 105
KindleGen (software), 88
Kirtas Technologies, 123
Knight Ridder, 90, 92
KRON-TV, 55
KUDA Media Center, 144
— L
L’Italia futurista (magazine), 34
L=A=N=G=U=A=G=E (zine), 126
182La Nature (journal), 35
La Révolution 
Surréaliste (magazine), 35
La Risata (Boccioni), 34
Lacerba (magazine), 34
Langlois Foundation, 126
Launch (CD-ROM magazine), 48
Le Monde Diplomatique (newspaper), 
46
Lega degli editori democratici (group), 
142
Liberation News Service, 42, 141
Library of Alexandria, 121
Library.nu, 123
Lightning Source, 71
Literaturwurst (Rot), 165
Little Printer (Berg Cloud), 96
LiveJournal (software), 111
Living Stories, 62
Love Sky (Mika), 98
Lulu, 71, 108, 149
— M
Macmillan, 105
Mag Nation, 79
Mag.net (Magazine Network for Electronic Cultural Publishers),  
143-144, 145, 165
Magazine Library, 78
mail art, 40, 44-46, 48, 140
Mainichi Shimbun (newspaper), 96
Make (magazine), 114
Maximumrocknroll (zine), 44, 141
McCormick School of Engineering, 
62
Medill School of Journalism, 62
Meet the Press, 47
Memex, 24
Merz (magazine), 36
Microcard, 104
mimeo, mimeograph, 36-38, 42, 43
mimoZine (USB zine), 102Mine (magazine), 61
Minotaure (magazine), 35
MIT Media Lab, 110
MMS, 58
Modern History (Charlesworth), 95
MOMA, 165
Money (magazine), 61
More is More, 147
Mstand, 99
Multitudes (journal), 146
Mute (magazine), 71, 143, 147
My Life in Tweets (Bridle), 73
— N
N Gen (software), 81
NamelessleTTer, 148
Narrative Science, 62
National Archives, 88
net.art, 54
Netscape, 56
Neural (magazine), 139, 143, 163, 
 164
New American Dictionary: Security/Fear Edition (Institute for Infinitely Small Things), 
149
New Museum, 56
New York Correspondence School Weekly Breeder (zine), 
44-45
New York Sun (newspaper), 22
New York Times (newspaper), 22, 
 49, 51, 53, 55, 56, 58, 61-63, 85, 95, 
 109, 130
New York Times Roulette (Vydra’s),  
61
New York Times Special Edition (The Yes Men, Lambert, The Anti-Advertising Agency), 
51-53, 63
New York University, 57
New York World Telegram (newspaper), 
22
New Yorker (magazine), 41
Newark Daily 
183Advocate (newspaper), 72
News at Seven, 61
News Knitter (Kurbak, Yavuz), 62
Newsmap (Weskamp), 65
Newspaper via Radio Facsimile, 
 95-96
NewspaperDirect, 99
Newstweek (Oliver, Vasiliev), 51
Newsweek (magazine), 24, 51, 86
Northwestern University, 61
Noteboek (Lohbeck), 110
— O
O’Reilly, 88, 115
Occupy, 156
OCR, 122, 126, 128
Old News (Mandiberg), 58
Open Content Alliance, 123
Open Publishing Lab, 96
open source, 74, 77, 78
Open Source Publishing,  78
OpticBook 3600, 101
Optigraph, 103
Oracle, 41
Other Books & So, 163
Other Scenes (zine), 42
Ottawa Citizen (newspaper), 23
— P
Page2Pub (software), 96
Pamphlet (Smits), 66
PaperKiller (software), 28
PaperofRecord.com, 120
Parabólica (magazine), 144
Parole in Libertà (Marinetti), 34
PC Magazine (magazine), 58
PDF mags, 99
PDF, Portable Document Format,  
51, 59, 68, 70-72, 87, 90, 94, 99-101, 
 108-109, 116, 124, 126-127, 134, 
 137, 155, 159-160
PediaPress, 94Pencil Printer (Lee, Jeong, Yoon),  
116
penny press, 79
perzine, 111
photo-book, 71
Photostatic Retrograde (zine), 127
Piet Zwart Institute, 100
Pirate Bay, 100, 109
Pirate Coelho, 109
Pirates of the Amazon, 100
plantable paper, 116
Play (magazine), 58
Playboy (magazine), 123-124
Playgirl (magazine), 58
Plustek, 101
POD, print on demand, 70-78
Poesia (magazine), 33
Popular Science (magazine), 86
PostScript, 81, 159
Press Display, 115
Princeton University, 105
Print Gocco, 45
PRINT/pixel (conference), 69
Profane Existence (group), 141
Project Gutenberg, 84
Prounen (Lissitzky), 35
Pulse (software), 155
Punk, Punk Planet (zine), 59-60
Punti Rossi, 142
— Q
Qipit (software), 101
QR code, 155
— R
Radical Software (magazine),  
126-127
Rand Corporation, 127
Ranters, 32
Readability, 94
Readefine (Sasikumar),  94
Readies (Brown), 19-20
184readme.cc, 150
Reason (magazine), 75
reCAPTCHA (software), 122
Recycled Ideas, 116
Reference Finder, 104
reflowability, 97-98, 160
RFID, 62
riot grrrl, 141
RIXC, 143
Robotlab, 105-106
Rochester Institute 
of Technology,  96
Rocky Mountain News (newspaper), 
55
Rolling Stone (magazine), 148
Romanticism, 33
Rosetta Disk, 124-125
Rote Armee Fraktion,  46
— S
sab0t (zine), 68
samizdat, 38
San Francisco Chronicle (newspaper), 
55
San Francisco Examiner (newspaper), 
55
ScanDock (software), 101
Scribd, 101
Seattle Post-Intelligencer (newspaper), 
55
Sharp Corporation, 96
Shifd, 62
shopdropping, 148
Signwave Auto-Illustrator (Ward), 
81
Simon & Schuster, 105
Slow Information, 117
Smart Design, 90
Smell of Books™, 89
Sniffin’ Glue (zine), 45
Something Else Press, 39
Sony Walkman, 90speaking telegraph, 16
Sports Illustrated (magazine),  
61, 92
Springerin (magazine), 143, 145
Stack Magazines, 79
Stack View (Goldenson), 105
Stalinist U.S.S.R., 38
Stammheim Prison, 46
Stats Monkey (software), 62
StatSheet, 61
Steal This Book (Hoffman), 134
Streetlevel (magazine), 144
Stump (Jeremijenko), 116
Subsol (magazine), 144
Surrealism, surrealist, 31, 35, 46
— T
TAG, 69
Teatro sintetico futurista, 34
tele-paper, 55
Telestreet, 68
Teletype, 84
Text 2.0, 93
Texts Collection (Internet Archive), 
121
The Anti-Advertising Agency, 51
The Bachelor Machine (Leu), 76
The Economist (magazine), 16
THE ELECTRO-LIBRARY (Lissitzky), 
36, 103
The Last Newspaper (exhibition), 56
The New Art of Making Books (Carrión), 
163
The Office (TV series), 89
The Open Library, 123
The Playboy Cover to Cover Hard Drive, 
123-124
The Printed Blog (magazine), 96
The Quick Brown (Puckey), 63-64
The Times Of New York (Wong),   
88-89
The Yes Men (group), 51-53, 63
185theblogpaper (magazine), 96
thehumanprinter (Naunton 
Morgan), 107
Think Publishing, 144
Time Slip (Schmitt), 64
Time, Time, Inc., 24, 61, 92
Topography of Typography (Lissitzky), 
35, 103
Transmediale, 69
Traumgedanken (Fischer), 94
Travel+Leisure (magazine), 61
Trybuna Ludu (newspaper), 46
Tucson Citizen (newspaper), 55
Tweetbook (Bookapp), 74
Tweetghetto, 74
Twitter, tweet, 7, 57, 73-74, 163
— U
Ubuntu Linux, 108
Umelec (magazine), 144
Underground Press Syndicate,  
42, 141
Undo (magazine), 143
UNESCO, 121
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 
84
University of Michigan’s Shapiro Library, 
74
University of Pennsylvania, 123
Urb (magazine), 58
Usenet, 120
— V
vanity press, 10, 72-74
Variant (magazine), 144
Vibe (magazine), 58
Village Voice (newspaper), 41
Virtual Printer, 71
Visionaire (magazine), 107
VIV (magazine), 92— W
Wall Street Journal (newspaper),   
57
Washington Post (newspaper), 62
we-make-money-not-art.com,  
114-115
Whig Party, 140
Whole Earth Catalog (magazine),   
43, 141
Wikipedia, 29, 56, 58, 94, 130, 
 133, 146
Willem de Kooning Academy, 69
Wired (magazine), 75, 114
WordFlashReader (software), 102
Wordperhect (Takahashi), 110
Wordpress, 111
World Digital Library, 121
WorldCat, 123
Written Images (Bichsel, Fuchs), 155
WWF, World Wide Fund for Nature, 
116
— X
X Ray (zine),  45
Xerox, 25, 43, 45, 70, 75, 84, 116
Xerox Corp.’s Palo Alto Research Center (PARC), 
26, 84
Xerox iGen3, 75
XML, 97
— Z
Zapatista, 68
Zehar (magazine), 144
Zinio, 59
186
187(Name index) 
— A
Acker, Kathy, 49
Akasegawa, Genpei, 39
Andreessen, Marc,  56
Arora, Nikesh, 121 
Auzina, Ieva, 143
— B
Backstrom, Lars, 102
Bair, Peggy, 91
Banner, Fiona,  74
Bantjes, Marian, 76
Barach, Arnold B., 104
Baroni, Vittore, 46
Bataille, Georges, 35
Batchen, Geoffrey, 131
Becker, Christopher, 45
Beiguelman, Giselle, 28
Berardi, Franco‚ ‘Bifo’ , 53, 68
Berlusconi, Silvio, 106, 164
Berzowska, Joanna, 111
Bezos, Jeff, 85-88
Bichsel, Peter, 76, 155
Bielicky, Michael,  65
Blake, William, 33 
Boccioni, Umberto, 34
Bolter, Jay David, 54
Borges, Jorge Luis, 28, 125 
Bouchet, Mike, 133
Boyle, Harry J., 23
Brand, Stewart, 43
Branwyn, Gareth, 49, 111  
Brecht, George, 40
Breton, André, 31, 35
Bridle, James, 73
Brown, Bob, 19-20 
Brown, Dan, 109
Buccellato, Felix, 88Buergel, Roger M., 146
Bunz, Mercedes, 143
Bush, Vannevar, 24
— C
Calvino, Italo, 89
Canetti, Patricia, 146
Canova, Antonio, 106
Carrión, Ulises, 163, 165
Cascone, Kim, 162 
Cassirer, Ernst, 163
Castelo, Claudia, 144
Ceausescu, Nicolae, 38
Charlesworth, Sarah, 95
Cirio, Paolo, 134, 164
Coelho, Marcelo, 111
Coelho, Paulo, 109
Cohen, Allen, 41
Cooper, Dennis,  48
Coover, Robert, 27-28
Ćosić, Vuk, 54
Cox, Barney, 117
Cramer, Florian, 162
Crinkle, Nym, 73
— D
Dair, Tom, 90
Debatty, Régine, 114-115
Decapitator, 148
Devin, Tim, 110, 147
Dickson, Malcolm, 144
Doctorow, Cory, 88, 108-109
— E
Edison, Thomas Alva, 24, 36
Eraso, Miren, 144
Ericson, Kate, 88
— F
Fidler, Roger, 90-92
Filliou, Robert, 40
Fischer, Maria, 94
188Fitzpatrick, Brad, 111
Flood, Richard, 56
Frauenfelder, Mark, 114
Friedman, R. Seth, 49
Fuchs, Martin, 77, 155
— G
Garvey, Ellen Gruber 135-136
Gibson, William, 50
Gleick, James, 118
Godsill, Benjamin, 56
Goldenson, Jeff, 105
Gunderloy, Mike, 49
Gutenberg, Johannes, 15, 28, 
 31-32, 66, 73, 84, 93, 162
— H
Hall, Lyndl, 111
Harper, Richard, 24, 26, 67, 93  
H. R. Hart, Michael, 84
Hayles, Katherine, 29
Held Jr., John, 44
Higgins, Dick, 39, 50
Hitchcock, Steve, 44
Hoffman, Abbie, 134
Hyde, Adam, 77
— I
Ilich, Fran, 68, 143
— J
John Paul II, Pope, 46
Jeong, Seunghwa, 116
Jeremijenko, Nathalie, 116
Jimenez, Pedro, 144
Johnson, Phyllis, 40
Jordan, Pete, 112
— K
Kahle, Brewster, 104, 123
Kleinberg, Jon, 102
Knoebel, Anna and Tess,  79Kösch, Sascha, 143
Kostelanetz, Richard, 45
Krekovic, Slavo, 144
Kurbak, Ebru, 62
— L
LaGuardia, Fiorello, 22
Lambert, Steve, 51, 52
Landow, George P., 28, 67, 93
Lee, Hoyoung, 116
Leskovec, Jure, 102
Lessig, Lawrence, 109
Leu, Per-Oskar, 76
Levy, Steven, 86-87
Licklider, J.C.R., 25
Lin, Fang-Yu ‚ ‘Frank’ , 98
Lissitzky, El, 35-36, 103
Lohbeck, Evelien, 110 
Lukic, Kristian,  144
— M
Maciunas, George, 39
Maes, Pattie, 111
Mandiberg, Michael, 58
Manzetti, Innocenzo, 16
Marinetti, Filippo Tommaso, 19, 
 33-34
Markoff, John, 49
Marx, Karl, 46 
Matthews, Rob, 133
Mayer, Marissa, 60
McLuhan, Marshall, 21-24, 66, 87, 
 93, 95, 114, 126, 131, 135, 163 
Meyer, Philip, 56
Mod, Craig, 93, 97
Morgan, Louise Naunton, 107 
Muller, Nat, 67
Murphie, Andrew,  64
— N
Newman, Steve, 55
Noack, Ruth, 146
189— O
Obama, Barack, 51, 63, 87
Oliver, Julian,  51
O’Neil, Mathieu, 139
Ortiz, Carme, 144
Orwell, George, 88
Owens, Ashley Parker, 46
— P
Paine, Thomas, 32-33
Pake, George E., 26
Papini, Giovanni,  34
Parker, Philip M., 77
Phillpot, Clive, 165
Pound, Ezra, 19
Proulx, Annie, 87
Puckey, Jonathan, 63-64
— R
Ramelli, Agostino, 103
Randolph, Sal, 148
Reinbold, Dirk, 65-66
Richardson, Joanne, 144
Richter, Kamila B., 65-66
Rider, Fremont, 103
Rifkin, James, 119
Robida, Albert, 17, 83, 91
Rose, Joel, 48
Rot, Dieter, 165
Rothenberg, Jeff, 127
Ruesga, Julian, 144
— S
Šarić, Marin, 121
Sasikumar, Anirudh, 94
Schmidt, Eric, 56
Schmidt, Karsten, 75-76 
Schmitt, Antoine, 64
Schöllhammer, Georg, 143, 145-146
Schwartz, Stephen, 50
Schwartz, Tim, 132
Schwieger, Marc, 57Schwitters, Kurt, 36
Sellen, Abigail J., 24, 26, 67, 93
Shakira, 148
Sheridon, Nick, 85
Shirky, Clay, 57, 73
Shuttleworth, Mark, 108
Sinclair, Carla, 114
Sir, Vladan, 144 
Smith, Paul, 116
Smits, Helmut, 68
Stallman, Richard M., 88
Standage, Tom, 16
Stein, Gertrude, 19 
Sulzberger, Arthur Jr., 55
— T
Takahashi, Tomoko, 110
Texier, Catherine, 48
Thomson, Robert, 57
Tozzi, Tommaso, 47
Trepte, Cody, 132
Trotsky, Lev, 36
Twain, Mark, 136
Tzara, Tristan, 34
— U
Ubermorgen, 134, 164
Uzanne, Octave, 17-18, 21, 83, 91 
— V
Vasiliev, Danja, 51
Verne, Jules, 20
Villaespesa, Mar, 144
Villemard, 18
Vydra, Daniel, 61
— W
Wales, Jimmy, 56, 58
Walker, Scott, 102
Ward, Adrian, 81
Watson, Steve, 79
Welch, Chuck, 40
190Wells, Herbert George, 20
Weskamp, Marcus, 65 
Wilcock, John, 42
Wojtyla, Karol, 46
Wong, Tobias, 88
Worthington, Simon, 71, 143
— Y
Yavuz, Mahir Mustafa, 62
Yoon, Jin-young, 116
— Z
Ziegler, Mel, 88
191Onomatopee 77: Cabinet Project
Post-Digital Print – The Mutation of Publishing since 1894
ISBN: 978-90-78454-87-8
Text: Alessandro LudovicoAfterword by: Florian CramerDesign: Eric de Haas (TheNewStudio)Heavy editing: Joe Monk, Monastic Language, RotterdamMade possible by: 
Kenniscentrum Creating 010, Hogeschool RotterdamPiet Zwart Institute, Willem de Kooning Academy, Rotterdam
Printer: Lecturis, EindhovenProject manager: 
Florian CramerEllen Zoete
Edition: 1000© 2012 the authorOnomatopee 
Bleekstraat 235611 VB Eindhoven
Creating 010
Instituut voor Onderzoek en InnovatieHogeschool RotterdamMuseumpark 403015 CX Rotterdam
This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported License. To view a copy of this license, visit http:/ /creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-
sa/3.0/ or send a letter to Creative Commons, 444 Castro Street, 
Suite 900, Mountain View, California, 94041, USA.
192
