My Mother Was a Computer 
DIGITAL SUBJECTS AND LITERARY TEXTS 
N. Katherine Hayles 
The University of Chicago Press CHICAGO AND LONDON 
N. KATHERINE HAYLES is the Hillis Professor of Literature at the Univer­
sity of California, Los Angeles. She is the author of four books, most recently 
How We Became Posthuman: Virtual Bodies in Cybernetics, Literature, and 
Informatics. 
The University of Chicago Press, Chicago 60637 
The University of Chicago Press, Ltd., London 
© 2005 by The University of Chicago 
All rights reserved. Published 2005 
Printed in the United States of America 
14 13 12 11 10 09 08 07 06 05 
ISBN: 0-226-32147-9 (cloth) 
ISBN: 0-226-32148-7 (paper) I 2 3 4 5 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in -Publication Data 
Hayles, N. Katherine. 
My mother was a computer : digital subjects and literary texts / 
N. Katherine Hayles. 
p.cm. 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN 0-226-32147-9 (cloth: alk. paper) -ISBN 0-226-32148-7 (pbk.: alk. 
paper) 
1. Computational intelligence. 2. Human-computer interaction. 
3. Computers in literature. 4. Virtual reality. 5. American literature-
20th century-History and criticism. 1. Title 
Q342.H39 2005 
006.3-dc22 
@J The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of 
the American National Standard for Information Sciences-Permanence of 
Paper for Printed Library Materials, ANSI Z39-48-1992. 
To my mother, who was not a computer 
Contents 
Acknowledgments 
Prologue: Computing Kin 
PART I. Making: Language and Code IX 
1 Intermediation: Textuality and the Regime of Computation 15 
2 Speech, Writing, Code: Three Worldviews 39 
3 The Dream ofInformation: Escape and Constraint in the Bodies of 62 
Three Fictions 
PART II. Storing: Print and Etext 
4 Translating Media 
5 Performative Code and Figurative Language: Neal Stephenson's 
Cryptonomicon 
6 Flickering Connectivities in Shelley Jackson's Patchwork Girl 
PART III. Transmitting: Analog and Digital 
7 (Un)masking the Agent: Stanislaw Lem's "The Mask" 
8 Simulating Narratives: What Virtual Creatures Can Teach Us 
9 Subjective Cosmology and the Regime of Computation: 
Intermediation in Greg Egan's Fiction 
Epilogue: Recursion and Emergence 
Notes 
Works Cited 
Index 143 
171 
193 
214 
241 
245 
265 
279 
Acknowled gments 
In the four or five years this book has been swirling around in my thoughts, 
it has benefited from the insights of many friends and colleagues who have 
been generous enough to converse with me and to read all or part of the 
manuscript. I began this project, and to some extent finished it, feeling 
intensely ambivalent about the Regime of Computation, and so I found 
this input from others an invaluable way of testing and refining my ideas. 
Among those who read and commented on drafts or offered valuable in­
sights in conversation are Jay Bolter, Nathan Brown, Dino Buzzetti, John 
Cayley, Bruce Clarke, Mats Dahlstrom, Johanna Drucker, Michael Dyer, 
Dene Grigar, Mark Hansen, Linda Henderson, Jerzy Jarzebski, John John­
ston, Michael Kandel, Matthew Kirschenbaum, Kate Marshall, Jerome 
McGann, Brian McHale, Anne Mellor, Adelaide Morris, Mark Poster, Jessica 
Pressman, Rita Raley, Mark Rose, Stephanie Strickland, Peter Swirski, Thorn 
Swiss, Joseph Tabbi, John Unsworth, Carol Wald, and Noah Wardrip-Fruin. 
Greg Egan, Shelley Jackson, Karl Sims, and Neal Stephenson received drafts 
graciously and provided material help. Alan Liu, a reader for the University 
of Chicago Press, made many valuable suggestions for revision in a report 
that was exceptionally helpful. David Toole's astute copyediting made many 
improvements in the manuscript. Other colleagues too numerous to name 
provided thoughtful and useful comments along the way, and to all of them 
I owe a debt of gratitude. 
My work was greatly facilitated by a Senior Fellowship from the National 
Endowment for the Humanities; a President's Research Fellowship from 
the University of California; a fellowship from the Zentrum fur Literatur­
forschung in Berlin, Germany; several Senate Research Grants from the Uni­
versity of California, Los Angeles; a Rockefeller Foundation Fellowship for 
Residence at Bellagio; and research funds provided by the John Charles Hillis 
Endowed Chair. I am grateful for this generous support. Alan Thomas at the 
University of Chicago Press awaited the manuscript with patience and gave 
unfailing support throughout the process. Carol Wald, Nathan Brown, and 
Michael Fadden provided valuable research assistance and generous intel­
lectual exchanges. Thomas Wortham and Lynn Batten helped more than I 
can say with their superb administr ative skills and their generous accom­
modation of teaching requests so as to allow concentrated research time. 
lowe a special debt of gratitude to my good friend Marjorie Luesebrink, 
whose suggestions, support, readings, and comments thread through this 
book and make it better than it otherwise would have been. My husband 
Nicholas Gessler provided so many ideas, comments, suggestions, refer­
ences, and information that I scarcely know where to start acknowledging 
his contributions, except to say that the book would not have been the same 
without him. 
In somewhat different form, chapters of this book have appeared as es­
says, and I am grateful for permission to reprint the following: Chapter 3 
appeared as "Escape and Constraint: Three Fictions Dream of Moving from 
Energy to Information;' in From Energy to Information, edited by Linda 
Henderson and Bruce Clarke (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2002), 
235-54; © 2002 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Jr. Univer­
sity, used by permission of the publisher. Chapter 4 appeared as "Translating 
Media: Why We Should Rethink Textuality;' Yale Journal of Criticism 6, no. 3 
(2003): 263-90; used by permission of The Johns Hopkins University Press. 
Chapter 5 was published as "Performative Code and Figurative Language: 
Neal Stephenson's Cryptonomicon," in The Holodeck in the Garden: Science 
and Technology in Contemporary American Fiction, edited by Peter Freese 
and Charles B. Harris (New York: Dalkey Archive Press, 2004), 2-27; used 
by permission of the publisher. Chapter 6 appeared in significantly differ­
ent form as "The Invention of Copyright and the Birth of Monsters: Flick­
ering Connectivities in Shelley Jackson's Patchwork Girl;' Postmodern Cul­
ture 10, no. 2 (January 2000), http:// www.iath.virginia.edu/pmc. Chapter 8 
appeared as "Simulated Narratives: What Virtual Creatures Can Teach Us," 
Critical Inquiry 26, no. 1 (Autumn 1999): 1-26. Most of this material was also 
presented at various conferences and invited lectures, and I am grateful to 
all those who offered valuable comments that helped me rethink and refine 
my arguments. 
Finally, my greatest debt is to my family, and especially my mother, with­
out whom none of this would have been possible. To them I give my deepest 
thanks and affection. 
X ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Prologue 
Computing Kin 
On the Title 
In Neal Stephenson's Cryptonomicon, the fictional mathematical genius Law­
rence Pritchard Waterhouse is showing off his new mechanical invention to 
his supervisor, Lieutenant Colonel Earl Comstock. Comstock inquires: 
"If you had to give a name to the whole apparatus, what would you call it?" 
"Hmmm;' Waterhouse says. "Well, its basic job is to perform mathematical calcu­
lations-like a compute r." 
Comstock snorts, "A computer is a human being:' (600) 
The dialogue reflects the historical fact that in the 1930S and 1940S, people 
who were employed to do calculations-and it was predomin antly women 
who performed this clerical labor-were called "computers." Anne Balsamo 
references this terminology when she begins one of the chapters in her book 
Technologies of the Gendered Body with the line I have appropriated for my 
title: "My mother was a computer." 1 Balsamo's mother actually did work as 
a computer, and she uses this bit of family history to launch a meditation 
on the gender implications of information technologies. For my purposes, 
the different interpretations of the sentence from World War II to the end of 
the twentieth century mark a shift from a society in which the intelligence 
required for calculations was primarily associated with humans to the in­
creasing delegation of these labors to computational machines. The sentence 
stands, therefore, as a synecdoche for the panoply of issues raised by the re­
lation of Homo sapiens to Robo sapiens, humans to intelligent machines. 2 
The semantic shock the sentence is likely to give us today is rooted not 
only in the shift from human to machine labor, but also in the feeling that a 
kinship category essential to human society has been violated. In this sense, 
the sentence alludes to what Hans Moravec, among others, has called our 
"postbiological" future: the expectation that the corporeal embodiment that 
has always functioned to define the limits of the human will in the future 
become optional, as humans find ways to upload their consciousness into 
computers and leave their bodies behind.3 In How We Became Posthuman, 
I argued strongly against this vision of the posthuman, ending the book 
with a call to contest for versions of the posthuman that would acknowledge 
the importance of embodiment and be conducive to enhancing human and 
nonhuman life on the planet. 
In the half decade since the publication of that book, computational tech­
nologies have penetrated even further into the infrastructure of developed 
countries. Pervasive computing, mobile communication devices, satellite 
networks, and Internet traffic have spread dramatically; and, correspond­
ingly, economic, manufacturing, transportation, and communication tech­
nologies have been tightly integrate d into globally mediated networks. As a 
result, the interplay between the liberal humanist subject and the posthu­
man that I used to launch my analysis in How We Became Posthuman has al­
ready begun to fade into the history of the twentieth century. In the twenty­
first century, the debates are likely to center not so much on the tension 
between the liberal humanist tradition and the posthuman but on different 
versions of the posthuman as they continue to evolve in conjunction with 
intelligent machines. 
In juxtaposing the p with the liberal humanist tradition, I ar­
gued that despite many important differences, some versions of the posthu­
man continued to reinscribe the disembodiment that was a prominent fea­
ture of the liberal tradition, insofar as it associated self with mind and saw 
the body as a mere container for the mind's operations. As new and more 
sophisticated versions of the posthuman have evolved, this stark contrast 
between embodiment and disembodiment has fractured into more com­
plex and varied formations. As a result, a binary view that juxtaposes dis­
embodied information with an embodied human lifeworld is no longer suf­
ficient to account for these complexit ies. Although I have not abandoned 
my commitment to the importance of embodiment, it seems to me that 
contemporary conditions call increasingly for understandings that go be­
yond a binary view to more nuanced analyses. From my perspective, this 
development requires repositioning materiality as distinct from physical­
ity and re-envisioning the material basis for hybrid texts and subjectivi ties. 
The thinking I did for my book Writing Machines has been crucial in al­
lowing me to work out the arguments advanced here. Writing Machines, 
How We Became Posthuman, and this book form a trilogy that arcs from the 
2 PROLO GUE 'osthuman 
mid-twentieth century to the present, a trajectory that moves from a binary 
opposition between embodiment and information through an engagement 
with the materiality ofliterary texts to a broadening and deepening of these 
ideas into computation and textuality. 
Materiality, as I defined it in Writing Machines, is an emergent property 
created through dynamic interactions between physical characteristics and 
signifying strategies. Materiality thus marks a junction between physical re­
ality and human intention. Following Bruno Latour's call for a turn from 
"matters of fact" to "matters of concern;' I like to think of materiality as 
the constructions of matter that matter for human meaning. 4 This view of 
materiality goes hand in hand with what I call the Computational Universe, 
that is, the claim that the universe is generated through computational pro­
cesses running on a vast computational mechanism underlying all of phys­
ical reality. For scientists making the strong claim for computation as on­
tology, computation is the means by which reality is continually produced 
and reproduced on atomic, molecular, and macro levels. In A New Kind of 
Science, Stephen Wolfram extends the claim to include biological systems 
and, indeed, complex behaviors of every kind, including social and cultural 
systems. 5 In this context, "My mother was a computer" can be understood as 
alluding to the displacement of Mother Nature by the Universal Computer. 
Just as Mother Nature was seen in past centuries as the source of both human 
behavior and physical real ity, so now the Universal Computer is envisioned 
as the Motherboard of us all. 
The appearance of the Computational Universe at a moment in human 
history when computers have achieved unparalleled scope and importance 
is obviously not coincidental. We might draw an analogy with eighteenth­
century commentators who, impressed by the reductive power of Newton's 
laws of motion and the increasing sophistication of time-keeping mecha­
nisms, proclaimed that the universe was a clockwork. 6 As Marjorie Hope 
Nicolson pointed out in the 1940S, the clockwork metaphor worked power­
fully to express the orderliness and predictability of a universe that moved 
with beautiful precision. 7 At the same time, it occluded other aspects of re­
ality that subsequently found expression in such diverse developments as 
Romantic poetry, quantum mechanics, and complexity theory. Similarly, 
the Computational Universe enables deeper insight and new intuitions into 
certain aspects of reality; we may safely assume that it also obscures other 
aspects of reality, including constructions of subjectivity that have tradition­
ally found expression in the humanities and social sciences. The friction be­
tween traditional views of subjectivity and a computational perspective is 
PROLOGUE 3 
one focus of this inquiry, but other foci are new configurations that put tra­
ditional and computational perspectives into synergistic cooperation with 
one another. 
In the course of this book, I offer my own commentary on the Com­
putational Universe, including a critical interrogation of current research 
claims. My primary interest, however, is not in separating the Computa­
tional Universe as the means by which reality is generated from its function 
as a metaphor for understanding natural and cultural processes. Rather, I 
am interested in the complex dynamics through which the Computational 
Universe works simultaneously as means and metaphor in technical and 
artistic practices, producing and also produced by recursive loops that en­
tangle with one another and with the diverse meanings of computation as 
technolo gy, ontology, and cultural icon. This dynamic interplay of recursive, 
multiple causalities becomes, I argue, the fertile ground for re-envisioning 
and remaking a wide variety of cultural artifacts, including computer sim­
ulations and literary texts. 
In addition to its associations with the Computational Universe and 
Mother Nature, the title also alludes to Friedrich Kittler's influential argu­
ment that reading functions as "hallucinating a meaning between letters 
and lines." 8 In Discourse Networks, Kittler notes that with the introduc­
tion of phonics in the nineteenth century, children were taught to read by 
sounding out words, first articulating them out loud and then subvocalizing 
them. 9 These practices gave "voice" to print texts, particularly novels-and 
the voice most people heard was the same voice that taught them to read, 
namely, the mother's, which in turn was identified with Mother Nature and 
a sympathetic resonance between the natural world and human meaning. 
In the contemporary period, reading as "hallucination" has been displaced 
in part by the instant messaging, chat rooms, video games, e-mail, and Web 
surfing that play such a large role in young people's experiences. To an ex­
tent, then, the mother's voice that haunted reading has been supplanted by 
another set of stimuli: the visual, audio, kinesthetic, and haptic cues emanat­
ing from the computer. If the mother's voice was the link connecting subjec­
tivitywith writing, humans with natural environments, then the computer's 
beeps, clicks, and tones are the links connecting contemporary subjectivi­
ties to electronic environments, humans to the Computational Universe. 
One strand of my analysis interrogates the effects of these pervasive inter­
actions on the construction of subjectivity and contemporary reading prac­
tices, charting the resulting shifts by locating both print and electronic texts 
in relation to computational practices. 
4 PROLOGUE 
Turning to the title's kinship implications, we can also understand "My 
mother was a computer" as the answer an artificial-l ife simulation might 
give if asked who its parent was. Researchers in the field frequently evoke 
human kinship terminology to describe computer simulatio ns; it is com­
mon, for example, to say that the computer (or more precisely, the pro­
gram) "gives birth" to evolving artificial biota. Such usage promiscuously 
mingles anthropomorphic projection with descriptive intent. In this sense 
"My mother was a computer" articulates a certain kind of anthropomorphic 
projection that creates (mis ) understandings of the computer's functioning. 
Mystifying the computer's actual operation, anthropomorphic projection 
creates a cultural Imaginary in which digital subjects are understood as au­
tonomous creatures imbued with human-like motives, goals, and strategies. 
This projection also has a reverse undertow, for it brings into question the 
extent to which human beings can be understood as computer programs. 
The "digital subjects" of the subtitle alludes to this dialectical positioning of 
humans and artificial creatures in relation to each other. Read as a phrase 
delineating an area of inquiry, "digital subjects" punningly connects the sub­
ject of digitality, especially the Computational Universe, with these hybrid 
'Subjectivities. 
Why literary texts, the other half of the subtitle? I am indebted to Alan 
Liu, a reader for the University of Chicago Press, for challenging me on this 
issue. In the first draft, I took the inclusion of literature to be more or less 
self-evident. I am, after ail, a literary critic (among other things). On fur­
ther reflection, however, I understand the question both as an indication 
ofliterature's increasingly marginal position in mainstream culture, where 
it competes and cooperates with such cultural phenomena as blockbuster 
movies and best -selling computer games, and as an invitation to rethink the 
role of literature in creating the contemporary cultural Imaginary. 
To elucidate my decision to include literary texts, I begin from a fun­
damental question. What resources do we have to understand the world 
around us? As Nicholas Gessler, among others, has pointed out, these re­
sources can be grouped into three broad categories: mathematical equa­
tions, simulation modeling, and discursive explanations. 10 Of mathemat­
ical equations, I have little to say, other than to note the point that Harold 
Morowitz, Stephen Wolfram, and others make about the limited usef ulness 
of mathematics in describing complex behaviors. Because complex systems 
exhibit nonlinear behaviors that typically cannot be described by equations 
having explicit solutions, the kind of mathematics that gave us classical me­
chanics and other triumphs of modern science has little traction in the case 
PROLOGUE 5 
of complex systems, which leaves us with simulations and discursive expla­
nations. 
There are, of course, many different forms of discursive explanations, 
including such preeminent nonliterary forms as history, philosoph y, and 
cultural anthropology. Among these discourses, literature is distinct for cre­
ating, as Marie-Laure Ryan puts it, "possible worldS:'ll Kittler's proposi­
tion that reading novels is like a hallucination highlights one ofliterature's 
main fascinations: its ability to create vividly imagined worlds in which 
readers can "hallucinate" scenes, actions, and characters so fully that they 
seem to leap off the page and inhabit the same psychic space as the readers 
themselv es. In this respect, literature functions more like simulations than 
do other discursive forms, because like computer simulations such as Karl 
Sims's "Evolved Virtual Creatures" (discussed in chapter 8), literary texts 
create imaginary worlds populated by creatures that we can (mis)take for 
beings like ourselves. 
There are also important differences between simulations and literary 
texts. Whereas computation is essential for simulations that model complex 
phenomena, literature's stock-in-trade is narrative, especially in the con­
temporary period when novels have become the preeminent literary form. 
Narrative is much older than simulation modeling in artificial media­
almost as old, many anthropologists believe, as the human species itself. 
Narrative, with its evocation of the human lifeworld, speaks to subjectiv­
ities that remain rooted in human perceptual systems, human languages, 
and human cultures. Simulations, by contrast, are essentially numerical cal­
culations. Although they can be rendered in visual forms that evoke the 
perceptible world that humans see (as is the case for Karl Sims's simula­
tions), these appearances are generated through algorithms that operate 
first and foremost with numerical quantitie s. Because computers are much 
better equipped than human minds to carry out the staggeringly tedious 
calculations involved in creating simulations, simulations are closely asso­
ciated with artificial intelligence and with postbiological subjectivit ies. The 
dynamic tensions between simulation and narrative thus involve a dialectic 
between the human lifeworld and the (relatively) inhuman world of massive 
numerical calculations. 
The traffic between language and code that this similarity /opposition sets 
up is one of the principal ways in which digital subjects and literary texts are 
interrogated and articulated together in this book. The two other modal­
ities highlighted here are the interpenetration of print and electronic text, 
and the dialectic between analog and digital representations. Together, these 
three dynamics can be parsed as making (language and code), storing (print 
6 PROLOGUE 
and electronic text), and transmitting (analog and digital). Making, storing, 
and transmitting can be thought of as modalities related to information; 
they also help to constitute the bodies of subjects and texts. Another way 
in which literary texts and digital subjects are articulated together is by an­
alyzing the effects of these modalities on their bodies. As an embodied art 
form, literature registers the impact of information in its materiali ty, in the 
ways in which its physical characteristics are mobilized as resources to create 
meanmg. 
This entanglement of the bodies of texts and digital subjects is one man­
ifestation of what I call "intermediation;' that is, complex transactions be­
tween bodies and texts as well as between different forms of media. Because 
making, storing, and transmitting imply technological functions, this mode 
of categorization insures that the different versions of the posthuman will 
be understood, in Kittlerian fashion, as effects of media. At the same time, in 
my analysis ofliterary texts and espec ially in my focus on subjectivity, I also 
insist that media effects, to have meaning and significance, must be located 
within an embodied human world. In refusing an either/or choice between 
media effects and a human lifeworld, I again invoke the necessity, as I did 
-in my repositioning of materiality, to think in terms of multiple causalities, 
complex dynamics, and emergent possibilities. As both computer simula­
tions and literary texts recognize, autonomous agents interacting recursively 
with one another and their environments can never be reduced to linear 
dynamics or simple causalities. The final and most important significance 
of My Mother Was a Computer: Digital Subjects and Literary Texts, as a title 
and as a book, is to insist on the irreducible complexity of contemporary 
posthuman configurations as they continue to evolve in digital subjects and 
literary texts, computer programs and human mindbodies. 
Method and Scope 
I turn now to the book's methodology and organization. Three main parts 
explore the distinct but related processes of making (through language and 
code), storing (as print and electronic text), and transmitting (through ana­
log and digital encoding). As noted earlier, making, storing, and transmit­
ting imply technological functions that are intimately co-involved. Their di­
vision here into separate parts helps to clarify their specific functionalities 
but should not obscure the fact that they constantly engage one another in 
dynamic and multiple recursive interactions. 
Within each part, different chapters emphasize theory, technolo gy, and 
thematics. In discussions of electronic literature and computer simulations, 
the emphasis on technology ensures that the analysis takes place not only 
PROLOGUE 7 
at the level of the screen but also at the level at which screenic effects are 
achieved. The emphasis on thematics allows me to integrate into the dis­
cussion close readings of different kinds of texts, ranging from print novels 
and electronic literature to computer simulatio ns used in scientific research. 
Both the technological and thematic analyses have theoretical implications, 
which the chapters emphasizing theory explore explicitly in ways that the 
other chapters test, confirm, modify, and extend. Theory, technolo gy, and 
thematics are, of course, in constant interaction with one another, so all the 
chapters have some of each, although usually one strand is predominant. 
The order in which I take up these three strands of inquiry varies from part 
to part. For example, the chapter devoted predomina tely to theory comes 
second in part 1, first in part 2, and last in part 3, whereas the chapter de­
voted to technology comes first in part 1, last in part 2, and second in part 3. 
In this regard, the organization of the book is flexible. 
Part 1, "Making: Language and Code;' focuses on the signifying processes 
oflanguage and code. To set the stage, chapter 1 develops the concept of in­
termediation and relates it to the technologies driving the Regime of Com­
putation. As a result of these developments, code assumes new importance 
as the lingua franca of nature. This raises the issue of how code can be re­
lated to theoretical frameworks for the legacy systems of speech and writing, 
the topic of chapter 2. From a systematic comparison of Saussure's semi­
otics, Derrida's grammatolo gy, and programming languages, implications 
emerge that reveal the inadequacy of traditional ideas of signification for 
understanding the operations of code. In instances where code becomes 
important-as is the case for virtually all forms of textuality in the digital 
age-the dynamics at work bring into question such long-held verities as the 
arbitrariness of the sign, while simultaneously highlighting processes given 
relatively little attention in Saussurean semiotics and Derridean gramma­
tology, such as the act of "making discrete." The result is a significant shift 
in the plate tectonics of signification, with a consequent rethinking of the 
processes through which texts emerge. The point is not simply to jettison 
the worldviews of speech and writing-even if by some miraculous fiat this 
were possible-but rather to understand the processes of intermediation by 
which they are in active interplay with the worldview of code. This endeavor 
necessarily assumes an understanding of the differences and similarities be­
tween these three worldviews, so in this sense chapter 2 lays the groundwork 
for the chapters that follow. 
Chapter 3 shows how bodies are interpolated differently as the technol­
ogy transforms from the passive code of the telegraph to the active code 
of sophisticated cybernetic devices and computer programming, moving 
8 PROLOGUE 
through Henry James's "In the Cage" (1898) to Philip K. Dick's The Three 
Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch (1966) and James J. Tiptree's "The Girl Who 
Was Plugged In" (1973). The protagonists of these narratives share a com­
mon desire to escape from the constraints oflife within a capitalistic regime, 
yearning to partake of an informational realm where goods flow freely and 
life escapes from being a zero-sum game. As the technology becomes more 
sophisticated, this dream is not fulfilled; instead, embodied subjects are in­
terpolated ever more tightly into a circuit controlled by capitalistic dynam­
ics. As bodies enter more completely into the circuit, subjects cease to be 
circumscribed by these dynamics and are constructed through them, a pro­
cess enacted in Tiptree's story with disconcerting literalness. The complex 
dynamic created when language meets code proves to be crucial in all three 
narratives, highlighting the processes of intermediation that cycle through 
these fictions. 
Part 2, "Storing: Print and Etext;' emphasizes the interactions of print and 
electronic literature as production systems. Chapter 4 is theoretically ori­
ented and argues that received ideas of the foundational concepts of work, 
text, and document should be reconceptualized to take materiality more 
fully into account. As I indicated above, materiality on this view cannot sim­
ply be collapsed into physicality but is an emergent property generated by 
interactions between a work's signifying strategies and the physical charac­
teristics it mobilizes as resources for its operations. This chapter argues that 
taking materiality seriously requires different models of subjectivity than 
those usually assumed in textual editing, as well as changed concepts of 
how embodied texts relate to one another. Here the cycles of intermedia­
tion are illustrated through the complex dynamics by which novels, films, 
Web sites, and other media forms interact with one another. Rather than 
holding up as an ideal a unitary convergent work to which variants can be 
subordinated (for example, by considering a novel as the "real" work and a 
film based on the novel as a more or less faithful enactment of the original), 
this chapter argues that we should conceptualize texts as clustered in assem­
blages whose dynamics emerge from all the texts participating in the cluster, 
without privileging one text as more "original" than any other. To articulate 
this approach further, I compare and analyze the contrasting ideas of Jorge 
Borges, Warren Weaver, and Walter Benjamin toward linguistic translation. 
Chapter 5 asks in what ways a text's existence as an electronic document 
matters, if its final output form is a print novel. Do the intervening stages, 
when the document consisted not of durable marks on paper but of flick­
ering voltages in a digital computer, leave their mark on the visible surface 
of the print book? Although the question might be easily answered in the 
PROLOGUE 9 
affirmative for print books that use computer technology to create innova­
tive typography and other visual effects difficult to achieve without a com­
puter, more challenging are the far more numerous instances of books that 
are entirely conventional in appearance, such as Neal Stephenson's Crypto­
nomicon. In the admittedly somewhat idiosyncratic case of Cryptonomicon, 
written by a print author who is also a computer programmer, digital pro­
cesses are deeply implicated in the text's construction and expressed through 
a subterranean narrative propelled by dialectical interactions between mu­
tating terms. At issue in this subterranean narrative are tensions between 
figurative language and performa tive code, between hackers who yearn to 
make information free and capitalistic moguls who want to convert it into 
a market commodity. In the convoluted configurations the text assumes, it 
both mimics and obscures its relation to a digital computer, at once cele­
brating its form as a print book and suggesting that hidden within it is a 
powerful command core based on code. Intermediation here is figured as 
an engine driving narrative reconfigurati ons, deriving its motive force from 
complex feedback loops between language and code, print novels and com­
puter programs. 
Exploring the relation between fragmented subjects, multiple distributed 
authorship, and digital textuality, chapter 6 builds on the argument of chap­
ter 2 that code goes farther in the direction of "making discrete" than speech 
and writing. Locating this electronic work in the context of Mark Rose's 
analysis of copyright battles in the eighteenth century, this chapter uses his 
conclusions, specifically the links he establishes between the literary work 
as intellectual property and the liberal humanist subject, as the backdrop 
against which Shelley Jackson's Patchwork Girl (1995) can be seen as a contes­
tation of the ideology implicit in the print novel as a literary form. Pushing 
toward new forms of subjectivity even as it enacts different kinds of textual 
configurations, Patchwork Girl both reinscribes the print novel and uses this 
reinscription to invent a form suitable for digital media. For the principal 
narrator, subjectivity cannot be separated from the digital technology that 
produces the work, leading to speculation about what it might mean to be a 
digital rather than analog subject. Intermediation here manifests itself in a 
complex entanglement of print and electronic text, continuous and discrete 
consciousness, language and code. 
Part 3, "Transmitting: Analog and Digital," takes up the distinction be­
tween the analog and digital, specifically with reference to its implications 
for subjectivity. Chapter 7 focuses on the intermediation between analog 
consciousness and digital program within a single creature; chapter 8 ex­
plores the dynamics between digital creatures living in computers and hu-
10 PRO LOG U E 
mans interacting with them; and chapter 9 takes up the highly speculative 
"postbiological" future when humans make digital computerized Copies of 
themselves that live in computers. As the ramifications broaden, at issue are 
the feedback loops not only between computation and human conscious­
ness but also between human consciousness and the nature of reality, envi­
sioned as the result of computational processes. In a recursive loop appro­
priate to intermediation, the epilogue cycles back to reconsider in a new light 
the issues raised in the first chapter, rethinking computation and embodi­
ment not as opposed visions of a posthuman future but as intermediating 
modalities, both of which are crucial to the human world in the present. 
As all of these chapters illustrate, making, storing, and transmitting are 
not so much distinct arenas of interaction as they are different analytical 
slices through the multidimensional dynamics of intermediatio n. The im­
plications for rethinking digital subjects and literary texts are extensive and 
include: understanding how the worldview of code is positioned in relation 
to the worldviews of speech and writing; forging new ways to think about 
the foundational terms "work," "text;' and "document"; recognizing the dif­
ferent ways in which print and electronic texts mobilize the processes that 
produce them; and exploring how computer simulations may be related to 
human subjectivity and consciousness. The intermediating processes that I 
partially and incompletely describe are operating in the contemporary mo­
ment to challenge received ideas about language, subjectivity, literary ob­
jects, and textuality, including both print and electronic forms. If nothing 
else, I hope this book will convince you that literary and cultural critics 
steeped in the print tradition cannot simply continue with business as usual. 
Needed are new theoretical frameworks for understanding the relation of 
language and code; new strategies for making, reading, and interpreting 
texts; new modes of thinking about the material instantiation of texts in dif­
ferent media; and new ways to put together scientific research with cultural 
and literary theory. Rethinking digital subjects and literary texts as interme­
diation will not be accomplished in a single moment or by anyone person. It 
is necessarily a collective and ongoing enterprise, to which I hope this book 
contributes. 
PROLOGUE 11 
1 MAI(I NG 
Language and Code 
1 Intermediation 
Textuality and the Regime of Computation 
language and Code 
Unnoticed by most, new languages are springing into existence, prolifer­
ating across the globe, mutating into new forms, and fading into obsoles­
cence. Invented by humans, these languages are intended for the intelligent 
machines called computers. Programming languages and the code in which 
they are written complicate the linguistic situation as it has been theorized 
for "natural" language, for code and language operate in significantly dif fer­
ent ways. 1 Among the differences are the multiple addressees of code (which 
include intelligent machines as well as humans), the development of code 
by relatively small groups of technical specialists, and the tight integration 
of code into commercial product cycles and, consequ ently, into capitalist 
economics. Although virtually everyone would agree that language has been 
decisive in determining the specificity of human cultures and, indeed, of the 
human species, the range, extent, and importance of code remain contro­
versial. Many people would argue that natural languages are much more 
broadly based than programming languages, a stance that relegates code 
to the relatively small niche of artificial languages intended for intelligent 
machines. Recently, however, strong claims have been made for digital algo­
rithms as the language of nature itself. If, as Stephen Wolfram, Edward Fred­
kin, and Harold Morowitz maintain, the universe is fundamentally compu­
tational, code is elevated to the lingua franca not only of computers but of 
all physical reality. 
Given these complexiti es, it has become an urgent task to understand in 
nuanced and theoretically sophisticated ways interactions between code and 
language. The scholarship on human languages is, of course, immense, and a 
smaller but still enormous quantity of research exists on programming lan­
guages. To date, however, criticism exploring feedback loops that connect 
the two kinds of language has been minimal. 2 At issue are the semiotica lly 
and materially distinct ways in which code and language operate, as well as 
the different contexts in which they emerge and develop. The task of un­
derstanding these differences is impeded by the diversity of the expert com­
munities attending to them, comprising humanists and linguists on the one 
hand and computer programmers and software engineers on the other. De­
spite the general lack of communication between these communities, pro­
gramming code and language interact continually in millions of encounters 
every day. The trading zones in which these negotiations occur are global in 
scope, penetrating deep into nearly every aspect of environments that rely 
on computers to carry out everyday tasks. Language alone is no longer the 
distinctive characteristic of technologi cally developed societies; rather, it is 
language plus code. 
This project aspires to contribute to our understanding of these complex­
ities by creating a theoretical framework in which language and code (in 
both its narrow and broader senses) can be systematically thought together. 
In addition, it explores through a series of case studies implications of the 
interactions of language and code for creative, technological, and artistic 
practice. The case studies focus on a range of issues, including the relation of 
print to electronic textuality, the constitution of subjectivity through bits as 
well as words, and the (mis )understandings through which humans interact 
with analog patterns functioning as metaphors for digital processes. 
In the next chapter, I consider the three principal discourse systems of 
speech, writing, and digital computer code. To focus my discussion, I choose 
as representative of speech the semiotic theories of Ferdinand de Saussure,3 
and of writing, the early texts of Jacques Derrida, especially Of Gramma­
tology, Positions, Writing and Difference, and Margins of Philosophy, works 
where he discusses the language system as theorized by Saussure and con­
trasts it with his theory of grammatolog y. My remarks on code are drawn 
from a number of sources; particularly important is the work of Stephen 
Wolfram, Edward Fredkin, Harold Morowitz, Ellen Ullman, Matthew Fuller, 
Matthew Kirschenb aum, and Bruce Eckel. 4 Further, I claim that theories 
about speech, writing, and code as represented by these sources are fraught 
with presuppositions, premises, and implications, in effect constituting 
what, for lack of a better term, I call "worldviews ." The worldviews of speech, 
writing, and code are inextricably entwined with the technological condi­
tions enveloping the theorists that developed these ideas, the philosophi­
cal, linguistic, and scientific traditions in which they claimed lineage, and 
the purposes toward which they wanted their work to contribute. From the 
comparison of these worldviews emerges a series of tensions and problem-
16 M A KIN G: LAN G U AGE AND COD E 
atics that will form the basis for the arenas of interaction-making, storing, 
and transmitting -central to contemporary creative practices in scientific 
simulations, digital arts, electronic literature, and print literature. 
The Regime of Computation 
To facilitate the comparison of speech, writing, and code, I want to explore 
the larger context in which code as performative practice is located. For this 
inquiry, let us backtrack for a moment to consider the relation of compu­
tation (and hence of code, the language in which computation is carried 
out) to preexisting models for understanding truth statements, especially 
classical metaphysics. Perhaps no philosopher in the last century has been 
more successful than Jacques Derrida in exposing the impossible yearning 
at the heart of metaphysics for the "transcendental signified;' the manifes­
tation of Being so potent it needs no signifier to verify its authentici ty. Yet 
Derrida repeatedly remarks that we cannot simply leave metaphysics be­
hind. 5 He frequently asserts that metaphys ics is so woven into the structure 
of Western philosoph y, science, and social structures that it continually im­
poses itself on language and, indeed, on thought itself, creeping back in at 
the very moment it seems to have been exorcised. In this sense, classical 
metaphysics plays the role of the hegemonic influence that makes Derrida's 
resistant writing necessary and meaningful as a cultural practice. Derrida's 
discourse, as he himself remarks, is "entirely taken up with the reading of 
[others'] texts" and in this sense can be considered parasitic. 6 In his early 
writings, this preoccupation focuses specifically on texts that reinscribe the 
metaphysical yearning for presence that he devotes himself to deconstruct­
ing. To paraphrase a notorious remark, if metaphysics did not exist, Derrida 
would have been forced to invent it. 
The worldview of computation also offers new answers to metaphysical 
questions, although in a very different way than Derridean grammatolog y. 
"Computation" in the sense it is used here connotes far more than the digi­
tal computer, which is only one of many platforms on which computational 
operations can run. Computation can take place in a variety of milieu and 
with almost any kind of material substrate. Leonard M. Adelman has pio­
neered the use of solutions of DNA as computational platforms for solving 
certain topological problems; Daniel Hillis recounts that as a child he made a 
computer out of Tinker toys; John von Neumann, brooding over the birth of 
the digital computer, envisioned computation taking place with giant iron 
I beams adjacent to a factory that could assemble them into patterns repre­
senting binary code. 7 
If computation is not limited to digital manipulations, binary code, or 
Intermedia tion:Textuality and the Regime of computation 17 
silicon, what is it? Alan Turing gave a formalist definition of computation 
in his famous 1936 article describing an abstract computer known as the 
Turing machine, the most general version of which is called the Universal 
Turing machine. The Universal Turing machine, as its name implies, can 
perform any computation that any computer can do, including computing 
the algorithm that constitutes itself. 8 The computational regime continues 
in the tradition of Turing's work by considering computation to be a process 
that starts with a parsimonious set of elements and a relatively small set of 
logical operations. Instantiated into some kind of platform, these compo­
nents can be structured so as to build up increasing levels of complexity, 
eventually arriving at complexity so deep, multilayered, and extensi ve as to 
simulate the most complex phenomena on earth, from turbulent flow and 
multiagent social systems to reasoning processes one might legitimately call 
thinking. 
The wide-reaching claims made for the Regime of Computation are dis­
played in Stephen Wolfram's A New Kind of Science. The ambition of this 
book is breathtaking, especially considering the modesty with which scien­
tists have traditiona lly put forth their claims. The book makes a fascinat­
ing contribution to the Regime of Computation, demonstrating through 
Wolfram's twenty years of research into cellular automata that simple rules 
can indeed generate complexity through computational means. Cellular au­
tomata have been around for decades. John von Neumann experimented 
with them, learning from Stanislaw Ulam how they could be reduced to a 
grid of two-dimensiona l cells; 9 Konrad Zuse in the 1950S suggested that they 
could form the basis for the physical universe; 10 in the 1990S researchers at 
the Santa Fe Institute, particularly Christopher Langton and his colleagues, 
explored the conditions under which cellular automata create, modify, and 
transmit information; 11 and John Conway showed that they could give the 
impression of living systems in his famous Game Of Life. 12 
The basic idea is disarmingly simple, illustrated through this typical con­
figuration. 13 Imagine a square grid, with each square representing a cell that 
can be either "on" or "off"; further suppose that we represent these states 
by black or white. An initial state is defined for each cell, as well as a set 
of rules telling each cell how to update its state. For example, a cell might 
have a rule specifying that it is "on" if two or more of its four neighbors 
are "on"; otherwise it is "off." Each cell in parallel then canvases the state of 
its neighbors and updates its state accordingly, while all of the other cells 
do the same. This update results in a new state for the system, which trans­
forms in yet another iteration during which all the cells again canvas their 
neighbors and update their states accordingly. With contemporary comput-
18 M A KIN G: LAN G U AGE AND COD E 
ing power, it is possible to run through hundreds or thousands of iterations 
in a relatively short time. Through extensive research into various categories 
of cellular automata with simple rules, Wolfram shows that these conceptu­
ally simple systems are nevertheless capable of emergent behaviors in which 
astonishingly complex patterns appear. In particular, he discovered that the 
one-dimensional cellular automata described by Rule no yielded a Univer­
sal Turing machine, previously thought possible only in complex cellular 
automata of high dimensions. 14 That it should prove possible to create a 
Universal Turing machine in a system this simple is indeed a remarkable 
discovery. 
Wolfram is not slow to draw sweeping implications from his work. He 
summarizes them in the Principle of Computational Equivalence, explored 
at length in chapter 12 of A New Kind of Science. In one of its formula­
tions, the principle states, "Whenever one sees behavior that is not obviously 
simple-in essentially any system-it can be thought of as corresponding to 
a computation of equivalent sophistication" (5). The principle, as I read it, 
has three interlocking claims. The first is that all complex behavior can be 
simulated computation ally, up to and including human thought and action 
(at least in principle ). The second claim is that complex systems are "com­
putationa lly irreducible" (6). Although the computations may be generated 
through simple rules (as are the cellular automata Wolfram discusses ), there 
is no way to shorten the labor of computing the system's behavior (for exam­
ple, by reducing it to mathematical equations). Simulating the behavior of 
these complex systems requires roughly the same amount of computation as 
the system itself puts forth to generate its actions, which implies a redistribu­
tion of intellectual labor. In a classical system susceptible to explicit solution, 
the equations may be difficult to solve but, once solved, serve to explain a 
wide variety of disparate behavior. For the cellular automata Wolfram dis­
cusses, the rules are extremely simple, but the labor of computing the be­
havior is intensive, requiring hundreds (or thousands or more) of iterations. 
The third claim, often not stated explicitly, is implied by the sweeping con­
sequences Wolfram envisions for his research. This is the strong claim that 
computation does not merely simulate the behavior of complex systems; 
computation is envisioned as the process that actually generates behavior in 
everything from biological organisms to human social systems. 
Wolfram's slide from regarding his simulations as models to thinking of 
them as computations that actually generate reality can be tracked at several 
places in his massive text. For example, he comments that "countless times 
I have been asked how models based on simple programs can possibly be 
correct, since even though they may successfully reproduce the behavior of 
Intermediation: Textuality and the Regime of Computation 19 
some system, one can plainly see that the system itself does not, for exam­
ple, actually consist of discrete cells that, say, follow the rules of a cellular 
automaton" (366). He answers this objection by claiming that "there is no 
reason that the model should actually operate like the system itself" (366). 
Elsewhere, however, he equivocates: 
My approach in investigating issues like the Second Law is in effect to use simple pro­
grams as metaphors for physical systems. But can such programs in fact be more than 
that? And for example is it conceivable that at some level physical systems actually op­
erate directly according to the rules of a simple program? ... At first the laws might 
seem much too complicated to correspond to any simple program. But one of the cru­
cial discoveries of this book is that even programs with very simple underlying rules 
can yield great complexity .... And so it could be with fundamental physics. Under­
neath the laws of physics as we know them today it could be that there lies a very simple 
program from which all the known laws-and ultimately all the complexity we see in 
the universe-emerges. (434) 
In this passage and in similar ones, Wolfram introduces a crucial ambi­
guity into his claims for the Computational Universe. At issue is whether 
computation should be understood as a metaphor pervasive in our cul­
ture and therefore indicative of a certain "climate of opinion" (in Raymond 
Williams's phrase) at the turn of the millennium, or whether it has ontolog­
ical status as the mechanism generating the complexities of physical reality. 
Rather than attempting to argue one side or the other of this controversial 
issue, I explore the implications of what it means to be situated at a cul­
tural moment when the question remains undecidable-a moment, that is, 
when computation as means and as metaphor are inextricably entwined as 
a generative cultural dynamic. As we shall see, this entanglement has ex­
tensive implications for the positioning of humans in relation to intelligent 
machines and the broader landscape of the Computational Universe. 
What does it mean to say that the Computational Universe functions si­
multaneously as metaphor and means? One way to understand their entan­
glement is through feedback loops that connect culturally potent metaphors 
with social constructions of reality, resulting in formulations that imagi­
natively invest computation with world-making power, even if it does not 
properly possess this power in itself. In The Second Self and Life on the 
Screen, Sherry Turkle shows compellingly that such feedback loops can dra­
matically influence how people perceive themselves and others. This influ­
ence extends even to the interactions of young children with intelligent toys. 
One of my favorite examples comes when one of her respondents, a shy and 
socially inept young man, comments, "Reality is not my best window." 
A second kind of feedback loop emerges when belief in the Computa-
20 M A KIN G: l A N G U AGE AND COD E 
tional Universe is linked with an imagined future through which anticipa­
tion cycles to affect the present. A striking example of the Regime of Compu­
tation,s ability to have real effects in the world, whatever its status in relation 
to the underlying physics, is the initiative to reorganize the U.S. military 
to pursue "network-centric warfare." Presupposing the ontology of code, 
military strategists argue that information has become a key military as­
set and that the U.S. military must be reorganized to take full advantage of 
it. They aim to abandon a centralized command/control structure in favor 
of a highly mobile and flexible force, a transformation that involves mov­
ing from platform-based strategies (based on tanks, airplanes, ships, etc.) 
to "network-centric" structures in which units are seen not as independent 
actors but as "part of a continuously adapting ecosystem." 15 Vice Admiral 
Arthur K. Cebrowski of the U.S. Navy and his collaborator, John J. Garstak, 
writing for the Naval Institute Proceedings Magazine, proclaim, "We are in 
the midst of a revolution in military affairs (RMA) unlike any seen since the 
Napoleonic Age." They quote Chief of Naval Operations Admiral Jay John­
ston to the effect that network-centric warfare marks a "fundamental shift" 
in military thinking (1). 
A principal advantage of network-centric warfare is the presumed abil­
ity to create "lock-out" effects through superior flexibility and speed. (The 
textbook example oflock-out occurred when video producers made the de­
cision to produce for VHS equipment instead of Beta, thus converting a 
slight numerical advantage in the marketplace into interrelated equipment­
content-consumption networks that decisively locked out Beta, despite the 
fact that in some ways it was technically superior to VHS). Cebrowski ar­
gues that lock-out can happen even faster in warfare and be even more 
decisive. Creating lock-out in military terms means acting fast and flexibly 
enough so that the opponent's very ability to plan strategically is disrupted. 
Cebrowski argues that such action demands a high-performance informa­
tion grid combined with interoperable sensor and engagement grids. More­
over, it also requires the ability to achieve "self-synchronization" in which 
the commander's intentions, instead of filtering from the top slowly down 
the chain of command, are activated through the bottom -up organization of 
flexible units called "swarms:' which can continually reorganize and restruc­
ture themselves (the nomenclature isno doubt indebted to the artificia l-life 
software called "Swarm:' designed to create self-organization and emergent 
behaviors). 
Anticipating a future in which code (a synecdoche for information) has 
become so fundamental that it may be regarded as ontological, these trans­
formations take the computational vision and feed it back into the present to 
Intermediation: Textuality and the Regime of Computation 21 
reorganize resources, institutional structures, and military capabilities. Even 
if code is not originally ontological, it becomes so through these recursive 
feedback loops. In Wetwares, Richard Doyle makes a similar observation 
about the belief that we will someday be able to upload our consciousness 
into computers and thereby effectively achieve immortality. Doyle com­
ments, "'Uploading: the desire to be wetware, makes possible a new tech­
nology of the self, one fractured by the exteriority of the future .... Up­
loading seems to install discursive, material, and social mechanism for the 
anticipation of an externalized self, a techno-social mutation that is perhaps 
best characterized as a new capacity to be affected by, addicted to, the fu­
ture" (133). 
We will return to the entanglement of means and metaphor in chapter 9 
through an analysis of Greg Egan's "subjective cosmology" trilogy: Quaran­
tine, Permutation City, and Distress. An enormously inventive writer, Egan 
is arguably the most admired and influential novelist associated with the 
Regime of Computation. In the trilogy, feedback cycles between human cog­
nition and the Computational Universe function to construct the nature of 
both reality and human beings. The novels will be contrasted with Slavoj 
Zizek's analysis of the symptom, which presupposes that such phantasmatic 
imaginations function as symptoms pointing toward repressed trauma and 
underlying psychopathologies. Thus in the final chapter we return to the 
issues raised here through a sharp contrast between a view that sees the 
Computational Universe as metaphoric and symptomatic, and one that sees 
the Computat ional Universe as physically real and deeply bound up with 
human thought. Through the encounter staged in chapter 9 between Egan 
and Zizek, the book cycles back to the beginning, although from the changed 
perspective articulated in the epilogue. 
I am, however, getting ahead of my story.· The third way in which the 
Computat ional Universe functions indeterminably as means and metaphor 
is through its current status as a provocative hypothesis that has neither won 
wide consensus nor been definitively disproved. Although many physicists 
remain skeptical of Wolfram's claims and of the Computational Universe 
generally, the idea of the Computational Universe has also attracted con­
siderable attention and speculation. To understand the controversy in more 
detail, let us return to explore the different levels at which the Computa­
tional Universe has been postulated to run. To this end, it will be useful 
to summarize where we are at this point by indicating how the Regime of 
Computation positions itself in relation to classical metaphysics. 
The regime reduces ontological requirements to a bare minimum. Rather 
than an initial premise (such as God, an originary Logos, or the axioms of 
22 M A KIN G: LAN G U AGE AND COD E 
Euclidean geometry) out of which multiple entailments spin, computation 
requires only an elementary distinction between something and nothing 
(one and zero) and a small set of logical operations. 16 The emphasis falls 
not on working out the logical entailments of the initial premises but on un­
predictable surprises created by the simulation as it is computed. The conse­
quences of a simulation are not logically entailed by the starting point, which 
is why there is no shortcut to the computational work of running the sim­
ulation, and why the behaviors of complex systems cannot be compressed 
into more economical expression such as mathematical equations. Conse­
quently, the Regime of Computation provides no foundations for truth and 
requires none, other than the minimalist ontological assumptions necessary 
to set the system running. Far from presuming the "transcendental signi­
fied" that Derrida identifies as intrinsic to classical metaphysics, computa­
tion privileges the emergence of complexity from simple elements and rules. 
Underscoring the point, Wolfram comments that "throughout most of his­
tory it has been taken almost for granted that such complexity-b eing so 
vastly greater than in the works of humans-could only be the work of a 
supernatural being" (3). Now complexity is understood as emerging from 
the computational processes that constitute the universe, and that changes 
everything. "The crucial idea that has allowed me to build a unified frame­
work;' Wolfram summarizes, " ... is that just as the rules for any system can 
be viewed as corresponding to a program, so also its behavior can be viewed 
as a computation" (5). 
Thinking along similar lines, Edward Fredkin has proposed a worldview 
that he calls "digital philosoph y," a term that, like Wolfram's remarks, im­
plicitlypositions itself as providing answers to metaphysical questions. Fred­
kin argues that the discrete nature of elementary particles indicates that the 
universe is discrete rather than continuous, digital rather than analog. Elec­
trons, protons, and neutrons always have charges represented by a small in­
teger (-1, +1, 0); atomic nuclei are composed of neutrons and protons that 
are always (relatively) small integers; other qualities like spin and charm are 
either integers or halves of integers. These observations are consistent with 
Fredkin's major thesis: that the universe is digital all the way down and, 
moreover, can be understood as software running on an unfathomable uni-­
versal digital computer. "Digital Philosophy carries atomism to an extreme 
in that we assume that everything is based on some very simple discrete pro­
cess, with space, time, and state all being discrete:' 17 Moreover, the discrete­
ness he takes as axiomatic implies that information is conserved, a radically 
different view than, for example, Ilya Prigogine's view of thermodynamic 
dissipative systems. 18 "Digital Philosophy supports the beliefs that at differ-
Intermediation: Textuality and the Regime of Computation 23 
ent levels information is often best thought of as digital, and processes can 
often be best understood as digital processes. Thus anything in the world of 
Digital Philosophy that is changing or moving does so in a manner similar 
to how things are made to change or move in the memory of a computer:' 19 
Acknowledging that quantum mechanics in some sense "works;' Fredkin 
argues that the theory is ugly because it is largely ad hoc, concluding that we 
should prefer digital mechanics because it yields a more intuitively plausi­
ble and beautiful picture, one so simple and coherent it can be grasped by 
schoolchildren . His theory implies that quantum mechanics may describe 
what happens at the quantum level but fails to penetrate into the essen­
tial mechanisms generating the behavior. These mechanisms, in his view, 
are discrete and computational. The proof that digital mechanics underlies 
quantum mechanics will be demonstrated, Fredkin believes, when his re­
search team is able to show that quantum mechanics emerges from the un­
derlying digital mechanics base (a goal so far not achieved, although some 
progress toward it has been made). He remarks, ''As one really understands 
the ideas ofDM [digital mechanics ], the currently accepted models oftime, 
space, and process begin to seem mystical. From a Digital perspective, con­
temporary models of fundamental physics are a bit like looking at an ani­
mated cartoon while assuming that it's reality: that the images are moving 
continuou sly. So far, everyone we have interviewed who buys'into Digital 
Philosophy has come to the conclusion that ordinary physics is a subject 
full of magic." 20 
Although Fredkin's claims are not as sweeping as Wolfram's, he too re­
mains confident that a computational approach will explain living as well 
as nonliving systems. "Most biologists do not think about the processes of 
life in the same ways as would a Digital Philosopher;' he remarks. "Yet some 
kind of information processing in living things begins with the informa­
tional process of sperm and egg combining and continues with differentia­
tion as a kind of computation based on inherited information, and finally, 
as is obvious for all creatures that move, behavior involves information pro­
cessing at a more familiar level."21 Yet most of his examples are drawn from 
particle physics and quantum mechanics, realms that operate at a much 
lower level of complexity than living organisms. 
Ray Kurzweil's criticism of Wolfram is telling in this regard; as Kurzweil 
points out, the cellular automata that Wolfram explores evolve complex pat­
terns at what might be called the first level of complexity, but these complex 
patterns never self -organize to create further levels of emergence and com­
plexity.22 They do not, for example, self-organize to create bacteria or even 
viruses, never mind more complex organisms such as a duck or a human. 
24 MAKI NG: LANG UAGE AND CODE 
Even if Wolfram and Fredkin are correct in their claims that at the particle 
level the universe is a computer, this claim does not preclude higher lev­
els of complexity emerging from different mechanisms, including analog 
processes (which can, of course, also be represented as computation, that 
is, analog computation rather than digital ). Kurzweil further criticizes Wol­
fram for downplaying the role of evolution as a mechanism favoring the 
emergence of complexity; Kurzweil suggests that emergence at higher levels 
of complexity may well require the selective pressures and fitness criteria 
essential to evolutionary explanations. 23 
At best, then, the claims of Fredkin and Wolfram are incomplete, espe­
cially with regard to the emergence of higher-order from lower-order com­
plexity. This is where the views of Harold Morowitz and like-minded re­
searchers become important, for they offer a way to think about emergence 
as a process that not only operates at a single level of complexity but also 
continues up a dynamical hierarchy oflinked systems to produce complex­
ities out of complexi ties. In The Emergence of Everything: How the World 
Became Complex (a glitzy title for a good book), Morowitz reviews twenty­
eight stages in the history of the cosmos to show that they can be charac­
terized as emergent processes, each of which builds on the complexities that 
emerged from the preceding level. 
"Emergence" carries special weight in this discourse. The term refers to 
properties that do not inhere in the individual components of a system; 
rather, these properties come about from interactions between components. 
Emergent properties thus appear at the global level of the system itself rather 
than at the local level of a system's components. Moreover, emergences typ­
ically cannot be predicted because the complex feedback loops that develop 
between components are not susceptible to explicit solution. As with Wol­
fram's simulations, the only way to determine the behavior of such a system 
is to run the simulation and see what emerges. 
The new idea Morowitz adds is the insight that the emergences of a first­
order complex system become properties that a second-or der system can 
use to create a new dynamics from which further emergences will come. To 
the second-order system can be added a third-order system, a fourth-order 
system, and so on, with each level creating new emergences made possible 
by the emergences of the previous system. Multilevel ed complex systems 
synthesized in this way are called "dynamical hierarchies" (sometimes, sig­
nificantly, "dynamic ontology" ),24 and the complexities they generate are 
potentially unlimited in scope and depth. Building on these ideas, Morowitz 
groups his twenty-eight events into four main stages: the emergence of the 
cosmos; the emergence of life; the emergence of mind; and the emergence 
'ntermediation: Textuality and the Regime of computation 25 
of mind contemplating mind, or reflexivity. Presently, he believes, we are on 
the threshold of this last stage, whose development will be the catalyst for 
further evolution of the human into the posthuman in the centuries and 
millennia ahead. He finds the noosphere, the distributed global intelligence 
postulated by Pierre Teilhard de Chardin as the next stage in the evolution 
of intelligent life, suggestive of what might lie ahead for this fourth period. 25 
Whatever the future, the implications of this view for the present are clear, 
and it is here that the links between the "emergence of everything" and the 
Computational Universe become explicit. When the scope expands to the 
universe, simulations that could compute such behaviors become impos­
sibly large, or in the terminology of the field, "transcomputable:' To un­
derstand what "transcomputable" means, suppose that all the computing 
power on the planet was harnessed together and programmed to compute 
a given simulation. If the simulation qualified as "transcomputable;' even 
this powerful array would not make more than a dent in the problem the 
simulation represented. For transcomputable situations, researchers must 
use pruning algorithms and selection rules to identify from an extremely 
large possibility space the conditions most likely to apply. The application 
of successive constraints, then, is crucial. What emerges has the force of an 
explanation but differs significan tly from typical explanations in the physi­
cal sciences because it is not causal in nature and frequently is retrodictive 
rather than predictive. 
These modes of explanation are necessary because complex systems can­
not be described by mathematical equations that would allow precise pre­
diction through linear causality. Like Wolfram and Fredkin , Morowitz em­
phasizes that the kinds of systems for which equations can be used constitute 
only a small set of all possible systems. According to Morowitz, although the 
traditional mathematical approach will continue to be useful, it will be un­
derstood increasingly as a specialized tool applicable only in (relatively) few 
situations. Future progress, he maintains, lies largely in the realm of compu­
tation and simulation. In a revealing analogy, Morowitz likens the invention 
of calculus and its central importance to the rise of modern science to the 
invention of the digital computer and the crucial role it plays in simulation. 
What calculus has been to physics and mathematics, the digital computer 
will be to understanding complex systems, evolution, and emergence. 
Although the simulations and complex systems Morowitz discusses are 
not teleological (a characteristic related to the ontological minimalism of 
their starting points and to the lack of entailments these starting conditions 
embody), there is nevertheless directionality at work in their operations. 
The arrow of emergence points in the direction of increasing complexity, 
26 M A KIN G: LAN G U AGE AND COD E 
both for the preferred simulations and, presumably, for the evolution of the 
universe itself (a proposition endorsed by Stuart Kauffman in his work on 
the evolution oflife through autocatalytic networks). 26 In Morowitz's view, 
humans are the most complex systems yet to emerge, and they now have 
sufficient complexity to emulate the very processes of emergence that cre­
ated them and every thing else. Far from needing to presume or construct a 
separation between the observer and the observation-a premise necessary 
in the classical understanding of science to ensure objectivity-the com­
putational perspective endorsed by Morowitz, Wolfram, and Fredkin has 
no need of such a stipulation. These researchers can account for the pres­
ence of the observer simply by introducing a component into the simulation 
that performs this function. Indeed, in Morowitz's view the human observer 
plays an indispensable role in the jump from the third stage (emergence of 
mind) to the fourth stage (emergence of reflexivity ), for our ability to sim­
ulate complex processes within computers makes possible the next stage of 
emergences. 27 
The Regime of Computation, then, provides a narrative that accounts 
for the evolution of the universe, life, mind, and mind reflecting on mind 
by connecting these emergences with computational processes that operate 
both in human-cr eated simulations and in the universe understood as soft­
ware running on the "Universal Computer" we call reality. This is the larger 
context in which code acquires special, indeed universal, significance. In the 
Regime of Computation, code is understood as the discourse system that 
mirrors what happens in nature and that generates nature itself. 
Having looked at the claims, I turn now to a critical examination of them. 
From my perspective, all of these researchers claim much more than they 
actually demonstrate. Wolfram's assertion that cellular automata underlie 
and explain the complexity ofliving systems, including human culture and 
social processes, is a giant (and mostly unwarranted) leap from the simple 
systems he has explored. He shows convincingly only one level of emergence, 
from individual cells to group behavior. He does not show how this group 
behavior, however complex, provides the basis for further emergences that 
would build upon it. In my view, analog processes are undervalued in Fred­
kin's and Wolfram's accounts and arelikely to playa central role as first -level 
complexities evolve into second-level complexities.and further levels beyond 
that. Moreover, Wolfram often does not tie his cellular automata models to 
actual mechanisms at work in physical systems, a connection that must be 
made to validate the kind of ontological claims he advances. In this sense, 
Fredkin's program is more ambitious, for it tries to show how phenomena 
described by particle physics can emerge from the group behavior of cellular 
Intermediation: Textuality and the Regime of Computation 27 
automata. If this result can be achieved, it would indeed be a striking accom­
plishment and might well lead to radical rethinking of such foundational 
concepts as space and time, as he believes. Even in this best-case scenario, 
however, the leap Fredkin makes to higher-level complexities would remain 
to be demonstrated. 
As for Morowitz, the novel component he adds is the interpretive frame­
work of dynamical hierarchical emergences. Virtually all the phenomena he 
instances are well-known within their respective fields (cosmology, origins­
of-life biology, evolution, psychology, etc.). Although he offers a compelling 
overall picture, he does not explicate the mechanisms that link one level of 
emergence to another, other than as a precondition (for example, there must 
be a planet before life can emerge on that planet). This sort oflinear causal­
ity is well-known and offers nothing new. What would be new is a detailed 
understanding of how one dynamical level enchains and emerges from the 
next lower one through their intersecting dynamics. This he does not show, 
nor does he explore the specific mechanisms that bring it about. 
In fact, no one to date has demonstrated clearly how complex dynam­
ics in simulatio ns can progress more than one leveL Accordin gly, such a 
demonstration has become the goal of the community of artificial- life re­
searchers, who are devoting several major conferences to the problem in ad­
dition to organizing a special issue of the Artificial Life Journal on dynamical 
hierarchies. 28 History provides many examples of scientific and technolog­
ical breakthroughs that occurred because researchers became convinced a 
certain goal was achievable and were willing to devote significant resources 
to accomplishing it (often aided by substantial government funding), from 
mapping the human genome to building an atomic bomb. In my view, it is 
likely that within the next three or four years multilevel dynamical hierar­
chies will be created in simulations, and I expect that much will be learned 
from detailed studies of their dynamics. Whether these insights will signifi­
cantly alter the current picture remains to be seen. 
The central problem of achieving emergence through more than one 
level is bound up tightly with issues of representat ion. As Nicholas Gessler, 
among others, has pointed out, one way to think about this process is to 
imagine a mechanism whereby the patterns that emerged at the first level 
are represented by a different kind of mechanism, which then uses these 
representations as primitives to create new emergent patterns, which in turn 
would undergo further re-representation and be turned into primitives for 
the third level, and so on.29 This schema suggests a new interpretation of 
Wolfram's interaction with his cellular automata. 
As noted above, one weakness of Wolfram's argument is his underesti-
28 M A I{ 1 N G: LAN G U AGE AND COD E 
mation of the importance of analog processes, and especially of the produc­
tive interplay between analog and digital processes. Take DNA replication 
for example. DNA is often understood to operate as a digital code, in the 
sense that it is discrete rather than continuous. With the sequencing of the 
human genome, however, it has become clear that sequence is only part of 
the story, perhaps even the less important part. Protein folding, an analog 
process that makes use of continuous transformation in form, is essential 
to understanding how the genome actually functions. The combination of 
the two processes, the digitality of DNA sequences and the analog process 
of protein folding, gives the gene its remarkable power of information stor­
age and transmission. Similar cooperations between digital and analog pro­
cesses occur everywhere in nature and in contemporary technologies. Music 
CDs, for example, which Jean Baudrillard famously and mistakenly charac­
terized as purely digital, rely on analog processes (such as microphones and 
other analog equipment) to capture the morphology of sound waves, which 
then can be represented numerically and transformed into computer code. 
That the combination of analog and digital should prove far more powerful 
than either by itself is no mystery, for each has properties that complement 
the other. As explained more fully in chapter 2, digital representations al·· 
low for precise error control, extreme fragmentation and recombination, 
whereas analog processes have the advantages of the continuum, including 
the ability to transmit informational patterns between differently embodied 
entities. 
Consider now the moment when Wolfram bends over the output of one 
of his cellular automata and perceives in it patterns strikingly similarly to 
the shell of a mollusk. What exactly is happening in this scene? One way 
to understand it is as are-representation of the patterns that emerged from 
the first-level operations of the cellular automata by another kind of analog 
mechanism we can call Wolfram's consciousness (assume for purposes of 
this discussion that consciousness is analog, even though in fact it may well 
be an emergent phenomenon itself produced by the synergistic interaction 
. of analog and digital components ). This kind of interaction between digital 
mechanisms and analog consciousness happens all around us every day, of­
ten resulting in emergent reorganizations across many levels of complexity, 
for example when digital technologies are re-represented in the conscious­
ness of military strategists and used as the basis for reorganizing military 
units to create and facilitate emergent behaviors. 
This larger vision of synergistic cooperation between consciousness and 
computer, language and code, epitomizes the kind of complex interactions 
to which this study is devoted. Notwithstanding the problems with the 
Intermediatio n:Textuality and the Regime of computation 29 
claims of Wolfram, Fredkin, and others, the computational worldview these 
researchers advocate contains valuable insights that should not get lost in 
the skeptical scrutiny to which their claims are rightfully subjected. Espe­
cially crucial are the entwined concepts of emergent processes and dynami­
cal hierarchies, which represent ways of thinking that are powerful heuristics 
through which to understand the dynamics of complex systems of many dif­
ferent kinds. Whatever their limitations, these researchers fully understand 
that linear causal explanations are limited in scope and that multicausal 
complex systems require other modes of modeling and explanation. This 
seems to me a seminal insight that, despite three decades of work in chaos 
theory, complex systems, and simulation modeling, remains underappreci­
ated and undertheorized in the physical sciences, and even more so in the 
social sciences and humanities. 
Meanwhile, the pervasiveness and importance of computing in contem­
porary culture continue to reinforce the idea that computation is a funda­
mental process. Even if many of the claims associated with the Universal 
Computer are disproved, it is unlikely that the idea will die out altogether, 
particularly in communities of researchers concerned with the development 
of code and the construction of simulatio ns. Already circulating are versions 
of the Universal Computer based on different mechanisms than cellular au­
tomata. Seth Lloyd, among others, has proposed that "the universe is a quan­
tum computer: life, sex, the brain, and human society all arise out of the 
ability of the universe to process information at the level of atoms, photons, 
and elementary particles:' 30 Significantly, this proposition came in response 
to "hard -edge" questions posed by popular science writer and literary agent 
John Brockman, questions that "render visible the deeper meanings of our 
lives, redefine who and what we are."3l 
I ntermed iation 
For my purposes, I find the Regime of Computation valuable for articu­
lating the context in which code takes shape within the worldview of com­
putation. Speech and writing also have extensive links with their respective 
worldviews, which, as noted above, for the purposes of this project I identify 
with Saussurean semiotics and Derridean grammatol ogy, respectively. Like 
computation, these worldviews imply distinctive ways of constituting com­
munities, dealing with evolutionary changes, accommodating technological 
intervent ions, and describing the operations of systems. A thorough under­
standing of the interactions in which speech, writing, and code participate 
requires more than knowing the details of the three systems. Also at stake 
are the diverse conflicts and cooperations between their respective world-
30 M A KIN G: LAN G U AGE AND COD E 
views. As the worldview of code assumes comparable importance to the 
worldviews of speech and writing, the problematics of interaction between 
them grow more complex and entangled. These complex and entangled in­
teractions are what I call "intermediation;' a term suggested by Nicholas 
Gessler. 32 
An important aspect of intermediation is the recursivity implicit in the 
coproduction and coevolution of multiple causalities. Complex feedback 
loops connect humans and machines, old technologies and new, language 
and code, analog processes and digital fragmentations. Although these feed­
back loops evolve over time and thus have a historical trajectory that arcs 
from one point to another, it is important not to make the mistake of priv­
ileging anyone point as the primary locus of attention, which can easily 
result in flattening complex interactions back into linear causal chains. The 
contemporary indoctrination into linear causality is so strong that it con­
tinues to exercise a fatal attraction for much of contemporary thought. It 
must be continually resisted if we are fully to realize the implications of 
multicausal and multilayered hierarchical systems, which entail distributed 
agency, emergent processes, unpredictable coevolutions, and seemingly 
paradoxical interactions between convergent and divergent processes. 
A case in point is the current tendency to regard the computer as the 
ultimate solvent that is dissolving all other media into itself. Since sound, 
image, text, and their associated media (such as phonogra phy, cinema, and 
books) can all be converted into digital code, many commentators, includ­
ing Lev Manovich and Friedrich Kittler, have claimed that there is now only 
one medium, the digital computer. 33 Asserting that "one century sufficed to 
transform the ancient storage monopoly of writing into the omnipotence 
of integrated circuits;' Kittler writes that "all data flows end in a state n of 
Turing's universal machine: numbers and figures become (in spite of ro­
manticism) the key to all creatures:' 34 This claim has the effect of flattening 
into a single causal line-the convergence of all media into one-social and 
cultural processes that are in fact much more complex. To take the case of 
. books, clearly it matters that print has now become a particular kind of out­
put for digital text. As I argue in chapter 5 with regard to Neal Stephenson's 
print novel Cryptonomicon, digitization leaves its mark even on print texts 
that remain entirely conventional in appearance and functionalit y. More­
over, a stroll through any major bookstore will confirm that print books in 
general have moved toward the visual and away from straight text, a ten­
dency that bears witness to their interactions with other media. 
Nevertheless, it is also true that any book, conventional or not, partic­
ipates in the rich historical contexts and traditions of print that influence 
Intermediation: Textuality and the Regime of Computation 31 
how books are designed, produced, disseminated, and received. The sub­
vocalization that Kittler associates in Discourse Networks with the advent of 
phonetics and the ability of readers to hallucinate an imagined world does 
not disappear simply because blockbuster movies attract millions of view­
ers, any more than it evaporates because cinema and books are increasingly 
interpenetrated by digital techniques.35 If anything, print readers relish all 
the more the media -specific effects of books precisely because they no longer 
take them for granted and have many other media experiences with which 
to compare them.36 Although Sven Birkerts draws a different lesson from 
media proliferation in The Gutenberg Elegies, his book can be understood 
as a demonstration of the fact that print no longer exists in isolation from 
other media (even as it also illustrates the tendency to flatten complex in­
teractions into a single causal chain). Recognizing entangled causalities and 
multiple feedback loops enables us to understand how media can converge 
into digitality and simultaneously diverge into a robust media ecology in 
which new media represent and are represented in old media, in a process 
that Jay Bolter and Richard Grusin have called "remediation."37 
Grusin and Bolter define remediation, in one formulation, as "the for­
mal logic by which new media technologies refashion prior media forms." 38 
They trace feedback loops between the seemingly opposed but nonetheless 
correlated strategies of "immediacy" (the tendency of media to represent 
their productions as transparent and naturally accessible) and "hypermedi­
acy" (the tendency of media to draw attention to their modes of represen­
tation and the media-specific strategies they use). This coevolution of ap­
parently opposed trends, like the simultaneous coevolution of convergence 
and divergence in media, is characteristic of complex systems with multiple 
feedback loops. 
Think, for example, of an ecological system in which predator and prey 
develop opposing strategies because each is involved in a feedback loop with 
the other. The opposition looms large if we look only at a single interac­
tion between predator and prey (that is, position them in a linear causal 
relationsh ip). In the more comprehensive context of the complex dynam­
ics formed by their continuing interactio ns over generations of coevolution, 
however, the opposition becomes part of a larger picture in which one strat­
egy catalyzes the opposing strategy, which in turn catalyzes a further devel­
opment of the first one. In a similar way, extensive research on the Prisoner's 
Dilemma, a famous thought problem in which players must choose between 
competitive and cooperating strategies, demonstrates that the dynamics of 
this system change dramatically when the game is iterated, that is, subjected 
to repeated interactions between players.39 Coevolution that extends over 
32 M A f( I N G: LAN G U AGE AND COD E 
many cycles, such as that instantiated in iterated Prisoner' s Dilemma simu­
lations, is typical of media interactions in contemporary society, including 
the interactions that help to form (and in-form) the complex dynamics of 
textualities. 
Grusin and Bolter's arguments in Remediation demonstrate insightfully 
that complex feedback occurs between the oppositional strategies of imme­
diacy and hypermediac y. Nevertheless, for my purposes I prefer the term 
"intermediation:' "Remediation" has the disadvantage oflocating the start­
ing point for the cycles in a particular locality and medium, whereas "inter­
mediation" is more faithful to the spirit of multiple causality in emphasizing 
interactions among media. In addition, "remediation" (thanks to the excel­
lent work Grusin and Bolter have done in positioning the term) now has 
the specific connotation of applying to immediate/hyp ermediate strategies. 
Because the dynamics I want to explore go far beyond this particular cycle, 
I would rather use the lesser known "intermediation" (which, being not as 
well known, is more open to new interpretati ons). To make the term more 
useful for my purposes, I want to expand its denotations to include inter­
actions between systems of representations, particularly language and code, 
as well as interactions between modes of representation, particularly ana­
log and digital. Perhaps most importantly, "intermediation" also denotes 
mediating interfaces connecting humans with the intelligent machines that 
are our collaborators in making, storing, and transmitting informational 
processes and objects. 
In emphasizing intermediation, I have been instructed by studies that 
adopt different strategies to achieve different ends. I regard this project as 
complementary to these studies, for I see both these studies and my own 
project as useful in developing new frameworks with which to understand 
where we are and where we may be heading, both in literary studies and 
the broader context of contemporary Anglo-American-European culture. 
To some extent, this project is also intended as a corrective to the tendency 
in other studies, useful as they are, to privilege one medium and/or mode 
. of interaction to the exclusion of others and thus to fall again into the trap 
of linear causality. By keeping the focus on intermediation, I hope to in­
corporate some of the insights from other studies while clarifying how the 
recognition of multiple causalities leads to different conclusions. 
Media Technolo gies and Embodied Subjects 
To help situate this project, let us consider the contrasting approaches of 
Friedrich Kittler and Mark B. N. Hansen. Kittler's strategy for escaping from 
the confines of humanist discourse is to focus on media rather than sub-
Intermediati on:Textua/ity and the Regime of Computation 33 
jects. In Discourse Networks, he argues that subjects speak within discourse 
systems, and that discourse systems are constituted by the technological ap­
paratuses enabling them to operate. "Media determine our situation;' he 
proclaims in the preface to Gramophone, Film, Typewriter, asserting that 
"technologies that not only by-pass writing but suck in and carry off so­
called humanity render their own description impossible" (28), thus mak­
ing post-print media the sea in which we posthuman fish swim. Although 
Kittler does not ignore bodies and subjectivities, he positions them as being 
constituted by the media they use. "In order to optimize writing for ma­
chines;' he asserts with typical hyperbole "it must no longer be dreamt of as 
an expression of individuals or as a trace of bodies. The forms, differences, 
and frequencies of letters have to be reduced to formulas. So-called man 
becomes physiology on the one hand and information technology on the 
other."4o The rhetoric of force ("must no longer;' "have to be") performs 
an epistemic break reminiscent of the eqrly Foucault, with the important 
difference, as Kittler himself has o bserved in critiquing Foucault, that his fo­
cus is on the media technologies that produce discourse systems ("discourse 
networks ") rather than on discourse systems themselv es. 41 
Strenuously resisting Kittler's coercive rhetoric, Hansen, in New Philos­
ophy for New Media, performs a violence of his own by attempting to re­
duce Kittler's argument to a linear causal chain that rests solely on the truth 
or falsity of Shannon's information theory. "What remains decisive for Kit­
tler;' he argues, "are precisely the formal properties of Shannoh's model: 
as the basis for the technical de-differentiation that constitutes the logical 
culmination of the historical decoupling of information from communica­
tion' Shannon's model allows Kittler to postulate an informational posthis­
tory. From the standpoint of the optoelectronic future, the human or so­
called Man-as well as the entire range of media effects said to comprise 
a media ecolog y-must be revalued as the purely contingent by-product 
of a preparatory phase in the evolution of information toward truly au­
tonomous circulation" (77). To show that this foundation cannot stand, 
Hansen instances Donald MacKay's alternative approach to information, 
which was developed contemporaneously with Shannon's. In contrast to 
Shannon's separation of information and meaning, MacKay develops a con­
cept of information that places the embodied receiver at the center of his the­
ory.42 Hansen's recourse to MacKay is somewhat disingenuous, for it ignores 
the fact that it was the Shannon/Wiener theory, and not Mackay's work, that 
was important for the development of information theory, for the good rea­
son that MacKay's theory, although more encompassing in correlating in­
formation with meaning, could not be reliably quantified with technologies 
34 M A I{ I N G: LAN G U AGE AND COD E 
available in the 1950S (and still cannot today). Moreover, Hansen's refutation 
concerns only one line of reasoning in Kittler's extensive oeuvre, and for this 
reason is insufficient to discount his approach entirely, as Hansen seems to 
imply. 
In contrast to Kittler, Hansen privileges embodiment as the locus of sub­
jectivity, reading new media through its effects on embodied users and view­
ers. "Correlated with the advent of digitization, then, the body undergoes a 
certain empowerment, since it deploys its own constitutive singularity (af­
fection and memory) not to filter a universe of preconstituted images but 
actually to enframe something (digital information) that is originally form­
less. Moreover, this 'originary' act of enframing information must be seen as 
the source of all technical frames (even if these appear to be primary) , to the 
extent that these are designed to make information perceivable by the body, 
that is, to transform it into the form of an image" (10). It is no accident, 
I think, that coercive rhetoric similar to Kittler's appears here ("must be 
seen"), for Hansen wants to unseat Kittler's media focus in order to place 
the embodied subject at the center of his own "new philosophy for new 
media." 43 
Notwithstanding their opposed viewpoints, Hansen and Kittler share a 
mode of argumentation that privileges one locus of the human/machine 
feedback loop at the expense of the other. For Kittler it is all about media: 
the technical configurations they impose on representations, and the con­
tent of representations that reflect and reinscribe these configurations. For 
Hansen it is all about embodied subjects: the perceptual and cognitive pro­
cessing they incorpora te as a result of the media they encounter, specifically 
media images, and the representations within new media that catalyze and 
foreground these incorporations. From where I stand, it looks like Kittler 
and Hansen are perched on a seesaw that teeters up and down while they 
fail to notice that both ends are connected by a fulcrum joining the two in 
correlated actions. 
Certainly media are dependent on embodied subjects, not only for their 
reception and significance but also because researchers extensively investi­
gate the precise nature of computer/human interfaces to develop and design 
networked and programmable media that will have certain effects. There 
would be no media without humans to invent them, and no purpose to 
them without humans to give them meaning and significance (notwith­
standing the futuristic scenarios evoked by Kittler, Moravec, Kurzweil, and 
others of a postmedia, posthuman age in which media are autonomously 
created by other media and/or intelligent machines ). 44 On the other hand, 
media clearly determine and help constitute humans' embodied responses, 
Intermedia tion:Textuality and the Regime af Computation 35 
which include not only the historically specific conditioned reactions of a 
given epoch but also the evolutionarily evolved cognitive and perceptual ca­
pabilities that Hansen evokes. Moreover, in certain contexts the body itself 
becomes a medium at the same time as it is in-formed by other media, a 
complex dynamic ingeniously enacted by Sha Xin Wei's "Tgarden;' in which 
performers strive to create new gestural languages in association with mo­
tion sensors and virtual projections.45 Surely a fuller account-to which I 
hope to contribute by focusing on intermediation-w ould take into consid­
eration both of the vectors that Hansen and Kittler mobilize, acknowledg­
ing, on one hand, the role technical configurations play and, on the other, 
the centrality of embodied subjects to new media productions. The trick, 
as I see it, is to enlarge the scope of inquiry so that it includes both Wol­
fram and his cellular automata, the embodied human and his perceptions 
along with the computational processes that he creates and that work to co­
constitute him and his perceptions. In a strikingly literal sense, Wolfram and 
his cellular automata co evolve together in a synergistic dynamic that allows 
emergences to occur across many levels of complexity. 
A similar pattern emerges from the contrast between Espen Aarseth's Cy­
bertext and Jerome McGann's Radiant Textuality. Like the work of Kittler 
and Hansen, these texts are seminally important studies deserving close at­
tention. Defining "ergodic literature" as literature requiring "nontrivial ef­
fort" to "allow the reader to traverse the text" (1), Aarseth makes a point of 
including print books as well as computer games and electroni� interactive 
fiction. He slyly takes a poke at the literary establishment by remarking that 
to limit his analysis to computer-driven texts "would be an arbitrary and un­
historical limitation, perhaps comparable to a study ofliterature that would 
only acknowledge texts in paper-printed form" (1). Nevertheless, if com­
puter games, electronic hypertexts, and interactive fiction were not on the 
scene, no one (including Aarseth) would have been likely to find it neces­
sary to define "ergodic literature" as a category of analysis. In this sense, his 
analysis is motivated primarily by the kind of literature the computer has 
made popular, especially computer games, now his principal focus of in­
terest. The centrality of computers to his analysis is indicated, among other 
places, by his defense of the cybertext perspective as necessary because no 
other existing approach takes into account "tlIe text as a material machine, a 
device capable of manipulating itself as well as the reader" (24), a description 
much more relevant to computers than to books. Moreover, he develops sev­
eral important distinctions-includin g "scriptons" as strings the reader sees 
versus "textons" as strings generating the text-that are crucially important 
for computer texts but infrequently so for codex books and print texts in 
36 M A KIN G: LAN G U AGE AND COD E 
general. The computer orientation also helps to explain why his analysis is 
heavily weighted toward functionality. Most of the terms he defines to de­
velop his typology have to do with functions available to the player/user or 
with functions that elements within a text can perform. Since most print 
texts differ little from one another in their functional ity, this emphasis is an 
additional indication that Aarseth's perspective is oriented primarily toward 
computer-generated texts. 
There is nothing wrong, of course, with a computer orientation. This ori­
entation is part of what makes Cybertext an invaluable contribution to the 
field of electronic textuality, which continues to be too often seen through a 
print-centric perspective. More problematic is the fact that Aarseth's func­
tionalist approach tends to flatten multiple causalities into linear causal se­
quences determined by a work's functionality. This flattening can be seen 
both in his relative neglect of the political, social, and cultural contexts in 
which texts are used and in the "textonomy" he develops for his typology 
(58). Similarly, he also neglects interactions of different modalities within 
electronic texts. Even though many of his examples include visual displays 
and animations, he defines a text as "any object with the primary function to 
relay verbal information" (62, emphasis added), leaving out of account vi­
sual, graphic, sonic, kinetic, and other nonverbal signifiers. Although he rec­
ognizes that materiality should be part of the picture, his analysis pays scant 
attention to the material specificity of texts. He asserts -astonishingly, given 
the contemporary legal and political debates over Gnutella and Napster­
that in "the transition from long-playing records to compact discs in the 
music industry;' the "analog-to- digital shift of the artifact did not change 
any substantial aspects of the cultural production or consumption of mu­
sic" (59). To be fair, it is much easier to see the importance of these issues 
in 2004 than it would have been in 1997, when Cybertext was published, for 
the intervening seven years have seen remarkable growth in the visuality of 
electronic media and the accelerating digitization of all media. Nevertheless, 
there remains an important gap between Aarseth's emphasis on typology as 
a list of static functionalist components located on a grid of 576 positions, 
and the kind of dynamic multicausality required to understand complex 
emergent processes characterized by entangled feedback loops cycling back 
and forth between different levels. 
In contrast to Aarseth's methodology is the approach Jerome McGann 
takes in Radiant Textuality. As I argue at more length in chapter 4, McGann's 
primary interest lies in using electronic textuality to deepen our understand­
ing of how print literature works. In this the book is successful, as its de­
served recognition by the James Russell Lowell Prize indicates. A brilliant 
Intermedia tion:Textua/ity and the Regime of computation 37 
reader of print literature, particularly poetry, McGann continues to argue 
that even modest works in the print tradition are far better, as literature, 
than the most complex <1nd interesting works of electronic literature. 46 This 
is a judgment I do not share, and in my view it stems largely from a ten­
dency to apply to electronic literature the same reading strategies one uses 
for print, while underappreciating or perhaps simply not recognizing the 
new strategies available to electronic literature: animation, rollovers, screen 
design, navigation strategies, and so on. Whereas Aarseth faces forward and 
reads print literature through a matrix developed in the context of computer 
games, McGann faces backward and reads electronic literature through a 
matrix developed in the context of print literature. McGann has been a pi­
oneer in arguing for multidimensional models to explain how print texts 
come into being. However, despite his leadership in creating and imple­
menting the D. G. Rossetti Hypermeci}fl 'cliive, an important Web site, one 
looks in vain in Radiant Textuality fors'i�'!':;'ar deep insights into the multiple 
causalities, complex feedback loops, and emergent processes through which 
electronic texts are made, stored, and disseminated. 47 
Of course, it is much easier to characterize in general terms what should 
be done'than it is to do it, especially when attempting to work against the 
grain of)mething as entrenched and powerful as linear causal models. My 
argument, will stand or fall not on general claims and caveats about seminal 
texts but on in-depth explorations of the complex dynamics with which I 
want to engage. Accordingl y, I turn now from this chapter focused on tech­
nology to a comparison of the theoretical frameworks and worldviews of 
speech, writing, and code. 
38 M A I( I N G: LAN G U AGE AND COD E 
2 Speech, Writing, Code 
Three Worldviews 
The locus of Complexity 
Speech, writing, code: these three major systems for creating signification 
interact with each other in millions of encounters every day. Each, as it 
has been theorized, comes with its own worldview, associated technologies, 
and user feedback loops. In the progression from speech to writing to code, 
each successor regime reinterprets the system(s) that came before, inscrib­
ing prior values into its own dynamics. Now that the information age is well 
advanced, we urgently need nuanced analyses of the overlaps and disconti­
nuities of code with the legacy systems of speech and writing, so that we can 
understand how processes of signification change when speech and writ­
ing are coded into binary digits. Although speech and writing issuing from 
programmed media may still be recognizable as spoken utterances and print 
documents, they do not emerge unchanged by the encounter with code. Nor 
is the effect of code limited to individual texts. In a broader sense, our un­
derstanding of speech and writing in general is deeply influenced by the per­
vasive use of code (my deliberate situating of them as legacy systems above is 
intended as a provocati on to suggest the perceptual shifts underway). This 
chapter will show how the worldview of computation sketched in chapter 
1 manifests itself in the specific case of the digital computer. It will also in­
dicate ways in which commonly accepted ideas about signification need to 
be reevaluated in the context of coding technologies. Finally, it will suggest 
terms for analysis that, although not absent in speech and writing, assume 
new importance with code and therefore lead to new theoretical emphases 
and foci of attention. 
In drawing comparisons of code with speech and writing, one is faced 
with an embarrassment of riches. One thinks, for example, of the embodied 
views of speech explored by practitioners and theorists as div erse as Walter 
Ong and Oliver Sacks; of such preeminent theorists of writing as Paul de 
Man and 1. Hillis Miller. Out of many possibilities, I have chosen to focus on 
Ferdinand de Saussure's view of speech and Jacques Derrida's grammatolog­
ical view of writing partly because these theorists take systemic approaches 
to their subjects that make clear the larger conceptual issues. Like them, I 
want to take a systemic approach by focusing on the conceptual system in 
which code is embedded, a perspective that immediately concerns program­
ming for digital computers but also includes the metaphysical implications 
of the Regime of Computation. In addition, both Saussure and Derrida have 
been extremely influential in shaping contemporary views of speech and 
writing. By addressing their work in detail, I can by implication address 
the large number of related projects these two theorists have inspired. An 
additional advantage is Derrida's engagement with Saussure's theories of 
the speech system; Derrida's work has an intimate relation with Saussure's, 
which is richly documented in Derrida's writings, especially his early work. 
Moreover, one ofDerrida's critical points is that writing exceeds speech and 
cannot simply be conceptualized as speech's written form. Similarly, I will 
argue that code exceeds both writing and speech, having characteristics that 
appear in neither of these legacy systems. This project, then, is not meant 
as a general comparison of code with structuralism and deconstruction but 
as a more narrowly focused inquiry that takes up specifically Saussure and 
Derrida. 
Before turning to a systematic comparison of code with Saussure's speech 
system and Derrida's grammatolo gy, I want to establish a general framework 
for my remarks . Derrida's remarkably supple and complex writing notwith­
standing, much of his analysis derives from a characteristic of writing that 
would likely spring to mind if we were asked to identify the principal way in 
which writing differs from speech. Writing, unlike speech (before recording 
technologies ), is not confined to the event of its making. It can be stored 
and transmitted, published in dozens of countries and hundreds of differ­
ent editions, read immediately after its creation or a thousand years hence. 
In a sense it is no surprise that Derrida summarizes this difference between 
writing and speech by fusing "difference" with "defer," for the ability to de­
fer indefinitely our encounter with writing leaps out as perhaps the most 
salient way in which it differs from speech. Derrida, of course, complicates 
and extends this commonsense idea by linking it with a powerful critique 
of the metaphysics of presence-but these complexities have their root in 
something most people would identify as a constitutive difference between 
speech and writing. 
Ifwe were to ask about the parallel characteristic that leaps to mind to dis-
40 M A I( I N G: LAN G U AGE AND COD E 
tinguish code from speech and writing, an obvious contender would be the 
fact that code is addressed both to humans and intelligent machines. A fur­
ther distinction is implied when we note that computers, although capable 
of performing diverse and complicated tasks, have at the base level of ma­
chine language only two symbols and a small number of logical operations 
with which to work. As Stephen Wolfram eloquently testifies in relation to 
his cellular automata, the amazing thing about them is that starting from an 
extremely simple base they can nevertheless produce complex patterns and 
behaviors. 
This train of thought suggests the following question: Where does the 
complexity reside that makes code (or computers, or cellular automata) 
seem adequate to represent a complex world? In his critique of speech and 
the metaphysics of presence, Derrida makes clear that complexity was vested 
traditionally in the Logos, the originary point conceptualized as necessarily 
exceeding the world's complexity, since in this view the world derived from 
the Logos. For Derrida's grammatolo gy, complexity is conceptually invested 
in the trace and by implication in the subtle analysis that detects the move­
ment of the trace, which can never be found as a thing-in- itself. For code, 
complexity inheres neither in the origin nor in the operation of difference 
as such but in the labor of computation that again and again calculates 
differences to create complexity as an emergent property of computation. 
Humans, who have limited access to their own computational machinery 
(assuming that cognition includes computational elements, a proposition 
explored in chapter 9), create intelligent machines whose operations can be 
known in comprehensive detail (at least in theory). In turn, the existence of 
these machines, as many researchers have noted, suggests that the complexi­
ties we perceive and generate likewise emerge from a simple underlying base; 
these researchers hope that computers might show us, in Brian Cantwell 
Smith's phrase, "how a structured lump of clay can sit up and think." 1 The 
advantages of the computational view, for those who espouse it, is that emer­
gence can be studied as a knowable and quantifiable phenomena, freed both 
from the mysteries of the Logos and the complexities of discursive expla­
nations dense with ambiguities. One might observe, of course, that these 
characteristics also mark the limitations of a computational perspective. 
It is not an accident that my analysis starts by inquiring about the lo­
cus of complexity, for the different strategies through which Saussurean lin­
guistics, Derridean grammatol ogy, and the Regime of Computation situ­
ate complexity have extensive implications for their respe ctive worldviews. 
From this starting point I will develop several ways, not all of them obvi­
ous, in which code differs from speech and writing. My purpose is not to 
Speech. Writing. Code: Three Worldviews 41 
supplant these legacy systems and especially not to subordinate speech and 
writing to code (an important point, given Saussure's historic claim that 
writing must be subordinate to speech, and Derrida's insistence that, on the 
contrary, speech is subordinate to writing). Rather, for me the "juice" (as 
Rodney Brooks calls it) comes from the complex dynamics generated when 
code interacts with speech and writing, interactions that include their mun­
dane daily transactions and also the larger stakes implicit in the conflict and 
cooperation of their worldviews . 
Saussur ean Signs and Material Matters 
Let us begin, then, where Saussure began, with his assertion that the sign 
has no "natural" or inevitable relation to that which it refers; "the linguistic 
sign is arbitrary;' he writes in Course in General Linguistics. 2 Partly for this 
reason, he excludes from consideration hieroglyphic and idiomatic writing. 
As he makes clear in a number of places, he regards speech as the true lo­
cus of the language system (la langue) and writing as merely derivative of 
speech. ''A language and its written form constitute two separate systems of 
signs. The sole reason for the existence of the latter is to present the former. 
The object of study in linguistics is not a combination of the written word 
and the spoken word. The spoken word alone constitutes that object" (24-
25). Objecting to the primacy Saussure accords to speech, Derrida sees in 
this hierarchy indications that Saussu re remains bound to a metaphysics of 
presence and to the Logos with which speech has traditionally been associ­
ated; in an interview with Julia Kristeva, he remarks that "the concept of the 
sign belongs to metaphysics." 3 
Derrida marshals numerous arguments to insist that writing, far from be­
ing derivative as Saussure claims, in fact precedes speech; "the linguistic sign 
implies an original writing."4 This counterint uitive idea, to which we will 
return, depends on his special understanding of writing as grammatolog y. 
In addition, he critiques Saussure's notion of the arbitrariness of the sign, 
asking if the "ultimate function" of this premise is to obscure "the rights 
of history, production, institutio ns etc., except in the form of the arbitrary 
and in the substance of naturalism" (Of Grammatology, 33). Of course he 
recognizes that the arbitrariness of the sign as Saussure posits it refers to the 
absence of a necessary connection between sign and referent, but his cri­
tique implies that Saussure's formulation tends to suppress the recognition 
that constraints of any kind might encumber the choice of sign. The produc­
tive role that constraints play in the Regime of Computation, functioning to 
eliminate possible choices until only a few remain, is conspicuously absent 
in Saussure's theory. Instead, meaning emerges and is stabilized by differ-
42 M A KIN G: LAN G U AGE AND COD E 
ential relations between signs. Jonathan Culler, writing his influential book 
on Saussure just as Saussure was becoming well known in the United States, 
makes explicit this implication: "The fact that the relation between signifier 
and signified is arbitrary means, then, that since there are no fixed universal 
concepts or fixed universal signifiers, the signified itself is arbitrary, and so 
is the signifier .... Both signifier and signified are purely relational or dif­
ferential entities:' 5 
Culler's interpretation helps explain why material constraints tend to 
drop out of Saussure's theory as appropriated by American poststructural­
ism, with a corresponding emphasis on differential relations and shifting 
uncertain ties to reference and, indeed, to the material conditions of pro­
duction altogether (interpretations that have been contested by later com­
mentators seeking to recuperate Saussure for various purposes ). 6 Although 
Derrida's suggestion that Saussure had erased "the rights of history, pro­
duction, institutions, etc." remains underdev eloped in his writing, the rec­
ognition that materiality imposes significant constraints becomes crucially 
important in code, and arguably in speech and writing as well. Why, for 
example, are there no words in English (and so far as I know, in any other 
language) that have one hundred or more syllables? Obviously, we have no 
such words because they would take too long to pronounce. In contrast to 
the erasure of materiality in Saussure, material constraints have historically 
been recognized as crucial in the development of computers, from John von 
Neumann in the 1950S agonizing over how to dissipate heat produced by 
vacuum tubes to present -day concerns that the limits of miniaturization are 
being approached with silicon-based chips. Moreover, material constraints 
have played a central role in favoring the shift to digital computers over 
analog. 
To understand why digital computers have been favored, consider Tran­
sistor to Transistor Logic (TTL) chips, where the binary digit zero is repre­
sented by zero volts and the binary digit one by five volts. If a voltage fluc­
tuation creates a signal of .5 volts, it is relatively easy to correct this voltage 
to zero, since .5 is much closer to zero than to five. Error control is much 
more complex with analog computers, where voltages vary continuou sly. 
For code, then, the assumption that the sign is arbitrary must be qualified 
by material constraints that limit the ranges within which signs can operate 
meaningf ully and acquire significance. As we shall see, these qualifications 
are part of a larger picture that tie code more intimately to material condi­
tions than is the case either for Saussure's speech system or Derrida's gram­
matological view of writing. In the worldview of code, materiality matters. 
Culler was not wrong in emphasizing differential relations rather than 
Speech. Writing. Code: Three Worldviews 43 
material constraints, for it is clear that Saussure's view of the sign tended 
toward demateriali zation. "The physical part of the [speech 1 circuit can be 
dismissed from consideration straight away;' he says (13). Although he later 
acknowledges that "linguistic signs, although essentially psychological, are 
not abstractions;' he sees their materiality as "realities localized in the brain" 
and distinguishes this mediated materiality from linguistic structure, where 
"there is only the sound pattern" (15). He argues that differences in pronun­
ciation should be excluded because they "affect only the material substance 
of words" (18). Considering the sign to consist of signifier and signified, he 
insists that the signifier is not the acoustic sound itself but the "sound pat­
tern" or "sound image," that is, an idealized version of the sound, whereas 
the signified is the concept associated with this image. The advantage of 
defining an immaterial pattern as the signifier is obvious; through this move, 
he dispenses with having to deal with variations in pronunciation, dialects, 
and so on (although he does recognize differences in inflection, a point that 
Johanna Drucker uses to excavate from his theory a more robust sense of 
the materiality of the sign). 7 
This is Saussure's way of coping with the noise of the world, whereby 
idealization plays a role similar to the function performed by discreteness in 
digital systems. It is worth reflecting on the differences between these two 
strategies. Rectifying voltage fluctuations could be compared to Saussure's 
"rectification" of actual sounds into idealized sound images. Important ly, 
however, rectificati on with code happens in the electronics rather than in 
the (idealized) system created by a human theorist. Thus it is a physical op­
eration rather than a mental one, and it happens while the code is running 
rather than retrospec tively in a theoretical model. These differences again il­
lustrate that code is more intrinsica lly bound to materiality than Saussure's 
conception of la langue. 
The disjunctions between Saussure's theory and the materially deter­
mined practices of code raise the question of whether it makes sense to use 
such legacy terms as "signifier" and "signified" with code. Many theorists 
concerned with electronic textuality are starting from new frameworks that 
do not rely on these traditional terms. In chapter 1, for example, I introduced 
Espen Aarseth's "textonomy," which sweeps the board clean and works from 
fundamental considerations to create a taxonomic scheme for analyzing 
ergodic literature. Similarly, a group of German researchers at the University 
of Siegen are working together in a project they call "Medienumbruche" 
(Media Upheavals). They "regard the semiotic difference between strings 
and nets of signifiers as the foundation of a theory of 'net literature' which 
calls basic concepts such as 'author; 'work; and 'reader' into question."s 
44 MAKI NG: LANGUAGE AND CODE 
Although valuing these new theoretical frameworks as necessary interven­
tions, I think it is important also to undertake a nuanced analysis of where 
code does and does not fit with traditional terms, especially for this project 
with its focus on intermediation. The exchanges, conflicts, and coopera­
tions between the embedded assumptions of speech and writing in relation 
to code would be likely to slip unnoticed through a framework based solely 
on networked and programmable media, for the shift over to the new as­
sumptions would tend to obscure the ways in which the older worldviews 
engage in continuing negotiations and intermediations with the new. For 
my purposes, then, the comparison is vital. Later I will perform the reverse 
operation of trying to fit the speech and writing systems into the worldview 
of code, and here too I expect the discontinuities to be as revealing as the 
continuities. 
In the context of code, then, what would count as signifier and signified? 
Given the importance of the binary base, I suggest that the signifiers be con­
sidered as voltages-a suggestion already implicit in Friedrich Kittler's ar­
gument that ultimately everything in a digital computer reduces to changes 
in voltages.9 The signifieds are then the interpretations that other layers of 
code give these voltages. Programming languages operating at higher lev­
els translate this basic mechanic level of signification into commands that 
more closely resemble natural language. The translation from binary code 
into high-level languages, and from high-level languages back into binary 
code, must happen every time commands are compiled or interpreted, for 
voltages and the bit stream formed from them are all the machine can un­
derstand. 1O Thus voltages at the machine level function as signifiers for a 
higher level that interprets them, and these interpretat ions in turn become 
signifiers for a still higher level interfacing with them. Hence the different 
levels of code consist of interlocking chains of signifiers and signifieds, with 
signifieds on one level becoming signifiers on another. Because all these op­
erations depend on the ability of the machine to recognize the difference be­
tween one and zero, Saussure's premise that differences between signs make 
signification possible fits well with computer architecture. 
Derrida 's Differance and the Clarity of Code 
This continuity between computer architecture and Saussure's understand­
ing of signification becomes a discontinu ity, however, when Derrida trans­
forms difference into differance, a neologism suggesting that meanings 
generated by differential relations are endlessly deferred. Speaking meta­
phorically, we may say that whereas Saussure focuses on two (or more) lin­
guistic signs and infers a relationship connecting them, Derrida focuses on 
Speech, Writing, Code: Three Worldviews 45 
the gap as the important element, thus converting Saussure's presumption 
of presence into a generat ive force of absence: "differance is not, does not 
exist, is not a present-being (on) in any form .... It has neither existence 
nor essence. It derives from no category of being, whether present or ab­
sent." 11 To name this generative force, Derrida coins any number of terms 
in addition to differance: "trace;' "arche-writing;' "non-originary origin," 
and so on. Whatever the name, the important point is that the trace has no 
positive existence in itself and thus cannot be reified or recuperated back 
into a metaph ysics of presence. "Differance is not only irreducible to any 
ontological or theologica l-ontotheological-reappropriation, but as the 
very opening of the space in which ontotheology -philosophy-produces 
its system and its history, it includes ontotheolo gy, inscribing it and exceed­
ing it without return" (Margins, 6). Always on the move, the trace resides 
everywhere and nowhere, functioning as the elusive and fecund force that 
makes possible all subsequent meaning. In this sense the trace, as the arche­
writing that en�bles signification, precedes speech and also writing in the 
ordinary sense. The notoriously slippery nature of the trace has authorized 
the widely accepted idea, reinforced by thousands of de constructive read­
ings performed by those who followed in Derrida's footsteps, that meaning 
is always indeterminate and deferred. 
Let us now consider how this claim for difference/deferrallooks from the 
point of view of code. In the worldview of code, the generation of meaning 
happens in ways that scholars trained in the traditional humanities some­
times find difficult to understand and even more difficult to accept. At the 
level of binary code, the system can tolerate little if any ambiguity. For any 
physically embodied system, some noise and, therefore, possible ambigu­
ities are always present. In the case of digital computers, noise enters the 
system (among other places) in the voltage trail-off errors discussed ear­
lier, but these are rectified into unambiguous signals of one and zero before 
they enter the bit stream. 12 As the system builds up levels of programming 
languages such as compilers, interpreters, scripting languages, and so forth, 
they develop functionalities that permit increasingly greater ambiguities in 
the choices permitted or tolerated. The Microsoft Word spell checker is a 
good example. Given a letter string not in the program's dictionar y, it looks 
for the closest matches and offers them as possibilities. No matter how so­
phisticated the program, however, all commands must be parsed as binary 
code to be intelligible to the machine. 
In the context of digital computers, even less tenable than ambiguity is 
the proposition that a signifier could be meaningful without reference to a 
signified. In Derrida's view, Saussure's definition of the sign undercuts the 
46 M A KIN G: l A N G U AGE AND COD E 
metaphysics of presence in one sense and reinf orces it in another. He argues 
that the very idea of a signified as conceptually distinct from the signifier (al­
though for Saussure, indissoluble from it) gives credence to a transcendental 
signified, and to this extent reinscribes classical metaphysics. The distinction 
between signifier and signified, Derrida writes, "leaves open the possibility 
of thinking a concept signified in and of itself, a concept simply present for 
thought, independent of a relationship to language, that is of a relationship 
to a system of signifiers" (Positions, 19). At the same time, the distinction 
also opens the possibility that any signified, extracted from one context and 
embedded in another, could slide into the position of the signifier (for ex­
ample, when one concept entails another). Since the idea of a transcendental 
signified implies that there is nothing above or beyond this originary point, 
the dynamic of signified-becoming- signifier threatens to undermine the ab­
solute authority given to the transcendental signified. In this sense, Saus­
sure's theory (as interpreted by Derrida) can be seen as working against the 
metaphysics of presence in which it otherwise remains complicit. This back­
ground helps to explain why, in de constructive criticism, the focus tends to 
fall on the signifier rather than the signified. Indeed, I venture to guess that 
in contemporary critical theory, "signifier" is used thousands of times for 
every time "signified" appears. 
In the worldview of code, it makes no sense to talk about signifiers with­
out signifieds. Every voltage change must have a precise meaning in order to 
affect the behavior of the machine; without signifieds, code would have no 
efficacy. Similarly, it makes no sense to talk about floating signifiers (Lacan's 
adaptation of Derrida's sliding signifier) because every change in voltage 
must be given an unambiguous interpretatio n, or the program is likely not 
to function as intended. 13 Moreover, changes on one level of programming 
code must be exactly correlated with what is happening at all the other lev­
els. If one tries to run a program designed for an older operating system on 
a newer one that no longer recognizes the code, the machine simply finds 
it unreadable, that is, unintelligi ble. For the machine, obsolete code is no 
longer a competent utterance. 
Because it is a frequent point of confusion, I emphasize that these dynam­
ics happen before (or after) any human interpretation of these messages. 
Whatever messages on screen may say or imply, they are themselves gen­
erated through a machine dynamics that has little tolerance for ambigu ity, 
floating signifiers, or signifiers without corresponding signifieds. Although 
the computational worldview is similar to grammatology in not presum­
ing the transcendental signified that Derrida detects in Saussure's speech 
system, it also does not tolerate the slippages Derrida sees as intrinsic to 
Speech, Writing, Code: Three Worldviews 47 
grammatolo gy. Nor does code allow the infinite iterability and citation that 
Derrida associates with inscriptions, whereby any phrase, sentence, or para­
graph can be lifted from one context and embedded in another. ''A written 
sign carries with it a force that breaks with its context, that is, with the collec­
tivity of presences organizing the moment of its inscription. This breaking 
force [force de rupture 1 is not an accidental predicate but the very structure 
of the written text." 14 Although Derrida asserts that this iterability is not 
limited to written language but "is to be found in all language" (Limited Inc, 
10), this assertion does not hold true literally for code, where the contexts 
are precisely determined by the level and nature of the code. Code may be 
rendered unintelligible if transported into a different context-for exam­
ple, into a different programming language or a different syntactic struc­
ture within the same language. Only at the high level of object-oriented 
languages such as C++ does code recuperate the advantages of citability and 
iterability (i.e., inheritance and polymorphism, in the discourse of program­
ming language) and in this sense become "grammatological:' 15 
Ellen Ullman, a software engineer who has been a pioneer in a field largely 
dominated by men, has written movingly about the different worldviews of 
code and natural language as they relate to ambiguity and slippage. 16 Asked 
in an interview with Scott Rosenberg if code is a language, she replied, "We 
can use English to invent poetry, to try to express things that are very hard 
to express. In programming you really can't. Finally, a computer program 
has only one meaning: what it does. It isn't a text for an academic to read. 
Its entire meaning is its function."17 Emphasizing the unforgivingness of 
code, Ullman underscores its functionality. Code has become an important 
actor in the contemporary world because it has the power to change the 
behavior of digital computers, which in turn permeate nearly every kind of 
advanced technolog y. Code can set off missiles or regulate air traffic; control 
medical equipment or generate PET scans; model turbulent flow or help 
design innovative architecture. All of these tasks are built ultimately on a 
base of binary code and logic gates that are intolerant to error. Above all else, 
the digital computer is a logic machine, as Martin Davis shows elegantly in 
The Universal Computer, where he discusses the history of the logic on which 
the digital computer is based. 
In Close to the Machine, Ullman illustrates vividly the contrast between 
the worldviews of code and human language when she discusses a software 
system she was commissioned to create that would help deliver information 
to AIDS patients. She recounts working in her San Francisco loft with a small 
group of programmers she had hired. They worked around the clock to meet 
48 M A KIN G: LAN G U AGE AND COD E 
the deadline, speaking in rapid-fire phrases about the structure of the pro­
gram, the work-arounds they could devise, the flow charts that showed how 
the code would be processed. Junk food abounded, dress was disheveled, 
courtesy was a waste of precious minutes, and sleep became a distant mem­
ory as they subordinated all other concerns to the logic of the machine (1-
17). Then, as the independent contractor responsible for the system, she met 
with the staff whose clients would be using the software. Suddenly the clear 
logic dissolved into an amorphous mass of half-articulated thoughts, messy 
needs and desires, fears and hopes of desperately ill people. Even as she tried 
to deal with the cloud oflanguage in which these concerns were expressed, 
her mind raced to translate the concerns into a list of logical requirements 
to which her programmers could respond. Acting as the bridge arcing be­
tween the floating signifiers of natural language and the rigidity of machine 
code, she felt acutely the strain of trying to reconcile these two very differ­
ent views of the world. "I had reduced the users' objections to a set of five 
system changes. I would like to use the word 'reduce' like a cook: something 
boiled down to its essence. But I was aware that the real human essence was 
already absent from the list 1'd prepared. An item like 'How will we know if 
the clients have TB?'-the fear of sitting in a small, poorly ventilated room 
with someone who has medication-resistant TB, the normal and compli­
cated biological urgency of that quest.ion-became a list of data elements to 
be added to the screens and database" (13-14). 
One of the book's poignant scenes comes when Ullman, emotionally 
stressed by events in her life, decides to take her computer apart and put 
it back together, in a kind of somatic therapy that soothed by putting her 
physically in touch with the parts that functioned in such perfectly logical 
fashion (65-94). The scene illustrates another way in which the worldview 
of code differs from Saussure's dematerialized view of speech and Derrida's 
emphasis on linguistic indeterminac y. Although it is possible to view com­
puter algorithms as logical structures that do not need to be instantiated to 
have meaning (the received view of many computer science departments ), 
in practice any logical or formal system must run on some kind of platform 
to acquire meaning, whether a human brain or a digital computer. With­
out the ability to change the behavior of machines, code would remain a 
relatively esoteric interest of mathematicians working in areas such as the 
lambda calculus (where algorithms were used for research purposes in the 
1930S, prior to the invention of the digital computer). 18 Code has become ar­
guablyas important as natural language because it causes things to happen, 
which requires that it be executed as commands the machine can run. 
Speech, Writing, Code: Three Worldviews 49 
Code that runs on a machine is performative in a much stronger sense 
than that attributed to language. When language is said to be perform a­
tive, the kinds of actions it "performs" happen in the minds of humans, as 
when someone says "I declare this legislative session open" or "I pronounce 
you husband and wife." Granted, these changes in minds can and do result 
in behavioral effects, but the performative force oflanguage is nonetheless 
tied to the external changes through complex chains of mediation. By. con­
trast, code running in a digital computer causes changes in machine behav­
ior and, through networked ports and other interfaces, may initiate other 
changes, all implemented through transmission and execution of code. Al­
though code originates with human writers and readers, once entered into 
the machine it has as its primary reader the machine itself. Before any screen 
display accessible to humans can be generated, the machine must first read 
the code and use its instructions to write messages humans can read.Re­
gardless of what humans think of a piece of code, the machine is the fi­
nal arbiter of whether the code is intelligible. If the machine cannot read 
the code or if the program does not work properly, then the code must be 
changed and corrected before the machine can make things happen. In Pro­
tocol, Alexander R. Galloway makes this point forcefully when he defines 
code as executable language. "But how can code be so different from mere 
writing?" he asks. "The answer to this lies in the unique nature of computer 
code .... Code is a language, but a very special kind oflanguage. Code is the 
only language that is executable:' 19 
This character of code stands in striking contrast to the communities that 
decide whether an act of speech or a piece of writing constitutes a legible 
and competent utterance. As Saussure observes, no one person can change 
the spoken language system. ''A language, as a collective phenomenon, takes 
the form of a totality of imprints in everyone's brain .... Thus it is some­
thing which is in each individual, but is none the less common to all. At the 
same time it is out of reach of any deliberate interference by individuals" 
(Course, 19). It takes many individual adopters of a change and a (relatively) 
long time for changes in the speech system to occur. (To some extent this 
claim requires modification in light of mass media such as television and 
newspapers, where a single speaker or small group of speakers can change 
the system if given enough press coverage. Saussure's point remains valid, 
however, in the sense that only if the speech acts of such privileged speak­
ers are widely adopted can they actually change the system.) For Derrida, 
writing differs from S�ussure's view of the speech system because inscrip­
tions can endure over centuries or millennia, and thus can be cited, and 
therefore embedded, in a potentially infinite number of different contexts. 
SO M A KIN G: LAN G U AGE AND COD E 
Moreover, Derrida reads the qualities of iterability and citation back into 
speech, instancing precisely the phenomena (e.g., quotations and speeches 
performed by actors in a theatrical performance) that Austin excluded from 
his speech act theory because he viewed them as anomalous. 20 In Derrida's 
grammatolog y, the more or less coherent community of speakers that Saus­
sure presumes fractures into historically and geographi cally diverse contexts 
of different writing (and speaking) practices, different communities of gen­
eral or expert readers, and different criteria for what constitutes competence 
and legib ility. As William R. Paulson, among others, has observed, Derrida's 
complex writing style itself performs this diversity, insofar as it creates a 
class of "priestly" interpreters who can understand his writing, in contrast 
to many nonspecialist readers who have found it unintelligi ble. 21 
Like esoteric theoretical writing, code is intelligible only to a specialized 
community of experts who understand its complexities and can read and 
write it with fluency. There is, however, a significant difference between the 
worldview of code, on one hand, and, on the other, the community of speak­
ers Saussure presumes and the infinitely diverse inscription contexts Derrida 
invokes. With code, a (relatively) few experts can initiate changes in the sys­
tem that are often so significant they render previous systems illegible, as 
when Microsoft creates a new operating system such as Windows XP, which 
is not backward compatible with Windows 95 and earlier versions. More­
over, in code the breaks are much sharper and more complete than with 
either speech or writing. Occasionally I meet people who are using hard­
ware and software that have been obsolete for years. Although they can still 
produce documents using these versions, they are increasingly marooned on 
an island in time, unable to send readable files or to read files from anyone 
else. Whereas undergraduates can understand (with some help) the Middle 
English of Chaucer's Canterbur y Tales or the Elizabethan English of Shake­
speare, thus making a connection over the hundreds of years that separate 
them from these works, no such bridges can be built between Windows 95 
and Windows XP (separated by a mere seven or eight years), without both 
massive recoding and fluency in the nastily complex code of Windows pro­
gramming. 
Although code may inherit little or no baggage from classical metaphysics, 
it is permeated throughout with the politics and economics of capitalism, 
along with the embedded assumptions, resistant practices, and hegemonic 
reinscriptions associated with them. The open source movement testifies 
eloquently to the centrality of capitalist dynamics in the marketplace of 
code, even as it works to create an intellectual commons that operates ac­
cording to the very different dynamics of a gift economy. 22 
Speech, Writing, Code: Three Worldviews 51 
The Hierarchy of Code 
As we have seen, code differs from speech and writing in that it exists in 
clearly differentiated versions that are executable in a process that includes 
hardware and software and that makes obsolete programs literally unplay­
able unless an emulator or archival machine is used. Moreover, the historical 
strata of code do not involve a troublesome metaphysical inheritance but a 
troublesome deep layer of assembler code that can be understood and re­
verse engineered only with great difficulty, as demonstrated by attempts to 
excavate it and correct the problems associated with the Y 2K crisis. The ways 
in which the historical character of code influence its alterations is a subject 
that requires understanding the difference between change within a given 
slice of time ( synchrony) and change across time (diachron y). 
For Saussure, the proper object of study for the semiotics of the speech 
system is the synchronic orientation. He points out in the introduction to 
Course in General Linguistics that his analysis reorients the field of study 
from the historicist and philological emphasis it had in previous generations 
to an understanding that regards the language system as a (more or less) 
coherent synchronous structure (1-8).23 For Derrida, the diachronic man­
ifests itself as the (allegedly) inescapable influence of classical metaphys ics, 
whereas the synchronic ceases to have the force it does for Saussure because 
inscriptions, unlike speech prior to the invention of recording technologies, 
can be transported into historically disparate contexts, and so exist as rock 
does: in historically stratified formations that stretch back for thousands of 
years. Derrida writes, "This citationality, this duplication or duplicity, this 
iterability of the mark is neither an accident nor an anomaly, it is that (nor­
mal/abnormal) without which a mark could not even have a function called 
'normal.' What would a mark be that could not be cited? Or one whose ori­
gins would not get lost along with way?" (Limited Inc, 12).24 
Along with these differences in conceptualizing the sign and delineat­
ing its operations across and through time go related diff erences in how 
signs work together to comprise a semiotic system. When Saussure argues 
that differential relations between signs constitute the engine that drives 
signification, he identifies two vectors along which these relations operate, 
working at multiple levels within the speech system. The syntagmatic vector 
points horizontally, for example, along the syntax of a sentence. By contrast, 
the paradigmatic vector operates vertically, for example, in the synonyms 
that might be used in place of a given word in an utterance. Derrida makes 
little use of these terms in his grammatolo gy, focusing instead on the hi­
erarchical relations between concepts by which a privileged term posits a 
stigmatized term as the "outside" to its "inside:' For Derrida, perhaps the 
52 M A KIN G: LAN G U AGE AND COD E 
primary instance of this hierarchical relation, in the context of Saussure's 
theory, is Saussure's attempt to relegate writing to a purely derivative role. 
Derrida's deconstruction of this hierarchical arrangement is typical of his 
treatment of hierarchical dichotomies in general, for he shows that the priv­
ileged term must in fact contain and depend on what it tries to exclude. "The 
exteriority of the signifier is the exteriority of writing in general, and I shall 
try to show ... that there is no linguistic sign before writing. Without that 
exteriority, the very idea of the sign falls into decay" ( Of Grammatolo gy, 14). 
Like speech, coding structures make use of what might be called the syn­
tagmatic and paradigmatic, but in inverse relation to how they operate in 
speech systems. As Lev Manovich observes in The Language of New Media, 
in speech or writing the syntagmatic is what appears on the page (or as pat­
terned sound), whereas the paradigmatic (the alternative choices that could 
have been made) is virtually rather than actually present (229-33). In digital 
media using dynamic databases, this relationship is reversed. The paradig­
matic alternatives are encoded into the database and in this sense actually 
exist, whereas the syntagmatic is dynamically generated on the fly as choices 
are made that determine which items in the database will be used. In this 
sense, the syntagmatic is virtual rather than actual. This insight opens onto 
further explorations of how databases and narratives interface together, es­
pecially in electronic literature and the more general question ofliterariness. 
In Reading Voices, Garrett Stewart argues that literary language is literary 
in part because of its ability to mobilize "virtual" words-related by sound, 
sense, or usage to those actually on the page-that surround the printed 
text with a "blooming buzz" of variants enriching and extending the text's 
meanings. Although operating according to a different dynamic than envi­
sioned by Saussure, the luminous fog created by these variants resembles the 
paradigmatic vector that Saussure theorized for the speech system. When 
electronic literature offers the user hypertextual choices that lead to multi­
ple narrative pathways, the strategy of evoking "virtual" possibilities hap­
pens not only on the level of the individual word but at the narrative level 
where different strands, outcomes, and interpretations mutually resonate 
with one another. This richness is possible, of course, only because all these 
possibilities are stored in the computer, available to be rearranged, inter­
polated, followed or not. Somewhat paradoxically, then, the more data that 
are stored in computer memory, all of which are ordered according to spec­
ified addresses and called by executable commands, the more ambiguities 
are possible. Flexibility and the resulting mobilization of narrative ambigu­
ities at a high level depend upon rigidity and precision at a low level. The 
lower the level, the closer the language comes to the reductive simplicity of 
Speech, Writing, Code: Three Worldviews 53 
ones and zeros, and yet it is precisely the ability to build up from this reduc­
tive base that enables high-level literariness to be achieved. In this sense, the 
interplay between the virtual syntagmatic sequences and the actual paradig­
matic database resembles the dynamic that Wolfram, Fredkin, and Harold 
Morowitz envision for computer simulations, with high-level complexity 
emerging out of the brute simplicity of binary distinctions and a few logical 
relationship s. Literariness, as it is manifested in the panoply of choices char­
acteristic of hypertext literature, here converges with the Regime of Compu­
tation in using the "simple rules, complex behavior" characteristic of code 
to achieve complexity. 
Along with the hierarchical nature of code goes a dynamic of concealing 
and revealing that operates in ways that have no parallels in speech and writ­
ing. Because computer languages become more English-like as they move 
higher in the "tower of languages" (Rita Raley's phrase),25 concealing the 
"brute" lower levels carries considerable advantage. Knowing how to con­
ceal code with which one is not immedia tely concerned is an essential prac­
tice in computer programming. One of the advantages of object -oriented 
languages is bundling code within an object, so that the object becomes a 
more or less autonomous unit that can be changed without affecting other 
objects in that domain. At the same time, revealing code when it is appro­
priate or desired also bestows significant advantage. The "reveal code" com­
mand in HTML documents, for example, allows users to see comments, 
formatting instructions, and other material that may illuminate the con­
struction and intent of the work under study, a point Loss Pequeno Glazier 
makes effectively in Dig[iTJal Poet(I)(c)s. With programs such as Dream­
weaver that make layers easy to construct, additional dynamics of conceal­
ing and revealing come into play through rollovers and the like, re-creating 
on the screen dynamics that both depend on and reflect the "tower oflan­
guages" essential to code.2 6 
These practices of concealing and revealing offer fertile ground for aes­
thetic and artistic exploration. Layers that reveal themselves according to 
timed sequences, cursor movements, and other criteria have become an im­
portant technique for writers seeking to create richly dense works with mul­
tiple pathways for interactio n. One such work is Talan Memmott's Lexia to 
Perplexia, a notoriously "nervous" digital production that responds to even 
minute cursor movements in ways a user typically does not expect and finds 
difficult to control. Layering in this work is arguably the principal way by 
which complex screen design, text, animation, and movement interact with 
one another. Another example is M. D. Coverley's The Book of Going Forth 
S4 M A J( I N G: LAN G U AGE AND COD E 
by Day, where the visual tropes of revealing and concealing resonate with 
the multiple personae, patterned after ancient Egyptian beliefs, that cohabit 
in one body. The layers are instrumental in creating a visual/v erbal/sonic 
narrative in which the deep past and the present, modern skepticism and 
ancient rituals, hieroglyphs and electronic writing merge and blend with 
one another. 
The "reveal code" dynamic helps to create expectations (conscious and 
preconscious) in which the layered hierarchical structure of the tower oflan­
guages reinforces and is reinforced by the worldview of computation. The 
more the concealing/revealing dynamic becomes an everyday part oflife and 
a ubiquitous strategy in everything from commercial Web pages to digital 
artworks, the more plausible it makes the view that the universe generates 
reality though a similar hierarchical structure of correlated levels ceaselessly 
and forever processing code. Similarly, the more the worldview of code is 
accepted, the more "natural" the layered dynamics of revealing and conceal­
ing code seem. Since these dynamics do not exist in anything like the same 
way with speech and writing, the overall effect-no doubt subtle at first but 
growing in importance as digital cultures and technologies become increas­
ingly pervasive and indispensable-is to validate code as the lingua franca 
of nature. Speech and writing then appear as evolutionary stepping stones 
necessary to ratchet up Homo sapiens to the point where humans can un­
derstand the computational nature of reality and use its principles to create 
technologies that simulate the simulations running on the Universal Com­
puter. This, in effect, is the worldview Morowitz envisions when he writes 
about the fourth stage (after the evolution of the cosmos, life, and mind) 
as mind reflecting on mind. 27 The more "natural" code comes to seem, the 
more plausible it is to conceptualize human thought as emerging from a ma­
chinic base of computational processes, a proposition explored in chapter 7. 
As I argue throughout, however, human cognition, although it may have 
computational elements, includes analog consciousness that cannot be un­
derstood simply or even primarily as digital computation. Speech and writ­
ing, in my view, should not be seen as predecessors to code that will wither 
away but as vital partners on many levels of scale in the evolution of com­
plexity. As I said in chapter 1, not Wolfram or his cellular automata alone, but 
both together-hence my emphasis on narrative and subjectivity as these 
are intermediated with computation. It is not the triumph of the Regime 
of Computation that can best explain the complexities of the world and, 
especially, of human cultures but its interactions with the stories we tell and 
the media technologies instrumental in making, storing, and transmitti9-g. 
Speech, Writing, Code: Three Worldviews 55 
Making Discrete and the Interpenetr ation of Code and Language 
Let us now shift from interpreting code through the worldviews of speech 
and writing to the inverse approach of interpreting speech and writing 
through the worldview of code. An operation scarcely mentioned by Saus­
sure and Derrida but central to code is digitizatio n, which I interpret here as 
the act of making something discrete rather than continuous, that is, digital 
rather than analog. The act of making discrete extends through multiple 
levels of scale, from the physical process of forming bit patterns up through 
a complex hierarchy in which programs are written to compile other pro­
grams. Understanding the practices through which this hierarchy is con­
structed, as well as the empowerments and limitations the hierarchy entails, 
is an important step in theorizing code in relation to speech and writing. 
Let me make a claim that, in the interest of space, I will assert rather than 
substantiate: the world as we sense it on a human scale is basically analog. 
Over millennia, humans have developed biological modifications and tech­
nological prostheses to impose digitization on these analog processes, from 
the physiological evolution needed to produce speech to sophisticated dig­
ital computers. From a continuous stream of breath, speech introduces the 
discreteness of phonemes; writing carries digitization farther by adding ar­
tifacts to this physiological process, developing inscription technologies that 
represent phonemes with alphabetic letters. At every point, analog processes 
interpenetrate and cooperate with these digitizations. Experienced readers, 
for example, perceive words not as individual letters but as patterns per­
ceived in a single glance. The synergy between the analog and digital capital­
izes on the strengths distinctive to each. As we have seen, digitization allows 
fine-tuned error control and depth of coding, whereas analog processes tie 
in with highly evolved human capabilities of pattern processing. In addi­
tion, the analog function of morphological resemblance, that is, similarity 
of form, is the principal and indeed (so far as I know) the only way to convey 
information from one instantiated entity to a differently instantiated entity. 
How do practices of making discrete work in the digital computer? We 
have already heard about the formation of the bit stream from changing 
voltages channeled through logic gates, a process that utilizes morpholog­
ical resemblance. From the bit pattern bytes are formed, usually with each 
byte composed of eight bits-seven bits to represent the ASCII code, and an 
empty one that can be assigned special significance. At each of these stages, 
the technology can embody features that were once useful but have since 
become obsolete. For example, the ASCII code contains a seven-bit pat­
tern corresponding to a bell ringing on a teletype. Although teletypes are no 
longer in use, the bit pattern remains because retrofitting the ASCII code to 
56 M A KIN G: LAN G U AGE AND COD E 
delete it would require far more labor than would be justified by the benefit. 
To some extent, then, the technology functions like a rock strata, with the 
lower layers bearing the fossilized marks of technologies now extinct. 
In the progression from speech to writing to code, each successor regime 
introduces features not present in its predecessors. In Of Grammato[ogy, 
Derrida repeatedly refers to the space between words in alphabetic writ­
ing to demonstrate his point that writing cannot be adequately understood 
simply as the transcription of speech patterns (39, passim). Writing, he ar­
gues, exceeds speech and thus cannot be encapsulated within this predeces­
sor regime; "writing is at the same time more exterior to speech, not being 
its 'image' or its 'symbol; and more interior to speech, which is already in 
itself a writing" (46). Not coincident ally, spaces play an important role in 
the digitization of writing by making the separation of one word from an­
other visually clear, thus contributing to the evolution of the codex book as 
it increasingly realized its potential as a medium distinct from speech. Sim­
ilarly, code has characteristics that occur neither in speech nor in writing­
processes that, by exceeding these legacy systems, mark a disjunction. 
To explore these characteristics, let us now jump to a high level in the 
hierarchy of code and consider object-o riented programming languages, 
such as the ubiquitous C++. (I leave out of this discussion the newer lan­
guages ofJava and C#, for which similar arguments could be made). C++ 
commands are written in ASCII and then converted into machine language, 
so this high-level programming language, like everything that happens in 
the computer, builds on a binary base. Neverthel ess, C++ instantiates a 
profound shift of perspective from machine language and also from the 
procedural languages like FORTRAN and BASIC that preceded it. Whereas 
procedural languages conceptualize the program as a flow of modularized 
procedures (often diagrammed with a flowchart) that function as com­
mands to the machine, object-o riented languages are modeled after natural 
languages and create a syntax using the equivalent of nouns (that is, objects) 
and verb s (processes in the system design). 
A significant advantage to this mode of conceptualization, as Bruce Eckel 
explains in Thinking in C++, is that it allows programmers to conceptual­
ize the solution in the same terms used to describe the problem. In pro­
cedural languages, by contrast, the problem would be stated in real-world 
terms (Eckel's example is "put the grommet in the bin"), whereas the solu­
tion would have to be expressed in terms of behaviors the machine could 
execute ("set the bit in the chip that means that the relay will close"; 43). 
C++ reduces the conceptual overhead by allowing both the solution and the 
problem to be expressed in equivalent terms, with the language's structure 
Speech. Writing. Code: Three Worldviews 57 
performing the work of translating between machine behaviors and human 
perceptions. 
The heart of this innovation is allowing the programmer to express her 
understanding of the problem by defining classes, or abstract data types, 
that have both characteristics (data elements) and behaviors (functionali­
ties). From a class, a set of objects instantiate the general idea in specific 
variations-the nouns referred to above. For example, if a class is defined as 
"shape;' then objects in that class might be triangle, circle, square, and so on 
(37-38). Moreover, an object contains not only data but also functions that 
operate on the data-that is, it contains constraints that define it as a unit, 
and it also has encapsulated within it behaviors appropriate to that unit. For 
example, each object in "shape" might inherit the capability to be moved, to 
be erased, to be made different sizes, and so on, but each object would give 
these class characteristics its own interpretation. This method allows max­
imum flexibility in the initial design and in the inevitable revisions, mod­
ifications, and maintenance that large systems demand. The "verbs" then 
become the processes through which objects can interact with each other 
and the system design. 
New objects can be added to a class without requiring that previous ob­
jects be changed, and new classes and metaclasses can also be added. More­
over, new objects can be created through inheritance, using a preexisting ob­
ject as a base and then adding additional behaviors or characteristics. Since 
the way the classes are defined in effect describes the problem, the need for 
documentation external to the program is reduced; to a much greater extent 
than with procedural languages, the program serves as its own description. 
Another significant advantage of C++ is its ability to "hide" data and func­
tions within an object, allowing the object to be treated as a unit without 
concern for these elements. ''Abstraction is selective ignorance;' Andrew 
Koenig and Barbara E. Moo write in Accelerated C++, a potent aphorism 
that speaks to the importance in large systems of hiding details until they 
need to be known.28 Abstraction (defining classes), encapsulation (hiding 
details within objects and, on a metalevel, within classes), and inheritance 
(deriving new objects by building on preexisting objects) are the strate­
gies that give object-oriented programs their superior flexibility and ease 
of design. 
We can now see that object -oriented programs achieve their usefulness 
principally through the ways they anatomize the problems they are created 
to solve-that is, the ways in which they cut up the world. Obviously a great 
deal of skill and intuition goes into the selection of the appropriate classes 
and objects; the trick is to state the problem so it achieves abstraction in an 
58 M A KIN G: LAN G U AGE AND COD E 
appropriate way. This often requires multiple revisions to get it right, so ease 
of revision is crucial. 
Some of the strategies C++ uses to achieve its language- like flexibility 
illustrate how it makes use of properties that do not appear in speech or 
writing and are specific to coding systems. Procedural languages work by 
what is called "early binding;' a process in which the compiler (the part of 
the code hierarchy that translates higher-level commands into the machine 
language) works with the linker to direct a function call (a message calling 
for a particular function to be run) to the absolute address of the code to 
be executed. At the time of compiling, early binding thus activates a direct 
link between the program, compiler, and address, joining these elements 
before the program is actually run. C++, by contrast, uses "late binding;' in 
which the compiler ensures that the function exists and checks its form for 
accuracy, but the actual address of the code is not used until the program 
is run.29 Late binding is part of what allows the objects to be self-contained 
with minimum interference with other objects. 
The point of this rather technical discussion is simple: there is no parallel 
to compiling in speech or writing, much less a distinction between compil­
ing and run-time. The closest analogy, perhaps, is the translation of speech 
sounds or graphic letter forms into synapses in the human brain, but even 
to suggest this analogy risks confusing the production of speech and writing 
with its interpretation by a human user. Like speech and writing, computer 
behaviors can be interpreted by human users at multiple levels and in di­
verse ways, but this activity comes after (or before) the computer activity of 
compiling code and running programs. 
Compiling (and interpreting, for which similar arguments can be made) 
is part of the complex web of processes, events, and interfaces that medi­
ate between humans and machines, and its structure bespeaks the needs of 
both parties involved in the transaction. The importance of compiling (and 
interpreting) to digital technologies underscores the fact that new emphases 
emerge with code that, although not unknown in speech and writing, oper­
ate in ways specific to networke d and programmable media. At the heart of 
this difference is the need to mediate between the natural languages native 
to human intelligence and the binary code native to intelligent machines. As 
a consequence, code implies a partnership between humans and intelligent 
machines in which the linguistic practices of each influence and interpene­
trate the other. 30 
The evolution of C++ grew from precisely this kind of interpenetration. 
C++ is consciously modeled after natural language; once it came into wide 
use, it also affected how natural language is understood. We can see this 
Speech, Writing, Code: Three Worldviews 59 
two-way flow at work in the following observation by Bruce Eckel, in which 
he constructs the computer as an extension of the human mind. He writes, 
"The genesis of the computer revolution was in a machine. The genesis of 
our programming languages thus tends to look like that machine. But the 
computer is not §b much a machine as it is a mind amplification tool and 
a different kind of expressive medium. As a result, the tools are beginning 
to look less like machines and more like parts of our minds, and more like 
other expressive mediums like writing, painting, sculpture, animation or 
filmmak ing. Object- oriented programming is part of this movement toward 
the computer as an expressive medium" (Thinking in C++, 35). As comput­
ers are increasingly understood (and modeled after) "expressive mediums" 
like writing, they begin to acquire the familiar and potent capability of writ­
ing not merely to express thought but actively to constitute it. As high-level 
computer languages move closer to natural languages, the processes of in­
termediation by which each affects the other accelerate and intensify. Rita 
Raley has written on the relation between the spread of Global English and 
the interpenetration of programming languages with English syntax, gram­
mar, and lexicon. 31 In addition, the creative writing practices of "code work;' 
practiced by such artists as MEZ, Talan Memmott, Alan Sondheim, and oth­
ers' mingle code and English in a pastiche that, by analogy with two natural 
languages that similarly intermingle, might be called a creole. 32 
The vectors associated with these processes do not all point in the same 
direction. As explored in chapter 8, (mis)recognizing visualizations of com­
putational simulations as creatures like us both anthropomorphizes the sim­
ulations and "computationalizes" the humans. Knowing that binary code 
underlies complex emergent processes reinforces the view that human con­
sciousness emerges from similar machinic processes, as explored in chapter 
7. Anxieties can arise when the operations of the computer are mystified to 
the extent that users lose sight of (or never know) how the software actu­
ally works, thus putting themselves at the mercy of predatory companies 
like Microsoft, which makes it easy (or inevitable) for users to accept at face 
value the metaphors the corporation spoon-f eeds them, a concern explored 
in chapter 6. These dynamics make unmistakably clear that computers are 
no longer merely tools (if they ever were) but are complex systems that in­
creasingly produce the conditions, ideologies, assumptions, and practices 
that help to constitute what we call reality. 
The operations of "making discrete" highlighted by digital computers 
clearly have ideological implications. Indeed, Wendy Hui Kyong Chun goes 
so far as to say that software is ideology, instancing Althusser's definition of 
ideology as "the representation of the subject's imaginary relationship to his 
60 MAKI NG: LANGUAGE AND CODE 
or her real conditions of existence :'33 As she points out, desktop metaphors 
such as folders, trash cans, and so on create an imaginary relationship of 
the user to the actual command core of the machine, that is, to the "real 
conditions of existence" that in fact determine the parameters within which 
the user's actions can be understood as legible. As is true for other forms 
of ideology , the interpolation of the user into the machinic system does not 
require his or her conscious recognition of how he or she is being disciplined 
by the machine to become a certain kind of subject. As we know, interpola­
tion is most effective when it is largely unconscious. 
This conclusion makes abundantly clear why we cannot afford to ignore 
code or allow it to remain the exclusive concern of computer programmers 
and engineers. Strategies can emerge from a deep understanding of code 
that can be used to resist and subvert hegemonic control by megacorpora­
tions;34 ideological critiques can explore the implications of code for cul­
tural processes, a project already evident in Matthew Fuller's call, seconded 
by Matthew Kirschenbaum, for critical software studies;35 readings of sem­
inalliterary texts can explore the implications of code for human thought 
and agency, among other concerns. Code is not the enemy, any more than 
it is the savior. Rather code is increasingly positioned as language's perva­
sive partner. Implicit in the juxtaposition is the intermediation of human 
thought and machine intelligence, with all the dangers, possibilities, libera­
tions, and complexities this implies. 
Speech, Writing, Code: Three Worldviews 61 
3 The Dream of Information 
Escape and Constraint in the Bodies of Three Fictions 
The Economy of Information 
The worldviews of speech, writing, and code discussed in chapter 2 are not, 
of course, merely theoretical models. They are enacted through media, and 
media are in turn deeply embedded in economic and social structures. Inter­
mediating feedback circulates between these sites, connecting technological 
change with theory, theory with economics, economics with technological 
change. This chapter explores these intermediating cycles in the effects reg­
istered on bodies and subjectivities as they are represented in fictions from 
the close of the nineteenth century to three-quarters of the way through the 
twentieth century, roughly the period of time it took to go from the passive 
code of the telegraph to the executable code of the digital computer. At issue 
here are not so much the bodies of texts themsel ves-to pics to which we will 
turn in the next set of chapters-but the bodies within texts and their rela­
tion to the human lifeworld as it is reconfigured by interpolating humans 
with machines that, as they become intelligent, increasingly interpenetrate 
and indeed constitute human bodies. 
Throughout this period, the dream of information beckoned as a realm 
of plenitude and infinite replenishment, in sharp contrast to what might be 
called the regime of scarcity. The regime of scarcity is based on the funda­
mental assumption that energy and matter are conserved (i.e., every slice 
of pie that goes in your mouth is one that I cannot eat, or if I do manage 
to grab it from you and eat it, I cannot eat it again). This regime has pre­
vailed throughout most of modern history and is a foundational premise 
for everything from G. M. Foster's "Limited Good" to the first and sec­
ond law of thermodynamics (the first law states that energy is conserved, 
and the famous second law, more pessimistic, states that in closed systems 
every exchange tends to result in the loss of energy for useful purposes ). 1 
Consider, for example, such terms as "exchange value" and "surplus value"; 
they presume that matter and energy are conserved and must be balanced 
by accounting for their transformations and movements through economic 
structures. 
The dream of information is much more recent and emerges from the 
radically different economics of information. As Mark Poster and others 
have observed, information does not operate according to the same con­
straints that govern matter and energy. 2 
If I have a disk and make a copy for you, we both have the informa­
tion. Like the fabled magic pot, information promises to proliferate vir­
tually without cost. At the beginning of the new millennium, as informa­
tion technologies move toward nano-components, optical storage media, 
and photonic switches, this promise sings its siren song louder than ever. 
Charles Ostman, senior fellow at Global Futures, a consultant firm that 
anticipates near-future technological development, predicted recently that 
once nanotechnology is developed, all shortages will disappear. The "covet­
ing of stuff, territory , physical things will no longer be an issue because there 
won't be any reason for it-you can make what you need. Wars, conquests, 
enslavement of peoples, malevolent dictato rships-all the stuff driven by 
predation -will be obsolete:' 3 
As I argued in How We Became Posthuman, assumptions that may not be 
immediately apparent link the conservation laws of thermodynamics with 
the formation of the liberal subject. If, as Ostman predicts, people could 
make whatever they desire virtually without cost, private property would 
cease to be meaning ful (a utopian vision Neal Stephenson both accepts and 
contests in The Diamond Age). 4 Along with the demise of private property 
would go an idea of selfhood based on the notion that in the first instance 
one owns oneself, a proposition that C. B. Macpherson has called posses­
sive individualism and that he identifies as foundational to liberal philos­
ophy.5 If these constraints fall away, surely others can follow. Operating in 
the economy of information, one can dream that social position and eco­
nomic class will cease to matter, dream even of loosening the constraints 
of living in a single body located at a single position in space and time. 6 
These utopian visions invite resistant readings of the kind articulated by 
Robert Markley in his critique of the information superhighway.7 Rightly 
criticizing the rhetoric of free information, Markley points to the ecological 
and social costs involved in developing a global information network, from 
junked computer monitors leaking lethal heavy metals into the groundwater 
of the developing countries that buy them as scrap, to infrastructure costs 
that add significantly to governmental and university budgets, to upheavals 
The Dream of Information 63 
in the u.s. economy as dot-coms go bust and skilled technical jobs move 
abroad to India, China, and other countries. 
Yet important issues remain obscured if the emphasis falls solely on recu­
perating the dream of information back into the constraints governing mat­
ter and energy. To understand fully the dynamics at work, it is necessary to 
look at the intermediating feedback cycles connecting the regime of scarcity 
with the economy of information. How are these dynamics configured? On 
one side the dream of freely flowing information strains to escape scarcity, 
restricted physical space, class, gender, embodiment, time, and mortality; 
on the other side the claims of corporate profit, stratified social structures, 
physical confinement, gender inequalities, marked and failing bodies re­
assert their inevitab ility. Connecting the two are complex feedback loops. 
Since technologies of conimunication make the dream possible, one kind 
of feedback articulates bodies together with prostheses of communication. 
Another loop initiates the changes that subjectivities undergo as t�ey are 
reconfigured for an economy of information and then, in continuing inter­
mediating cycles, reconfigured again, as bodies and subjects are pulled back 
into the constraints of energy and matter. Processes of signification are also 
involved, for as we saw in chapter 2, the dynamics of signs change as they 
move from the flat, durable inscriptions of print to the hierarchies of code 
characteristic of electric and electronic communication technologies. The 
change from flat marks to hierarchical structures opens the possibility of in­
terventions into the encoding/decoding chains. Because these intervent ions 
typically require humans to interact with communication technologies, the 
changed nature of signification ties back into the prostheses joi ning humans 
and machines. Signification, technol ogy, and subjectivity co evolve. 
I will use three fictions, stretching across the span of most of the twentieth 
century, to interrogate these intermediating dynamics. Henry James's "In 
the Cage;' written in 1898, explores intimations of an information regime 
through telegraph y. As the woman in the telegraph cage sends out messages 
and uses her active imagination to reconstruct dangerous sexual liaisons 
from the sparse codes, she also contemplates her own future marriage to 
Mudge the grocer, a transaction firmly rooted in the constraints of scarcity. 
Vacillating between the dream of information and the restrictions of matter 
and energy, the telegraphist attempts to code her interactions in ways that 
would inscript them into the regime of information. Her struggle is not so 
much to perform a subjec tivity appropriate to information as to reinterpret 
actions performed under the regime of scarcity so that their significance 
escapes that regime. In Philip K. Dick's The Three Stigmata of Palmer El­
dritch, written two-thirds of a century later, the issue is not reinscription 
64 M A KIN G: LAN G U AGE AND COD E 
but transubstantiation, a dream of translation into an economy of infor­
mation that fundamenta lly changes the nature of subjectivity. A corporate 
battle between the purveyors of two drugs (one merely relocates traditional 
subjects, and the other radically alters the experience of subjectivity) sets the 
stage for moving beyond inf ormation considered as passive code to infor­
mation as simulation. Once posited as simulatio n, information develops the 
power to infect reality, making it appear to be a simulation. In this way The 
Three Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch anticipates the Regime of Computation, 
in which reality itself is conceptualized as a kind of simulation running on 
the Universal Computer. The last text is James Tiptree's "The Girl Who Was 
Plugged In;' a fiction whose title resonates with James's girl in the cage. This 
1973 story is sufficiently later than Dick's fiction to envision the economy 
of information not as competing with reality but as interpenetrating and, 
indeed, indistinguishable from it. In this respect, Tiptree's fiction seems to 
hearken back to James's story, but with the crucial difference that here sub­
jectivity is split between two bodies. One body exists in a real-life dream in 
which scarcity drops away; the other body participates in that dream but at 
the same time endures extreme physical constraints. 
The trajectory formed by these three fictions displays a clear pattern. First 
the dream of information is figured as an escape, but the more powerfully it 
exerts its presence as a viable place in which to live, the more it appears not as 
an escape at all but rather as an arena in which the dynamics of domination 
and control can be played out in new ways. What changes is finally not the 
regime of scarcity but the subjects within and through whose bodies the 
informational codes are transmitted. 
Code as Reinscription: "'n the Cage" 
"In the Cage" is structured through a series of oppositions that dramatizes 
the contrast between the constraints of ordinary life and the freedom of 
information. Confined in the small space of the telegraph cage where she 
endures the inquiries of Mr. Buckton and the elbows of the counter clerk, 
the girl feels that her nervous system, and especially her imagination, ex­
tend outward through the telegraph network, until there "were times when 
all the wires in the country seemed to start from the little hole-and-corner 
where she plied for a livelihood" (153).8 The messages she is given by her cus­
tomers operate according to a similar dual logic. In one guise they are words 
to be counted, commodities that make mbney for the company. However, 
decoded by her imagination, they become tokens of the secret lives of the 
aristocrats making use of her services; she imagines that these aristocrats 
constitute an economy in which calculation is transformed into passion, 
The Dream of Information 65 
constraint into glorious freedom. "More than ever before it floated to her 
through the bars of the cage that this at last was the high reality, the bristling 
truth that she had hitherto only patched up and eked out-lin which] ... 
all the conditions for happiness actually met" (146). 
The different economy in which her imagination operates, compared to 
the economy of her mundane life, is illustrated through the diverse effects 
her imaginings have on the future, compared to those of her betrothed, Mr. 
Mudge. In the informational econom y, imagining the future makes it blos­
som with possibility. The girl eagerly anticipates the visits of the dashing 
Captain Everard, whom she intuits is having an adultero us liaison with Lady 
Bradeen, variously encoded in the telegrams as "Mary," "Cissy:' or "Miss 
Dolman:' In this dream, the more the girl imagines, the more there is. In 
contrast are the anticipations of Mudge, who seems to wear the future out by 
fingering it over and over in his calculations, as though his imagina tive life 
operates according to laws of conservation that subtract antic;ipated plea-
I" 
sures from lived pleasures in a strict balancing of quantities. 9 ' " ' 
Operating in an economy of scarcity privileges possession, and posses­
sion takes place within a dialectic of presence and absence: one has money 
or loses it; one possesses an object or gives it away. Information is not a 
presence or an absence and so does not operate within that dialectic. Rather, 
information emerges from a dialectic of pattern and randomness, signal and 
noise. 10 With information, it is not a question of possession but access. In 
James's story, the contrast is played out in the different strategies adopted by 
the girl and Mrs. Jordan, the clergyman's widow who aspired to a not un­
desirable social standing before her husband died. We never know precisely 
what happened to the father under whose protection the girl aspired to like 
status; we know only that when it failed, she, her mother, "lost brother:' 
and sister began skidding toward the bottom from "which she alone had 
rebounded" (141). Mrs. Jordan hopes to regain status by arranging flowers 
for the wealthy, a service that allows her to enter their homes. This physical 
proximity to wealth gives her, according to her account, chances much su­
perior to those the girl enjoys. She urges the girl to join her in her enterprise, 
intimating that this is the way for the girl to find a wealthy husband. Trapped 
in her cage, the girl has no physical entry into spaces of wealth and privilege, 
but she does have access to the messages they send. As she hesitates between 
joining Mrs. Jordan and continuing to send messages, the girl is forced to 
confront what, exactly, the dream of information can do to help her. 
The matter comes to a head in a meeting the girl allows to happen out­
side the cage between herself and Captain Everard. For weeks she has made 
a detour on her way home that takes her past his lodgings, and finally she 
66 M A KIN G: LAN G U AGE AND COD E 
meets him "by chance" outside his door. Strolling together into the park, 
they sit down on a bench. At stake for the girl in this encounter is the regime 
into which her actions will be inscribed. If they take place in the regime of 
scarcity, her initiatives can be read only as the advances of a shop girl to a 
gentleman; the girl realizes that if such advances were to proceed to a sexual 
encounter, they would not even be considered significant enough to count 
as infidelity on the captain's part toward his lover, Lady Bradeen. Moreover, 
the encounter could easily slide into casual prostitution, as Ralf Norrman 
shows in a careful reading that traces how the girl's thoughts of blackmail­
which she briefly entertains and quickly rejects-slip into a covert evocation 
of prostitution. 11 Indeed, after this encounter the captain appears to offer 
the girl money, as if in anticipation of sexual favors. "It was either the frenzy 
of her imagination or the disorder of his baffled passion that gave her once 
or twice the vision of his putting down redundant money-sovereigns not 
concerned with the little payments he was perpetua lly making-so that she 
might give him some sign of helping him to slip them over to her" (215). 
Norrman also argues that the girl's ultimate goal in meeting with Everard 
is to get him to marry her. This may indeed form part of her intention, but 
as the meeting progresses, it becomes clear to her that an equally likely-in 
actuality, far more likely-possibi lity is that she might become his mistress, 
in which case she would be ruined, having neither the rank nor financial 
resources Lady Bradeen has to get away with this kind of scandal. Desperate 
to avoid this interpretation of their relation, the girl struggles to define the 
realm in which their interactions take place as something beyond and above 
the regime of scarcity, an economy in which she is in a position to be ex­
travagantly generous toward the captain rather than the other way around 
and in which the relation between them will be "not a bit horrid or vulgar" 
(193). 
Significant ly, this realm turns out to be the dream of information. The girl 
has an opportunity to exercise her generosity by recalling for the captain an 
intercepted telegram that Lady Bradeen had sent to him. Emphasizing the 
informational nature of the exchange, the telegram, which was intended to 
be transcribed into Morse code, is itself written in code, a series of numbers 
correlated with events in the physical world through undisclosed encryp­
tion rules. The girl had already intervened in the coding chains when she 
corrected Lady Bradeen's code for tlfe place-name that corresponded with 
the pseudonym "Miss Dolman:' 12 Whether this "correction" was a mistake 
that led to the telegram's interception we do not know. 13 However this may 
be, the arbitrary nature of the code is underscored when the Captain an­
nounces that "It's all right if it's wrong:' possibly because the number code 
The Dream of Information 67 
passed on to him secret inf ormation that the mistake exonerated him from 
knowing (223). 
These events, left mysterious by the narrator, have the effect of emphasiz­
ing the arbitrariness of codes. It is important to note that this arbitrariness 
is of a different nature than Saussure's assertion that the relation between 
the signifier and signified is arbitrary. As discussed in chapter 2, Saussure 
denied that a "natural" relationship exists between a word and a thing. After 
Saussure, his conceptual distinction between signifier and signified became 
the occasion for an increasing emphasis on the signifier, until the signified 
seemed to recede from view. However, as we have seen, in codes the signi­
fied does not disappear. Rather, at every level the relation between signifier 
and signified is specified precisely by rules governing the transformations 
of encoding and decoding. Nevertheless, mistakes happen, and a symbol in 
the object code may be correlated incorrectly with the matching symbol in 
the target code. These mistakes do riot testify to an inevitable v-ndecidabi lity 
in the relation between signifier and signified; mark and concept, such as a 
deconstructionist reading would display. Rather, coding errors point instead 
to the inevitab ility of noise in the system, a shift bound up with the concep­
tualization of the sign as a product of a series of transformations between 
different levels of code. 
This shift from the arbitrariness of language to the noise of code signals 
a change of emphasis from the limitations oflanguage in producing mean­
ing to the limitations of code in transmitting messages accurately. Whereas 
the arbitrariness oflanguage implies the inability OflangUage to ground it­
self in originary meaning, the arbitrariness of code leads to multiple sites 
for intervention in the coding chains and thus to a focus on the fragility of 
messages as they are encoded, sent through communication channels, and 
decoded through prosthetic articulations between humans and machines. 
Whereas deconstruction focuses on economies of supplem entarity, coding 
theory focuses on techniques of supplementation that graft together organic 
components with communication technologies. Deconstruction implies a 
shift from the authority of a speaking subject to the instabilities of a writing 
subject, whereas coding theory implies a transformation from the writing 
subject to a posthuman collective of encoders/decoders. 
Significantly, in James's story the girl is only infrequently depicted as 
working the sounder; her efforts tend not toward a seamless integration with 
the machine but in the opposite direction of transforming words from com­
modi ties into intuitions. Before the telegrams are translated into code, the 
girl operates selectively on some of them to encrypt them into other com­
binations. "Most of the elements swam straight away, lost themselves in the 
68 MAKING: LANGUAGE AND CODE 
bottomless common, and by so doing kept the page clear. On the clearness, 
therefore, what she did retain stood sharply out; she nipped and caught it, 
turned it and interwove it" (156). The girl's selective attention is here repre­
sented as a coding operation, a physical rearrangement of marks on the page 
that erases some of the "elements" and makes others into signifiers resonant 
with meaning, a hallucinated action she will later enact physically when she 
takes the telegram fr om Lady Bradeen, erases one of the words, and puts an­
other in its place. Commenting on the above passage in highly condensed 
prose that might itself be called telegraphic, Jennifer Wicke points out the 
importance of the girl's intervent ions into the coding sequences. "This puta­
tive action mystifies the process of the sending out of the telegrams, but also 
alters it, produces it back so that the nameless intermediary of the process 
of communication reorchestrates that information, as James calls it, that 
ceaselessly traverses the cage." 14 
Viewing language as a code rather than as a loose network of floating 
signifiers also entails different reading techniques. At issue is the difference 
between a language that cannot unambiguously say what it means, and a 
message that cannot be encoded and decoded without undergoing trans­
formations as interventions distort the codes and thereby produce noise in 
the system. Thus in code what is available for readerly inspection is not so 
much the ambiguity of meaning -we never find out what the numbers in 
the telegram refer to-but places in the text where intervent ions in the cod­
ing chain occur, as when the girl alters the telegram. A characteristic of code, 
as distinct from natural language, is the leverage that comes about through 
multiple coding correlations, as when a single keystroke changes the entire 
appearance of a text on screen, or when a single mistake in transcribing DNA 
code leads to drastic physical changes when that gene is expressed in an or­
ganism. This characteristic enters James's story through a plot that makes 
the fate of Captain Everard and Lady Bradeen hang upon a change in the 
coded telegram. That the climax depends upon a mistake in the coding se­
quence, not simply on ambiguities in language, indicates that the story , like 
the yearnings of the protagonist, locates itself within an economy of infor­
mation. 
Yet matters are not quite so simple. At the close of the nineteenth century, 
the economy of information had not penetrated far enough into the infra­
structure of the society to maintain itself as a separate space. Although the 
story's climax validates the power of information when the girl displays her 
power by dangling the message the captain so despera tely needs to recover 
just out of hiS' reach, this proves to be a momentar y-if satisfying-triumph 
rather than the establishment of an economy of information as a place where 
The Dream of Information 69 
one might live. The end of the story reasserts the power of the regime of 
scarcity, albeit with some reservat ions; it arrives when the girl learns from 
Mrs. Jordan that she is to be married. The encounter escalates into a con­
test for preeminence based on who knows the most information about the 
scandalous affair between Lady Bradeen and Captain Everard. Mrs. Jordan 
knows, as the girl does not, information having to do with presence and ab­
sence. She tells the girl that Lord Bradeen discovered that Lady Bradeen had 
taken an object-"It's even said she stole it!"-and given it to Captain Ever­
ard (240). But the girl knows that the object to which Mrs. Jordan refers in 
her formulation ("something was lost-something was found") was a tele­
gram, or more precisely the message the telegram contained (240). Since her 
office has destroyed the physical copy of the telegram, it is only through a 
memory made eidetic by the excitement of her imaginative de co dings that 
she remembers the number sequence and can reproduce it for the captain. 
What is produced, then, is not a presence or an absence but a pattern where 
the crucial issue is whether a mistake has been made in the code. 
Mrs. Jordan believes it is only because Lady Bradeen is able to rescue the 
captain by "stealing" the object that he agrees to marry her, whereas the 
girl has the bittersweet knowledge that it was she, not Lady Bradeen, who 
produced the message that saved the captain and Lady Bradeen. This infor­
mation she simultaneously gave away to the captain and kept for herself, an 
exchange possible only within an economy of information. This doubleness 
is soon to end, however, for the dream of information cannot sustain its 
powers, cannot offer a real space in which to live. Her exciting double life, 
one strand of which was spun in an informational realm replete with mys­
tery and the promise of infinite expansion, is about to collapse into a single 
lifeline whose unwinding in the regime of scarcity is all too easily foreseen. 
As the girl and Mrs. Jordan exchange confidences, the girl holds back the 
information that it was she who saved the captain. But this very hoarding 
indicates that she has fallen back into a regime of scarcity, for if she gives 
this news to Mrs. Jordan, she will lose the sense of superiority she savors by 
knowing something those around her do not. She has become an inhabitant 
of Mudge's world, where her secrets, like his anticipations, are worn out if 
they are fingered too often. Resigned to the inevitability of her return to the 
regime of scarcity, she resolves to postpone her marriage no longer and in 
fact to hasten it. Nor does this reassertion of scarcity claim her as its only 
victim. Mrs. Jordan will enter into marriage with a butler because, as she 
admits in an incautious burst of emotion, "it has led to my not starving!" 
(236), and the captain will enter into a marriage in which his authority in 
70 M A I( I N G: LAN G U AGE AND COD E 
the household is very much diminished, because it is Lady Bradeen who has 
the fortune while he has mostly debts. 
In opening the informational realm to view, exploring its dynamics and 
possibilities, and finally allowing it to be folded again into a regime based 
on conservation, James writes what might be called the prequel to the story 
of information in the twentieth century . The girl may feel a doubleness in 
her life, but she never doubts such fundamental facts as where her body is 
located or what, in an ordinary sense, her identity is. As the economy of 
information expands in force and scope, and as technologies of communi­
cation sink deeper into the infrastructure of society, these anchors in every­
day physical reality begin to drift, and finally come unmoored. The passive 
code of the telegraph opened issues connected with the transmission and 
intervent ion of messages, but it did not penetrate nearly as far into the bod­
ies of subjects as would be the case in the next century with the emergence 
of intelligent machines. As the century progresses, information increasingly 
determines the constitution of subjects and, as we saw in chapter 1, the con­
struction of reality itself. A writer who not only anticipated this develop­
ment but wrote about it with incandescent intensity is Philip K. Dick. 
Code as Transubstantiation: The Three Stigmata of Palmer fldritch 
Published in 1965, The Three Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch reflects the emerg­
ing awareness in the United States of hallucinogenic drugs. Dick gives this 
awareness his own twist in making drugs a communication technolog y. 
Colonists on Mars ingest Can -D to relieve the unbearable bleakness of their 
lives on an inhospitable alien planet, where they are housed in underground 
dwellings so dismal they are appropria tely called hovels. Under the influence 
of the illegal Can-D, the colonists collectively project their consciousness 
into miniature dolls, Perky Pat and Walt, modeled on Barbie and Ken. While 
inhabiting the dolls, each person knows the thoughts of others sharing the 
same doll, highlighting the drug's function as a communication technol­
ogy. The drug is further linked to communication technologies by satel­
lite broadcasts that push the drug and use encrypted messages to tell the 
colonists when the next drop will take place. In sharp contrast to the regime 
of scarcity that the colonists inhabit in mundane reality, the drug creates a 
space of promise and infinite expansion characteristic of the realm of in­
formation. In the Perky Pat world,'the women are all buxom and beautiful, 
the men all drive fast sports cars, and every day is Saturday. Moreover, these 
common goods are achieved without sacrificing individual identity. 
Although the women all enter Perky Pat and the men enter Walt (no 
The Dream of Information 71 
transgendering for Dick), each person retains her or his sense of self and in­
dividual agency. The dolls' imagined actions in the carefully realistic minia­
ture sets, "minned" precisely to resemble Earth artifacts, are the result of 
the desires of the majority of people occupying the doll. If two of the women 
want Pat to go swimming and the third does not, Pat will go swimming, and 
Walt will follow her into the water only if the majority of men occupying 
him agree he should. Thus the drug, despite its hallucinogenic properties, 
preserves intact fundamental aspects of the liberal subject, inCluding agency 
and a sense of individual identity based on possession, for it is primarily 
through the display and consumption of commodities that the Perky Pat 
world is made to seem real. 
The narrative viewpoint nevertheless marks a clear boundary between 
the illusory world of Perky Pat and the reality of the colonists' everyday 
lives. While the colonists are experiencing themselves as the glamorous Pat 
and Walt, the narrator describes them as an objective eye would see them, 
sprawled in the hovel with drool dripping from their mouths from the 
chewed-up Can-D. When the drug wears of f, the colonists, too, see the scene 
the narrator describes and are snapped back into the reality they never in fact 
escaped. As in James's story, the dream of information promises an escape 
it cannot deliver. This firm basis in the reality of scarcity is reinforced by the 
capitalistic market that links Perky Pat dolls with Can-D. As the colonists 
scramble to get together enough truf fle skins to purchase the legal layouts 
and the illegal drug (in Dick's satirically rendered economy, truffle skins cir­
culate as currency because they are the only objects that cannot be success­
fully simulated), it is clear that liberal subjectivity, capitalism, an essential 
self, and narrative realism are all part of the same cultural configuration-a 
configuration based in laws of conservation and corresponding systemic in­
equalities. 15 The high living standard on Earth requires the dismal existence 
of the Martian colonists, for the draft that forces some people to emigrate to 
Mars drains off surplus population and provides a continuing strong market 
for certain products, chief among them Perky Pat and Can-D. 16 
Whereas for James the collapse of the dream of information provided the 
story's resolution, in Dick the folding of information back into a regime 
of scarcity functions as prologue rather than conclusion. Can-D has a rival, 
Chew-Z. Palmer Eldritch-a "mad capitalist;' as Darko Suvin has called him 
(instead of a mad scientist)-has returned from a decade-long trip out of 
the solar system with a new drug that promises to remedy the deficiencies 
of Can -D and, more importantly, hand over the ultimate prize of religion. 
"God promises eternal life:' the Chew-Z slogan boasts, "We can deliver it" 
(160). The promise is based on one of Chew-Z's two major differences from 
72 MAKI NG: LANGUAGE AND CODE 
Can-D. Whereas Can-D preserves conventional time, Chew-Z creates a sub­
jective perception of time that is much longer than the actual time elapsed. 
Someone under the influence of Chew-Z might experience hours, days, even 
months of time passing, while in the real world, only a few seconds have 
gone by. As users soon learn to their dismay, however, time by itself means 
little; if it passes in a nightmare world, long duration is not a blessing but 
a curse. What makes the Chew-Z world so unpleasant is a fact that users 
discover only gradually. Whereas actions in the Can-D world happen as a 
net result of all the users' agencies, in the Chew-Z world one person alone 
determines the rules by which the world operates-Palmer Eldritch. More­
over, the stakes are alarmingly raised, for if one dies in the Chew-Z world, 
one is dead in the real world as well. 
Leo Bulero, the corporate mogul who markets the interdependent prod­
ucts Perky Pat and Can-D, would never win an election for sainthood, but 
his self- interestedness pales in comparison with that of Palmer Eldritch, who 
ruthlessly intends to use Chew-Z to take over Earth as well as Mars. Dick's 
work from this period often sets up a contrast between two types of capital­
ism. The more beneficent kind folds family relationships into the corpora­
tion, and the bonds between employer and employee include claims ofloy­
alty and friendship. This is the case with Leo Bulero and Barney Mayerson, 
Leo's "pre-fash" consultant whose job is to use his precognition to deter­
mine which Earth products are about to become hits on the home market 
so they can be "minned" and made ready for the Martian market. Involved 
with Barney is a subordinate pre-fash consultant and sometime lover, Roni 
Fugate, who is gunning for Barney's job. Discussions between this trio nat­
urally focus on the firm's business; equa lly of concern to them, however, are 
bonds of allegiance, especially actions that indicate loyalty or betrayal. The 
profit motive, although not lacking, is tempered by other considerations. In 
some deep way the stability of the subject in Dick's work is bound up with 
this kind of capitalism, as if he intuited that the liberal subject, capitalism, 
and the family are as inextricably entwined as Perky Pat and Can-D. 17 
By contrast, the more rapacious kind of capitalism represented by Palmer 
Eldritch has left behind any consideration of the subject as capable of loy­
alty or betrayal. Palmer Eldritch does not intend merely to make a profit. 
Rather, his goal is to infect everyon� in the solar system with himself, as if 
he were eating them from the inside and displacing their subjectivities with 
his own. "It's Palmer Eldritch who's everywhere, growing and growing like a 
mad weed;' Leo thinks, having been captured by Eldritch and given Chew­
Z involuntarily (196). Palmer Eldritch's inhuman ambitions are signified by 
the prostheses he sports as a result of multiple accidents and that constitute 
The Dream of Information 73 
his three stigmata: a distended jaw line covering huge metal teeth, an arti­
ficial forearm and hand, and artificial eyes with horizontal slots instead of 
irises. 
Just as Palmer Eldritch eats people from the inside, so Chew-Z eats reality 
from the inside. Leo first discovers its powers when he finds himself in the 
Chew-Z world and, realizing that events in the Chew-Z world happen within 
a subjective realm, escapes by thinking into being a stairway to his office. 
Safely back at his desk, he begins to conduct business as usual, only to find 
that through his secretary's normal appearance the three stigmata of Palmer 
Eldritch begin to gleam, as though reality has become a mere husk that at 
any moment might disappear, revealing the Chew-Z world underneath. The 
narrative viewpoint that revealed the Can-D world as illusory appears pow­
erless to constitute this difference with Chew-Z. Moreover, users of Can-D 
assumed the drug-induced surfaces were "accidental" while the interiors re­
mained "essential." Extending this convention to the Chew-Z world leads 
to a disconcerting insinuation, for now reality is the exterior husk and the 
simulation is the underlying essence that keeps breaking through. Posing as 
a dream of information that can satisfy the deepest desires of humans, the 
Chew-Z world reveals itself not as a refuge but as a rapacious dynamic that 
preys on the autonomy of the liberal subject and, indeed, on the autonomy 
of the world itself. 
This is the nightmare vision that, once articulated, the narrative tries to 
draw back from by a series of strategies, none of which is entirely successful. 
The narrative reacts as if the vision is too horrific to bear, but any attempt to 
mitigate it is unsatisf actory because then the narrative has failed to do jus­
tice to the strength of the vision. Consider the following sequence of events. 
Hoping to exploit Barney's feelings ofloyalty, Leo gives him a brain- rotting 
chemical that Barney is to take and blame its effects on Chew-Z. As part of 
this plan Barney, now living on Mars, is supposed to communicate with a 
satellite broadcaster using a code book the broadcaster has given him. When 
he opens the book he finds it blank, presum ably because by that time he is 
an inhabitant of the Chew-Z world-or rather, has been inhabited by it­
and Palmer Eldritch has intervened in his perceptions so he cannot read the 
code. Here is an instance where intervention in the chain of coded signifiers 
appears to cause a decisive turn of plot, much as it did in James's story. 
The diff erence between Dick's text and James's epistemological assump­
tions can be measured by what happens next. Under the influence of Chew­
Z, Barney time-travels into the future and learns that his refusal to ingest 
Leo's brain-rotting chemical was not crucial after all, for as more people 
take Chew-Z, they realize it is a con and the drug is banished without his 
74 M A KIN G: LAN G U AGE AND COD E 
help. Instead of following through on a chain of events in which the issue 
is loyalty or betrayal, the plot twists to throw the emphasis elsewhere . The 
person who reveals this information to Barney is his future self, who help­
fully reassures him that the experiences the present -day Barney is having are 
hallucinations that will wear off in time. The issue here, then, is whether the 
narrative can regain ontological stability. The future Barney reinforces this 
stab at stability by making reality depend on a congruence of subjectivity 
and time; he argues that he is real because he is in his own time, whereas the 
present- day Barney is a phantasm because he has traveled out of his time. 
After he offers this reassuring parsing of events so that they fall neatly into 
the categories of fantasy and reality, however, Barney's future self begins to 
display the stigmata of Palmer Eldritch, throwing doubt on which Barney is 
phantasmatic, which real-if indeed either is real. Moreover, his assurances 
to Barney that the Chew-Z world will wear off in time are scarcely trustwor­
thy, since they are offered by the perpetrator of the world himself. His cover 
blown, Palmer Eldritch tells Barney that the best way he can spend the sub­
jective eons before the drug wears off is as an inanimate object. When Bar­
ney tries to project his consciousness into a wall plaque, Eldritch intervenes 
to switch bodies with him. First the code book is the site of intervent ion, 
then the body. The first intervent ion destroys the cipher that allows differ­
ent levels of signifiers to be correlated; the second breaks the indecipherable 
complexities that unite mind and body. Unmoored from its basis in embod­
ied physicality, the "self" becomes increasingly destabilized, subverting the 
narrative's earlier attempts to regain ontological security. 
The switch of bodies provides the climax. It threatens to be fatal, for El­
dritch at that moment in "real" time is on a defenseless space cargo ship 
about to be shot to smithereens by Leo Bulero's heavily armed gun ship. 
This would appear to be the real world, its authenticity guaranteed by the 
finality of death. Again, the narrative reaches toward the stability of a secure 
ontology, albeit in a different time and place than before. Just before the fatal 
shot is fired, however, the effects of the drug wear off and Barney is translated 
back into his own body in a Martian hovel. Present again in his own time and 
space, Barney is confident this is reality. He later realizes that the switch back 
into his "real" body was not complete, however, for he retains some trace of 
Palmer Eldritch within himself, just as he has left some trace of himself in 
Eldritch . 1t appears that subjectivity cannot be transmitted from one body to 
another without change, for noise in the channel amounts to an irreversible 
alteration of identity. Thus even when reality is apparently restored, it dif­
fers in some degree from what it was before the interventions happened. In 
this space-opera mixture of the fantastic with the melodramatic, it is not so 
The Dream of Information 75 
much the dizzying turns of plot that are remarkable as the dizzying reversals 
of which world is authentic and which fake, which subject is a simulacrum 
and which a real person. The net result of the narrative's veering now toward 
ontological security, now toward destabilizatio n, is to break down the dis­
tinctions that enabled the fake and the real to be constituted as separate cat­
egories. To an indeterminate extent, the fake and the real have infused into 
one another. Significa ntly, the erosion of the real/simulation distinction has 
been achieved by the absorption into the body of a drug capable of func­
tioning like a communication medium. The technology of communication 
has literally become indistinguishable from the constitution of the subject 
in a narrative that blends this anticipation of the Regime of Computation 
with a devastating deconstruction of the self. 
Also subverted is the status of the body as a guarantor of identity, a phys­
ical presence inhabited by an essential self within. The status of Palmer El­
dritch's body has been peculiar from the beginning. We first see him when 
he interrogates the captive Leo Bulero. The interrogation is carried out not 
by Palmer Eldritch in the flesh, however, but by an electronic box encrusted 
with mechanical appendages that serves as a surrogate for Eldritch's body. 
A similar strangeness occurs when Palmer Eldritch appears on Mars to talk 
with Barney Mayerson. When Barney contemplates attacking Eldritch, the 
body bounces high up into the air as if it were a balloon and is drawn into 
the spaceship by a tether. These events are explained by the growing (and 
accurate) suspicions of several characters that an alien has eaten Palmer El­
dritch from the inside during his long interstellar journey and taken over 
his body. Palmer Eldritch's three stigmata are not so much artificial aids to 
a natural body, then, as they are signifiers that the entire body is a pros­
thesis manipulated by the alien. The body itself has become a prosthesis of 
communication, for Palmer's body and its surrogates are brought into play 
primarily when Palmer wishes to communicate with someone. The implicit 
threat to the liberal subject when possessi ve individualism no longer func­
tions as a foundation for subjectivity is here realized through the science 
fiction trope of the alien. The irony, of course, is that this subversion has 
been achieved without realizing information's dream of endless plenitude. 
The liberal subject may be eaten from the inside, but capitalism continues 
more rapaciously than ever. Indeed, Kim Stanley Robinson has suggested 
that the alien who takes over Palmer Eldritch's body can be taken as "repre­
senting the spirit of capitalism, just as his product Chew-Z could be thought 
of as the ultimate consumer item:' 18 
After the narrative's wild veering between ontological stability and desta­
bilization, a resolution can scarcely be achieved by coming down on one 
76 MAKI NG: LANGUAGE AND CODE 
side or the other, for the oscillation suggests that the opposite outcome was 
equally likely, in which case the resolution would have no more authority 
than a roulette wheel that stops on red rather than black. Instead, the text 
offers different strategies for dealing with a world that cannot be unambigu­
ously categorized as either real or fake. In the instant that Barney is trans­
lated into the alien's body, he briefly shares Palmer's consciousness. Barney 
senses that the alien is immensely old, so old that Barney decides he must 
be what humans have called "God:' Authorized by this ultimate signifier, 
the alien appears to be definitively named, thus stabilizing the regression 
into ontological uncertai nty. However, Anne Hawthorne, a character repre­
sented ambiguously as both a pilgrim to Mars bent on converting colonists 
to her religion and a spy for Leo Bulero, disagrees with Barney's assessment. 
"The key word happens to be is;' she asserts. "Don't tell us, Barney, that 
whatever entered Palmer Eldritch is God, because you don't know that much 
about Him; no one can. But that living entity from intersystem space may, 
like us, be shaped in His image. A way He selected of showing Himself to us. 
If the map is not the territory, the pot is not the potter. So don't talk ontology, 
Barney; don't say is" (232). Here the oscillation does not disappear but rather 
is made irrelevant to living one's lif e. Ontological security is sacrificed, but 
Anne implies that it is possible to live a perfectly satisfactory life without 
this security. A key element in her calm acceptance of the alien/Palmer EI­
dritch is the modesty of her expectations. The crucial gap between "is" and 
"appears," ontology and experience, inheres in the signifier called Palmer 
Eldritch, but this signifier is not confined to that body, as the replication 
of the stigmata within other bodies indicates. In a deep sense, the stigmata 
are not manifestations of God but of a reality whose ontology cannot be 
unequivoca lly stabilized. Even though Anne also takes on the stigmata from 
time to time, she is not bothered by her inability to bridge the gap between 
experience and ultimate realit y, because her faith paradoxically allows her 
to give up ontology. 
Leo Bulero practices a different strategy, based on continuing contesta­
tion and the exercise of personal power. The grander the claim or the more 
ambitious the project, the more likely it is that the stigmata will reappear. In 
contrast to Anne's acceptance is Leo's c;onviction that he can triumph over 
Palmer Eldritch . Leo believes his thinking is more elevated than the ordi­
nary person's, since he has been taking E-therapy radiation treatments from 
Dr. Denkmal's evolution clinic. With his supposedly more evolved brain, 
he hatches the plan to become a Protector of Earth, gathering other humans 
evolved through E-therapy into a group that will become a watchdog society 
protecting Earth from Palmer Eldritch . Although he sports the stigmata, he 
The Dream of Information 77 
convinces himself that inside is a core of authenti city, a belief that transcends 
his personal identity and that therefore constitutes "something in me that 
even that thing Palmer Eldritch can't reach and consume because since it's 
not me it's not mine to lose. I feel it growing. Withstanding the external, 
nonessential alterations, the arm, the eyes, the teeth-it's not touched by 
any of these three, the evil, negative trinity of alienation, blurred reality, and 
despair that Eldritch brought back with him" (244). Leo intends to draw on 
this core to save himself and the Earth. But when he pokes "with his non­
artificial elbow the semi-thing beside him" (his lieutenant Felix Blau, who 
also displays the stigmata ), Felix responds laconica lly, ''Anything you say, 
Leo;' whereupon Leo fails to recognize his own name (245). Even if we ac­
cept Leo's claim that his project will be successf ul-which the text effectively 
undercuts through Felix's response-at best he can win only the battle, for 
the war to maintain his human identity has already been lost. 
More successf ul is the modest plan Barney decides upon. During the brief 
moment Barney shared Eldritch's mind, he realized that the alien intended 
to spend his days taking over Barney's life on Mars. Far from finding it un­
bearable, the alien delighted in such small pleasures as perfectly seasoned 
eggs. Barney reasons that iflife on Mars is good enough for the alien, it can 
be good enough for him as well, and he resolves to enjoy it. Compared to 
the fatal attractions and illusory promises of the realm of information, the 
regime of scarcity ends up looking not so bad after all. It is significant that 
Barney intends to share this life with Anne Hawthorne, the pilgrim who is 
content to admit she can never grasp ultimate reality. 
These modest accommodations notwith standing, The Three Stigmata of 
Palmer Eldritch represents a more profound subversion of conventional re­
ality than does James's "In the Cage." More is at stake than revealing the 
emptiness of information's promise as a dream of effortless plenitude. If 
Can-D points to the sweetness of this illusion, Chew-Z points to the scarier 
possibility that, instead of a person consuming the drug, the drug will con­
sume the person. With Chew-Z the space of simulation acquires an ominous 
agency of its own, including the power to usurp reality. Nevertheless, this 
usurpation is not absolute. Hideous as the stigmata are, they bring a degree 
of epistemological stability to the narrative, for they function as markers 
that indicate, more or less reliably, the realm within which the characters are 
operating. If the stigmata are absent, the character is in conventional reality 
or in the translated world of Can-D; if present, the character is operating 
in the Chew-Z world, where Palmer Eldritch makes the rules and infects 
all subjectivities with his alien identity. The stigmata thus have the effect 
of marking the space of simulation and constituting it as a distinguishable 
78 MAKI NG: LANGUAGE AND CODE 
phenomenon. The next step is a fiction in which these markers are lost and 
there is no distinction between simulation and reality. 
Tiptree's "The Girl Who Plugged In" takes this step. The self becomes a 
message to be encoded and decoded, but the self the receiver decodes is never 
exactly the same self the sender encoded. The liberal subject, distributed 
between a privileged and stigmatized body connected by a noisy channel, is 
not so much lost as reconstituted as a dream of the machine. The focus thus 
shifts from how the self expresses its agency to questions of who controls the 
machine. 
Code as {Re}incarnation :"The Girl Who Was Plugged In" 
In the near-future world of Tiptree's story, advertising has been banned. 
The communication conglomerate GTX has responded by airing shows that 
follow beautiful people around the world, the real purpose being strategic 
product placement. Beautiful people tend to be unreliable from a commer­
cial viewpoint, however, so GTX has a new idea. They decide to build a 
beautiful person from scratch, a genetica lly engineered body without a func­
tioning brain, to be operated remotely by a cybernetically modified human 
who will control the body as a "waldo." For the operator they use P. Burke, 
a wretch ed, deformed woman off the streets who hitherto has looked up to 
beautiful people as gods. Immured in an underground cavern at the heart of 
a high-tech research center, P. Burke undergoes numerous operations that 
extend her nervous and sensory system into wires. After months of practice, 
she learns to inhabit the beautiful fifteen-year-old girl-body as if it were her 
own, a body that GTX advertising whizzes name Delphi. P. Burke still needs 
to tend to her own body as well, so while Delphi "sleeps" (i.e., returns to a 
vegetative state when her operator has withdrawn ), P. Burke falls back into 
her own loathsome flesh and carries out the routines that enable her to con­
tinue living: eating, exercising, excreting. 
Like Dick's novel and James's story, Tiptree's fiction constructs a sharp 
contrast between an informational realm and a "real" world of severe con­
straints that operates according to the laws of conservation. On the one 
hand, Delphi lives in a world of seemingly endless possibility, expansive in its 
glittering displa ys of wealth and privilege; on the other hand, P. Burke lives 
a severely controlled Spartan existence in an underground cavern where her 
every move, including her physiological responses, are closely monitored. 
Yet there are important differences between Dick's novel and Tiptree's fic­
tion, illustrated by the comparison with Perky Pat. Both the Perky Pat lay­
outs and Delphi's glamorous life exist to market commodities. Whereas the 
dolls are inanimate and move only in the drug-enhanced imaginations of 
The Dream of Information 79 
the participants, Delphi appears to those around her as a normal person, 
complete with small talk and conspicuous consumption. 
Recall that in Dick's story the colonists maintained their sense of individ­
ual identities while their minds were projected into the doll. On some level, 
they knew the difference between the "real" bodies and the doll's physique. 
For P. Burke, the projection into Delphi's body is so complete that she per­
ceives it as her own. During the time of projection she experiences her iden­
tity as Delphi, all the more strongly because Delphi is everything she might 
have wished to be and so painfully is not. With Perky Pat, the narrative view­
point constituted a sharp distinction between the dismal locale of the hovel 
and the privileged world of Perky Pat; but in Tiptree's story the bodies them­
selves are clearly distingui shed: P. Burke's deformed flesh versus Delphi's 
heavenly features. In Dick's novel, the binary division between the colonists' 
lives in the hovel and their expansive existences in the Perky Pat world was 
used to mark one as real, the other as illusory. Even when the Chew-Z world 
threatens to displace the autonomy of the real world, there is still a clear 
conceptual division between reality and illusion, the world as it is in itself 
and the world as it is created by Palmer Eldritch's mind. 
By contrast, in Tiptree's story both spaces are real. Indeed, in some re­
spects Delphi lives a more "real" life than P. Burke in her secret niche within 
the research complex, for Delphi moves in a socially constructed space that, 
filmed by the media and beamed out to communication networks through­
out the world, represents the epitome of the autonom y, freedom, and agency 
of the liberal subject. The irony lies not in the illusory nature of this world 
but in the apparent freedom and luxury of Delphi's life as it is broadcast 
around the globe, in contrast to the constant surveillance and discipline to 
which both she and P. Burke are in fact subject, an irony especially evident 
in light of the fact that GTX is dedicated to "freeing the world from garble" 
(46). The issue, then, is not which world is real, for Delphi's high-flying life 
and P. Burke's spartan physical existence are both located in real time and 
space. Rather, the focus in on the connections that make the two bodies 
into an integrated cybersystem-the kinds of discipline, surveillance, and 
punishment to which the bodies are subject, and the distribution of agency 
between these two different sites in the cybersystem. 
The joint between bodies is not altogether seamless. There is a gap of a 
few seconds between the time that P. Burke thinks the command and Del­
phi's body enacts it, a temporal reflection of the physical space separating 
them. Delphi's body also does not work in exactly the same way as other 
human bodies. She sees and hears as well as normal humans, but to con­
serve bandwidth the engineers left her with little sense of touch, almost no 
80 M A I( I N G: LAN G U AGE AND COD E 
smell, and only enough kinesthesia for the body to work correctly. It is no 
accident that the senses she needs for broadband communication with the 
TV networks are left intact, while the intimate senses most deeply bound up 
with pleasure are diminished, making sex for her mostly a cerebral experi­
ence. Moreover, the diurnal pattern of waking and sleeping does not, in her 
case, signify that her body is refreshing itself. Rather, the pattern reflects and 
enacts the distribution of agency, consciousness, and subjectivity between 
the two bodies according to a strict law of conservation: P. Burke's body 
must "sleep" while the consciousness is inhabiting Delphi, and Delphi's 
body must "sleep" while the consciousness is back in P. Burke's body. Inter­
vening in both the media-constructed public world of Delphi and the secret 
research-dominated existence of P. Burke are the corporate structure and 
politics of GTX. The conglomerate controls the communication channels 
through which subjectivity-as-message flows and decides how the distribu­
tion of subjectivity will be parsed. Thus the time gap does more than signify 
that agency is distributed; it also indicates that multiple sites are available 
for intervention by the corporation. 19 GTX no longer finds it necessary to 
discipline the bodies directly, for Delphi/P. Burke can be controlled more 
effectively by intervening in the messages that flow between the bodies.2o 
Discipline becomes necessary when Delphi attracts the attention of Paul 
Isham, son of a top-ranking executive at GTX. In a script familiar from the 
1960s, Paul uses the power and access bestowed on him by his family con­
nections to make satirical TV shows critical of capitalism and the dominant 
ideologies. Delphi interests him not only because of her alluring combi­
nation of innocence and sexiness, but also because she is naive enough to 
object when the products she displays do not live up to their promises. As 
infatuated with Paul as he is with her, Delphi willingly accompanies him on 
romantic excursions, tolerated by GTX in a precise calculation that balances 
the leeway she is allowed against the strength of her ratings. Intending to an­
noy the corporation, Paul deliberately makes plans he knows will interfere 
with Delphi's filming schedules. Finally a "ferret-face" twerp at GTX, plot­
ting for advancement, convinces his superiors that he should be allowed to 
discipline P. Burke/Delphi, which he d<?es by twisting the dials that control 
the communication flow between the bodies. The result is excruciating pain 
for them both. Paul, seeing Delphi writhe in pain, comes to the erroneous 
conclusion that she has had an implant placed in her brain. Furious at this 
interference with his desires and the defilement of his love object, he plots 
to "free" Delphi from her imprisonment. 
He can do so, he thinks, by using a wire mesh cage he has constructed to 
cut off the signals sent to Delphi's brain. As if in ironic reversal of James's 
The Dream of Information 81 
story, he plots to rescue Delphi from the realm of information by placing 
her in the cage. He hires a pilot to drive a small plane and whisks Delphi 
away from her keepers, in a wild dash for freedom that is undercut when 
GTX tracks the plane's precise location through its computers. When Paul 
tries to place the cage over his "bird" (as he thinks of Delphi), she resists, 
knowing that if she is put in the cage she will cease to be the person Paul 
loves, in fact will cease to be a person at all. Alarmed that his intervent ion 
does not free Delphi, Paul directs the plane toward the research center, deter­
mined to force the researchers to remove the supposed implant. His mistake 
is thinking that Delphi is an autonomous subject whose free will has tem­
porarily been disrupted; in reality, Delphi's subjectivity cannot be separated 
from the integrated cybersystem that also includes P. Burke. The irony is 
inscribed into Delphi's name, which GTX coined when they discovered that 
the "P" in P. Burke stood for Philadelphia, home of the Liberty Bell and 
American individua lism. 
The climax comes when Paul bursts into the research center and demands 
to have Delphi "freed." P. Burke, inhabiting Delphi's body, knows that Paul is 
coming, and as he enters the inner sanctum to which her cubicle is attached, 
she bursts through the doors, croaking his name in a scarcely intelligible 
voice. Overwrought, Paul fails to recognize her as a part of the cybersystem 
that includes Delphi; instead, he sees her as an independent and remarkably 
hideous creature scarcely recognizable as human because of her surgically 
altered body and its trailing equipment. His response is to shoot her, where­
upon Delphi also collapses, since there is now no one to operate her body. 
But there is a twist. After Delphi/P. Burke had fallen in love with Paul, 
anomalies began occurring that should have been technically impossible. 
Delphi stirred in her "sleep" and once or twice murmured Paul's name, 
as if the waldo was somehow breaking into consciousness by itself. Mean­
while P. Burke, knowing a crisis was coming, had been fighting with all her 
might to leave her own flesh and force herself into Delphi's body.21 The nar­
rative intimates that in some measure one or both of these attempts may 
have partially succeeded, for after P. Burke dies, Delphi retains enough con­
sciousness to say plaintively, "I'm Delphi," asserting the right to become the 
autonomous subject she can never be (78). The implication is that some 
measure of the possessive individual can survive, if only momenta rily. If 
the corporation can intervene in the channels to discipline the bodies, per­
haps the bodies can also intervene to send messages the corporation has 
not authorized. Such an intervent ion, however transitory, is by no means 
trivial, for GTX's "nightmares are about hemorrhages of information, chan­
nels screwed up, plans misimplemented, garble creeping in" (46). 
82 M A KIN G: LAN G U AGE AND COD E 
As the narrative races toward its conclusion, the narrator reveals that Del­
phi's name is doubly significant, for the ferret-face twerp rescues his career 
by ferreting out the next big technical development in the corporation re­
search labs, the ability to time-travel. In classical myth, Delphi is the site of 
the oracle, the voice that can reveal the future. Throughout, the narrator 
has been calling her story a tale of the future. 22 As if anticipating Ostman's 
utopic vision, the narrator's ironic tone mocks the reader for thinking that 
communication technologies will soon create a realm,of information that 
will bestow endless plenitude on those of us fortunate enough to enter it. In­
stead, the future itself has become a commodity, one of many sites available 
for sale through the miracle of communication technolog y. Like subjectiv­
ity, time can now be sent through the wires and so is subject to distribution 
according to corporate needs. The implication is that both subjecti vity and 
time itself may be transformed, but capitalism continues intact. 
Code as Female Subjectivity: 
What Can a Girl Sell When She Really Needs To? 
Another way to think about the trajectory formed by "In the Cage;' The 
Three Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch, and "The Girl Who Was Plugged In" is 
to trace the restricted ways in which the female characters can engage in 
commerce. As we have seen, the girl in the cage briefly considers prostitu­
tion as an option. "Horrid and vulgar" as causal prostitution is to her, it 
nevertheless is a transaction firmly based in possessive individualism, for 
it assumes that she owns her own body and therefore has the right to sell it, 
albeit in a way legally proscribed by the capitalistic system in which she is 
enmeshed. As many historians have argued, the social arrangements of Vic­
torian London virtually required prostitution, for the large numbers of "sur­
plus" women would otherwise have starved. Beds, even more than telegraph 
offices, are notorious sites of the exchange of information. Jennifer Wicke 
says ofJames's story that "women come to mediate exchange. Communica­
tion flows through them, telegraphically or otherwise enhanced; inf orma­
tion traveling along class lines collocates in them; the mechanisms of mass 
cultural transfer of libidinal, commodity desire are set up with 'woman' as 
the switch point." 23 
One might generalize this argument by noting that it applies to anyone 
occupying the subject position of woman. There is historical evidence that 
at the time James wrote the story he may have been aware of recent scandals 
involving telegraph boys and prostitution. In Ric Savoy's reading of the story, 
the allusions to prostitution stand in for the more scandalous prospect of 
male homosexual prostitution and the fear that the lower-class telegraph 
The Dream of Information 83 
boys would testify against their aristocratic clients. 24 The effect of this read­
ing is to position prostitution centrally within the story's dynamics, making 
it crucial to the outcome, rather than the girl's passing thought. Whatever 
one makes of this argument, the fact remains that the girl's interpolation 
into the market economy depends upon her ownership of her body. Cor­
respondingly, the narrative locates complexity in the girl's consciousness 
rather than in the message or the channel. Placing the locus of complex­
ity, agency, and possession in the (conscious) mind indicates that the liberal 
subject remains largely intact. 
In Dick's novel, implicit bargaining to exchange sex for goods occurs in 
both the real and virtual worlds. Roni Fugate sleeps with Barney Mayerson 
and uses this intimacy to gain information that enables her to compete suc­
cessfully for his job. We see these events through Barney's consciousness, so 
the narrative positions Roni as a mingled temptation and threat, at times 
appearing loyal to Barney and genuinely helpful, at other times treacher­
ous and bent on achieving her success at his expense. As we have seen, this 
oscillation between loyalty and betrayal is characteristic of Dick's represen­
tations of a relatively benign capitalism in which familial relationships are 
folded into a corporation. Still, there remains a significant difference be­
tween male and female characters. Whereas the narrative is focalized in the 
consciousness of male characters and so makes their actions comprehensible 
if not commendable, we are never taken into Roni's mind, a partitioning of 
narrative viewpoint that makes her motives obscure and her actions more 
threatening than they otherwise would be.25 Like Barney, Leo Bulero finds 
Roni both attractive and threatening. After he returns from the Chew-Z 
world, he propositions her, offering to make her his mistress and install her 
in his estate on a space satellite. When she refuses, Leo takes his revenge by 
wishing that she was a hundred years old, "forgetting" that for those infected 
by Chew-Z, thoughts have the power to create reality. As a result of the wish, 
Roni becomes an animate horror, for she dies before reaching one hundred, 
and her decayed body reassembles into a nightmare of the living dead. Roni 
had declined Leo's offer because she did not find his evolved "bubblehead" 
attractive, so her refusal was not only an exercise of personal agency but 
also an assertion of her own desires. As punishment, she is interjected into 
a world where she no longer owns her body, where her body is not even 
a commodity but a thought-object under the control of a vindictive male. 
Possessive individualism does not hold because there is no individual. 
Another scene foregrounding male/female bargaining for sex is the ex­
change between Fran and Sam in the Martian hovel when he tries to con­
vince her to have virtual sex with him by entering Perky Pat and Walt. As 
84 M A KIN G: LAN G U AGE AND COD E 
an inducement, Sam offers Fran a gift of Can-D, which she can choose to 
accept or not; but once she has entered the Can-D world, her agency in con­
summating virtual sex is less clear, for they are joined by other colonists who 
have their own ideas. Nevertheless, as we have seen, the Can-D world com­
plicates rather than eradicates possessive individual ism. Once the Can-D 
world is displaced by Chew-Z, prostitution gives way to a construction of 
subjectivity in which powerful males do not have to bargain because they 
can think revenge or pleasure as they choose. It is surely no accident that 
after Leo Bulero has spent time in the Chew-Z world he resolves to fire Roni 
Fugate, deciding that her independence is a threat he does not have to put 
up with. The narrative here generates complexity largely by indeterminate 
oscillations between real and simulated realms, an ambiguity mirrored by 
the indeterminate fusion of the subjects' bodies with the stigmata of Palmer 
Eldritch. The subversion of the autonomous self moves in conjunction with 
the subversion of an autonomous world. 
In Tiptree's story, P. Burke is so totally under the sway of the GTX corpo­
ration that they do not need to buy her body. Instead, she gives it to them 
freely in exchange for being able to project her consciousness into Delphi's 
beautiful girl-body. After P. Burke dies, the corporation takes this expensive 
commodity and hooks it up with another operator. IfP. Burke does not own 
the waldo, she does not own her body either, for her multiple operations and 
prostheses mean that she can live only so long as GTX is willing to main­
tain her life supports. At the critical moment when Paul is rushing toward 
the research complex, the ferret-face twerp gives the order to administer a 
fatal drug dose to P. Burke. P. Burke lives long enough to meet her ironic 
fate only because the female nurse in charge refuses to carry out the order, 
continuing to see her as a "she" rather than an "it:' the pronoun the narrator 
uses for the dying Delphi after P. Burke has been killed. The dramatic climax 
makes clear that P. Burke has ceased to be an individual. Rather, she/it is a 
component in a cybersystem, which is how the male technician who trained 
her and who alone mourns her death thinks about her. Any claim to pos­
sessive individualism based on ownership of th� self has thus been co-opted 
by a merger between corporate capitalism and communication technolo­
gies so potent that it operates in the intimate territory of nerve and muscle 
as well as global networks . Coincident with this penetration, the narrative 
locates complexity neither in the sender nor the receiver but in the channel, 
the focus for such decisi ve events as discipline, noise, and time-delay (and 
eventually, we are told, time-ma nipulation). 
Following the trope of prostitution and the locus of complexity through 
these stories reveals the continuing force of gender hierarchies, which do 
The Dream of Information 85 
not disappear as possessive individualism collapses but rather continue to 
operate differentially for male and female characters. Although both genders 
are threatened by the collapse of possessive individua lism, men continue to 
exercise more power, autonomy, and individual choice than women. What 
has changed is not the historical power difference between genders but the 
distribution of subjectivities in relation to the Regime of Computation. In­
formation goes from being an imagined realm of plenitude in James's story, 
to a marked realm that interpenetrates reality in Dick's novel, to reality in 
Tiptree's fiction. The shifting locus of complexity, which is one focus of the 
analysis I started in chapter 1, here shows that both subjectivity and reality 
itself are increasingly entangled with communication media. As Timothy 
Lenoir has suggested, Baudrillard's prediction of a hyperreality that will dis­
place reality has proven too conservative to keep up with the transformative 
power of information technologie s.26 Tiptree's story suggests that we will 
not call what emerges from this ongoing transformation "hyperreality" but 
simply "reality." In this sense, the Regime of Computation, marking a shift 
from the construction of complexity as it occurs in speech and writing to 
complexity as an emergent result of computation, is implicit in the trajec­
tory these fictions enact; Despite the differences in historical contexts and 
authorial voices that give these fictions distinctive visions, they concur in 
puncturing the dream of an informational realm that can escape the con­
straints of scarcity. Finally it is not scarcity and market relations that are 
transformed, but the subjects who are constrained and defined by how they 
participate in them. 
86 M A )( I N G: LAN G U AGE AND COD E 
2 STORI NG 
Print and Etext 
4 Translating Media 
From Print to Electronic Texts 
In "The Don Quixote of Pierre Menard;' Borges uses his technique of re­
viewing nonexistent books to explain Pierre Menard's fantastic project of 
re-creating Don Quixote in the twentieth century. 1 Although Menard's cre­
ation reproduces Cervantes' masterpiece word for word, Borges explains 
that it is an utterly different work, for the changed cultural context makes 
thoughts that were banal for Cervantes virtually unthinkable for a twentieth­
century intellectual. Borges's mock-serious fantasy recalls more mundane 
operations carried out every day around the globe. Suppose Don Quixote 
is transported not into a new time but a new medium, and that the word 
sequences on the computer screen are identical to Cervantes' original print 
edition. Is this electronic version the same work? Subversive as Borges's fic­
tion, the question threatens to expose major fault lines running through our 
contemporary ideas of textuality. 
To explore these complexities, I propose to regard the transformation of 
a print document into an electronic text as a form of translation-"media 
translation" -which is inevitably also an act of interpretation. In invoking 
the trope of translation, I follow the lead ofDene Grigar. As she observes, the 
adage that something is gained as well as lost in translation applies with spe­
cial force to print documents that are imported to the Web.2 The challenge 
is to specify, rigorously and precisely, what these gains and losses entail and 
especially what they reveal about presuppositions underlying reading and 
writing. My claim is that they show that our notions of textuality are shot 
through with assumptions specific to print, although they have not been 
generally recognized as such. The advent of electronic textuality presents us 
with an unparalleled opportunity to reformulate fundamental ideas about 
texts and, in the process, to see print as well as electronic texts with fresh 
eyes. For theory, this is the "something gained" that media translation can 
offer. It is a gift we cannot afford to refuse. 
The issues can be illustrated by the William Blake Archive, a magnificent 
Web site designed by three of our most distinguished Blake scholars and ed­
itors.3 It is no exaggeration to say that the William Blake Archive establishes 
the gold standard for literary Web sites. The site is informed throughout 
by an enlightened editorial policy, for the editors state that they take the 
"work" to be the book considered as a unique physical object. They thus 
declare implicitly their allegiance to an idea that Jerome McGann, among 
others, has been championing: the physical characteristics of a text-page 
size, font, gutters, leading, and so on-are "bibliographic codes;' signify­
ing components that should be considered along with linguistic codes.4 The 
editors make canny use of the computer's simulation powers to render the 
screen display as much like the printed book as possible. They provide a 
calibration applet that lets users set screen resolution so the original page 
dimensions can be reproduced. They include a graphical help section that 
uses illustrations of pages to indicate the site's functionalities and capabil­
ities. Clearly an enormous amount of thought, time, and money has gone 
into the construction of this site. 
The editors of the archive are meticulous in insisting that even small dif­
ferences in materiality potentially affect meaning, so they have gone to a 
great deal of trouble to compile not only different works but extant copies 
of the same work. Yet these copies are visually rendered on screen with a 
technology that differs far more in its materiality from print than the print 
copies do from one another. The computer accurately simulates print doc­
uments precisely because it is completely unlike print in its architecture and 
functioning. The simulation of visual accuracy, which joins facsimile and 
other editions in rescuing Blake from text-only versions that suppress the 
crucial visual dimensions of his work, is nevertheless achieved at the cost of 
cybernetic difference. Consider, for example, the navigation functionality 
that allows the user to juxtapose many images on screen to compare dif­
ferent copies and versions of a work. To achieve a comparable (though not 
identical) ef fect with print-if it could be done at all-would require access 
to rare books rooms, a great deal of page turning, and constant shifting of 
physical artifacts. A moment's thought suffices to show that changing the 
navigational apparatus of a work changes the work. Translating the words on 
a scroll into a codex book, for example, radically alters how a reader encoun­
ters the work; by changing how the work means, such a move alters what it 
means. One of the insights electronic textuality makes inescapably clear is 
that navigational functionalities are not merely ways to access the work but 
90 5 TOR 1 N G: P R 1 N TAN D E T EXT 
part of a work's signifying structure. An encyclopedia signifies differently 
than does a realistic novel in part because its navigational functionalities 
anticipate and structure different reading patterns (a clash of conventions 
that Milorad Pavic has great fun exploiting in Dictionar y of the Khazars: A 
Lexicon Novel). 
In terms of the William Blake Archive, we might reasonably ask: if slight 
color variations affect meaning, how much more does the reader's naviga­
tion of the complex functionalities of this site affect what the texts signify? 
Of course, the editors recognize that what they are doing is simulating, not 
reproducing, print texts. One can imagine the countless editorial meetings 
they must have attended to create the site's sophisticated design and func­
tionalities; surely they know better than anyone the extensive differences 
between the print and electronic Blake. Nevertheless, they make the rhetor­
ical choice to downplay these differences. For example, there is a section 
explaining that dynamic data arrays are used to generate the screen displays, 
but there is little or no theoretical exploration of what it means to read an 
electronic text produced in this fashion rather than the print original. Great 
attention is paid to the relation of meaning to linguistic and bibliographic 
codes and almost none to the relation of meaning to digital codes. Matthew 
Kirschenbaum's call for a thorough rethinking of the "materiality of first 
generation objects" in electronic media is very much to the point.5 Call­
ing for a closer relationship between electronic textuality (focusing on dig­
ital work) and textual studies (traditionally focused on print), he lays out a 
framework for discussing electronic texts in bibliographic terms, including 
the nomenclature "layer, version, and release"; "object"; "state"; "instance"; 
and "copy."6 As his argument makes clear, electronic texts often have com­
plex bibliographic histories that materially affect meaning, to say nothing of 
differences between print and electronic instantiations of a work. Concen­
trating only on how the material differences of print texts affect meaning, as 
does the William Blake Archive, is like feeling slight'texture differences on 
an elephant's tail while ignoring the ways in which the tail differs from the 
rest of the elephant. 
What Is a Text? 
Tackling the whole elephant requires rethinking the nature of textuality, 
starting with a basic question: what is a text? In "Forming the Text, Per­
forming the Work;' Anna Gunder, in an effort to clarify the relations be­
tween electronic and print media, has undertaken a meticulous survey of 
textual criticism to determine how editors employ the foundational termi­
nology of "work;' "text;' and "document" in the context of print biblio-
Translating Media 91 
graphic studies. A work is an "abstract artistic entity;' the ideal construction 
toward which textual editors move by collating diff erent editions and copies 
to arrive at their best guess for what the artistic creation should be (86). It 
is important to note that the work is ideal not in a Platonic sense, how­
ever, for it is understood to be the result of editorial assumptions that are 
subject to negotiation, challenge, community norms, and cultural presup­
positions. (Jerome McGann's attacks on the principle of defining the work 
through an author's "final intentions" is a case in point.) 7 Next down the 
scale comes the text. Gunder points out that the "work as such can never 
be accessed but through some kind of text, that is, through the specific sign 
system designated to manifest a particular work" (86). Texts, then, are ab­
stract entities from which editors strive to excavate the work. In this respect, 
she notes, texts of poems are unlike paintings. Whereas no one would claim 
it makes sense to talk about a painting separate from the substrate in which 
it is embodied, editors presume that it does make sense to talk about a text 
as something separate from its physical embodiment in an artifact. Only 
when we arrive at the lowest level of the textual hierarchy, the document, 
is the physical artifact seen as merging with the sign system as an abstract 
representati on. 
Gunder's analysis is consistent with the terminological practices of Pe­
ter Shillingsburg, one of the editors she surveys. In Scholarly Editing in the 
Computer Age, Shillingsburg defines a text as "the actual order of words and 
punctuation as contained in anyone physical form, such as a manuscript, 
proof or book." To forestall misunderstanding, he clarifies that "a text (the 
order of words and punctuation) has no substantial or material existence, 
since it is not restricted by time and space .... The text is contained and sta­
bilized by the physical form but is not the physical form itself" (46). Driving 
the nail farther into this terminological coffin, he insists "it is possible for the 
same text to be stored in a set of alphabetic signs, a set of Braille signs, a set 
of electronic signals on a computer tape, and a set of magnetic impulses on 
a tape recorder. Therefore, it is not accurate to say that the text and the signs 
or storage medium are the same. If the text is stored accurately on a second 
storage medium, the text remains the same though the signs for it are different. 
Each accurate copy contains the same text; inaccurate or otherwise variant 
copies contain new texts" (47, emphasis added). Some hundred pages later, 
he admits that "proponents of the bibliographic orientation have demon­
strated beyond argument, I believe, that the appearance of books signifies a 
range of important meanings to their users" (150); but apparently he does 
not think this imbrication of physical form with meaning requires a dif­
ferent notion of textuality. To be fair to Shillingsburg, he has since defined 
92 S TOR I N G: P R I N TAN D E T EXT 
"text" as a compound of matter, concept, and action.8 Nevertheless, there 
are no doubt many editors and literary scholars-I dare say the majority­
who assume much the same definitions of "work," "text;' and "document" 
that he formulates. Moreover, Shillingsburg's more nuanced explanations of 
"text" and "work" in his recent analysis result in an alarming proliferation 
of terms, so that "work;' "text;' and "version" all split into multiple subcate­
gories. This scheme is reminiscent of the Ptolemaic model of the universe as 
it piled epicycles upon cycles in an effort to keep the earth at the center of the 
universe. The problem with the Ptolemaic universe was not that it could not 
account for celestial motion; rather, it was the cost of increasing complexity 
required for its earth-centric view. Perhaps it is time for a Copernican revo­
lution in our thinking about textuality, a revolution achieved by going back 
and rethinking fundamental assumptions. 
We can begin this reassessment by noticing how Shillingsburg's defini­
tions are perfectly crafted to trivialize differences between print and elec­
tronic media and to insulate "text" and even more so "work" from being 
significantly affected by the specificities of media. To return to his examples, 
he claims that a Braille version of a novel is the same text as a print version, 
yet the sensory input of the two forms is entirely different. Moreov er, it is 
clear that one medium-print-provides the baseline for the definitions, 
even though they are postulated as including other media as well. Thinking 
of the text as "the order of words and punctuations" is as print -centric a defi­
nition as I can imagine, for it comes straight out of the printer's shop and the 
lineation of type as the means of production for the book. We can see how 
Shillingsburg imports this print-centric notion into electronic media when 
he refers to "computer tape" in the quotation above, for this construction 
unconsciously carries over the notion that the text resides at one physical 
location, even though it is at the same time alleged to be "not restricted by 
time and space." When a text is generated in an electronic environment, the 
data files may reside on a server hundreds of miles distant from the user's 
local computer. Moreover, in cases where text is dynamically assembled on 
the fly, the text as "the actual order of words and punctuation" does not exist 
as such in these data files. Indeed, it does not exist as an artifact at all. Rather, 
it comes into existence as a process that includes the data files, the programs 
that call these files, and the hardware on which the programs run, as well 
as the optical fibers, connections, switching algorithms, and other devices 
necessary to route the text from one networked computer to another. 
An even more serious objection to Shillingsburg's definition is its im­
plicit assumption that "text" does not include such qualities as color, font 
size and shape, and page placement, not to mention such electro nic-specific 
Translating Media 93 
effects as animatio n, mouseovers, instantaneous linking, and so on. In most 
contemporary electronic literature, screen design, graphics, multiple layers, 
color, and animation, among other signifying components, are essential to 
the work's effects. Focusing only on "the actual order of words and punc­
tuation" would be as inadequate as insisting that painting consists only of 
shapes, ruling out of bounds such things as color, texture, composition, and 
perspective. The largely unexamined assumption here is that ideas about 
textuality forged in a print environment can be carried over wholesale to the 
screen without rethinking how things change with electronic text, as if "text" 
were an inert, nonreactive substance that can be poured from container to 
container without affecting its essential nature. 
Moreover, the comparison with electronic text reveals by implication how 
limited this definition of "text" is even for print media. Although Shillings­
burg gives a nod to those of the "bibliographic orientation;' he does not 
begin to deal in a serious way with Jerome McGann's brilliant readings of 
poets ranging from Lord Byron to Wallace Stevens and with his repeated 
demonstrations that bibliographic effects are crucial in setting up meaning 
play within the texts. To exclude these effects from the meaning of "text" is to 
impoverish criticism by cutting it off from resources used to create artistic 
works. How can one find these effects in a text if "text" has been defined 
so as to exclude them? Although Shillingsburg's definition of "work" may 
not be Platonic in an ideal sense, there is neverthel ess a Platonic yearning 
on display in his definitions, for he seeks to protect the "work" from the 
noisiness of an embodied world-but this very noise may be the froth from 
which artistic effects emerge. 
The desire to suppress unruliness and multiplicity in order to converge 
on an ideal "work" is deeply embedded in textual criticism. However the 
criteria facilitating this convergence are defined, textual editors have largely 
agreed that convergence is the ideal. Hans Zeller, arguing in 1975 for a shift 
of the editorial perspective from the author's "final intentions" to a broader 
historical viewpoint, observes that "the editor searches in the transmitted 
text for the one authentic text, in comparison with which all else will be 
a textual corruption:'9 Not arriving at a single authoritative text, editors 
argue, risks plopping the reader into a rat's nest of complexly interrelated 
variants, thus foisting onto her the Sisyphean labor of sorting through the 
mess and arriving at a sensible text that most readers would prefer to have 
handed to them. In this view, readers want a text they can take more or less at 
face value so that they can get on with the work of interpreting its meaning 
and explicating its artistic strategies. Here the comparison of editing with 
translation is especially apt, for the editor, like the translator, makes innu-
94 STORING: PRIN T AND ETEXT 
merable decisions that can never be fully covered by an explicit statement 
of principles. As McGann points out, these decisions inevitably function as 
interpretatio ns, for they literally construct the text in ways that foreground 
some interpretive possibilities and suppress others. 
When texts are translated into electronic environments, the attempt to 
define a work as an immaterial verbal construct, already problematic for 
print, opens a Pandora's box of additional complexities and contradictions, 
which can be illustrated by debates within the community formulating the 
Text Encoding Initiative (TEl). The idea of TEl was to arrive at principles for 
coding print documents into electronic form that would preserve their es­
sential features and, moreover, allow them to appear more or less the same in 
complex networked environments, regardless of platform, browser, and so 
on. To this end, the community (or rather, an influential contingent) arrived 
at the well-known principle of OHCO, the idea that a text can be encoded 
as an ordered hierarchy of content objects. As Allen Renear points out in his 
seminal analysis of this process, the importation of print into digital media 
requires implicit decisions about what a text is. 10 Expanding on this point, 
Mats Dahlstrom, following Michael Sperberg-McQueen, observes that the 
markup of a text is "a theory of this text, and a general markup language is 
a general theory or conception oftext." 11 
With respect to the general theory of OHCO, Renear identifies three 
distinct positions within the text encoding communi ty, which correspond 
roughly to three historical stages. The first stage held that a text consists of 
a hierarchical set of content objects such as chapters, sections, subsections, 
paragraphs, and sentences. This view asserted that the hierarchy is essential 
to the production of the text and so must occupy center stage in transform­
ing print text into digital code. This belief in hierarchy informed how the 
community used SGML (Standard Generalized Markup Language) to cre­
ate protocols and standards that would ensure that the content objects were 
reproduced in digital media, and moreover reproduced in the same hier­
archy as print. 12 Although most of these researchers thought of themselves 
as practitioners rather than theorists, their decisions, as Renear points out, 
constituted a de facto theory of textuality that was reinforced by their tacit 
assumption that the "Platonic reality" of a text really is its existence as an 
ordered hierarchy of content objects. 
The next stage, which Renear identifies as pluralism, was propelled by the 
realization that many texts consist of not just one hierarchy but several inter­
penetrating hierarchie s; the standard example is a verse drama, which can be 
parsed as sentences and metrical lines. Epistemologically, this realization led 
to a view of texts as systems of ordered hierarchies, and refinements such as 
Translating Media 95 
Document Type Definitions (DTDs) were designed to introduce more flexi­
bility into the system. The third stage, which Renear calls antirealism, draws 
the conclusion that the text does not preexist encoding as a stable ontological 
object but is brought into existence through implicit assumptions actualized 
through encoding procedures. Renear quotes Alois Pichler as exemplifying 
this approach: "Our aim in transcription is not to represent as accurately as 
possible the originals, but rather to prepare from the original another text 
so as to serve as accurately as possible certain interests in the text." 13 Ren­
ear, who identifies himself as a pluralist, astutely points out the tautologies 
and ambiguities in the antirealist position-for exam ple, indeterminacies 
in identifying which "certain interests in the text" are to be served. 
My interest in this controversy points in a different direction, for what 
strikes me is the extent to which all three positions-Platonist, pluralist, and 
antirealist-f ocus almost exclusively on linguistic codes, a focus that allows 
them to leave the document as a physical artifact out of consideration. I can 
illustrate the implications of this erasure by returning to the William Blake 
Archive. The editors of the archive, as we have seen, take into account the 
book as a physical object. Their encoding practices make clear, however, that 
they implicitly understand the bibliographic almost exclusively in terms of 
the visual. Other aspects of the text as physical object, such as the lovely feel­
ing of a leather binding or the musty smell of old paper, are not reproduced 
in digital codes. To undertake the complete bibliographic coding of a book 
into digital media would be to imagine the digital equivalent of Borges's 
Library of Babel, for it would have to include an unimaginable number of 
codes accounting for the staggering multiplicity of ways in which we pro­
cess books as sensory phenomena. To reduce this impossible endeavor to 
manageable proportions, editors must identify some features of particular 
interest, and it makes excellent sense to emphasize the visual aspect of Blake's 
works. But we lose important insights if we naturalize this process and allow 
ourselves the illusion that Blake's books-or any books, for that matter­
have been faithfully reproduced within digital media. Rather, choices have 
been made about which aspects of the book to encode, and these choices are 
heavily weighted toward the linguistic rather than the bibliographic. More­
over, the choices have further implications in the correlations they establish 
between linguistic, bibliographic, and digital codes. Thus in his rigorous 
analysis of how markup languages such as SGML relate to the Hjelmslevian 
distinction between content and expression (the physical instantiation of a 
text), Dino Buzzetti shows that these languages do not solve the problems 
raised by thinking of the text as an abstract entity; rather, they amplify im­
plicit problems and further complicate the situation. 14 Only if we attend to 
96 STORING: PRINT AND ETEXT 
the interrelations oflinguistic, bibliographic, and digital codes can we grasp 
the full implications of the transformations books undergo when they are 
translated into a digital medium. 
The debates about encoding assume implicitly that there is some textual 
essence that can be transported from print to digital media. Even the anti­
realist position assumes an essence, although now it is an essence created by 
an editor. All three positions elide from electronic texts the materiality of 
books and their physical differences. A more accurate perception would fo­
cus on the editorial process of choice, which is always contextual and driven 
by "certain interests;' although these reside not exclusively in the text but 
in the conjunction of text, editorial process, and cultural context. In my 
view, the ontology card is not worth playing. There is no Platonic reality 
of texts. There are only physical objects such as books and computers, foci 
of attention, and codes that entrain attention and organize material opera­
tions. Since no print books can be completely encoded into digital media, we 
should think about correspondences rather than ontologies, entraining pro­
cesses rather than isolated objects, and codes moving in coordinated fashion 
across representational media rather than mapping one object onto another. 
The issue goes to the heart of what we think a text is, and at the heart of 
the heart is the belief that "work" and "text" are immaterial constructions 
independent of the substrates in which they are instantiated. We urgently 
need to rethink this assumption, for as long as it remains intact, efforts to 
account for the specificities of print and electronic media will be hamstrung. 
Without nuanced analyses of the differences and similarities of print and 
electronic media, we will fail to grasp the fuller significance of the momen­
tous changes underway as the Age of Print draws to a close and print-as 
robust, versatile, and complex as ever-takes its place in the dynamic media 
ecology of the twenty-first century. For an appreciation of these changes we 
will require a more workable sense of materiality than has traditionally ac­
companied theories of textuality, which invoke it only to dismiss it as some­
thing to be left behind through the labor of creating the ideal work. 
Physicality, Materi ality, and Embodied Textuality 
There are, of course, good reasons why editors have sought to separate the 
idea of the work from its physical instantiation. If the "work" is instanti­
ated in its physical form, then every edition would produce, by definition, 
another "work," and textual form would never be stable. Whether textual 
form should be stabilized is a question at the center of Jerome McGann's 
"experiments in failure;' which he discusses in Radiant Textuality. As both 
Mats Dahlstrom and McGann point out, the two imperatives guiding most 
Translating Media 97 
textual criticism are, if not contradictory, at least in tension with one an­
other: editors want to converge on the ideal work and at the same time pro­
vide readers as much information as possible about textual variants. IS The 
Web promises to allow these dual imperatives to be more successfully inte­
grated than ever before, as the William Blake Archive and McGann's work 
on the D. G. Rossetti Hypermedia Archive demonstrate. At the same time, 
perhaps ironically, the Web's remarkable flexibility and radically different 
instantiation of textuality also draw into question whether it is possible or 
desirable to converge on an ideal "work" at alL Educated by his work with 
the D. G. Rossetti Hypermedia Archive, McGann argues against convergence 
as a critical and theoretical principle, attempting to show through cogent 
readings of poetic works and other strategies that a text is never identical 
with itself. 16 
Instead he argues for the practice of what he calls "deformation;' a mode 
of reading that seeks to liberate from the text the strategies by which it 
goes in search of meaning. Following the ideas of Galvano della Volpa, an 
Italian critic writing in the 1960s, McGann argues that meaning is not the 
goal of critical explication but a residue left over after critical interroga­
tion is finished. Meaning itself cannot be the goal of critical explicatio n, 
for "this would run the risk of suggesting that interpretation can be ade­
quate to poiesis. It cannot" (Radiant Textuality, 130). Indeed, explication 
cannot be adequate even to its own understanding of itself, which can be 
accomplished only through an explication of the explication, which in turn 
requires another explication to try to get at the residue left over when these 
two explications are compared, and so on to infinity or to the exhaustion 
of the critical wilL Underlying this argument is an implicit analogy. Just 
as textual criticism has traditiona lly tried to converge on an ideal work, so 
hermeneutical criticism has tried to converge on an ideal meaning. Echo­
ing deconstruc tive theory more than he acknowledges, McGann asks what 
would happen if both kinds of enterprise were to abandon the movement 
toward convergence and were to try instead to liberate the multiplicities of 
texts through a series of deformations. Thus he is more interested (at least 
theoretically) in what deformations of Rossetti's images in Photoshop reveal 
about their composition than in the accomplishments of the William Blake 
Archive in simulating the color tones and sizes of the paper documents. 17 
This kind of argument opens the way for a disciplined inquiry into the 
differences in materiality between print and electronic textuality. As editor 
of the D. G. Rossetti Hypermedia Archive, McGann has had ample-one 
might almost say, painful-opportunity to appreciate the differences be­
tween the print and electronic text. Indeed, it is precisely this gap that leads 
98 STORING: PRIN T AND ETEXT 
him to think that John Unsworth's essay "The Importance of Failure" is so 
important. McGann's project is to convert the failure to make electronic tex­
tuality perform as an exact duplicate of print into a strength by using "defor­
mation" as a tool for critical insight. He emphasizes the importance of doing 
and making, suggesting that practical experience in electronic textuality is 
a crucial prerequisite for theorizing about it. In this sense, his work repre­
sents an important advance over the rhetoric of the William Blake Archive 
(though not necessarily over its technical accomplishmen ts), for he sees that 
electronic textuality can be used as something other than a simulacrum of 
print. Rather, he understands that it can provide a standpoint from which 
to rethink the resources of the print medium. 
The impact of his experience is readily apparent in his redescriptions of 
print texts in terms that make them appear fully comparable to electronic 
texts. He argues, for example, that all texts are marked; he regards paragraph 
indentations and punctuation as forms of marking equivalent to HTML, the 
Hypertext Markup Language used to format documents for electronic envi­
ronments. Moreover, he proposes that all texts are algorithmic, containing 
within themselves instructions to generate themselves as displays (the dis­
play form of the document here being considered distinct from the data and 
algorithms used to create it). So extensive and detailed are his redescriptions 
that one wonders if electronic text has any distinctive features of its own. 
The burden of his argument would suggest that it does not, an implication 
strengthened by his overly casual dismissal of the cases made by Janet Mur­
ray and Espen Aarseth for the specificities of electronic textuality. 18 
When push comes to pixel, it is clear that McGann's primary allegiance 
is to print rather than electronic textuality. He repeatedly asserts that the 
resources of the electronic medium pale in comparison to print. 19 Speak­
ing specifically of fiction, he argues in Radiant Textuality that "there is no 
comparison ... between the complexity and richness of paper-based fic­
tional works, on the one hand, and their digital counterparts -hypermedia 
fiction-on the other" (130). Although he is too astute a critic to make com­
parisons directly, by juxtaposing in the next sentence Stuart Moulthrop with 
!talo Calvino, McGann implies that Moulthrop, a contemporary pioneer in 
electronic hypertext, is not as good a writer as Calvino, or at any rate does 
not produce literature of the same quality. Like many arguments McGann 
mounts to prove the superiori ty of print, the implied comparison here be­
tween print and electronic literature is seriously flawed. It is obviously inap­
propriate to compare a literary medium that has been in existence for fifteen 
years with print forms that have developed over half a millennium. A fairer 
comparison would be print literature produced from 1550 to 1565, when the 
Translating Media 99 
conventions of print literature were still in their nascent stages, with the elec­
tronic literature produced from 1985 to 2000. I believe that anyone familiar 
with both canons would be forced to agree it is by no means obvious that the 
print canon demonstrates conclusively the superiority of print as a medium 
for literary creation and expression. Given five hundred years in which to 
develop-if we can possibly stretch our imaginations this far-electronic 
literature may indeed prove itself equal or superior to print. 
If, as Mrs. Malaprop observes, comparisons are odorous (i.e., odious), 
this one is especially so. As McGann acknowledges, it should not be a ques­
tion of pitting one medium against the other but of understanding the speci­
ficities of each. By using electronic textuality to better understand print, 
McGann opens the way for important insights into its possibilities. Unfortu­
nately, he is not as successful in using print to understand the specificities of 
electronic textuality. When problems crop up in his arguments, they almost 
always stem from this source. He asserts, for example, that print text differs 
from itself, and he uses close readings to argue the point. But his argument 
confuses what happens in the mind of the reader with the stability of print 
in a given document. To demonstrate that print is unstable even at the level 
of a document, he scans a document with an optical character reader and 
reports that the machine gives different readings on different scans. How­
ever, this experiment does not demonstrate that print is not self-identical, 
but only that the translation between print and electronic text is unstable. 
In other argumen ts, he conflates the instability of a text-for example, 
variations in different copies of an edition or between different editions­
with the instability of a print document, again to argue that print, like elec­
tronic text, is fluid and unstable. 20 The stubborn fa ct remains, however, that 
once ink is impressed on paper, it remains relatively stable and immovable. 
The few exceptions that might be invoked-f or example, an artist's book 
created with thermochromic ink that changes color when heated by a hand 
touch, or print impressed on cutouts that move-should not be allowed to 
obscure the general observation that the print of a given document is stable 
for (more or less) long periods of time, in dramatic contrast to the constant 
refreshing of a computer screen many times each second. Moreover, print 
does not normally move once impressed onto the paper fiber, again in con­
trast to the animations, rollover, and other such features that increasingly 
characterize electronic literature. No print document can be reprogrammed 
once the ink has been impressed onto the paper, whereas electronic texts 
routinely can. These differences do not mean, of course, that print is infe­
rior to electronic text, only that it is different. Admitting these differences 
does not diminish the complexity and flexibility of print books, which have 
100 5 TOR I N G: P R I N TAN D E T EXT 
resources different than those of electronic texts; but it does pave the way for 
understanding the specificities of electronic textuality and, thereby, coming 
to a fuller appreciation of its resources. 
What, then, are these differences, and what are their implications for 
theories of textuality? Mats Dahlstrom tackles this question in his explo­
ration of how notions of a scholarly edition might change with electronic 
textuality. 21 He makes the important point, also noted by Anna Gunder in 
"Forming the Text, Performing the Work;' that with electronic texts there 
is a conceptual distinction-and often an actualized one-between storage 
and delivery vehicles, whereas with print the storage and delivery vehicles 
are one and the same. With electronic texts, the data files may be on one 
server and the machine creating the display may be in another location en­
tirely, which means that electronic text exists as a distributed phenomenon. 
The dispersion introduces many possible sources of variation into the pro­
duction of electronic text that do not exist in the same way with print, for ex­
ample, when a user's browser displays a text with different colors than th.ose 
the writer saw on her machine when she was creating it. More fundamental 
is the fact that the text exists in dispersed fashion even when it is confined 
to a single machine. There are data files, programs that call and process the 
files, hardware functionalities that interpret or compile the programs, and 
so on. It takes all of these together to produce the electronic text. Omit any 
one of them, and the text literally cannot be produced. For this reason it 
would be more accurate to call an electronic text a process than an object. 
Certainly it cannot be identified with, say, a diskette or a CD-ROM, for these 
alone can never produce a text unless they are performed by the appropriate 
software running on the appropriate hardware. 
Let me emphasize that this processing is necessarily prior to whatever 
cognitive processing the user performs to read and interpret the text. Al­
though print readers perform sophisticated cognitive operations when they 
read a book, the printed lines exist as such before the book is opened, read, 
or understood. An electronic text does not have this kind of prior existence. 
It does not exist anywhere in the computer, or in the networked system, in 
the form it acquires when displa yed on screen. After it is displayed, of course, 
readerly processing may occur, as with print. But we should not indulge in 
the logical confusion that results when it is assumed that the creation of the 
display-a process that happens only when the programs that create the text 
are activated-e ntails the same operations as a reader's cognitive processing. 
In this sense, electronic text is more processual than print; it is performative 
by its very nature-independent of whatever imaginations and processes the 
user brings to it, and regardless of variations between editions and copies. 
Translating Media 101 
Acknowledging these differences, Mats Dahlstrom argues that electronic 
text should be understood as consisting, at bottom, of binary code, the 
sequences of ones and zeros that underlie all the languages built on top 
of them. But defining electronic text in this way, a move reminiscent of 
Friedrich Kittler's argument in "There Is No Software;'22 inexplicably priv­
ileges binary code over all the other things necessary to produce the text 
as a document a user can read. In insisting further that electronic text is 
above all a pattern, Dahlstrom risks reinscribing the dematerialization so 
prominently on display in Shillingsburg's definition of "text" as a sequence 
of words and pauses. If the idea of print text as a dematerialized entity is 
already a fiction (however convenient ), how much more fictional is the idea 
of an electronic text as binary code, when how that code is stored, processed, 
and displayed is utterly dependent on the nature of the hardware and soft­
ware? Perhaps it is time to think the unthinkable-to posit a notion of "text" 
that is not dematerialized and that does depend on the substrate in which 
it is instantiated. Rather than stretch the fiction of dematerialization thin­
ner and thinner, why not explore the possibilities of texts that thrive on the 
entwining of physicality with informational structure? 
This is where I think McGann is trying to go with his argument that texts 
are never self-identical, an insight he is developing further in his present 
work on the quantum nature of textuality (i.e., textuality that is unresolv­
ably ambiguous until a reader interacts with it in a specific way). As we have 
seen, if one accepts the physicality of the text, then the door opens to an array 
of infinite difference, with no text identical to any others because there are 
always differences between any two physical objects, however minute. Al­
though McGann does not fully develop the point with regard to electronic 
textuality, his argument that a text is not physically self-identical (which he 
applies most ly to print) is mere common sense with electronic texts. Con­
sider, for example, the time it takes images to appear on screen when they 
are being drawn from a remote server. Certainly the time lag is an important 
component of the electronic text, for it determines in what order the user 
will view the material. Indeed, as anyone who has grown impatient with 
long load times knows, in many instances it determines whether the user 
will see the image at all. These times are difficult to predict precisely because 
they depend on the individual computer's processing speed, traffic on the 
Web, efficiency of data distribution on the hard drive, and other imponder­
ables. This aspect of electronic textuality -along with many others- cannot 
be separated from the delivery vehicles that produce it as a process with which 
the user can interact. Moreover, for networked texts, these vehicles are never 
102 S TOR I N G: P R I N TAN D E T EXT 
the same twice, for they exist in momentary configurations as data pack­
ets are switched quickly from one node to another, depending on traffic at 
the instant of transfer. In this respect and many others, electronic texts are 
indeed not self-identical. As processes they exhibit sensitive dependence on 
temporal and spatial contexts, to say nothing of their absolute dependence 
on specific hardware and software configurations. Rita Raley points to this 
aspect of electronic textuality in her emphasis on performance. Seeking to 
locate the differences between print and electronic texts, she remarks, "The 
operative difference of hypertext can only be revealed in the performing and 
tracing of itself, in its own instantiation." 23 
What are the consequences of the idea that textuality is instantiated rather 
than dematerialized, dispersed rather than unitary, processural rather than 
object-like, flickering rather than durably imprinted? The specter haunting 
textual criticism is the nightmare that one cannot then define a "text" at 
all, for every manifestation will qualify as a different text. Pervasive with 
electronic texts, the problem troubles notions of print texts as well, for as 
physical objects they also differ from one another. But this need not be a 
catastrophe if we refine and revise our notion of materiality. 
Let us begin rethinking materiality by noting that it is impossible to 
specify precisely what a book-or any other text-is as a physical object, 
for there are an infinite number of ways its physical characteristics can be 
described. Speaking of an electronic text, for example, we could focus on the 
polymers used to make the plastic case or the palladium used in the power 
cord. The physical instantiation of a text will in this sense always be indeter­
minate. What matters for understanding literature, however, is how the text 
creates possibilities for meaning by mobilizing certain aspects of its physi­
cality. These will necessarily be a small subset of all possible characteristics. 
For some texts, such as Edwin Schlossberg's artist's book Wordswordswords, 
the activated physical characteristics may include the paper on which the 
words are impressed. For other texts, the paper's contribution may be neg­
ligible. 
The following definition provides a way to think about texts as embodied 
entities without falling into the chaos of infinite difference: The material­
ity of an embodied text is the interaction of its physical characteristics with 
its signifying strategies. 24 Centered in the artifact, this notion of materiality 
extends beyond the individual object, for its physical characteristics are the 
result of the social, cultural, and technological processes that brought it into 
being. As D. F. McKenzie has argued in the context of the editorial theory of 
"social texts;' social processes too are part of a text's materiality, which leads 
Translating Media 103 
to the conclusion that it is impossible to draw a firm distinction between 
bibliographic and interpretive concerns. In Bibliography and the Sociology of 
Texts, his influential Panizzi lectures, McKenzie comments, "My own view 
is that no such border exists" (23). Because materiality in this view is bound 
up with the text's content, it cannot be specified in advan ce, as if it existed 
independent of content. Rather, it is an emergent property. What constitutes 
the materiality of a given text will always be a matter of interpretation and 
critical debate; what some readers see as physical properties brought into 
play may not appear so to other readers. But this is not the end of the world 
as textual criticism has known it. Indeed, it is normal procedure for literary 
scholars to consider a "text" as something negotiated among a community 
of readers, infinitely interpretable and debatable. McKenzie's definition of 
"text" includes "verbal, visual, oral and numeric data, in the form of maps, 
prints, and music, of archives of recorded sound, of films, videos, and any 
computer-stored information" (5). Moreover, he emphasizes that the recog­
nized negotiations that occur with print works should be extended to elec­
tronic works. 
Work as Assemblage 
The specter of never being able to claim that different documents consti­
tute the same text now appears much less threatening. Critical debate will 
explore whether there are sufficient differences in materiality (which in this 
definition cannot simply be collapsed into physicality) between two doc­
uments to warrant considering them different texts. If strong cases can be 
made for differences in how the materialities of the two documents are mo­
bilized, then perhaps they should be considered different texts. Common 
sense is not violated by supposing that a penny broadside bound in a hand­
some red cover and signed for with due ceremony in the Rare Book Room 
of the British Museum is a different text than the same broadside snatched 
from the gutter and quickly scanned in Shakespeare's London. Indeed, it 
would strain credulity to suppose that the different physical instantiations 
of these two documents has no effect on how and what they signify (I speak 
here only of the physical differences, not the inevitable differences also in­
troduced by culture, language, etc., though these too obviously playa role in 
how materiality will emerge). In this account of embodied textuality, texts 
would spread out along a spectrum of similarity and difference, and clusters 
would emerge. Texts that differed only slightly would occupy adjacent points 
(say, different editions that closely matched each other in physical character­
istics), whereas outlying members of the cluster might include texts in dif­
ferent media (Braille rather than print, an electronic version of a print text, 
104 5 TOR I N G: P R I N TAN D E T EXT 
a film version of a novel, etc.). 25 These clusters could usefully be considered 
to constitute a "work;' without implying that "work" is a single convergent 
object. Editors might argue, for example, that a given edition should be priv­
ileged because it is positioned at the center of a cluster, or they might discuss 
an edition in terms of some notion of a weighted average. In a sense, of 
course, editors already work in this way. What would change is not so much 
editorial practice as the conceptual framework and vocabulary invoked to 
explain and justify an edition. 
Perhaps the most important consequence to emerge from this new frame­
work would be preventing the text from being thinned out of existence as 
a physical object. Texts would be routinely discussed in terms of both their 
conceptual content and their physical embodiments. In some instances, a 
text would remain relatively constant over many documents, assuming that 
debate led to agreement that the physical differences between the docu­
ments were not important as signifying components. In other instances, 
there could be as many texts as there are documents. Neither document, 
text, nor work would be considered immaterial; all would be invested with 
nuanced senses of their materialit ies, a viewpoint that would further ener­
gize and foreground discussions of how physical characteristics, verbal con­
tent, and nonverbal signifying strategies work together to produce the object 
called "text:' 
These changed senses of work, text, and document make it possible to 
see phenomena that are now obscured or made invisible by the reigning 
ideologies. For example, with the advent of the Web, communication path­
ways are established through which texts cycle in dynamic intermediation 
with one another, which leads to what might be called Work as Assemblage, 
a cluster of related texts that quote, comment upon, amplify, and otherwise 
intermediate one another. One form of such an assemblage is illustrated 
by L. J. Winson's Dark Lethe, a science-fiction Web site at which collabo­
rators contribute stories loosely related to one another. Another example, 
suggested by David Silver, is the cluster of texts associated with Myst. This 
cluster includes, in addition to the computer game and its companion game 
Riven, Web sites populated by devotees of the games, as well as the associated 
print novels that expand upon the narratives in the games and that supply 
back�tories and other plot details missing from the games. 26 
Yet another example is the cluster of texts around House of Leaves, Mark 
Danielewski's brilliant contemporary print novel. House of Leaves was pub­
lished on the Web before being instantiated in print. The print novel itself 
exists in four different editions, each significantly different from the others. 
Also in the cluster is a Web site devoted to the novel, on which hundreds 
Translating Media 105 
of readers make postings exploring details of the print novels. Still other 
examples include the now common practice of setting up Web sites to go 
along with the release of new films. Although most of these sites are merely 
publicity vehic les, a new genre is emerging in which the site is an indepen­
dent aesthetic production initiating media-specific strategies to transform, 
subvert, and play with the film's materiaL The fascinating site for Requiem 
for a Dream includes pseudo-advertisements, graphic mutations of scenes 
and characters from the film, and reinscriptions of scraps of dialogue recon­
textualized visually and verbally to interrogate their meanings-an assem­
blage that constitutes a new art form, according to Jack Post's compelling 
argument. 27 
Going along with the idea of Work as Assemblage are changed construc­
tions of subjectivity. The notion of the literary work as an ideal immaterial 
construction has been deeply influenced by a unitary view of the subject, 
particularly in the decades when editors sought to arrive at the work by de­
termining an author's "final intentions." The work as it was formulated us­
ing this principle in turn reinforced a certain view of the author as a literary 
figure. As the discussion in chapter 6 on the history of copyright will make 
clear (in a different context), the unitary work and the unified subject mutu­
ally reinforced and determined each other. As the rest of critical theory and 
cultural studies deconstructed the unified subject and exposed the prob­
lematic ideological bases on which it rested, editorial criticism underwent 
similar revisionist movements, particularly in Jerome McGann's arguments 
for the "social text." 28 Perhaps now it is time to think about what kinds of 
textuality a dispersed, fragmented, and heterogeneous view of the subject 
might imply. 
An appropriate model may present itself in Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guat­
tari's rhizomatic Body without Organs (BwO), a construction that in its 
constant deterritorialization and reterritorialization has no unified essence 
or identifiable center, only planes of consistency and lines of flight along 
which elements move according to the charged vectors of desire.29 The 
rather esoteric vocabulary invoked here is part of Deleuze and Guattari's 
project to change the emphasis from objects to processes, and from hierar­
chical structures to rhizomatic ones. The examples given above of the Work 
as Assemblage (which by analogy can be abbreviated as the WaA) illustrate 
clusters of texts that take the distinctive form of rhizomatic tendrils branch­
ing out from one another in patterns of fractal complexity. WaA in this view 
is not an aberration but a paradigmatic configuration that writes large the 
dynamics of intermediation and media specificity at work in all embodied 
texts. Rather than being bound into the straitjacket of a work possessing an 
106 S TOR I N G: P R I N TAN D E T EXT 
immaterial essence that textual criticism strives to identify and stabilize, the 
WaA derives its energy from its ability to mutate and transform as it grows 
and shrinks, converges and disperses according to the desires of the loosely 
formed collectives that create it. Moving fluidly among and across media, its 
components take forms distinctive to the media in which they flourish, so 
the specificities of media are essential to understanding its morphing con­
figurations. 
To see such possibilities-to bring the Work as Assemblage into sight at 
all-requires a fundamentally different view of authorship than that which 
undergirds the idea of the work as an immaterial verbal construction. The 
subjectivity implied by the WaA cannot by any stretch of the imagination be 
considered unified, a point that Deleuze and Guattari make in another con­
text by replacing a coherent subject with the flows of desire associated with 
the Body without Organs. Similarly, the subjects producing the WaA are 
multiple in many senses, both because they are collectivities in and among 
themselv es, and also because they include nonhuman as well as human ac­
tors, a dynamic I will explore in chapter 6 by considering the monstrously 
fragmented and dispersed narrator of Shelley Jackson's Patchwork Girl. As 
this work emphasizes, with an electronic text the computer is also a writer, 
and the software programs it runs to produce the text as process and display 
also have complex and multiple authorship (not to mention the authoring 
done by hardware engineers in configuring the logic gates that create the bit 
stream). A robust account of materiality focusing on the recursive loops be­
tween physicality and textuality is essential to understanding the dynamics 
of the WaA. Once we let go of the assumption that the literary work must 
be an expression of an immaterial essence-a line of thought dominant in 
literary criticism at least since the eighteenth century-we see the new forms 
of textuality that, racing ahead of textual theory, are already cycling through 
diverse media in exuberant and playful performances that defy the old ver­
ities even as they give rise to the new. 
The present moment presents us with a rare opportunity to break out 
of assumptions that have congealed around the technology of print, ren­
dered transparent by centuries of continuing development, refinement, and 
use. This opportunity is powerfully present in the implicit juxtaposition of 
print and electronic textuality. The game is to understand both print and 
electronic textuality more deeply through their similarities and differences. 
McGann's project of revitalizing our understanding of print by redescribing 
it in terms usually used for electronic text is a seminal contribution. The 
very comprehensiveness that makes his redescriptions so valuable, however, 
also works to obscure differences between the two media. But a nuanced 
Translating Media 107 
understanding of the differences is as important to the project as a deep 
appreciation for the similarities. 
The primary diff erence is the fact that an electronic text is generated 
through multiple layers of code processed by an intelligent machine before a 
human reader decodes the information. McGann argues that print texts are 
also coded, but this point relies on slippage between the narrow sense of code 
as it applies to computers and a more general sense of code as Roland Barthes 
envisions it, including codes of social decorum, fashion, polite conversation, 
and so on.30 In the narrow sense in which code operates in computers, code 
can be defined as a system of correspondences that relate the elements of one 
symbol set to another symbol set, for example, when Morse code associates 
dots and dashes with alphabetic letters. Unlike Morse code, however, code 
within the computer is active, for it functions as instructions that initiate 
changes in the system's behavior. 
Working with these instructions, writers develop a nuanced sense of code 
as a form of writing with its own stylistic elegance and formal possibili­
ties. Increasingly, writers of electronic literature view code as a resource for 
signifying practices. Reviewing some of this work, Loss Pequeno Glazier, 
a distinguished writer of electronic poetry as well as a critic, observes that 
programming is writing (a point also made by John Cayley). 31 In Dig[iTJal 
Poet(I)(c)s, Glazier argues that users who want to understand how an elec­
tronic text works cannot afford simply to stay at the surface level of the 
screenic text, any more than a writer can afford to know nothing about 
how screenic text is generated and displayed. Agreeing with McGann that 
the defining characteristic of literary language is the impulse to investigate 
its conditions of possibility, Glazier names literary writing as "writing that, 
whether or not it serves other ends, has an engagement with its own for­
mal qualities" (54). He sees print and electronic text on a continuum, argu­
ing that "innovative literature" in both media "has explored the conditions 
that determine ... the procedure, processes, and crossed paths of meaning­
making, meaning-making as constituting the 'meaning'" (32). As Glazier 
points out, print writers have also explored the materiality of the medium, 
from the typewriter poems ofIan Hamilton Finlay to the Mimeo movement 
and concrete poetry. The specificity of electronic media, he implies, lies in 
its distinctive materiality: "materiality is key to understanding innovative 
practice" (22). 
These useful insights are somewhat offset by Glazier's tendency to elevate 
his preferred genre-p oetry-and his preferred set of literary strategies at 
the expense of narrative and "non-innovative literature," a back formation 
that certainly does not do justice to the complexity of other literary strate-
108 5 TOR; N G: P R I N TAN D E T EXT 
gies. Although he has a remarkable sense of the possibilities for electronic 
poetry, his remarks on non-inno vative literature are flat to the point of un­
intentional parody. "Non-innovative literature;' he writes, "can be said to 
possess a number of distinguishing textual features. These can include nar­
rative, plot, anecdotal re-telling of human experiences, logical descriptions, 
chronological sequence of events, a reliance on factual information, a view 
oflanguage as a transparent (at most, tinted) bearer of meaning, and an at­
tachment to a Modernist aesthetic" (47). The underlying culprit in his view 
is "the position of the '1;" which non-innovative literature constructs by 
asserting "forms of authority" and creating "a nonpermeable (or semiper­
meable) filter between the ego and the world" (48). Although Glazier tends 
to identify these qualities with narrative, which apparently for him is virtu­
ally synonym ous with bad literature, I suspect that non -innovative literature 
as he characterizes it is an empty set. Does there exist any important Mod­
ernist text for which a convincing critical argument could not be made that it 
destabilizes language, subjectivity, and consciousness? As Johanna Drucker 
comments in her review of Glazier's book, "The traditions of innovation 
from which Glazier draws for support are often broader in their scope and 
of much more complex development than his taking up them within late 
twentieth century references would imply:'32 
These caveats notwithstanding, Glazier makes an important point when 
he says that innovative literature tends to interrogate its materiality, an ob­
servation that returns us to our starting place with renewed urgency. Iflit­
erature and materiality are indeed closely entwined, what happens when a 
text is translated into a different medium than that in which it was origi­
nally created? I began this chapter with a reference to Borges's "The Don 
Quixote of Pierre Menard;' which suggests slyly that the same words in the 
same order can nevertheless mean something utterly different when trans­
ported into a new context. In this sense Pierre Menard's project is analogous 
to the translation of a literary text into a new medium, for the same words 
appear in the same order, yet like Menard's "Don Quixote;' they may mean 
something very different than in the original. Indeed, I use the term "media 
translation" to suggest that recreating a text in another medium is so sig­
nificant a change that it is analogous to translating from one language to 
another. Unlike Pierre Menard's project, language translation changes both 
the words and their order, and in this sense is unlike (most) media trans­
lation. Neverthe less, the analogy with language translation can offer useful 
insights into the problems and possibilities that haunt media translation. I 
turn now to explore in more depth the resonances evoked by this imperfect 
and yet provocative analogy. 
Translating Media 109 
Intermed iating between Language Translation and Media Translation: 
Implications for Textuality 
As we saw in chapter 2, the performative power of networked and pro­
grammable media that enables them to simulate print texts so successfully 
is deeply related to what Rita Raley calls the "tower of programming lan­
guages;' a point John Cayley explicates when he refers to "machine code, to­
kenized code, low-level languages, high -level languages, scripting languages, 
macro languages, markup languages, Operating Systems and their scripting 
language," and so on, all stacked in different levels. 33 Raley's phrase alludes, 
of course, to the Tower of Babel, a mythic origin story that was also im­
portant to Warren Weaver's seminal memorandum of July 15, 1949, subse­
quently published as an essay. 34 In "The New Tower," a foreword to the vol­
ume in which his essay appeared, Weaver suggested that machine translation 
should be seen as a "Tower of Anti-Babel;' since in his optimistic expecta­
tion it promised to allow "men to communicate freely" despite differences 
in language. 35 In the essay he relates an incident in World War II in which a 
cryptographer successfully decrypted a message in Turkish, although he did 
not know that the source text was written in Turkish and did not himself 
read Turkish. Weaver recounts sending a letter to Norbert Wiener in which 
he suggested that machine translation should be treated as a problem in 
cryptography: "It is very tempting to say that a book written in Chinese is 
simply a book written in English which was coded into the 'Chinese code: If 
we have useful methods for solving almost any cryptographic problem, may 
it not be that with proper interpretation we already have useful methods for 
translation?" (22).36 Raley rightly criticizes the hegemonic implication here 
that all languages are in some sense already English. 37 Additiona lly, there is 
a fallacy, as W. J. Hutchins points out in his critique of the memorandum, 
that stems from Weaver's equation of decryption and translation. 38 Whereas 
a successf ul decryption can render a message exactly as it was before it was 
encrypted, no translation, no matter how successful, ever renders the origi­
nal exactly the same as it was in the source language. The problem, of course, 
lies in the fact that languages and cultures are inextricably entwined; words 
resonate with connotations that drift like fragrances on a breeze, impossible 
to duplicate in all their subtleties and complexities in another language. 39 
To be fair to Weaver, he acknowledged that literary language constituted a 
special case. His proposa l was aimed at utilitarian texts where only the infor­
mation is important, such as when a plane would take off or how to install a 
carburetor. Nevertheless, even this much more modest project had a theory 
oflanguage undergirding it, and it is here that his project recalls contempo­
rary claims that the computer is the ultimate medium capable of dissolving 
110 5 TOR I N G: P R I N TAN 0 E T EXT 
all other media in itself. Returning to the Tower of Babel metaphor, he asks 
us to "think, by analogy, of individuals living in a series of tall closed towers, 
all erected over a common foundation. When they try to communicate with 
one another, they shout back and forth, each from his own closed tower. It is 
difficult to make the sound penetrate even the nearest towers, and commu­
nication proceeds very poorly indeed. But, when an individual goes down 
his tower, he finds himself in a great open basement, common to all towers. 
Here he establishes easy and useful communication with the persons who 
have also descended from their towers" (23).40 In context, Weaver believed 
that the "great open basement" would be a universal substratum common 
to all languages. His hope finds a different instantiation in the coding of 
many different kinds of documents-not only words but also sounds, im­
ages, films, etc.-in the binary code that operates in the "basement" of the 
tower oflanguagesY Not a universal grammar, then, but a universal ma­
chine that has its own grammar of code. 
Today, code and linguistic translation come together in machine trans­
lation, which normally consists of a dictionary that matches terms in one 
language with those in another, plus a context interpreter. Although great 
strides have been made in machine translation-a highly technical field that 
has expanded far beyond Weaver's ideas-m any instances remain where hu­
man translators are necessary. Even here, however, computers have dramat­
ically changed how translations are done. Jules van Lieshout, co-owner of 
a translation company in the Netherlands, has writes compellingly in "The 
New Alchemists" about his experiences translating documentation for the 
automobile industry. 42 He notes that the practices of the software industry 
are rapidly becoming the accepted business model for companies that, in 
Nicholas Negroponte's phrase, "manufacture atoms rather than distribut[ e 1 
bits:' Van Lieshout observes, "You do not buy software, you rent a first draft, 
[in a 1 beta society that markets patches rather than engineer [s 1 innovation. 
There may be failures, but no product recalls. In ... a genuine marketing 
triumph, the buyer has turned into an unpaid beta tester with the software 
automatically reporting errors to the developer" (1). Taking its cue from the 
software industry, the manufacturing sector dreams of documentation that 
flows frictionlessly between media and languages, that is produced at a speed 
comparable to the short life span of documentation itself, and that is driven 
by the relentless cycles of innovation and obsolescence characteristic of cap­
italist practices. 
To minimize costs, manufacturers now use software such as Content 
Management Systems and Workflow Systems, which control and regulate 
the authoring and production of documentation. When a new version of a 
Translating Media 111 
document is needed, they use software such as Translation Memory Systems 
and Machine Translation Systems to identify and extract all the required 
changes, recycling everything that has not changed directly into the new 
version from the old. This practice in itself impacts language use, for man­
ufacturers instruct their technical writers not to correct or change anything 
that is not absolutely necessary (e.g., punctuation errors or stylistic infe­
licities), because every change, no matter how trivial, will be routed to the 
human translators, and so cost them money. Thus language is driven to the 
lowest common denominator even before the translators receive it. 
Moreover, what the translators receive are now only snippets, often 
phrases or parts of phrases and sometimes only single words. Rarely is the 
full context available to them, making it impossible for them to translate 
accurately words or phrases that change meaning according to context. Pre­
sumably they could look up the context in earlier versions of the documen­
tation' but this would cost time and money that the manuf acturers are not 
willing to pay. "Ensuring that only the new information is translated;' van 
Lieshout writes, "documentation and translation tools help manufacturers 
meet their cost-efficiency and time-to-m arket requirements . The underly­
ing idea is: translate once, never look back" (2). As a result, he concludes, 
"documentation has become a continuous flow of information. Documen­
tation is an ongoing process where the lack of time and money dictate that 
information be reused as many times as possible for as many different au­
diences as possible. In the process, the atom of documentation has been 
reduced to what may be called an Information Entity, Information Unit, or 
Information Block. ... It is the documentation equivalent of component 
carry-over from one model to the next, component interchangeability be­
tween models, and nameplates sharing platforms" (2). Here the fragmen­
tation of code that in programmable media translates into high-level flexi­
bility operates, directly and indir ectly, to fragment language and reduce its 
complexities to small pieces. Slightly modifying van Lieshout's nomencla­
ture, we might call these pieces TIE (The Information Block), mirror image 
of the BIT (Binary Digit). Cramming language into the Procrustean bed 
of TIB would have disastrous effects, were it not for the fact that docu­
mentation is increasingly written to fulfill legal requirements rather than 
to produce something buyers can use to understand the products they have 
purchased. 
Faced with these relentless practices that aim to produce only instrumen­
tal prose (at best), I can almost sympathize with the tack taken by Wal­
ter Benjamin in his famous essay, "The Task of the Translator:' He begins 
by ruling out of court the utilitarian considerations that were paramount 
n2 5 TOR I N G: P R I N TAN D E T EXT 
for Weaver. "What does a literary work 'say'? What does it communicate? 
It 'tells' very little to those who understand it. Its essential quality is not 
statement or the imparting of information" (69). He asserts that only bad 
translations "perform a transmitting function" of relaying information (69). 
Rather, he proposes that all languages necessarily embody perspectives that 
are historically and culturally specific; if they were somehow all to contribute 
their perspectives to make up a totality, this impossible and elusive entity 
would be language itself, "pure language" (79). The translator, in Benjamin's 
view, aims to find the echo or reflection of pure language in the source text 
and highlight it, bringing it from its hidden implicitness into the light by ac­
tivating within the historical specificity of the target language a comparable 
resonance. "It is the task of the translator to release in his own language that 
pure language which is under the spell of another, to liberate the language 
imprisoned in a work in his re-creation of that work" (80). In this way, trans­
lation contributes uniquely to the literary enterprise, Benjamin suggests, by 
creating an emergence, a glimpse of the pure language that could not be seen 
as dearly without the conjunction of the source and target languages that 
the translation performs. 
Compare this vision, and the metaphors Benjamin mobilizes to express 
it, with Weaver's metaphor of separate towers connected by a subterra­
nean basement. Whereas Weaver wants to go down to find the common 
elements-down to universal grammar, code elements, or in contemporary 
usage, BITS and TIBS-Benjamin consistently uses metaphors suggesting 
that the appropriate action is to go up, asserting that "the ultimate purpose 
toward which all single functions tend is sought not in its own sphere but in 
a higher one" (72). In translation, he insists, "the original rises into a higher 
and purer linguistic air" (75). Whereas Weaver focuses on fragmentation and 
the benefits it can bestow, Benjamin envisions fitting together the fragments 
into larger wholes. "Languages are not strangers to one another, but are, a 
priori and apart from all historical relationships, interrelated in what they 
want to express;' he writes (72). This interrelation he imagines as the gluing 
together of a broken vessel, whose fragments "must match one another in 
the smallest details, although they need not be like one another. In the same 
way a translation, instead of resembling the meaning of the original, must 
lovingly and in detail incorporate the original's mode of signification, thus 
making both the original and the translation recognizable as fragments of a 
greater language, just as fragments are part of a vessel" (78). 
The problem with this idealistic view, as I see it, is its insistent evoca­
tion of "pure language;' a transcendental mode of signification so "pure" 
that it "no longer means or expresses anything but is, as expressionless and 
Translating Media 113 
creative Word, that which is meant in all languages" (80). Whereas We aver 
proposes to overcome Babel by going into the basement, Benjamin evokes 
the Tower of Babel as a subtext and seems to imply that we can return to 
the "pure language" spoken before languages differentiated or, even better, 
before the language of "man" separated from the Word of God. It is scarcely 
surprising, then, that he ends his essay by evoking the "Holy Writ;' where 
"language and revelation are one without any tension" (82). At that ideal 
point, media would cease to matter, for language would have escaped from 
historical specificity, cultural perspective, and material instantiation to be­
come the pure and perfect Word, impervious to the operations of reference 
and signification. So mystical a vision can have its justification only in an 
intense desire to rescue literature, translation, and language itself from base 
and instrumental purposes. However understandable the desire, this is not 
a theory that describes language as it actually works and as it is instantiated 
and performed in media. 
Positioned somewhere between Weaver and Benjamin is Jorge Luis 
Borges. Here we may refer profitably to the brilliant work Efrain Kristal 
has done on Borges's idea of translation. 43 Kristal shows compellingly that 
Borges thought of all writing as translation, not in the strong sense that 
Octavio Paz employs of writing as a translation of experience, but in the 
sense of all writing as a stab in the dark at articulating meanings that al­
ways remain to some extent elusive.44 Rather than hoping for a common 
substratum that would provide the key to universal translation or evoking a 
"pure language" indistinguishable from the Word of God, Borges delighted 
in thinking of all writings as drafts in progress, imperfect instantiations 
never fully one with the significations toward which they gesture. In this 
view, texts are provocations to go in search of meaning (echoing McGann ); 
when they become instantiated in a given set of words (and we may add, 
a given medium and performance in that medium), they necessarily miss 
some possibilities even as they realize others. Hence for Borges it is entirely 
possible for an original text to be unfaithful to its translation (in the sense 
of being inferior to its successor), for the translation may realize more fully 
possibilities that were only nascent in the original. Indeed, this view draws 
into question the very idea of an "original;' for temporal priority does not 
signify ontological priority when the original is regarded as simply one draft 
among many. Kristal comments, "Depending on the specific case, [Borges] 
at times favored a translation over its original, other times an original over 
its translation, and he was often interested in weighing their relative merits, 
aesthetic and otherwise."45 
Borges's idea of "originals" as provocations to go in search of meaning 
114 STORING: PRIN T AND ETEXT 
fits well with the idea of Work as Assemblage, for like the restless workings 
of desire and lines of flight that trace territorializations and deterritorializa­
tions of the Body without Organs, texts in an assemblage intermediate one 
another without necessarily bestowing on anyone text the privileged status 
of the "original." Everything is simultaneously a translation of everything 
else, each united to the others in a rhizomatic network without a clear be­
ginning or end. That Borges arrived at this view while working exclusively in 
print should caution us not to overstate the fluidity of electronic texts com­
pared to print. The advantages of programmable media notwithstanding, 
there is a long history of using the resources of print to achieve fluidity and 
indetermin acy, as Johanna Drucker, among others, has argued powerfully 
in her critical writing and demonstrated in her creative work. 46 It remains 
the case, however, that the resources of print are different than the resources 
of electronic textuality, and that each medium interacts with and influences 
the others. 
How might Borges's perspective apply to media translations? Let us re­
turn to consider the works of William Blake in this light. Van Lieshout, 
a Blake scholar as well as a professional translator, comments that Blake, 
in running off his books on his own printing press, used the freedom "to 
recreate every single work over and over again, and he did so consciously 
and deliberately .... Blake would have loved the flexibility and possibil­
ity that computers give artists .... Basically he was Photoshopping in the 
early nineteenth century."47 In this sense, the William Blake Archive, rather 
than being judged solely on the basis of providing a faithful reenactment 
of Blake's print works, might be regarded as also providing an opportunity 
to go freshly in search of meanings highlighted in new ways by electronic 
media. My UCLA colleague Anne Mellor, a specialist in the Romantic pe­
riod, observes that the William Blake Archive brings out an aspect of Blake's 
works that tends to be somewhat obscured by the print medium, namely, 
its hypertextual links and connections. Like van Lieshout, she suspects that 
if Blake were alive today, he would find authoring and production systems 
in programmable media entirely congenial to his vision. 48 
Another example of this kind of intermediation is provided by Raymond 
Queneau's Cent mille milliards de poemes. One might argue that this work is 
an attempt to do in a print medium what can be done more easily and "nat­
urally" in programmable media. In the latter, instead of cutting the page 
into strips and juxtaposing the lines in new combinations that generate a 
virtually endless variety of sonnets-the operation Queneau suggests in his 
print version-the entire corpus of possible poems can be generated elec­
tronically and presented to the user as a random series of novel productions, 
Translating Media 115 
as Nicholas Gessler has done in his c++ simulatio n.49 A program similar to 
Gessler's was written by Andrew J. Lurie, 50 who adapted it from the "Chom­
skybot" program created by John Lawler (and others), which generates new 
paragraphs using a randomizing program that splices together phrases from 
Noam Chomsky's writings. This program in turn was adapted from a still 
earlier program called "foggy;' created by one of Lawler's former students 
and popular around IBM. 51 
Like Borges's idea of translations as drafts circulating along with the orig­
inal in a stream of provisional attempts, so here programs circulate as patch­
work productions building on earlier ones and recycling code. John Lawler's 
comments are interesting in this regard. He writes, "What I find interesting 
about [the program 1 is how it just hovers at the edge of understanda bility, 
a sort of semantic mumbling, a fog for the mind's eye .... Foggy's most in­
teresting effects are in the mind of the beholder:' 52 Rather than aiming at 
a pure language, code here recycles "original" language in random patterns 
that cross and recross the threshold of intelligib ility, inviting the reader's 
projection into the echoic effects, as if infecting language with the random 
access memory of computer storage. 
Through the feedback loops in which electronic text recycles print and 
the programs generating electronic text recycle code, we glimpse the com­
plex dynamics by which intermediation connects print and electronic text, 
language and code, "original" and translation, the specificities of particular 
instantiations and the endless novelty of recombinations. These dynamics 
open out onto fundamental questions about the nature of texts, the relation 
of materiality to content, and the specificities of media. We already know 
that language matters. Media translation and the conjunctions it performs 
with print and electronic textualities can give us a deeper appreciation for 
the corollary propositions that media and materiality also matter. 
n6 S TOR I N G: P R I N TAN D E T EXT 
5 Performative Code and Figurative Language 
Neal Stephenson's Cryptonomicon 
The previous chapter explored the theoretical implications for textuality of 
translating print literature into digital media. This chapter looks at a work 
that remains in print but nevertheless bears within its body marks of its 
electronic composition. With the exception of a handful of fine letterpress 
books, every book produced in the United States and Europe this year will 
have been an electronic document in at least one and probably many stages 
of its existence. Given present modes of book production, it is more accu­
rate to view print as a particular form of output for electronic text than it 
is to regard print as a realm separate from digital media. Florian Cramer, 
in thinking about the significance of digital code for literary texts, remarks 
that "juxtapositions of 'the book' and 'the computer' are quite misleading, 
because they confuse the storage and analog output media (paper versus a 
variety of optical, magnetical, and electronical technologies) with the infor­
mation (alphabetical text versus binary code):>! Moreover, Cramer points 
out that "text and literature are highly privileged symbolic systems in these 
translation processes because a) they are already coded and b) computers 
run on code."2 These comments point to the interpenetration of print with 
electronic textuality , language with code, even when the focus is on a print 
book that appears entirely conventional in appearance. 
In the contemporary period, print books evolve through the interplay 
between two different vectors, one rooted in the past and the other arching 
toward the future, as they negotiate between the centuries-long traditions of 
bookmaking art and the new possibilities opened by digital media. Tensions 
between past and future are particularly acute at the present moment when 
the narrative conventions of the novel, rooted in the seventeenth century, are 
inscribed with writing technologies profoundly different from the mechan-
ical printing presses with which the history of the novel is deeply entwined. 
Through what pathways and by what means does the influence of an infor­
matic writing technolo gy, with its complex trading zones in which language 
and code mutually put pressure on one another, penetrate into a book that 
on the surface appears as ink marks on paper? Assuming these subterranean 
perturbations exist, what critical strategies might be used to excavate them? 
To explore these questions, I take as my tutor text Neal Stephenson's 
Cryptonomicon. As its name indicates, code is at the center of its thematic 
concerns, both as cryptological system and computer algorithm. Its mate­
rial form took shape through the interpenetration of code and language, for 
Stephenson's compositional habits are typical in combining old with new 
media. According to his comments in interviews, he writes first drafts with 
a fountain pen and paper, revising two or three times on paper, and then 
types the revised version into a computer, revising yet again as he does SO.3 
With an impressive background as a computer programmer, Stephenson 
does not employ the ubiquitous Windows or even Macintosh but interfaces 
with the computer through a Unix-based operating system. 4 As his nonfic­
tion work In the Beginning Was the Command Line testifies, he shifted from 
Macintosh to Unix when a crisis erupted in his compositional practices. He 
regarded this shift as so significant that he wrote a book explaining why Unix 
is far superior to any other operating system and exhorting his readers to ex­
perience similar enlighten ment. 5 The crisis that led to his conversion came 
when he lost a large file that was corrupted so badly it could not be recovered 
in its entirety. Cryptonomicon, published in the same year as Command Line 
and thus in some sense its sibling text, was almost certainly marked by his 
conversion to Unix, since he switched in 1995 and the book was written from 
1995 to 1998. Following this line of thought, we can assume that the clash of 
operating systems-including all that it implies about the nefarious corpo­
rate practices of Microsoft, the capitalistic greed that underlies its ruthless 
business practices, and the resistance to these practices by open source com­
munities, particularly Unix and the related Linux-p enetrated deeply into 
the electronic structure of this text in physical and material ways. Are there 
connections between these material manifestations of coding practices and 
the linguistic surface of the text? Through what means do they mark the 
work when it is manifested as a print book, that is, when the flickering sig­
nifiers of the electronic text have been converted to durable impressions on 
paper? 
To ask these questions is to regard the book not as a fixed and static ar­
tifact but as the trace of complex technological, conceptual, linguistic, and 
cryptological negotiations. In this chapter I argue that in Cryptonomicon 
118 STORING: PRINT AND ETEXT 
a series of systematic transformations bears witness to these negotiations. 
These transformations involve dialectical attempts to mitigate the tensions 
inherent in the clashes of materiality and abstraction, code and language, 
hackers and corporate moguls, good profit and evil greed. Cycling through 
a series of dialectic juxtapositions, the narrative is unable to achieve a final 
resting point, a resolution stable enough to permit it to effect a rising action 
that would lead to a satisfying climax and clear denouement. The failure 
of the text to conform to these expectations signals that despite its tradi­
tional physical appearance and conventional narrative techniques, the liter­
ary corpus is riven by the writing technologies that produced it. Wrenched 
from the context of mechanical printing presses and embedded within in­
formational technologies, this novel tries its best to remain a conventional 
narrative, but the differences between durable marks and flickering signi­
fiers, natural language and computer code, de-form the form and unsettle 
its dynamics. 6 Finally the text is forced into oxymoronic knots that bring to­
gether opposites and entwine them so closely that they cannot be separated. 
Only through such devices can the text articulate its contradictory enunci­
ations of code/language and the conflicting historical vectors of mechanical 
past/informatic future. 
Math and Lizards:The Dialectic's First Terms 
The basic problem for Lawrence was that he was lazy. He had figured out that every­
thing was much simpler if, like Superman with his X -ray vision, you just stared through 
the cosmetic distractions and saw the underlying mathematical skeleton. Once you 
found the math in a thing, you knew everything about it, and you could manipulate 
it to your heart's content with nothing more than a pencil and a napkin. (8) 
Sand erupts into the air, like smoke from the burning tires of a racer, and the lizard 
is rocketing across the beach. It covers the distance to the Imperial Marine in one, 
two, three seconds, takes him in the backs of the knees, takes him down hard into the 
surf. Then the lizard is dragging the dead Nip back up onto the land. It stretches him 
out there among the dead Americans, walks around him a couple of times, flicking its 
tongue, and finally starts to eat him. (326) 
A mathematician coolly controlling the world with a pencil and a napkin, 
and a primeval lizard so ferocious it erupts into Bobby Shaftoe's nightmares 
for years to come-these are contraries generating the first dialectical inter­
action. Cryptonomicon testifies eloquently to the importance of code in the 
contemporary world. Yet when the text pushes to the extreme of seeing the 
world as only code, a counter-resistance begins to build, becoming fiercer 
as more faith is placed in code. Although this resistance can take multiple 
Performative Code and Figurative Language: Neal Stephenson's Cryptonomicon 119 
forms, its most violent manifestation is animal appetite. As we shall see, the 
resulting clashes between abstract form and violent appetite remain largely 
unresolved in the text, leading to further transformations in the dialectic. 
An important assumption underlying code's supremacy is the idea that 
information can be extracted from its material substrate. Once the informa­
tion is secured, the substrate can be safely discarded. Peering through the 
window of Bletchley Park's "Ultra" -secret cryptographic decoding facility, 
Lawrence Pritchard Wate rhouse sees a tape running through a machine so 
fast it smokes and catches fire. Surmising he is witnessing a Turing machine, 
Lawrence realizes that the "men in the room accept the burning of the tape 
so calmly" because the tape itself is not important. "That strip of paper, a 
technology as old as the pyramids, is merely a vessel for a stream of infor­
mation. When it passes through the machine, the information is abstracted 
from it, transfigured into a pattern of pure binary data. That the mere ves­
sel burns is of no consequence. Ashes to ashes, dust to dust-the data has 
passed out of the physical plane and into the mathematical, a higher and 
purer universe where different laws apply" (195). From here it is a small step 
to seeing information as immaterial; although information must necessarily 
be embodied to exist in the world, these embodiments can easily be seen as 
contingent and dispensable, of no more consequence than the burning tape. 
Yet no sooner does someone make this assumption than the text offers a 
counterexa mple, an instance where physical instantiation is no mere trivi­
ality but essential to the system's operation. One such moment occurs when 
Lawrence's grandson Randy Waterhouse and his colleagues at their startup 
Epiphyte Corporation meet with the Sultan ofKinakuta about their scheme 
to create a data haven in the tiny Sultanate . At first, the Sultan mouths the 
conventional wisdom that "physical space no longer matters in a digitized, 
networked world. Cyberspace knows no boundaries" (316). But when he 
displays a world map with cables depicted between countries and conti­
nents, it is "not weblike at all;' with only a few intercontinental cables run­
ning through "a small number of chokepoints" (317). Geography matters, it 
seems, even if it is invoked here in the interest of creating "a free, sovereign, 
location- independent cyberspace" (317). If the dream of a sovereign realm 
where information can flow freely is to be realized, it cannot be divorced 
from the real world of geographical specificities, material constraints, and 
political realities. 
As this example illustrates, controlling the flow of information becomes 
much more problematic when the complexities of coupling it with physi­
cal actions are taken into account. The don explains to Lawrence at a high-
120 5 TOR I N G: P R I N TAN D E T EXT 
level strategy meeting after the Allies have broken the Enigma codes that 
"the Germans have not broken our important cyphers. But they can observe 
our actions-the routing of our convoys in the North Atlantic, the deploy­
ment of our air forces. If the convoys always avoid the U-boats, if the air 
forces always go straight to the German convoys, then it is dear to the Ger­
mans ... that there is not randomness here .... In other words, there is a 
certain point at which information begins to flow from us back to the Ger­
mans" (124). Unlike secret codes, physical actions do not require privileged 
knowledge to access them, and this tie with the physical world makes every 
action initiated by the possession of secret inf ormation potentially a two­
way channel of communication. 
Controlling information evolves quickly, then, into a problem of simu­
lating randomness. Indeed, as the don's remarks imply, cryptology can be 
understood as the art of hiding pattern in randomness, an understanding 
implicit in the Latin root for "crypt;' meaning "hidden, secret:' Of course, 
"crypt" also denotes a burial place, historically often an underground cham­
ber whose location is privileged knowledge. The convergence of the two 
plots-one focusing on cryptology in World War II, the second a contempo­
rary quest for the recovery of an incredible gold stash buried by the Japanese 
when they realized the Empire was doomed-is overdetermined not only by 
the lineages that connect Lawrence Waterhouse, friend and contemporary 
of Alan Turing, to his nerdy grandson Randy Waterhouse, but also by the 
secrecy that unites the crypt of gold with the coded information revealing 
its location, information that is buried in the fiendishly complex Arethusa 
cryptographic code invented for Goring by Rudolf von Hacklheber, prewar 
friend and lover of Alan Turing. The mathematical battle of cryptographic 
codes that stretches across half a century is punctuated by the realities of 
the physical actions with which codes are correlated. Far from leaving phys­
icality behind, the struggle to control the world through mathematical and 
cryptological manipulation must contend with the wild, chaotic, and often 
violent unpredictabilities of a realitytoo'vibrant, alive, and hungry to ignore. 
When cryptography is used not only for secrecy but also for deception, 
material specificities become even more important. Echoing an actual Brit­
ish Secret Service maneuver labeled Operation Mincemeat, the text narrates 
the story of tricking up a body as a secret agent, planting it with false infor­
mation, and throwing it into the ocean at a point where it is certain to be 
recovered by the Germans. 7 Participating in the operation is Bobby Shaftoe, 
the World War II haiku-writing marine whose granddaughter America 
(Amy) is predestined to hook up with Randy half a century later. Bobby stars 
Peljormative Code and Figurative Language: Neal Stephenson 's Cryptonomicon 121 
in the physically oriented plot that entwines with the cryptological one; he 
is as adroit at accomplishing the near-impossi ble in the material world as 
Lawrence and Alan Turing are in the cryptological realm. In converting the 
dead butcher's body into a supposed secret agent and therefore into a sign to 
be read and misunderstood by the Germans, everything depends upon the 
body's specificities-planted with the magnificent chronometer that must 
be Swiss rather than English, massaged with the German talcum powder 
used to ease on the European wet suit, and decorated with the tattoo that 
happens to read "Griselda" and not, say, "Amy." When he hears the Ger­
man name, Lieutenant Ethridge tells Bobby, "Battles have hinged on lesser 
strokes of luck than this one, Sergeant !" Bobby (inappropria tely from the 
lieutenant's point of view but apropos for this argument) uses the comment 
as an excuse to bring up the rampaging lizard from Guadalcanal that haunts 
his imagination the way the abject haunts the pure realm of mathematics in 
the text's Imaginary (152). 
The abject is everywhere in this text, smelly, slimy, loathsome, and in­
escapable. 8 Detachment 2702, dedicated to creating deceptions designed to 
keep the Germans from realizing that the Allies have broken the Enigma 
codes, tries to convert the material world into signs, but the abject resists 
this implicit dematerialization, insisting on its own repugnant physicality. 
Sent to a bivouac in Italy meant to simulate a secret observation post, Bobby 
orders his men to dollop barrels of G. 1. shit into privy holes, carefully inter­
leaving Italian toilet paper to make it look as though they had occupied the 
site for months. Shit appears repeatedly in conjunction with secret writing 
and cryptological codes: in the "old-fashioned two-holer mounted above 
deep shafts that must descend all the way to hell;' where Bobby reads the se­
cret note in which his true love, Glory, arranges their first assignation (46); 
in the "equatorial miasma" that pervades the tropical climes in which much 
of the action takes place, so intimately related to diarrhea that as soon as 
Bobby smells it he "feels his bowels loosening up already" (613); in the ver­
nacular of hacker culture that advocates strong cryptograp hy, where "Randy 
was forever telling people, without rancor, that they were full of shit" (80); in 
the exasperation of Doug Shaftoe, Bobby's son, when he exclaims to Randy, 
"Can't you recognize bullshit? Don't you think it would be a useful item 
to add to your intellectual toolkits to be capable of saying, when a ton of 
wet steaming bulls hit lands on your head, 'My goodness, this appears to be 
bullshit'?" (729), a remark that significantly refers to a plot to find the gold's 
location, which is concealed in the Arethusa code intercepts. Shit even be­
comes a pseudocode of its own when Detachment 2702 begins to use "shit" 
122 5 TOR I N G: P R I N TAN 0 E T EXT 
instead of "ship" to refer to the "pathetic heap of a freighter" that they use 
in one of their ruses: "let's get this cabin shit-shape! Where in the hell does 
the shit's master think he's taking us? And so on" (272). Surely one of the 
most significant instances occurs when Bobby and his comrades, attempt­
ing to rescue crucial Enigma code books from a sinking German submarine, 
wade through a cabin awash in coded documents and feces, a conjunction 
that brings the abject into intimate proximity with the secret writing that 
is supposed to operate in a realm of pure abstraction. Threatening to burst 
through the sphincters (bodily, social, military, and metaphorical) that seek 
to contain it, shit refuses to be reduced to only a sign. Expelled in involun­
tary reaction to intense fear, seeping out in uncontrollable diarrhea, drip­
ping from jungle foliage in brutal marches by the Japanese and Americans in 
the South Pacific, shit has a material reality that cannot be contained solely 
within the algorithmic and cryptological. 
Next to shit, perhaps the most conspicuous instance of the extent to 
which the world resists algorithmization is sexuality. Lawrence hypothesizes 
an inverse relation between- his level of sexual frustration and his ability to 
work, but just when he thinks he can graph the relationship effectively, he 
discovers that sexual satisfaction is a more complex function than he imag­
ined, depending not only on the time passed since his last ejaculation but 
also on how the ejaculation was accomplish ed-by a "manual override:' a 
prostitute, or someone with whom he is emotiona lly involved. "In other 
words, the post-ejaculatory horniness level was not always equal to zero, as 
the naIve theory propounded above assumes, but to some other quantity de­
pendent upon whether the ejaculation was induced by Self or Other" (545) 
"His life:' he concludes, "which used to be a straightforward set of basically 
linear equations, has become a differential equation" (548). 
Even the computer, site of digital code abstracted into ones and zeros, 
has a physical presence so violent it cannot be ignored. When Lawrence 
demonstrates to his superior officer, Earl Comstock, the computer he has 
built from mercury vibrating in tubes, it is a violently physical experience: 
"Hot sonic tongs are rummaging through his viscera, beads of sweat be­
ing vibrated loose from his scalp, his nuts are hopping around like Mexican 
jumping beans" (599). In the fictional world of Cryptonomicon, Lawrence 
gets the idea for this first digital computer from an equally violent encounter 
with a dusty organ in his beloved Mary's church. The encounter is depicted 
in a passage reminiscent of his resolve to clear out his own clotted sexual 
machinery: "Gouts of dust and salvos of mouse droppings explode from 
the pipes as Waterhouse invokes whole ranks that have not been used in 
Performative Code and Figurative Language: Neal Stephenson's Cryptonomicon 123 
decades" (575). Joining the physical with the abstract, this experience allows 
Lawrence to see "the entire machine in his mind, as if in an exploded drafts­
man's view. Then it transforms itself into a slightly different machine-an 
organ that runs on electricity, with ranks of vacuum tubes here, and a grid 
of relays there. He has the answer, now, to Turing's question, the question of 
how to take a pattern of binary data and bury it in the circuitry of a thinking 
machine so that it can later be disinterred" (576). The odd terminology used 
here to describe the operations of electric memory-bury and disinter­
further unites the cryptological operations of the computer, as it works to 
break the Japanese code, with the hidden crypt of gold revealed within the 
Arethusa code. Neither will be recovered with "nothing more than a pen­
cil and a napkin"; both will require engagement with a physical world that 
cannot be reduced to mathematical abstraction. 
The tension between abstraction and violent physicality is, however, it­
self a verbal construction and in this sense already takes place in an abstract 
realm. From this contradiction emerges the next phase of the dialectical 
transformation, as abstract code and animal appetite merge to create a third 
term: performative code. Unlike the abstract algorithms Lawrence uses to 
express mathematical ideas (a practice not uncommon among mathemati­
cians in the 1930S, before digital computers were invented), performative 
code operates as instructions to the machine and therefore initiates action 
in the world. In this sense, it combines the active vitality connoted by ani­
mal appetite with the conceptual power of abstract code. With the collapse 
of these terms into performative code, signaled in the text by Lawrence's 
fictional discovery of the digital computer, another term comes into fo­
cus as the dialectical complement of performative code, namely, "figurative 
language." 
Stephenson hints at the importance of this conjunction in an interview 
he gave shortly after Cryptonomicon was published. He comments that "it's 
become evident to me when I looked into the history of computers that they 
had this intimate relationship with cryptography going back a long way. You 
could say that writing books about it is a way to explore that relationship." 
Then he adds, "I could try to get really profound here and say that it has 
something to do with the process of writing books in general, which is a 
matter of encoding ideas in words and symbols, but that's sort of a level 
of navel gazing I will leave to much more sophisticated literary critics."9 
Command Line, which as we have seen can be considered the nonfictional 
companion to Cryptonomicon, offers valuable insights into the conjunction 
between writing novels and writing code-insights that are essential to ex­
plicating the next phase of the dialectical transformation. 
124 S TOR I N G: P R I N TAN D E T EXT 
Commandin g Cryptogra phy 
Abstract Code + Animal Appetite 
+ 
Performativ e Code + Figurative Language 
Stephenson's attitude toward computer code is clear in his quixotic jeremiad, 
In the Beginning Was the Command Line, published first online and later 
as a short print book. Working through analogy, personal anecdote, and 
technical exposition, Stephenson tries to persuade the educated public that 
Unix is a far superior operating system to either Macintosh or Windows. 
This superiority lies not only in Unix's efficiency and power, nor solely in its 
economy (it is available for little or nothing over the Web). Equally impor­
tant is the fact that it allows the user to understand exactly what is happening 
as typed commands are compiled and executed by the machine. Windows, 
if not exactly evil, is profoundly misleading because it hides the operations 
of the machine behind an interface that discourages the user from under­
standing how the actions of a mouse, for example, get translated into binary 
code-or even that they do get so translated. To make the point, Stephenson 
recounts his first experience with computers while in high school, in which 
he communicated with a mainframe through a teletype machine. Clunky as 
that interface was, it had the virtue of making clear that the symbol strings 
he typed in were being converted into binary code through the ASCII con­
ventions of encoding each symbol with eight bits. 
Why should the user know what is going on in the guts of machine? Or 
to put it another way, what is wrong with the user staying at the surface, as 
long as the interface is robust and functional? One problem is that the inter­
face may not really be that robust. To illustrate, Stephenson tells of the day 
his Macintosh PowerBook "broke my heart;' destroying a large document 
so thoroughly that not even a powerful utilities program could recover it. 
Since the document was too large to put on a single floppy, Stephenson had 
stored the only complete copy on the hard drive, so the loss was traumatic. 10 
That very day he encountered Unix and became an instant convert. Tested 
and refined by thousands of hackers, Unix would never make this kind of 
error, Stephenson maintains, contrasting the open Unix error file with the 
covert information about errors that corporations like Microsoft bury in 
their private files. As a result, the information can be obtained only through 
their professional help line, which Microsoft charges the user to access. 
Beyond the issue of robustness lies another reason, more difficult to 
quantify but perhaps even more important emotionally. The real individ­
ual, Stephenson implies repeatedly, would not want to put himself at the 
Performative Code and Figurative Language: Neal Stephenson'S Cryptonomicon 125 
mercy of large corporations that in effect tell him what to think, deciding 
what he wants and what is good for him. Such folks are "Eloi;' Stephenson 
suggests, in an allusion to H. G. Wells classic story The Time Machine. 11 In 
Wells's story, the Eloi are small-statured folk apparently living gentle lives in 
harmony with nature. Yet, as the time traveler Hillyer discovers, their lives 
are forfeit to the brutal and ugly Morlocks, who live below the surface with 
their superior technology and apparently regard the Eloi as food animals. 
Stephenson suggests that nowadays the Morlocks are on the surface running 
things, while the Eloi stampede stupidly into whatever operating system (or 
other technology) the Morlocks tell them they should want. At issue is pride, 
expertise, and, most importantly, control. Those who fail to understand the 
technology will inevitably be at the mercy of those who do. The implication 
is that those who choose Unix, even though it is more demanding techni­
cally, can escape from the category of the Eloi and transcend to Morlock 
status where the real power is. 
Among the weirder resonances between Command Line and Cryptonomi­
con is the former's allusion to the cannibalistic Morlocks, which echoes the 
many references to animal appetite in Cryptonomicon, including the jun­
gle cannibals who devour an unfortunate Filipino as Goto Dengo looks on 
from his hiding place, so ravenous himself he eats the starch the cannibals 
leave behind. In a startling reversal, however, Command Line reconfigures 
the Morlocks so that their relevant characteristic is technological prowess. 
Is their cannibalism merely beside the point in this extended analogy, which 
has no choice but to drag it along in the same way that analogies always in­
clude inappropriate elements if pushed far enough? Or is some covert line 
of thought connecting the two texts that makes the MorlockiEloi analogy 
appropriate in a deeper sense? Is it coincidence that yokes the cannibals' 
coming-of-age ritual in which an adolescent boy achieves his manhood by 
killing the intended victim, that is to say, a ritual in which he becomes a real 
individual, with Stephenson's imagining his Unix conversion as becoming a 
Morlock? 
As the risk of acting out the role of the ironically evoked "much more 
sophisticated literary critic," I want now to explore the subterranean con­
nections between the fictional world of Cryptonomicon and the nonfictional 
conversion narrative in Command Line. To write a command line is be in 
command, that is, to use an operating system that does not disguise the 
working of the machine, to prefer an interface that makes clear the connec­
tion between typing alphabetic symbols and the encoding of these symbols 
into ones and zeros. 12 Yet in constructing this argument, Stephenson contin­
ually uses extended analogies. For example, in addition to the Morlock/Eloi 
126 S TOR I N G: P R I N TAN D E T EXT 
analogy, he imagines a scene of car dealers hawking inferior products that 
cost a lot (Windows and the Mac OS) while across the street someone is 
giving away for free beautif ully made hefty tanks that get one hundred miles 
per gallon (Unix). Are these analogies just so much window dressing cov­
ering over the guts of the argument, like a Windows interface covering over 
the real workings of the machine? If the technological elite is distinguished 
by knowing what is actually going on, why dress the argument up in fancy 
clothes that pander to the weak-minded who cannot take their facts straight 
up? Who does the text construct as its audience, Eloi or Morlock, and how 
can one achieve Morlock status if one is treated by the text as an Eloi who 
needs analogies to understand what is, after all, a fairly simple and straight­
forward point? 
To entertain these questions is, of course, to suggest that figurative lan­
guage is to cultural understanding as Windows is to code, a pernicious cov­
ering that conceals the truth of things. This is the ancient charge brought 
by philosophers against rhetoricians, the suspicion of scientists that if hu­
manists really knew what they were talking about they would use equa­
tions rather than metaphors, the ideological program of the Royal Society 
to use plain unadorned language rather than fancy analogies. It is beside 
my purpose here to rehearse the thousand answers that have been made to 
these objections to literary language, from Philip Sydney to Gertrude Stein, 
John Milton to Gillian Beer, Alexander Pope to Arkady Plotnitsky . Rather, I 
want to highlight the tension between Stephenson's figurative language and 
performative code. Performative code makes machines do things, and we 
should be in control of our machines. But figurative language makes peo­
ple do things, and to be persuasive, to be effective, the writer must craft for 
his readers images that stick in the mind, narratives that compel through 
memorable scenes and psychological complexities, including paradox, con­
tradiction, irony, and all the rest of the tricks that constitute a writer's trade. 
Although these tricks can be seen as lies from one perspective, every student 
ofliterature understands what it means to say that writers lie to tell the truth. 
Stephenson's own explicit justification for figurative language focuses on 
myths rather than metaphors, or more accurately, myths as analogies. In 
several of his works, he has characters voice the view that mythic stories 
conceal profound technological insights, which simply need to be decoded 
to apply to present-day understandings of natural and artificial cognition. 
In Snow Crash, this device takes the form of an elaborate exposition by the 
Librarian, an artificial intelligence that summarizes Sumerian myths and ex­
plicates their relation to the Snow Crash virus. In Cryptonomicon, it occurs 
when Enoch Root explains to Randy that behind seemingly contradictory 
Performative Code and Figurative Language: Neal Stephenson's Cryptonomicon 127 
myths is a truth on which they converge. Suppose, he says, in an analogy 
meant to explain analogical thinking, that different people were to present 
different versions of him. Nevertheless, someone who knew him could see 
that behind these different representations was a "Root Representation" 
(800), a play on his name that connects him with the root directory of the 
computer. Because messing with the root directory can have catastrophic 
consequences, in large systems it is protected from most users and can be 
accessed only by the person responsible for .the system, the SysOp or Systems 
Operator. When Enoch Root first sends an e-mail to Randy, Randy pays it 
special heed because it includes the surname "root;' which Randy mistakes 
as an indication that the sender is a Systems Operator and therefore a knowl­
edgeable and powerful computer expert. In another sense, Root does play 
this role, although his special expertise stems from his association with the 
Societas Eruditorium, a shadowy organization that pursues its mysterious 
ends independent of the national interests at stake in the world war. Al­
though these ends are never made explicit, the implication is that Root, a 
priest, answers to a higher ethical power than national sovereignt y, an eth­
ical imperative that gives special emphasis to Root's explanation about the 
mythic relation between technology and war. Technology, Root argues, can 
be used for good or evil ends, and this difference is encoded in the distinc­
tion between Athena, goddess of technology and war used for ethical ends, 
and Ares, the god of violent warfare used simply for destruction and self­
gain. As with Snow Crash, connecting mythic figures with the contemporary 
action aims to bring about an ethical understanding of technolo gy, with the 
result that principled action follows. 
These explications of myth do not, however, resolve the deeper contra­
diction between the up-front nature of code and the devious nature of fig­
urative language. The tension between performative code and figurative 
language runs through many of Stephenson's books; indeed, it is no exag­
geration to say that it is central to his creation of fictive worlds. In Snow 
Crash, he imagines a virus that crashes the operating system of humans, ren­
dering them into automata that can be controlled through a monosyllabic 
language dubbed "falabala" after the way it sounds. Here language collapses 
into a kind of code capable of making humans act like computers, forced 
to run whatever commands the code inputs. At issue are the same concerns 
evident in Cryptonomicon and Command Line-control versus being con­
trolled, autonomy versus loss of agency, individualism versus the masses. 
In Cryptonomicon, the same concerns prevail but in a different configura­
tion. Instead of language becoming like code, code becomes like figurative 
language, creating a deceptive surface that misleads the masses while the 
l28 S TOR I N G: P R I N TAN D E T EXT 
cognoscenti penetrate this screen of symbols to extract the meaningf ul mes­
sages hidden within. Cryptanalysis thus becomes like mathematics, reveal­
ing the essential information hidden in "cosmetic distractions" such as those 
Lawrence sees through with his X-ray mathematical vision. 
A good illustration of this dynamic occurs in the scene where Randy is 
thrown into prison on a trumped-up drug charge. To his surprise, his cap­
tors return his confiscated laptop, which is protected by the strong cryptog­
raphy he has installed and hence worthless to his jailers unless they can trick 
him into voluntarily revealing the encryption key. He suspects, correctly, 
that his jailers have set up a Van Eck shadowing computer in the adjacent 
cell so that they will be able to see whatever appears on his screen. A superb 
hacker, Randy sets a program running in the background that will decode 
the crucial Arethusa intercepts, but he protects the screen surface by having 
it run a random display. The results of the background program, rather than 
appearing on screen, are transmitted by LEDs on the number and cap keys 
blinking Morse code. This clever ruse recalls the teletype machine through 
which Stephenson communicated with the mainframe in his high school 
days and that he likened to a telegraph. Now the computer-as-telegraph con­
notes not a transparent coupling but precisely the opposite, the triumph of 
cryptography over political surveillance carried out with malicious intent. 
These results are consistent with the logic of Command Line, for Randy can 
escape surveillance only because he understands what is really going on in­
side the machine, whereas his captors are demoted from Morlocks to Eloi 
because they can see only the deceptive surface he creates. 
The configuration in the prison is significant. On one side of the wall are 
Randy's captors, carrying out covert surveillance under the guise of legiti­
mate political purposes but actually because General Wing wants to find out 
the gold for personal gain. On the other side is Enoch Root, a cross-cutting 
character that connects the two generations of conspirators, communicat­
ing with Randy using a cryptographic code implemented by manipulating 
a deck of playing cards. Strong cryptography does more than distinguish 
the Morlocks from the Eloi; it also allows a freedom-lo ving band of like­
minded hackers to cohere in the midst of the Morlocks who use their power 
illegitimate ly. Through this means the hackers are distinguished from the 
cannibals in a purgative separation that amounts to a distinction between 
technology used for evil purposes and technology adopted for noble ends. 
Just as the active vitality of animal appetite and the conceptual power of 
abstract code merged in performative code, so the jail scene with Randy sig­
nals the merging of performative code and figurative language in the work 
of the Good Hacker. The Good Hacker reconciles the tensions between a 
Performative Code and Figurative Language: Neal Stephenson's Cryptonomicon 129 
code that honestly testifies to the interior operations of the machine and 
the deceptive power of metaphoric interfaces (and by implication, figura­
tive language in genera l). Randy, using his deep understanding of code to 
create deceptive surfaces, neverthe less uses his expertise for good ends. The 
conflation prepares for the next dialectical turn, which pits good hackers 
against evil deceivers. 
The Brotherhood of Code 
Abstract Code + Animal Appetite 
� 
Performative Code + Figurative Language 
� 
Good Hackers + Evil Deceivers 
Being technically proficient with code obviously does not assure that techni­
cians will use their expertise to enhance individual autonom y. Microsoft em­
ploys talented programmers who work to create the very interfaces that, in 
Stephenson's view, seduce and disempower users. Stephenson is well aware 
of this fact, of course, and frequently constructs plots that pit spirited in­
dividualistic hackers against soulless technicians and their evil masters. So 
strong is Stephenson's sympathy with the hacker versus the large organi­
zation that alliances among hackers frequently provide the motive power 
for his fiction. In Snow Crash, for example, the major plot reaches its cli­
max when Hiro Protagonist saves a virtual stadium full of hackers by de­
feating the software that would crash their neural operating systems, infect 
them with the Snow Crash virus, and turn them into Bob Rife's minions. In 
Cryptonomicon, much of the action takes place against the canvas of World 
War II, a military conflict in which national loyalties served to organize im­
mense amounts of manpower and material-a situation ripe for exploita­
tion by the powerful few. Against this volatile backdrop, Stephenson imag­
ines cross-cutting dynamics that organize energies differently, creating small 
pockets of resistance, subversion, and conspirac y. 
We have already considered one of these dynamics, the tension between 
mathematical abstraction and violent physicality that constituted the first 
phase of the dialectic. Significant ly, the carnivorous lizard with a violent 
appetite disrupts this stereotypical scene of beachhead warfare when it at­
tacks the Japanese, indicating that the dialectic has the power to intervene 
and redirect the military conflicts inscribed on the text's surface. Disrup­
tion occurs again in the next phase of the dialectic when good hackers are 
put in conflict with evil deceivers. The good hackers come together to form 
130 5 TOR I N G: P R I NT AND E T EXT 
what might be called the Brotherhood of Code, an alliance that has as its 
core their expertise in decoding encrypted messages. Although most of the 
explicit criticism of national agendas is directed against America's enemies 
(hardly surprising, given the author's nationalit y), evil deceivers are at work 
transnatio nally, including in America. Large organizations are shown to be 
susceptible to corruption when powerful men subvert their resources to pur­
sue private agendas dictated by greed and arrogance. General Wing pursues 
the Japanese war gold under the guise of Chinese nationalistic goals; Earl 
Comstock does the same with the newly formed National Security Agency; 
his son, Attorney General Paul Comstock, collaborates with the Dentist and 
his minions in attacking the Epiphyte Corporation's server. 
These are the forces against which the Brotherhood of Code struggles, in 
an unlikely cross-generational conspiracy that includes, during the World 
War II era: Goto Dengo (a Japanese Imperial soldier), Bobby Shaftoe (an 
American marine), Oscar Bischoff (a German submarine commander ), 
Rudy von Hacklheber (a high-level German cryptanalyst ), Lawrence Pritch­
ard Waterhouse (an American cryptologist working for the British), and 
Enoch Root (of Societas Eruditorium fame, nominally a Catholic priest and 
chaplain for the Marine Corps). Almost all of these characters betray orga­
nizational loyalties in favor of personal bonds, with cryptography and secret 
writing at the conspiracy's center. 
The Brotherhood of Code injects into the World War II era the same 
kind of bonding through cryptological expertise that Stephenson in Com­
mand Line identifies with the open source commun ity. Significant ly, the one 
member of the conspiracy who does not overtly betray his national loyalty 
is Bobby Shaftoe, killed in a suicide mission on which he is personally dis­
patched by General MacArthur. And it is Shaftoe, of course, who stars in 
the physical action in the same way that Rudy and Lawrence dominate in 
the cryptological arena. Although Bobby participates in the conspirac y, his 
character is anomalous in that he is not directly involved with decrypting 
documents, as are the others. Instead, his character illustrates how earlier 
tensions get integrated into the later dialectical configurations. These ten­
sions are not so much left behind as shifted in their narrative functions when 
the next phase of the dialectical interaction starts to drive the action. 
The conflict between physical action and abstract language, for exam­
ple, is reiterated in Bobby Shaftoe's meditation on two categories of men, 
one oriented toward language, the other toward physical action. "Men who 
believe thatthey are accomplishing something by speaking speak in a dif­
ferent way from men who believe that speaking is a waste of time .... For 
them, trying to do anything by talking is like trying to pound in a nail with 
Performative Code and Figurative Language: Neal Stephenson 's Cryptonomicon 131 
a screwdriver. Sometimes you can even see the desperation spread over such 
a man's face as he listens to himself speak:' Listening to Enoch Root and 
Lawrence, Bobby begins "to suspect that there might be a third category of 
man, a kind so rare that Shaftoe never met any of them until now" (373). 
Lawrence speaks, Bobby surmises, "not as a way of telling you a bunch of 
stuff he's already figured out, but as a way of making up a bunch of new shit 
as he goes along. And he always seems to be hoping that you'll join in. Which 
no one ever does, except for Enoch Root" (374). Slowly dawning on Bobby is 
the realization that language might be used not just as a tool for expression 
but also as a method of exploration. The realization points toward the next 
phase of the dialectic, which juxtaposes performative code with figurative 
language. In contrast to the relatively weak rationale that interprets myth 
as veiled history, Bobby has just discovered a much stronger justification 
for figurative language. Metaphors and analogies not only express existing 
ideas; they also lead to new thoughts and possibilities. It is surely no acci­
dent that in addition to being a superlative physical specimen, Bobby writes 
haiku, a poetic form that makes extensive use of metaphor and image. 
Like the other configurations before it, the good hackers/evil deceivers 
configuration becomes unstable, initiating another turn of the dialectical 
cycle. This time, however, its instability leads to a significantly different out­
come. The problem with the configuration becomes apparent in the gener­
ation following World War II, when the hackers get together to form the 
start-up Epiphyte Corporation. As the Internet matured and began to be­
come a commercial enterprise, visionaries saw their utopian dreams being 
co-opted by mercenary corporate interests. What ensures that Randy, Avi, 
and their colleagues in Epiphyte will not be similarly co-opted, forced to 
kowtow to someone like the Dentist, who plots to gain a controlling inter­
est in their fledgling corporation? In its last phase, the dialectic attempts 
to purge contamination from the Good Hacker and separate it out into a 
figure of pure evil, whose banishment from the plot can then signal the tri­
umph of the good technology of Athena over the bad technology of Ares. 
This purgative impulse is, of course, precisely contrary to the dialectic's nor­
mal operation of combining contraries. At this point, the dialectic can go no 
further. The figure of pure evil is indeed produced and expelled, but the di­
alectic's exhaustion is expressed through oxymoronic knots-lif e and death, 
a killing machine and a rescue mechanism, disaster and triumph, greed and 
altruism-that can be neither untied nor merged into a new synthetic term. 
Rather than work through these dense oxymoronic knots, the text achieves 
a muted resolution, such as it is, by working with them. 
132 S TOR I N G: P R I NT AND E T EXT 
Knotty Oxymorons:The Dialectic Exhausted 
Abstract Code + Animal Appetite 
,} 
Performative Code + Figurative Language 
,} 
Good Hackers + Evil Deceivers 
,} 
Oxymoron ic Knots + (Pure Evil) 
The tendency toward oxymoronic entanglement is concentrated around 
events with life and death consequences, becoming particularly important 
in the entwining plots of Lawrence's invention of the first digital computer 
and the burying and disinterring of the Japanese war gold. As we have al­
ready seen, both plots involve crypts, the gold because it is buried in an 
underground installation, the computer because it is linked with cryptol­
ogy and later with the Epiphyte data haven called "The Crypt:' Both plots 
evolve until they become so knotted into oxymoronic configurations they 
can go no further. 
With the crypt of gold, the oxymorons cluster around the secret inten­
tion to make it also a human cry pt. In a conversation with Lieutenant Mori 
(whose name connotes death), Goto understands the truth concealed be­
neath the lieutenant's riddling discourse (639). The lieutenant promises Goto 
a reward for work well done, a prize he would presumably want to earn, 
but Goto realizes this "reward" will in fact be his own death, that which 
he presumably most fears. The tunnels he has engineered to conceal the 
Japanese war gold are intended to hold his murdered body once the work 
is finished. Knowing that Golgotha, "the place of the skull:' is associated 
in the Christian tradition with Christ's betrayal and crucifixio n, Goto had 
privately given this name to the crypt. But when he mutters it and Captain 
Noda overhears, he dissembles by answering that it is a Tagalog word mean­
ing "hidden glade" (639); sign and signified are further muddled when the 
captain calls it "Gargotta." As the chain oflinguistic signifiers drifts toward 
nonsense, it resembles a cryptograp hic code whose hidden meaning can be 
decoded only by the cognoscenti. 
Similar obfuscation takes shape within the physical structure Goto has 
engineered. He builds into the design certain idiosyncrasies that are highly 
significant to him but meaningless to his superiors. When the installation is 
complete and the treasure concealed, the final slaughter is about to begin, 
but Goto gets "so excited he forgets to die" (734). As he prepares to swim to 
Performative Code and Figurative Language: Neal Stephenson's Cryptonom icon 133 
freedom using the breathing chambers he has designed, the place intended 
as his burial chamber flips into its opposite: the architecture that will save 
him. He reflects that "he is an engineer, trapped inside one of his own ma­
chines. The machine was designed to keep him alive, and he will never know 
whether it worked unless it works. After he has achieved that satisfaction, he 
supposes, he can always kill himself at leisure" (734), a hypothetical outcome 
that flips again from triumph to presumed despair. The conflation oflife and 
death, presented here as a matter of memory ("he forgets to die"), is deeply 
bound up with ethical complexitie s. Earlier, Goto had ordered his soldiers 
to jump ship rather than go down with the troop carrier, and so had labeled 
himself unworthy because he chose to live despite the shameful outcome of 
an American victory (323). Accepting that he is a "bad solider" because he 
shuns the senseless loss of life, he resolves to save as many men as he can 
at Golgotha, which finally amounts to a pitiful few. He hopes the gift of life 
will be enough for them and is shamed when one stops to pick up treasure 
along the way. "He himself has saved no treasure except these men's lives. 
But that's not why he feels so bad. He had hoped that being thus saved they 
would all be noble, and not think of the treasure. But maybe that was too 
much to hope for" (734). 
As future developments make clear, it was indeed too much to hope for. 
Gota's act of altruism is inextricably entwined with the greed that drives the 
final portion of the plot. The chief competitor for the gold in the contem­
porary plot is General Wing, the same Wing who takes off after the escape 
from Golgotha without bothering to thank Goto for saving his life. Goto 
continues to believe, as he tells Randy and Avi when they approach him for 
help in recovering the gold, that gold is the "corpse of value" (858). The real 
treasure, he explains, is in the head-"the intelligence of the people" -and 
in the hands-"the work they do" (858). Now a fabulously wealthy and pow­
erful contractor, his success testifies to the wisdom of his view. Only when 
Avi tells Goto that he wants the gold to attempt to end wars by developing 
HEAP-the Holocaust Education and Avoidance Pod-does Goto agree to 
cooperate in the effort. 
The scene where Avi and Goto make their pact is awkwardly written in 
a telling way. When Goto suggests that Avi wants the gold to become rich, 
Avi's "face turns red, the muscles of his head bulge as he clenches his teeth 
together, and he breathes heavily through his nose for a while. The Gotos 
both seem to be rather impressed by this, and so no one says anything for a 
long time, giving Avi a chance to regain his cool" (858). This heavy-handed 
indication of moral outrage indicates how desperately Stephenson wants 
to protect the Good Hacker against the greed that characterizes the evil 
134 5 TOR I N G: P R I N TAN D E T EXT 
deceivers, even at the cost of bad writing. 13 Greed sits cheek by jowl with en­
trepreneurial success, co-optation with individual initiative. 14 Stephenson 
knows too well the fate of successful dot-corns -sold for fabulous sums to 
large corporations before the Internet bubble burst-to be sanguine about 
the prospects for purity in the corporate world or the realm of the Internet, 
which is increasingly under corporate control. Stephenson's anxiety about 
protecting the Good Hacker from corruption finds its most extreme expres­
sion in the creation of a figure of pure evil, as if by isolating all impurities 
here he can ensure that they will not contaminate the good characters. This 
function is fulfilled by the character of Andrew Loeb. Loeb's final attack on 
Amy has no financial, and indeed no rational, basis at all. "Why does he 
want to hurt you?" Root asks, to which Randy replies, "Because he's evil:' 
When they finally succeed in killing the madman, "an insect lands on his 
thumb and starts to eat it" (893) in an ironic assertion of amoral appetite 
triumphant even over ultimate evil. 
In sharp contrast to the unequivocal judgment Randy passes on Loeb are 
the complexities of the oxymoronic clusters, which bring together oppo­
sites so closely entwined that they cannot be separated. Like the gold plot, 
the cryptology plot enacts these oxymorons by tangling together life and 
death so that they paradoxically signify each other. The difficult problem 
that Lawrence must solve before he can invent the first digital computer is 
how to create machine memory, or in the odd formulation noted earlier, 
how to "bury and disinter" information. One of the problems he will at­
tack once he has solved this difficulty is decrypting the Arethusa intercepts, 
which have encoded into them the gold's location. Coincident ally, he also 
solves the encrypted messages by which the conspirators are communicat­
ing with one another. As the conspirators radio messages about meeting at 
Bobby Shaftoe's memorial service, the crucial word that allows Lawrence to 
break the code is "funeral:' He follows the conspirators to their jungle meet­
ing place, where they have gathered to tap into a small portion of the gold, 
whose location Goto, now a member of the group, of course knows. When 
Lawrence reveals himself to Rudy, Rudy "heaves a big sigh. 'So. You win; he 
says. 'Where is the cavalry?'" Lawrence jokes, "Cavalry, or calvary?" linking 
the cliche of cavalry rushing to the rescue with the site of Christ's death. "'I 
know where Calvary is; Rudy replies. 'Not far from Golgotha" (883). As Avi 
will do half a century later with Goto, Rudy assures Lawrence that "most 
of [the gold 1 is going to help victims of war, in one way or another," even 
though they intend to take enough to make themselves rich. Convinced to 
help the conspirators, in part because they loyally chose to attend Bobby's 
funeral despite the risks, Lawrence protects them by destroying the Arethusa 
Performative Code and Figurative Language: Neal Stephenson's Cryptonom icon 135 
intercepts and substituting random numbers. Although he fails to save his 
friends-Comstock decrypts a message that betrays the location of the con­
spirators, submarin e-Lawrence's substitution of randomness will occupy 
Comstock for many years as he ruthlessly drives his NSA team to discover a 
code that is not there. 
As these scenes suggest, the oxymoronic clusters are knotted most tightly 
around gold, not coincidentally the focus for the text's deepest anxieties. The 
principal gold sites are Golgotha, about which we have already heard; the 
submarine carrying the conspirators that Comstock sinks and that Douglas 
Shaftoe, Bobby's son, disinters half a century later; and a mysterious mound 
of gold bars hidden in the jungle that anticipates and reflects the problems 
and possibilities of the gold at Golgotha. All three sites provide episodes 
in which oxymoronic knots express the final perplexities of the dialectic's 
operation. 
In addition to Rudy and Bischoff, the submarine carries some of the gold 
bars from the Golgotha site and five crates of gold foil plates that Rudy has 
stashed abroad. The plates Rudy identifies as "cultural treasures;' scoffing 
when Bischoff suggests that they may be encoded with Goring's pornog­
raphy (851). Careful reading suggests that the plates are in fact the "Leibniz 
archive" that Rudy had earlier asked Goring to gather for him from Europe's 
great libraries (503), precious research materials that Rudy has encoded via 
perforations onto gold foil because he knows the foil will be impervious to 
salt water. When Bischoff jokes that they should be exporting gold from the 
Philippines rather than importing it, Rudy explains, "When I export those 
sheets, I'll do it on wires;' suggesting a scene analogous to the burning tape 
that Lawrence witnesses; the gold foil will be worthless once the informa­
tion it holds has been extracted. But Bischoff, trying to visualize this scene, 
imagines it as "wires strung from here to Los Angeles, and sheets of gold foil 
sliding down them. It doesn't really work" (852). 
The fact that the sheets are gold puts them in a different category than 
the cheap paper tape. When the submarine is discovered decades later by 
Doug and his crew, they see the gold foil sheets as valuable in themselv es, 
and Randy, although intrigued by the perforations, is apparently never able 
to decode the information they contain (458-59). Along with the sheets­
ambiguously positioned between their material value as gold and their in­
formational value as mathematical archives-are the gold bars from Golgo­
tha, entombed along with those who died in the submarine. The death scene 
is rich with ironies. Rudy remembers that he has written the Golgotha coor­
dinates on a sheet of paper in his briefcase, and he and Bischoff presciently 
anticipate that the sunken submarine may eventually be found. Trapped in 
136 5 TOR I N G: P R I NT AND E T EXT 
an oxygen-rich air bubble at the stern of the broken boat, in a scene remi­
niscent of Goto and his men in the breathing chambers of Golgotha, Rudy 
and Bischoff realize that if they strike a match to burn the paper, they will 
be immolated in the resulting flash. Rudy swims to the hatch and opens it, 
with enough air to make it back to the bubble but not enough to escape. 
In a knot that ties together life and death, he then tells Bischoff to escape, 
lighting the match that at once burns the paper, kills him, and provides the 
illumination Bischoff needs to make it out of the sub. 
Decades later, when Doug, Amy, and Randy discover the submerged 
wreck, they find inside Rudy's briefcase a slip of paper on which is writ­
ten "WATERHOUSE LAVENDER ROSE" (462), the wedding china pattern that 
Lawrence had mentioned to Rudy when declining to join the conspirators in 
favor of becoming a mathematics professor at a small college where he will 
settle down with his bride, Mary Smith. Randy later confirms that this is 
indeed his grandmother's pattern, thus enabling him to rediscover the link 
between the submarine, the conspirators, and his grandfather. When Doug 
realizes that the hatch is open and presumes that someone was able to escape 
from the doomed ship, he lights a cigar to mark the occasion, telling Randy, 
"This is one of the most important moments in your life. Nothing will ever 
be the same. We might get rich. We might get killed. We might just have an 
adventure, or learn something. But we have been changed. We are standing 
close to the Heraclitean fire, feeling its heat on our faces" (442). Far removed 
from Doug's usual rhetoric, the melodramatic tone underscores the threads 
knotted together here-the fire that kills Rudy and saves Bischoff reflected 
in the "flaring safety match" that Doug produces "like a magician;' with 
Randy "staring into the flame"; the solemn toast to "whomever got out," 
honoring the moment of self-sacrifice that marks a crucial difference be­
tween the Brotherhood of Hackers and the greedy bureaucrats who oppose 
them. 
Nevertheless, it remains to be seen whether the gold of Golgotha can be 
situated so that it can be coded good instead of evil, Athena rather than Ares. 
Also at issue is the tension between materiality and information, enacted in 
the submarine scenes in the coexistence of the gold bars and gold foil sheets, 
but not really resolved. The tension between information and materiality is 
also performed in a different sense in the ruminations in the text over the 
nature of money. The opening scene-set in Shanghai, with coolies rushing 
to redeem notes printed by individual banks as the Marines fight their way to 
the waterfront and the Japanese attack the city-underscores the fragility of 
currency. Currency is, Lawrence reflects an ocean away, valuable only as long 
as people believe it so. Feeling that he knows how the Japanese think, having 
Performative Code and Figurative Language: Neal Stephenson's Cryptono micon 137 
read their decrypted messages every day, he is sure that "the Nipponese must 
have given thought to this problem of backing their imperial currency­
not just for Australia but New Zealand, New Guinea, the Philippines, Hong 
Kong, China, Indochina, Korea, Manchuria .... How much gold and silver 
would you need in order to convince that many human beings that your 
paper currency was actually worth something? Where would you put it?" 
(812). The answer, of course, is Golgotha. But once the gold is buried and 
booby-trapped, it will take a major engineering project to unearth it. At one 
point Randy and Avi wonder whether it needs to be unearthed. Why can't 
they use the gold to secure the electronic money they are in the process of 
establishing without needing to dig up the treasure? Isn't it enough that it 
exists and that they know where it is, even if it is not accessible? 
The debate is foreshadowed by the mysterious mound of gold bars they 
discover in a nearly inaccessible jungle site. A Philippine woman gives the 
latitude and longitude coordinates to Randy under the guise of a social 
dance, asking him "What is the value of the following information?" (485). 
After Doug, Randy, and their crew fight their way to the location, negotiat­
ing fierce jungle terrain and rebel roadblocks, they realize that although the 
unguarded gold appears to be theirs for the taking, there is no way they can 
actually remove it, given the unstable political and geographical situation. 
Without possession, access has no meaning. 
Does the inverse also hold, that without access, possession has no mean­
ing? When the tremors of underground explosions wake them from their 
dream of letting the Golgotha gold simply remain underground, they real­
ize that General Wing has marshaled men and material to tunnel diagonally 
into the stash from the side. The gold cannot be secure, and thus cannot 
function as a basis for their new virtual currency, unless they physically pos­
sess it. Like the Sultan's geography lesson, Wing's run for Golgotha makes 
clear that even in a world where electronic cash promises to be the currency 
of the future, the materiality implied by physical possession cannot be ig­
nored. They solve their problem by literally liquefying their assets, setting 
off enough fuel oil in the Golgotha chambers so that the gold turns to liquid 
and runs out into the river bed on its own. 
The scene provides the narrative's muted climax and abrupt ending, leav­
ing unresolved questions about how the gold will be spent, whether it will 
go to the HEAP project, the Societas Eruditorium, the Catholic Church, or 
the Brotherhood of Hackers-all of which are mentioned at one point or 
another as possible beneficiaries. Like the liquid gold poised between the 
solid materiality of appetite and the airy vapor of information, the text does 
not finally answer these questions, perhaps because they cannot be resolved 
138 s TOR I N G: P R I NT AND E T EXT 
within the parameters of a realistic novel. Apparently the gold has been pu­
rified enough to make its moral recovery possible, but not enough to allow 
a denouement to be written. Even when the plot threads are reassembled 
into a coherent story, the knots that signify how the action should be valued 
remain entangled. 
The Interpenetration of Technology and Text 
Let me now return to consider how the material technology that produced 
the book enters into its narrative construction. All the terms involved in the 
dialectical transformations are concerned with situating code in relation to 
the human world of signs and artifacts, language and objects. More than an 
abstraction, code has a material efficacy that demands it be recognized as a 
player in the world. Transparent to the technological elite who understand 
it, code can also be made deviously obscure; it can be put to socially desir­
able ends in the hands of idealistic hackers but remains vulnerable to the 
machinations of evil corporations. Since there is finally no way to ensure 
that code will not be co-opted, the text signs it with the oxymoronic knots 
that express the irreducible complexities of its entry into the world. This 
subterranean narrative, emerging from the operations of the dialectic, is not 
identical with the surface content and indeed in some ways contradicts it. 
Rather, this narrative functions as a deep structure within the text, setting 
up a surface/depth dynamic that mimetically re-creates within the text the 
surface/depth relation between the screenic text displayed on the computer 
screen and the coding languages producing the text as a display the reader 
can access. Thus the narrative implicit in the dialectic reproduces the struc­
tural dynamics of the trading zones between code and natural language that 
digital technologies have made a pervasive feature of contemporary culture. 
Further marks of the digital technologies that produced the text can be 
seen in the way the surface narrative is assembled. As the cryptological and 
gold plots begin to weave together, it becomes increasingly clear that the 
novel is functioning as a kind of machine assembling a coherent story out 
of plot lines that have been fragmented and spliced into one another. Until 
the final pages, the multiple plots proceed largely independently of one an­
other, with jump cuts across scenes separated by many decades and several 
continents. One effect of digital text editing has been to change the writ­
ing habits of people generally, making cut-and-paste practices much more 
prevalent than was previously the case with typewriters, when the process 
was much more laborious. Of course, as a host of literary narratives tes­
tify, writers working on typewriters also created cut-and-paste narratives, 
including such luminaries as Virginia Woolf and John Dos Passos. Never-
Performative Code and Figurative language: Neal Stephenson's Cryptono micon 139 
theless, in Cryptonomicon this technique acquires special significance, for it 
resonates with the emphasis on burying and disinterring information as the 
specific technological challenge that led to the invention of the digital com­
puter. In this context, the reader's activity is implicitly imagined as burying 
the memory of one section in order to cope with new information offered by 
the next plot thread; later, when the first thread resurfaces again, the reader 
must disinter that information and link it with the new developments. In 
effect, then, the reader functions like a digital computer, assembling coher­
ent narratives out of fragmentary strings dispersed throughout the memory 
space. Like Goto desperately swimming from air pocket to air pocket inside 
a machine that he himself has built, the reader is trapped inside a machine 
constructed jointly from the reader's memory and the text's words, at the 
mercy of a novel that "forgets to die" as it rambles on for hundreds of pages 
before reaching an inconclusi ve ending that leaves much undecided. 
Further complexities arise when we consider the relation of the Linux op­
erating system to the Macintosh system that Stephenson presumably used 
when he was drafting the first part of Cryptonomicon. As he explains in Com­
mand Line, Linux operates by giving the user direct access to the commands 
that control the computer's behavior, whereas the Macintosh operating sys­
tem offers the user metaphors for these commands (e.g., desktop, files, trash 
bin, etc.) and conceals the actual commands within its hidden coding struc­
tures. The fact that the operating system seals off access to the command 
core has everything to do with the fact it is proprietary software controlled 
by corporate interests. By contrast, within the Linux system the user can type 
commands that call up a Windows -like interface, but this metaphoric shell 
operates as a special functionality within Linux, and it is always possible for 
the user to regain direct control of the machine by returning to inner core 
of Linux commands. 
In Cryptonomicon, this nesting of an inner core within an outer meta­
phoric shell is reproduced through the fictional compendium of cryptology 
called the Cryptonomicon, which functions as a mise en abyme for Stephen­
son's novel (to distinguish the two, I will indicate the novel in italics and the 
compendium without italics ). Supposed ly, the Cryptonomicon was begun 
by John Wilkins, not coincidentally the proponent of an analytical language 
designed to rescue language from a morass of illogical forms and tame its 
wild metaphoricity by fitting it into a rationally constructed system of roots, 
prefixes, and suffixes. Since Wilkins, generations of cryptologists have added 
to the Cryptonomicon, including, in the twentieth century, the cryptolog­
ical genius William Friedman and the fictional Lawrence Pritchard Water­
house, second only to Alan Turing in his deep understanding of computers 
140 S TOR I N G: P R I N TAN D E T EXT 
and code. Thus the Cryptonomicon has become a kind ofKabala created by 
a Brotherhood of Code that stretches across centuries. To know its contents 
is to qualify as a Morlock among the Eloi, and the elite among the elite are 
those gifted enough actually to contribute to it. 
Containing the Cryptonomicon within itself, Stephenson's novel can be 
understood as a long footnote to this Kabala, as an explanation in figurative 
language of the significance of code that the novel posits as the dialectical op­
posite to the deceptive surfaces and fancy analogies in which it, as a literary 
work, necessarily indulges. Thus the novel at once contains within its own 
novelistic body the Cryptonomicon and postulates this fiction as a linguistic 
Other existing in a space exterior to itself. Elizabeth Weise quotes Stephen­
son as saying that "language ... is the reverse of cryptograph y;' because, as 
she explains, language "is about conveying information, not hiding it:' 15 In 
another sense, however, figurative language hides within linguistic formula­
tions what code reveals. It is significant in this regard that the novel contains 
an appendix by expert cryptographer Bruce Schneier, explaining the Soli­
taire encryption algorithm Enoch Root uses to communicate with Randy in 
jail. 16 This encryption scheme is sufficiently strong that it is possible the Na­
tional Security Agency would prohibit its exportation in electronic form, the 
only textual form it monitors. In Cryptonomicon, Stephenson included an 
e-mail from Enoch Root to Randy in which Enoch gives him the Perl script 
for the Solitaire algorithm (480), leading to the delicious irony that this print 
book can be exported legally, whereas the code it inscribes with durable 
marks, if translated into electronic voltages, may not be legally exported. 17 
In a literal sense, the text's natural language here operates as a metaphoric 
shell encapsulating a hidden core of code. Moreover, if Schneier's appendix 
is sufficiently astute, it could aspire to be included in the Cryptonomicon as 
a main entry, whereas the best the novel could hope for, as a writing prac­
tice linguistic and metaphoric rather than coded and algorit hmic, would be 
to make it into an appendix. In this playfully speculative scenario, Crypto­
nomicon is turned inside out to reveal the Cryptonomicon as the powerful 
core that can access command lines directly, whereas the novel resembles the 
Windows or Macintosh operating system that conceals the real command 
structures from the reader. The oxymoronic knots can now be understood as 
sites where the reader becomes aware of flips that transform something into 
its opposite, as here the appendix becomes the core and the novel becomes 
the appendix. The point of entangling the opposites so that they cannot be 
separated now emerges as a covert justification for figurative language, for 
effective communication in the digital realm requires an understanding both 
of machine- executable code and human-oriented metaphors. 
Performative Code and Figurative language: Neal Stephenson's Cryp tonomicon 141 
On multiple levels and in diverse ways, then, Cryptonomicon bears wit­
ness to the digital technologies that created it. In its structure, dialectical 
dynamics, and subterranean narrative, it incorporates in linguistic form the 
crisis in writing practices that materially marked its electronic body, un­
derstood simultaneously as a clash of operating systems, a struggle of open 
source utopianism against capitalistic greed, and an opposition between the 
command structures of code and the analogical surfaces of figurative lan­
guage. To probe these complexitie s, we require critical strategies that are 
attentive to the technologies producing texts as well as to the texts as lin­
guistic/conceptual structures-that is to say, we require material ways of 
reading that recognize texts as more than sequences of words and spaces. 18 
Rather, they are artifacts whose materialities emerge from negotiations be­
tween their signifying structures and the technologies that produce them. 
Whereas the New Criticism of the mid-twentieth century isolated texts from 
political contexts and technological productions, the New Materialism I am 
advocating in this book and practicing in this chapter insists that technolo­
gies and texts be understood as mutually interpenetrating and constituting 
one another. 
142 5 TOR I N G: P R I N TAN 0 E T EXT 
6 Flickerin g Connectivitie s in Shelley Jackson's 
Patchwork Girl 
So far in part 2 we have explored intermediation between print and elec­
tronic texts in two ways: first, by considering the media translation that 
occurs when print documents are transformed into an electronic medium 
like the Web, and second, by exploring a case where a print document in 
the form of a book nevertheless bears the marks of code within its body. 
What remains is the instance of a text conceived as a digital artwork from 
the beginning, a "first generation electronic object," in Matthew Kirschen­
baum's apt phrase. Shelley Jackson's brilliantly realized hypertext Patchwork 
Girl is an electronic fiction that manages to be at once highly original and 
intensely parasitic on its print predecessors. I have chosen Patchwork Girl 
for my tutor text because I think it remains one of the most interesting of 
electronic fictions and because it is deeply concerned with how digital me­
dia enact and express new kinds of subjectivity. To measure the difference 
between the subjectivity envisioned by Patchwork Girl and that associated 
with the late eighteenth-century and nineteenth-century texts it parasitizes, 
I will begin by returning to the eighteenth century, when a constellation 
of economic, class, and literary interests clashed over defining the nature 
ofliterary property. Although the decisions that emerged from the ensuing 
legal battles were no sooner formulated than they were again contested in 
legal and literary arenas, the debate is nevertheless useful as a foil to Jack­
son's work, which positions itself against the subjectivity associated with this 
moment in the print tradition. 
Subjectivity and the Legal Fictions of Copyright 
In his important book Authors and Owners, Mark Rose shows that copyright 
did more than provide a legal basis for intellectual property. The discussions 
that swirled around copyright also solidified ideas about what counted as 
creativity, authorship, and proper literature . One of the important assump­
tions that emerged out of this debate was the assertion that the literary work 
does not consist of paper, binding, or ink. Rather, the work was seen as an 
immaterial mental construct. Here is Justice Blackstone's assessment: "Style 
and sentiment are the essentials of a literary composition. These alone con­
stitute its identity. The paper and print are merely accidents, which serve as 
vehicles to convey that style and sentiment to a distance" (quoted in Rose, 
89). The abstraction of the literary work from its physical basis, discussed in 
chapter 4 in terms of editing practices, had the effect of obscuring the work's 
relation to the economic network of booksellers who purchased shares in the 
work and used their economic capital to produce books. The more abstract 
the work became, the further removed it was from the commodification in­
herent in book sales, and consequently the more exalted the cultural status 
that could be claimed for it. Cultural capital was maximized by suppressing 
the relation between cultural and economic capital, although it was primar­
ily the profit motive that stimulated the booksellers' interest in promoting 
literary works as immaterial works of art. As a result of these representations, 
literary works operated somewhat like the ideal work discussed in chapter 
4, in that they were not to be sullied by the noise of embodiment. 
Although Rose does not develop the gender implications of an evalua­
tion that places abstraction above embodiment, his examples reveal that the 
men producing these discourses had in mind the male writer, whose cre­
ative masculine spirit gave rise to works of genius that soared above their 
material instantiations in books. Thus a hierarchy of values emerged that 
placed at the ascendant end of the scale the disembodied, the creative, the 
masculine, and the writer who worked for glory; at the lower end of the scale 
were the embodied, the repetitive, the feminine, and the writer who worked 
for money. 
Rose traces a series of developments that progressively abstracted the 
work away from its material instantiation, only to re-embody it in purer, 
more transcendent form. Although Blackstone located the work both in 
"style" and "sentiment;' subsequent commentators realized that the part 
of the work that could be secured as private intellectual property, and there­
fore the part appropriate for copyright protection, was the way ideas were 
expressed, rather than the ideas themselv es. This aspect of the work-"style" 
or "expression" -was frequently likened to clothes that dressed the thought. 
Through the clothes of expression, the body of the work entered into social 
legibility and was recognized as partaking in the social regulations that gov­
erned exchanges between free men who could hold private property. As Rose 
144 STORING: PRINT AND ETEXT 
makes clear, it was the author's style-the clothes he selected to dress his 
thought-that was considered most indicative of his individual personality, 
so style was also associated with the originality that was rapidly becoming 
the touchstone ofliterary value. These interrelations were further extended 
through metaphors that identified style with the author's face. Note that it 
was the face and not the body. Not only was the body hidden by clothes; 
more significantly, the body was not recognized as a proper site in which 
the author's unique identity could be located. The final move was to recon­
stitute the author from the "face" exhibited in the style of his works, but by 
now bodies of all sorts had been left so far behind that critics felt free to at­
tach this ethereal, noncorporeal face to any appropriate subject. (The prime 
example was the detachment of "Shakespeare" from the historical actor and 
playwright and the reassignment of his "face" to such august personages as 
Francis Bacon.) As Rose observes, these developments operated as a chain 
of deferrals sliding from the embodied to the disembodied, the book to the 
work, the content to the style, the style to the face, the face to the author's 
personality, the personality to the author's unique genius. The purpose of 
these deferrals, he suggests, was to arrive at a transcendental signified that 
would guarantee the enduring value of the work as a literary property, estab­
lishing it as a "vast estate" that could be passed down through generations 
without diminishing in value. 
In the process, certain metaphoric networks were established that con­
tinued to guide thinking about literary properties long after the court cases 
were settled. Perhaps the most important were metaphors equating the work 
with real estate. The idea that a literary work is analogous to real estate fa­
cilitated the fitting together of arguments about copyright with the Lockean 
liberal philosophy that C. P. Macpherson has labeled possessive individual­
ism. 1 Rose finds it appropriate that James Thomson's long landscape poem 
The Seasons became the occasion for a major copyright case, for it was read 
as a poet transforming the landscape into his private literary property by 
mixing with it his imagination, just as the Lockean man who owns his per­
son first and foremost creates private property by mixing it with his labor 
(113). Whereas the landholder supplies physical labor, the author supplies 
mental labor, particularly the originality of his unique "style." Rose makes 
the connection clear: "The Lockean discourse of property, let us note, was 
founded on a compatible principle-'E very Man has a Property in his own 
Person' was Locke's primary axiom-and thus the discourse of originality 
readily blended with the eighteenth-century discourse of property" (121). 
Macpherson pointed out years ago that there is implicit in Locke a 
chicken-and-egg problem. Whereas Locke presents his narrative as if market 
Flickering Connectivities in Shelley Jackson's Patchwork Girl 145 
relations arose as a consequence of the creation of private property, it is clear 
that the discourse of possessive individualism is permeated through and 
through by market relations from the beginning. Only in a society where 
market relations were predominant would an argument defining the indi­
vidual in terms of his ability to possess himself be found persuasive. The 
same kind of chicken-and-egg problem inheres in the notion of literary 
property. The author creates his literary property through the exercise of 
his original genius, yet it is clear that writing is always a matter of appropri­
ation and transformation, from syntax to literary allusions and the structure 
of tropes. A literary tradition must precede an author's inscriptions for liter­
ature to be possible as such, yet this same appropriation and reworking of an 
existing tradition is said to produce "original" work. Arguments about lit­
erary property were persuasive in part because they fit together so well with 
prevailing notions of liberal subjectivity, but that same fit implied common 
blindnesses. 
In particular, anxiety about admitting that writing was a commercial en­
terprise haunted many of the defenders of literary properties. In a fine im­
age, Rose remarks that "the sense of the commercial is, as it were, the uncon­
scious of the text" for such defenders ofliterary property as Samuel Johnson 
and Edward Young (118). There were other suppressions as well. The erasure 
of the economic networks that produced the books went along with the era­
sure of the technologies of production, a tradition that continued beyond 
print technologies to other media, and beyond Britain to other countries. 
Rose recounts, for example, Burrow-Giles Lithographic Co. v. Sarony (1884), 
the landmark case in the United States in which the court decided that the 
photograph derived entirely from the photographer's "'original mental con­
ception'" and thus owed nothing to the camera that produced it (cited in 
Rose, 135). The decision clearly relied on the notion of the author's "original­
ity" as a key component of an artistic work. The commitment to originality 
led to especially strained interpretations when the work was collaborative, 
for "originality" implied that the work resulted from the unique vision of 
one gifted individual, not from the joint efforts of a team of skilled crafts­
men. Thus the legal fiction was invented that allowed an organization to 
become the "author;' a fiction routinely evoked to this day for films collab­
oratively produced by perhaps hundreds of cultural workers. 2 
The patchwork quality of these legal fictions indicates the fragility of 
the consensus hammered out in the eighteenth century. Over subsequent 
decades and centuries this consensus was challenged repeatedly in court. 
It was also challenged through artistic productions that sought to wrench 
the idea of the writer away from the transcendent ideal of the autonomous 
146 5 TOR I N G: P R I N TAN D E T EXT 
creator, from the automatic writing of the Surrealists to the theoretical argu­
ments of Michel Foucault in his famous essay "What Is an Author?" Patch­
work Girl contributes to these ongoing contestations by exploiting the speci­
ficities of the digital medium to envision a very different kind of subjectivity 
than that which emerged in eighteenth-century legal battles over copyright. 
Those aspects of textual production that were suppressed in the eighteenth 
century to make the literary work an immaterial intellectual property-the 
materiality of the medium, the print technologies and economic networks 
that produced the work as a commodity, the collaborative nature of many 
literary works, the literary appropriations and transformations that were ig­
nored or devalued in favor of "originality;' the slippage from book to work to 
style to face-form a citational substrata for Jackson's fiction, which derives 
much of its energy from pushing against these assumptions. When Patch­
work Girl foregrounds its appropriation of eighteenth-century texts, the ef­
fect is not to reinscribe earlier assumptions but to bring into view what was 
suppressed to create the literary work as intellectual property. In Patchwork 
Girl, the unconscious of eighteenth-century texts becomes the ground and 
surface for the specificity of this electronic text, which delights in point­
ing out that it was created not by a fetishized unique imagination but by 
many actors working in collaboration, including the "vaporous machinery" 
of digital text. 3 
Creating a Monster: Subject and Text 
Patchwork Girl's emphasis on appropriation and transformation begins with 
the main character, which is reassembled from the female monster in Mary 
Shelley's Frankenstein. Recall that in Frankenstein the male creature, having 
been abandoned on the night of his creation and having learned through 
hard experience that humankind finds him repulsive, returns to beg Frank­
enstein to create a mate for him, threatening dire revenge if he does not. 
Frankenstein agrees and assembles a female monster, but before animating 
her, he is struck with horror at the sight of her body and the prospect that 
she and the male creature will have sex and reproduce. While the howl­
ing creature watches at the window, Frankenstein tears the female body to 
bits. In Shelley Jackson's text the female "monster" (as she refers to herself) 
reappears, put together again by Mary Shelley. Like the female monster's 
body, the body of this hypertext is also seamed and ruptured, composed of 
disparate parts with extensive links between them. The main components 
of the hypertextual corpus are "body of text;' containing the female mon­
ster's narration and theoretical speculations on hypertextual and human 
bodies; "graveyard;' where the stories of the creatures whose parts were 
Flickering Connectivities in Shelley Jackson's Patchwork Girl 147 
used to make the female monster are told; "story;' in which are inscribed 
excerpts from the relevant passages in Frankenstein along with the mon­
ster's later adventures; "journal;' the putative journal of Mary Shelley where 
she records her interactions with the female monster; and "crazy quilt;' a 
section containing excerpts from Frank Baum's Patchwork Girl of Oz, as well 
as reinscriptions from other parts of the text. 4 
From the hypertext links and metaphoric connections between these 
parts, a vivid picture emerges that radically alters the eighteenth-century 
view of the subject as an individual with a unique personality and the Lock­
ean ability to possess his own person. For the female monster, it is mere 
common sense to say that multiple subjectivities inhabit the same body, for 
the different creatures from whose parts she is made retain their distinctive 
personalities, making her an assemblage rather than a unified self. Her in­
testines, for example, are taken from Mistress Anne, a demure woman who 
prided herself on her regularity. The monster's large size required additional 
footage, so Bossy the cow contributed, too. Bossy is as explosive as Mistress 
Anne is discreet, leading to expulsions that pain Mistress Anne, who feels 
she must take responsibility for them. The conflict highlights the monster's 
nature as a collection of disparate parts. Each part has its story, and each 
story constructs a different subjectivity. In her article "Stitch Bitch;' Jackson 
suggests that what is true for the monster is also true for us: "The body is 
a patchwork;' Jackson remarks, "though the stitches might not show. It's 
run by committee, a loose aggregate of entities we can't really call human, 
but which have what look like lives of a sort .... These parts are certainly 
not what we think of as objects, nor are they simple appendages, directly 
responsible to the brain" (527). 
The distributed nature of the monster's subje ctivity-and implicitly ours 
as well-is further performed in the opening graphic. Even before the ti­
tle screen appears, an image comes up entitled "her," displaying a woman's 
body against a black ground. Traversing the body are multiple dotted lines, 
as if the body were a crazy quilt of scars or seams; retrospectively the user 
can identify this image as representing the female monster's patched body, 
among other possible referents. Cutting diagonally across the ground of this 
image is a dotted line, the first performance of a concept central to this hy­
pertext. As the user progresses further into the text, a map view of the differ­
ent parts opens up, displayed in the Storyspace software (in which the text is 
written) as colored rectangles that, when clicked, contain smaller rectangles 
representing paragraph-sized blocks of text or lexias. The lexia "dotted line" 
explicates the significance of this image: "The dotted line is the best line;' this 
lexia proclaims, because the dotted line allows difference without "cleaving 
148 STORING: PRIN T AND ETEXT 
apart for good what it distinguishes" (body of text/dotted li ne). Hovering 
between separation and connection, the dotted lines mark the monster's 
affinities with the human as well as her differences from other people. 
The dotted line is also significant because it suggests that the image can 
move from two to three dimensions, as in a fold-up that lets "pages be­
come tunnels or towers, hats or airplanes" (body of text/dotted line). The 
movement out of the flat plane evokes the hypertext's stacks, which sug­
gest through their placement a three-dimensional depth to the screen and a 
corresponding ability to emerge from the depths or recede into them. The 
text mobilizes the specificity of the technology by incorpora ting the three­
dimensionality oflinked windows as a central metaphor for the fiction's own 
operations. Like the hypertext stacks, the monster will not be content to 
reside quiescent on the page but moves fluidly between the world repre­
sented on the pages of Mary Shelley's text and the three-dimensional world 
in which Mary Shelley lives as she writes this text. Lying on a plane but also 
suggesting a fold upward, the dotted line becomes a kind of joint or scar 
that marks the merging of fiction and metafiction in a narrative strategy that 
Gerard Genette has called "metalepsis," the merging of diegetic levels that 
normally would be kept distinct. 5 The line signals the dangerous potential 
of the monstrous text/body to disrupt traditional boundaries in a border 
war where the stakes are human identity. In an interview with Rita Raley, 
Shelley Jackson remarked that "a radical text can't just depict monstrosit y, 
but must be itself monstrous:' 6 
In hypertext fashion, let us now click back to "her;' the opening graphic, 
and explore some of the other links radiating out from this lexia. Linked to 
"her" is "phrenolog y," a graphic that further performs the metaphoric over­
lay of body and text. Showing a massive head in profile, "phrenology" dis­
plays the brain partitioned by lines into a crazy quilt of women's names and 
enigmatic phrases. When we click on the names, we are taken to lexias that 
tell the stories of the women from whose parts the monster was assembled; 
clicking on the phrases takes us to lexias that meditate on the nature of "her" 
multiple subjectivi ties. Thus we enter these textual blocks through a bodily 
image, implying that the text lies within the represented body. This dyn amic 
inverts the usual perception the reader has with print fiction that the rep­
resented bodies lie within the book. In print fiction, the book as physical 
object often seems to fade away as the reader's imagination re-creates the 
vaporous world of the text, so that reading becomes, in Friedrich Kittler's 
phrase (discussed in the prologue and chapter 1), a kind of hallucinat ion. 7 
Therefore, the bodies populating the fictional world seem to be figments 
of the reader's imagination. First comes the immaterial mind, then from it 
Flickering Connectivities in Shelley Jackson's Patchwork Girl 149 
issue impressions of physical beings. Here, however, the body is figured not 
as the product of the immaterial work but a portal to it, thus inverting the 
usual hierarchy that puts mind first. Moreover, the partitioning of the head, 
significantly seen in profile so that it functions more like a body part than 
a face delineating a unique identity, emphasizes the multiple, fragmented 
nature of the monster's subjectivity. The body we think we have-coherent, 
unified, and solid-is not the body we actually are, Jackson claims in "Stitch 
Bitch:' Like the monster's body, our corporeal ity, which she calls the "ban­
ished body;' is "a hybrid of thing and thought .... Its public image, its face 
is a collage of stories, borrowed images, superstitions, fantasies. We have no 
idea what it 'really' looks like" (523). 
Although the monster's embodiment as an assemblage may seem unique, 
Jackson employs several strategies to demonstrate that it is not nearly as un­
usual as it may appear. Drawing on the contemporary discourses of techno­
science, the lexia "bio" points out that "the body as seen by the new biology 
is chimerical. The animal cell is seen to be a hybrid of bacterial species. Like 
that many-headed beast [the chimera]' the microbeast ofthe animal cells 
combines into one entity, bacteria that were originally freely living, self suf­
ficient and metabolica lly distinct" (body of text/bio). In this view, the "nor­
mal" person is already an assemblage, designed so by evolutionary forces 
that make Frankenstein appear by comparison as an upstart amateur. Other 
perspectives yield the same conclusion. Boundaries between self and other 
are no more secure than those between plant, animal, and human. "Keep 
in mind;' the monster warns us in "hazy whole;' that "on the microscopic 
level, you are all clouds. There is no shrink-wrap preserving you from con­
tamination: your skin is a permeable membrane .... If you touch me, your 
flesh is mixed with mine, and if you pull away, you may take some of me with 
you, and leave a token behind" (body of text/hazywho le). In "Stitch Bitch;' 
Jackson writes that the mind, "what zen calls monkey-mind and Bataille 
calls project, has an almost catatonic obsession with stasis, centrality, and 
unity." The project of writing, and therefore of her writing most of all, is to 
"dismantle the project" (527). 
Following this philosoph y, Patchwork Girl not only normalizes the 
subject-as-assemblage but also presents the subject-as-unity as a grotesque 
impossibility. The narrator satirizes the unified subject by evoking visions of 
resurrection, when the body will be "restored to wholeness and perfection, 
even a perfection it never achieved in its original state" (body of text/res­
urrection ). But how can this resurrection be performed? What about am­
putees who have had their limbs eaten by other creatures? Following the 
medieval theological notion that the resurrected body will "take its matter, 
150 5 TOR I N G: P R I N TAN D E T EXT 
if digested, from the animal's own flesh;' the narrator imagines those parts 
re-forming themselves from the animals' bodies. The "ravens, the lions, the 
bears, fish and crocodiles ... gang up along shorelines and other verges to 
proffer the hands, feet and heads that they are all simultaneously regurgitat­
ing whole ... big toe scraping the roof of the mouth, tapping the teeth from 
the inside, seeming alive, wanting out" (body of text/resurrecti on/remade). 
Bizarre as this scenario is, it is not as strange as the problems entertained 
by medieval theologians trying to parcel everything out to its proper body. 
Some theologians theorized that eaten human remains will be reconsti­
tuted from the "nonhuman stuff" the creature has eaten, a proposition that 
quickly becomes problematic, as the narrator points out. "But what (hy­
pothesized Aquinas) about the case of a man who ate only human embryos 
who generated a child who ate only human embry os? If eaten matter rises in 
the one who possessed it first, this child will not rise at all. All its matter will 
rise elsewhere: either in the embryos its father ate ... or in the embryos it 
ate" (body oftext/resurrection/eat en). This fantastic scenario illustrates that 
trying to sort things out to achieve a unity (that never was) results in confu­
sions worse than accepting the human condition as multiple, fragmented, 
chimerical. 
Suturin g the (Textual) Body: Sewing and Writing in Storyspace 
As the unified subject is thus broken apart and reassembled as a multiplic­
ity, Patchwork Girl also highlights the technologies that make the textual 
body itself a multiplicity. To explore this point, consider how information 
moves across the interface of the CRT screen, compared with books. In 
print fiction, the reader decodes a durable script to create in her mind a 
picture of the verbally represented world. With an electronic text, the en­
coding/decoding operations are distributed between the writer, computer, 
and user. The writer encodes, but the user does not simply decode what the 
writer has written. Rather, the computer decodes the encoded information, 
performs the indicated operations, and then re-encodes the information as 
flickering images on the screen. As the discussion in chapter 2 makes clear, 
the transformation of the text from durable inscription into a flickering 
signifier means that it is mutable in ways that print is not, and this mu­
tability serves as a visible mark of the multiple levels of encoding/decoding 
intervening between user and text. Through its flickering nature, the text­
as-image teaches the user that it is possible to bring about changes in the 
screenic text that would be impossible with print (changing fonts, colors, 
type sizes, formatting, etc.). Such changes imply that the body represented 
within the virtual space is always already mutated, joined through a flexible, 
Flickering Connectivities in Shelley Jackson's Patchwork Girl 151 
multilayered interface with the user's body on the other side of the screen. In 
"Stitch Bitch;' Jackson puts it this way: "Boundaries of texts are like bound­
aries of bodies, and both stand in for the confusing and invisible boundary 
of the self" (535). 
These implications become explicit in one of the opening graphics of 
Patchwork Girl, "hercut 4." In this image, the monster's body, which was 
previously displayed with dotted lines traversing it, has now become com­
pletely dismembered, with limbs distributed into rectangular blocks defined 
by dotted lines, thus completing the body/text analogy by making the dis­
persion of body parts visually similar to the hypertext lexias connected to 
each other in the Storyspace display by lines representing hypertext links. In 
addition, the upper right-hand corner of the image looks as though it has 
been torn off, revealing text underneath . Although fragmentary, enough of 
the text is visible to allow the user to make out instructions on how to create 
links to "interconnect documents and make it easier to move from place to 
[word obscured]." Thus the text underlying the image points to the Story­
space software program used to create the work, so the entire image func­
tions as an evocation of the multilayered coding chains flexibly mutating 
across interfaces to create flickering signifiers. 
In her interview with Rita Raley, Jackson comments that the idea for 
creating a fiction that would use a patchwork quilt as a central metaphor 
came to her when she looked at the map view of Storyspace, which ap­
pears on the screen as linked and nested rectangular boxes (within boxes 
within boxes). "When I first started working in electronic media, the ap­
plications all seemed fraught with metaphoric implications, which not only 
bled into the work I was doing but inspired it;' Jackson comments. She con­
tinues, "I wouldn't have written Patchwork Girl at all if I hadn't been puz­
zling over hypertext in general, and I wouldn't have found the graveyard and 
quilt metaphors I employed in that piece nearly so ready to hand if I hadn't 
been using an application, Storyspace, that involved moving little rectan­
gles around inside bigger rectangles!"s As these comments suggest, much 
of the genius of Patchwork Girl derives from Jackson's ability to exploit the 
idiosyncrasies of Storyspace for her own purposes. Created by Mark Bern­
stein of Eastgate Systems, in collaboration with Jay Bolter and Michel Joyce, 
Storyspace was one of the first comprehensi ve hypertext writing systems. 9 
When the Web was still in its infancy, Storyspace provided a flexible and 
relatively easy-to-use tool for creating lexias, linking structures, and "guard 
fields" (conditional links) that allowed authors to establish pre-scripted se­
quences. From about 1987 through 1995, first-generation hypertext writers 
used Storyspace to create some of the first widely discussed literary hyper-
152 S TOR I N G: P R I N TAN D E T EXT 
texts, including Michael Joyce's afternoon, Stuart Moulthrop's Victory Gar­
den, and, of course, Patchwork Girl. These works have often been called (in 
retrospect) the "Storyspace school" of hypertext writing, and it is worth­
while to consider what such a designation means. 
Storyspace is conceived first and foremost as a software for creating and 
linking blocks of text. The principle unit is what the Storyspace manual calls 
a "writing space;' and although it is possible (with some difficulty, as I found 
when I tried to use the software) to import images and sound (WAV) files, 
the basic assumption is that the writing spaces will be filled primarily with 
text. 10 The software cannot, for exam ple, create animations or accommo­
date QuickTime movies. It was designed before the Web took off, and its 
Web capabilities remain limited. To port a Storyspace work to the Web, im­
age files stored in the Storyspace format have to be manually converted into 
JPEG or GIF files, and the articulation between the text styles used in Story­
space and Web text styles is somewhat unpredicta ble. Moreover, the differ­
ent views through which Storyspace displays a work's structure (such as the 
map view, chart view, and outline view) do not translate to the Web, and so 
the visual display of structure that is one of Storyspace's strengths is lost in 
the Web translation. Links from graphics also do not work, and sound files 
associated with writing spaces will not play. Because of these limitations, 
someone intending to create a work for the Web would be much better off 
beginning with a Web authoring tool rather than trying to retrofit a work 
created in Storyspace for the Web. 
In Patchwork Girl, Jackson uses only limited graphics and no sound, video, 
or animation. Moreover, she adapts her text to accommodate the limited 
ways in which the text's structure can be displayed. A good example is the 
"crazy quilt" section, in which Storyspace's extremely limited palette of eight 
colors does not seem overly restrictive, given the fact that crazy quilts were 
traditionally constructed from fabric scraps and did not necessarily have an 
artistically compelling or unified color scheme. Her most wide-ranging in­
spiration, as we have seen, was to use the visual display of nested and linked 
boxes as metaphors for the fragmented and dispersed body of her protago­
nist. Working with a software that can seem unbearably restrictive and rigid 
judged by today's standards of fluid animations, layered images, morphings, 
and sonic environments, she made a virtue of necessity by appropriating 
its visual displays and hierarchical structures as primary metaphors for the 
seamed and ruptured bodies foregrounded in her work. 
The specificities of the software sharply distinguish her text from the 
print works on which she draws. Of course, print texts are also dispersed, 
in the sense that they cite other texts at the same time they transform those 
Flickering Connectivities in Shelley Jackson's Patchwork Girl 153 
citations by embedding them in new contexts, as Derrida among others has 
taught us. II Nonetheless, the specificity of an electronic hypertext like Patch­
work Girl comes from the ways in which it mobilizes the resources (and 
restrictions) of the software and medium to enact subjectivities distributed 
in flexible and mutating ways across author, text, interface, and user. As we 
saw in chapters 2 and 4, electronic text is less durable and more mutable 
than print, and the active interface is not only multilayered but itself capable 
of cognitively sophisticated acts. By exploiting these characteristics, Jackson 
constructs distinctions between author and character, user and represented 
world, as permeable membranes that can be configured in a variety of ways. 
In Patchwork Girl, one of the important metaphoric connections express­
ing this flickering connectivity is the play between sewing and writing. 
Within the narrative fiction of Frankenstein, the monster's body is created 
when Frankenstein patches the body parts together; at the metafictional 
level, Mary Shelley creates this patching through her writing. Within Patch­
work Girl, however, it is Mary Shelley (not Frankenstein) who assembles the 
monster, and this patching is specifically identified with the characteristi­
cally feminine work of sewing or quilting. The fact that this sewing takes 
place within the fiction makes Mary Shelley a character written by Shelley 
Jackson as well as an author who herself writes. This situation becomes more 
complex when Mary Shelley is shown both to sew and write the monster, 
further entangling fiction and metafiction. "I had made her, writing deep 
into the night by candlelight," Mary Shelley narrates, "until the tiny black 
letters blurred into stitches and I began to feel that I was sewing a great quilt" 
(journal/writt en). This lexia is linked with "sewn": "I had sewn her, stitch­
ing deep into the night by candlelight, until the tiny black stitches wavered 
into script and I began to feel that I was writing, that this creature I was 
assembling was a brash attempt to achieve by artificial means the unity of a 
life-form" (journal/sew n). 
In the Raley interview, Jackson remarks that when she first began writ­
ing hypertext she "discovered that the link was not neutral, but was itself a 
kind of argument, one I should not duplicate in my prose. I had to learn 
to allow the link to make points that I would formerly have spelled out in 
words." 12 So here the link between writing and sewing, a stereotypical fem­
inine activity, serves to mark this as a female-and feminist-p roduction. 
Throughout, the relation between creature and creator in Patchwork Girl 
stands in implicit contrast to the relation between the male monster and 
Victor Frankenstein. Whereas Victor participates, often unconsciou sly, in a 
dynamic of abjection that results in tragedy for both creator and creature, 
in Patchwork Girl Mary feels attraction and sympathy rather than horror 
154 5 TOR I N G: P R I N TAN D E T EXT 
and denial. In contrast to Victor's determination to gain preeminence as a 
great scientist, Mary's acts of creation are hedged with qualifications that 
signal her awareness that she is not so much conquering the secrets of life 
and death as participating in forces greater than she. In "sewn;' the passage 
continues with Mary wondering whether the monster's fragmented unity is 
"perhaps more rightfully given, not made; continuous, not interrupted; and 
subject to divine truth, not the will to expression of its prideful author. Au­
thoress, I amend, smiling" (journal/sewn ). The self-conscious placement of 
herself in an inferior position of "authoress" compared to the male author­
surely in relation to her husband most of all-is connected in Jackson's text 
with subtle suggestions that the monster and Mary share something Mary 
and her husband do not, an intimacy based on equality and female bond­
ing rather than on subservience and female inferiority. Although Mary con­
fesses to feeling sometimes frightened of the female monster, she also feels 
compassio nate and even erotic attraction toward her creation. Whereas Vic­
tor can see his monster only as a competitor whose strength and agility are 
understood as threats, Mary exults in the female monster's physical strength, 
connecting it with the creature's freedom from the stifling conventions of 
proper womanhood. When the female monster leaves her creator to pursue 
her own life and adventures, Mary, unlike Victor, takes vicarious delight in 
her creation's ability to run wild and free. 
In her comprehen sive survey of the status of the body in the Western 
philosophic tradition, Elizabeth Grosz has shown that there is a persistent 
tendency to assign to women the burden of corporeality, leaving men free to 
imagine themselves as disembodied minds-an observation that has been 
familiar to feminists at least since Simone de Beauvoir. 13 Even philosoph ers 
as sympathetic to embodiment as Maurice Merleau-Ponty and Mark John­
son are often blind to issues of gender, implicitly assuming the male body 
as the norm. The contrast between woman as embodied female and man as 
transcendent mind is everywhere at work in the comparison between Mary's 
care for the female monster and Victor's astonishing failure to anticipate any 
of the male creature's corporeal needs, including the fact that making him 
seven feet tall might make it difficult for the monster to fit into human so­
ciety. Whereas the disembodied text of the eighteenth century work went 
along with a parallel and reinforcing notion of the author as a disembodied 
face, in Jackson's text the emphasis on body and corporea lity goes along with 
an embodied author and equally material text. "The banished body is not 
female, necessarily, but it is feminine;' Jackson remarks. "That is, it is amor­
phous, indirect, impure, diffuse, multiple, evasive. So is what we learned to 
call bad writing. Good writing is direct, effective, clean as a bleached bone. 
Flickering Connectivities in Shelley Jackson's Patchwork Girl 155 
Bad writing is all flesh, and dirty flesh at that .... Hypertext is everything 
that for centuries has been damned by its association with the feminine" 
("Stitch Bitch;' 534). 
Reinforcing this emphasis on hypertext as "femininely" embodied are 
links that re-embod y passages from Shelley's text in contexts that subtly or 
extravagantly alter their meaning. A stunning example is the famous pas­
sage from the 1831 preface where Mary Shelley bids her "hideous progeny go 
forth and prosper" (quoted in story/severance/hideous progeny). "I have an 
affection for it, for it was the offspring of happy days, when death and grief 
were but words which found no true echo in my heart. Its several pages 
speak of many a walk, many a drive, and many a conversation, when I was 
not alone; and my companion was one who, in this world, I shall never see 
more. But this is for myself; my readers have nothing to do with these associ­
ations" (story/severance/hideous progeny). In the context of Frankenstein, 
"hideous progeny" can be understood as referring both to the text and to 
the male monster. As Anne Mellor points out, taking the text as the referent 
places Mary Shelley in the tradition of female writers of Gothic novels who 
were exposing the dark underside of British society. 14 When the monster is 
taken as the referent, the passage suggests that Mary Shelley's textual crea­
ture expresses the fear attending birth in an age of high mortality rates for 
women and infants-a fear that Mary Shelley was to know intimately from 
wrenching personal experience. Moreover, in Barbara Johnson's reading of 
Frankenstein, Shelley is also giving birth to herself as a writer in this text, so 
her authorship also becomes a "hideous progeny." 15 The rich ambiguities 
that inhere in the phrase make Jackson's transformation of it all the more 
striking. 
In Jackson's work, the passage's meaning is radically changed by the 
lexia "Thanks;' to which it is linked. In this lexia, the female monster says, 
"Thanks, Mary, for that kindness, however tinged with disgust. Hideous 
progeny: yes, I was both those things, for you, and more. Lover, friend, 
collaborator. It is my eyes you describe-with fear, yes, but with fascination: 
yellow, watery, but speculative eyes" (story/severance / hideous progeny / 
thanks). The linked passage changes the referent for "hideous progen y;' so 
that the female monster occupies the place previously held by the male crea­
ture, the text of Frankenstein, and Mary Shelly as writer. All these, the link 
implies, are now embedded as subtexts in the female monster, who her­
self is indistinguishable from the ruptured, seamed textual body that both 
contains her and is contained by her. "The hypertext is the banished body;' 
Jackson remarks. "Its compositional principle is desire" ("Stitch Bitch," 536). 
If desire is enacted by activating links, this linked text not only expresses 
156 5 TOR I N G: P R I N TAN 0 E T EXT 
the user's desire but also Mary's desire for her monstrous creation. Its most 
subversive-and erotic-im plication comes in changing the referent for the 
lost companion "who, in this world, I shall never see more." Now it is not 
her husband whose loss Mary laments but the female monster-the "lover, 
friend, collaborator" without whom Patchwork Girl could not have been 
written. 16 
Among Patchwork Girl's many subversions is its attack on the "original­
ity" of the work. "In collage, writing is stripped of the pretense of original­
ity;' Jackson writes. "One can be surprised by what one has to say in the 
forced intercourse between texts or the recombinant potential in one text, 
by other words that mutter inside the proper names" ("Stitch Bitch;' 537). 
This muttering becomes discernible in Shelley Jackson's playful linking of 
her name with Mary Shelley's. The title screen of Jackson's work performs 
this distributed authorship, for it says Patchwork Girl is "by Mary/Shelley 
& herself;' a designation that names Mary Shelley, Shelley Jackson, and the 
monster all as authors. 17 
Jackson's subversions of her publisher's proprietary claims continue in 
a section entitled "MIS;' a naming that invites us to read the slash as both 
dividing and connecting Mary Shelley and Shelley Jackson. 18 When Jackson 
reinscribes Shelley's text into hers, the act is never merely a quotation, even 
when the referents are not violently wrenched away from the originals as 
in "Thanks"; witness the fact that Jackson divides Shelley's text into lexias 
and encodes it into the Storyspace software. Rather, the citation of Shelley is 
a performative gesture indicating that the authorial function is distributed 
across both names, as the nominative they share between them would sug­
gest (Mary Shelley/Shelley Jackson). In addition, the slash in MIS (ironically 
interjected into the MS that would signify the "original" material text in nor­
mal editorial notation) may also be read as signifying the computer interface 
connectingl dividing Mary Shelley (a character in Patchwork Girl) with Shel­
ley Jackson (the author who sits at the keyboard typing the words that, by 
conflating Mary's sewing and writing, make "Shelley" into both character 
and writer). 
The computer also actively participates in the construction of these flick­
ering signifiers, in all their distributed, mutable complexity. "There is a 
kind of thinking without thinkers," the narrator declares, "Matter thinks. 
Language thinks. When we have business with language, we are possessed 
by its dreams and demons, we grow intimate with monsters. We become 
hybrids, chimeras, centaurs ourself: steaming flanks and solid redoubtable 
hoofs galloping under a vaporous machinery" (body oftext/it thinks). The 
surface of the text-as-image may look solid, this passage suggests, but the 
Flickering (onnectivities in Shelley Jackson's Patchwork Girl 157 
"vaporous machinery" generating it marks that solidity with the mutability 
and distributed cognition characteristic of flickering signifiers. In "Stitch 
Bitch;' Jackson argues that even the subject considered in itself is a site for 
distributed cognition: "Thinking is conducted by entities we don't know, 
wouldn't recognize on the street;' Jackson writes. "Call them yours if you 
want, but puff and blow all you want, you cannot make them stop their 
work one second to salute you" (527). 
The trace of flickering signification is as pervasive and inescapable in this 
text as it is with the constantly refreshed CRT screen. In one of the fiction's 
climactic scenes, Mary and the monster, having become lovers and grown 
physically intimate with each other's bodies, decide to swap patches of skin. 
Each lifts a circle of skin from her leg, and Mary sews her flesh onto the 
monster, and the monster's flesh onto her own human leg. This suturing of 
self onto other reveals more than a wish of lovers to join. Because Mary is 
the monster's creator in a double sense, at once sewing and writing her, the 
scene functions as a crossroads for the traffic between fiction and metafic­
tion, writer and character, the physical body existing outside the textual 
frame sutured together with representations of the body in virtual space. 
Throughout, the narrator has been at pains to point out the parallels be­
tween surgery and writing: "Surgery was the art of restoring and binding 
disjointed parts .... Being 'seam'd with scars' was both a fact of eighteenth­
century life and a metaphor for dissonant interferences ruining any finely 
adjusted composition" (body of text/mixed up/seam'd). One of the sutures 
that reappears in severallexias is the "intertwisted" closing that "left needles 
sticking in the wounds-in manner of tailors-with thread wrapped around 
them" (body of text/mixed up/seam'd ). Thus a metaphoric relay system is set 
up between surgery (particularly sutures using needle and thread), sewing, 
the seamed body, and writing. 
Jackson uses this relay system of surgery/sewing/writing to set up an ar­
gument about "monstrous" writing that reverberates throughout the text. 
The narrator points out that "the comparison between a literary compo­
sition and the fitting together of the human body from various members 
stemmed from ancient rhetoric. Membrum or 'limb' also signified 'clause'" 
(body of textltypographical ). As the narrator notes, this body/writing anal­
ogy allowed rhetoricians to conclude that writing was bad if it resembled 
a disproportioned or grotesque body. But the analogy was to go only so 
far; writing was not actually to become the body. Decorum dictated that 
the barrier between the book as physical object and the text as immaterial 
work be maintained intact. Joseph Addison found any writing distasteful 
that was configured in the shape of the object it represented, such as George 
158 5 TOR I N G: P R I N TAN D E T EXT 
I Herbert's poem "Wings;' printed to resemble the shape of wings. The nar­
rator remarks that Addison called this "visual turning of one set of terms 
into another" the ''Anagram of a Man" and labeled it a classic example of 
"False Wit" (body of text/typographica l). This aesthetic judgment is consis­
tent with the assumption that the work is immaterial. Making the physical 
appearance of the text a signifying component was improper because it sug­
gested that the text could not be extracted from its physical form. According 
to this aesthetic, bodies can be represented within the text, but the body of 
the text should not mix with these representations. To do so is to engage 
in what Russell and Whitehead would later call a "category mistake"-an 
ontological error that risks, through its enactment of hybridity, spawning 
monstrous bodies on both sides of the textual divide. 
It is precisely such breaches of good taste and decorum that the monster 
embodies. Her body, "seam'd with scars;' becomes a metaphor for the rup­
tured, discontinuous space of the hypertext, which in its representations also 
flagrantly violates decorum by transgressi vely mixing fiction and metafic­
tion in the same chaotic arena. When deciding what skin to swap, the mon­
ster, with Mary's consent, significantly decides that "the nearest thing to a bit 
of my own flesh would be this scar, a place where disparate things are joined 
in a way that was my own" (story/severance/j oin). Composed of parts taken 
from other textual bodies (Frankenstein and Frank Baum's Patchwork Girl 
ofOz, among others), this hypertext, like the monster's body, hints that it is 
most itself in the links and seams that join one part to another. In a passage 
that conflates body and text, the monster says, "My real skeleton is made of 
scars, a web that traverses me in three dimensions. What holds me together 
is what marks my dispersal. I am most myself in the gaps between my parts" 
(body of text/dispersed). The user inscribes her subjectivity into this text by 
choosing which links to activate, which scars to trace. Contrary to the dic­
tates of good taste and good writing, the scars/links thus function to join the 
text with the corporeal body of the user who performs the enacted motions 
that bring the text into being as a sequential narrative. Because these enact­
ments take place through the agency of the computer, all these bodies-the 
monster, Mary Shelley, Shelley Jackson, the specificity of the electronic text, 
the active agency of the digital interface, and we the users-are made to 
participate in the mutating configurations of flickering signifiers. 
As a result of these dotted-line connections/divisions, the text has a 
livelier sense of embodiment than is normally the case, and the bodies 
within the text are more densely coded with textuality. "I am a mixed met­
aphor;' the monstrous text/ textualized monster declares. "Metaphor, mean­
ing something like 'bearing across; is itself a fine metaphor for my condi-
Flickering Connectivities in Shelley Jackson's Patchwork Girl 159 
tion. Every part of me is linked with other territories alien to it but equally 
mine ... borrowed parts, annexed territories. I cannot be reduced, my met­
aphors are not tautologies, yet I am equally present in both poles of a pair, 
each end of the wire is tethered to one of my limbs. The metaphorical princi­
ple is my true skeleton" (body of text!metaphor me). The multilayered sense 
of "metaphor" here-a rhetorical trope of writing that is also a Storyspace 
link and a scar traversing the monster's body-implies that the movement 
up and down fictionallmetafictional levels is not limited to certain mo­
ments in the text but pervades the text as a whole, spreading along with (and 
becoming indistinguishable from) the "true skeleton" of the text!monster! 
software. In this fluid movement between bodies inside texts and texts in­
side bodies, "inside" is constantly becoming "outside" becoming "inside;' 
as if performing at the visible level of the text the linkages between differ­
ent coding levels within the computer. The dynamic makes real for the user 
the fact that each visible mark on the screen, in contrast to the flat mark 
of print, is linked with multiple coding levels whose dimensionalities can 
expand or contract as the coding commands require. It is not entirely coin­
cidental that the dynamic is also central to Elizabeth Grosz's discussion of 
"volatile bodies;' in which she uses the Moebius strip as a metaphor indi­
cating that bodies are constituted through cultural and linguistic forces that 
move both from the outside in and from the inside out. 19 Like Patchwork 
Gir� Grosz understands bodies not as static structures but as sites where 
complex intermediations are enacted. 
The dynamic inside!outsidelinside is vividly, hauntingly represented in 
"body jungle;' in which the monster dreams herself inside a lush jungle 
landscape composed of body parts: beating hearts "roost like pheasants on 
high bone branches"; "intestines hang in swags from ribs and pelvic crests, 
or pile up like tires at the ankles oflegs become trees"; "ovaries hang like 
kumquats from delicate vines" (story!falling apart!body jungle). The mon­
ster imagines passing days and nights in the jungle. "In the morning the con­
voluted clouds will think about me. They will block my view of the domed 
sky, which I know will bear faint suture marks, the knit junctures between 
once-sof t sectors of sky." In time she supposes that her legs will be dissolved 
by the acid dripping from the overhanging stomachs. "My bony stumps will 
sink deep; I will shuffle forward until I tire, then stand still. I will place the 
end of a vein in my mouth and suck it. At last I will no longer bother to 
remove it .... I do not know how my skull will open, or if I will still know 
myself when my brain drifts up to join the huge, intelligent sky:' In this vi­
sion, she becomes a body part of some larger entity, perhaps the computer 
that thinks!dreams her, just as her parts were once autonomous entities that 
160 S TOR I N G: P R I N TAN D E T EXT 
have now been incorporated into the larger whole/hole that she is. Jackson 
remarks in "Stitch Bitch" that in hypertext fiction there are especially pow­
erful opportunities to "sneak up on reality from inside fiction ... to turn 
around and look back on reality as a text embedded in a fictional universe" 
(534). 
We can now see that in this text both the construction of multiple sub­
jectivities and the reconfiguration of consciousness in relation to body are 
deeply bound up with the intermediating dynamics of flickering significa­
tion, which is constituted through the fluidly mutating connections between 
writer, interface, and user. It is not, however, the hypertext structure that 
makes Patchwork Girl distinctively different from print books. As Dictionary 
of the Khazars has taught us (along with similar works), print texts may also 
have hypertext structures.20 Rather, Patchwork Girl could be only an elec­
tronic text because the trace of the computer interface, penetrating deeply 
into its signifying structures, does more than mark the visible surface of the 
text; it becomes incorporated into the textual body. Flickering signification, 
which in a literal and material sense can be understood as producing the 
text, is also produced by it as a textual effect. 
Through the complex enactment of linking structures, both within the 
text and within the distributed cognitive environment in which the text is 
read, Patchwork Girl brings into view what was suppressed in eighteenth­
century debates over copyright. Instead of an immaterial work, this text 
foregrounds the materiality of fictional bodies, authorial bodies, users' bod­
ies, and the writing technologies that produce and connect them. Instead of 
valorizing originality, it produces itself and its characters through acts of 
appropriation and transformation that imply that writing and subjectivity 
are always patchworks of reinscription and innovation. Rejecting the no­
tion of an author's unique genius, this text self-consciously insists on the 
collaborative nature of its productions, from the monster as assemblage to 
the distribution of authorship between the monster "herself;' Mary Shel­
ley, Shelley Jackson, the user, the computer, as well as other more shadowy 
actors. 
Closure: Link, lexia, and Memory 
To complete the comparison between Patchwork Girl and the subjectivity 
implicit in eighteenth-century debates over copyright, let us now turn to the 
distinctions between style and idea, form and content, face and body that 
informed the invention of copyright. Although one could still talk about 
the "style" of Patchwork Girl, the text offers another set of terms in which 
to understand its complexiti es: the alternation between lexia and link, the 
Flickering Connectivities in Shelley Jackson's Patchwork Girl 161 
screen of text that we are reading versus the "go to" computer command 
that constitutes the hypertextual link in electronic media. In Patchwork Girl 
this alternation is performed through a network of interrelated metaphors, 
including tissue and scar, body and skeleton, presence and gap. Underlying 
these terms is a more subtle association oflink and lexia with simultaneity 
and sequence. The eighteenth-century trope of the text as real estate has 
obviously been complicated by the distributed technologies of cyberspace. 
Moreover, when the print book becomes unbound in electronic media, time 
is affected as well. The chronotopes of electronic fictions function in pro­
foundly different ways than the chronotopes of literary works conceived as 
books. Exploring this difference will open a window onto the connections 
that entwine the link and lexia together with simultaneity and sequence. 
With many print books, the order of pages recapitulates the order of time 
in the lifeworld. Chronology might be complicated through flashbacks or 
flashforwards, but normally these flashes comprise episodes that stretch for 
many pages. There are, of course, notable exceptions, for example, Robert 
Coover's print hypertext "The Babysitter." Choosing not to notice such ex­
perimental print fictions, the narrator of Patchwork Girl remarks, "When 
I open a book I know where I am, which is restful. My reading is spatial 
and even volumetric. I tell myself, I am a third of the way down through a 
rectangular solid, I am a quarter of the way down the page, I am here on 
the page, here on this line, here, here, here" (body of text/this writing). In 
Patchwork Girl, as in many hypertexts, chronology is inherently tenuous be­
cause linking structures leap across time as well as space. As if recapitulating 
the processes of fragmentation and recombination made possible by digital 
technologies, Patchwork Girl locates its performance of subjectivity in the 
individuallexia. Since the past and the future can be played out in any num­
ber of ways, the present moment, the lexia we are reading right now, carries 
an unusually intense sense of presence, all the more so because it is a smaller 
unit of narration than normally constitutes an episode. "I can't say I enjoy it, 
exactly;' the narrator comments. "The present moment is furiously small, a 
slot, a notch, a footprint, and on either side it is a seethe of possibility, the 
dissolve of alphabets and of me" (body of text/a slot, a notch). 
Sequence is constructed by accumulating a string of present moments as 
the user clicks on links, as if selecting beads to string for a necklace. In con­
trast to this sequence is the simultaneity of the computer program. Within 
the non-Cartesian space of computer memory, all addresses are equidis­
tant (within near and far memory, respectively), so alilexias are equally 
quick to respond to the click of the mouse (making allowance for those that 
load slower because they contain more data, usually images). This situa-
162 5 TOR I N G: P R I N TAN D E T EXT 
tion reverses our usual sense that time is passing as we watch. Instead, time 
becomes a river that always already exists in its entirety, and we create se­
quence and chronology by choosing which portions of the river to sample. 
There thus arises a tension between the sequence of lexias chosen by the 
user, and the simultaneity of memory space in which all the lexias already 
exist. The tension marks the difference between the narrator's life as the user 
experiences it, and that life as it exists in a space of potentiality in which "ev­
erything could have been different and already is" (story/rethinking/a life). 
When the riarrator-as-present-su bject seeks for the "rest of my life:' 
therefore, the situation is not as simple as a unified subject seeking to fore­
see a future stretching in unbroken chronology before her. To find "the rest 
of my life," the narrator must look not forward into the passing of time 
but downward into the computer space in which discrete lexias lie jumbled 
together (in her metaphoric view, which neglects for poetic effect the com­
puter's prec.ise address system). "I sense a reluctance when I tow a frame for­
ward into the view:' the narrator says, in an utterance that conflates writer, 
user, and character, as if reflecting within the jumble of fiction and metafic­
tion the heterogeneous time represented by the lexias. "It is a child pulled 
out of a fantastic underground hideaway to answer a history quiz. Were you 
brought out of polymorphous dreams, in which mechanical contraptions, 
funnels, tubes and magnifying glasses mingled with animal attentions and 
crowd scenes, into a rigidly actual and bipolar sex scene? Don't worry, little 
boxy baby, I will lift you by your ankles off the bed .... I will show you the 
seductions of sequence, and then I will let the aperture close, 1 will let you 
fall back into the muddled bedsheets, into the merged molecular dance of 
simultaneity" (storylrest of my life). 
The interjection of simultaneity into the sequence of a user's choices 
makes clear why different ontological levels (character, writer, user) min­
gle so monstrously in this text. In the heart of the computer, which is to say 
at the deepest levels of machine code, the distinctions between character, 
writer, and user are coded into strings of ones and zeros, in a space where 
the text written by a human writer and a mouse-click made by a human user 
are coded in the same binary form as machine commands and computer 
programs. When the text represents this process (somewhat misleadingly) 
as a "merged molecular dance of simultane ity:' it mobilizes the specificity 
of the medium as an authorization for its own vision of cyborg subjectivity. 
Part of the monstrosit y, then, is this mingling of the subjectivity we at­
tribute to characters, authors, and ourselves as users with the nonanthro­
pomorphic actions of the computer program. This aspect of the text's mon­
strous hybridity is most apparent in "crazy quilt;' where excerpts from Frank 
Flickering Connectivities in Shelley Jackson's Patchwork Girl 163 
Baum's The Patchwork Girl of Oz increasingly intermingle with other sec­
tions of the hypertext and with instructions from the Storyspace manual. 
Typical is "seam'd;' a significantly named lexia that stitches together the 
Storyspace program and the surgery/sewing/writing metaphoric network 
established in other lexias: "You may emphasize the presence of text links by 
using a special style, color or typeface. Or, if you prefer, you can leave needles 
sticking in the wounds-in the manner of tailors-with thread wrapped 
around them. Being seam'd with scars was both a fact of eighteenth-century 
life and a metaphor for dissonant interferences ruining any finely adjusted 
composition" (crazy quilt/seam'd). The patchwork quality of the passage is 
emphasized by the fact that another lexia entitled "seam'd" appears else­
where (body of text/mixed up/seam'd), from which some of the phrases 
cited above were lifted. 
Although memory is equidistant within the computer, such is not the case 
for human users. In our memories, events take place in time and therefore 
constitute sequence. The "seam'd" lexia in "crazy quilt" relies for its effect 
on the probability that the user has already encountered the lexias of which 
this is a patchwork. Because we have read these lines in other contexts, they 
strike us now as a crazy quilt, a textual body stitched together from recycled 
pieces of other lexias and texts. Memory, then, converts simultaneity into 
sequence, and sequence into the continuity of a coherent past. But human 
memory, unlike computer memory, does not retain its contents indefinitely 
or even reliably. Ifhuman memory has gaps in it (a phenomenon alarmingly 
real to me as my salad days recede in the distance), then it becomes like atoms 
full of empty space, an apparent continuity riddled with holes. 
Fascinated with recovering that which has been lost, the narrator recalls a 
speech made by Susan B. Anthony at a "church quilting bee in Cleveland" in 
which the monster "was the featured attraction, the demon quilt" (body of 
text/mixed up/quilti ng). Anthony (or is it the monster?) remarks that "our 
sense of who we are is mostly made up of what we remember being. We are 
who we were; we are made up of memories. " But each of us also holds in 
her mind experiences she has forgotten. Do these memories, the monstrous 
Anthony speculates, cohere to make another subject, mutually exclusive of 
the subject constituted through the memories one remembers? If so, then 
"within each of you there is at least one other entirely different you, made up 
of all you've forgotten .... More accurately, there are many other you's, each 
a different combination of memories. These people exist. They are complete, 
if not exactly present, lying in potential in the buried places in the brain" 
(story/seance/she goes on). Like the eaten body parts incorporated in the 
animal's flesh that then scrape to get out at the resurrection, like the textual 
164 S TOR I N G: P R I N TAN D E T EXT 
body that exists simultaneously within the equidistant spaces of computer 
memory, human memory, too, is chimerical, composed of the subject I re­
member as myself and the multiple other subjects, also in some sense me, 
whom I have forgotten but who remember themselves and not me. 
When the monster offers to buy a past from Elsie, a randomly chosen 
woman she approaches on the street, this lack of a past is in one sense unique 
to the monster, a result of her having been assembled and not born, with 
no chance to grow into the adult she now is. In another sense, this divi­
sion between the past the monster can remember and the pasts embodied 
in her several parts is a common human fate. "We are ourselves ghostly;' 
Anthony /herself goes on. "Our whole life is a kind of haunting; the present 
is thronged by the figures of the past. We haunt the concrete world as reg­
isters of past events .... And we are haunted, by these ghosts of the living, 
these invisible strangers who are ourselves" (story/seance/she goes on). Sig­
nificantly, the hybridity performed here is a mental assemblage that does 
not depend on or require physical heterogen eity. Even if the text were an 
immaterial mental entity, it still could not be sure of internal cohesion be­
cause the human memories that contain it are themselves full of holes and 
other selves. On many levels and across several interfaces, this monstrous 
text thus balances itself between cohesion and fragmentatio n, presence and 
absence, lexia and link, sequence and simultan eity, coherent selfhood and 
multiple subjectivities. 
How can such a text possibly achieve closure? Jane Yellowlees Douglas, 
writing on Michael Joyce's hypertext fiction afternoon, suggests that closure 
is achieved not when all the lexias have been read, but when the user learns 
enough about the central mystery to believe she understands it.21 Doug­
las suggests that the privileged lexia in Joyce's text is "white afternoon"­
privileged because its transformative power on the user's understanding 
of the mystery is arguably greater than other lexias. Although Patchwork 
Girl has no comparable central mystery, it does have a central dialectic, 
the oscillation between fragmentation and recombination. "I believed that 
if I concentrated on wishing, my body itself would erase its scars and be 
made new;' the narrator confesses. This wishing for wholeness continues 
in dynamic tension with the simultaneous realization that she is always al­
ready fragmented, ruptured, discontinuous (story/falling apart/bec oming 
whole). When this oscillation erupts into a crisis, the text initiates events 
that make continuation impossible unless some kind of accommodation is 
reached. The crisis occurs when the narrator awakes one morning to find 
that she is coming apart. As she tries to cover over the cracking seams with 
surgical tape, the dispersion rockets toward violence. "My foot strove sky-
Flickering Connectivities in Shelley Jackson's Patchwork Girl 165 
ward ... trailing blood in mannered specks. My guts split open and some­
thing frilly spilled out .... My right hand shot gesticulating stump-first 
eastward" (story/falling apart/diaspo ra). The tide is stemmed when Elsie, 
the woman whose past the monster bought, comes upon the monster dis­
integrating in the bathtub and holds onto her. "I was gathered together 
loosely in her attention in a way that was interesting to me, for I was all 
in pieces, yet not apart. I felt permitted. I began to invent something new: a 
way to hang together without pretending I was whole. Something between 
higgledy-piggledy and the eternal sphere" (story/falling apart/I made myself 
over). This resolution, in which the monster realizes that if she is to cohere at 
all it cannot be through unified subje ctivity or a single narrative line, leads 
to "afterwar ds;' in which the monster decides that the only life she can lead 
is nomadic, a trajectory of "movement and doubt-and doubt and move­
ment will be my life, as long as it lasts" (storylrethinking/afterwards ). Thus 
the narrative pattern of her life finally becomes indistinguishable from the 
fragmentation and recombination of the digital technology that produces it, 
a convergence expressed earlier through the metaphor of the dotted line. "I 
hop from stone to stone and an electronic river washes out my scent in the 
intervals. I am a discontinuous line, a dotted line" (body of text/hop). Con­
necting and dividing, the dotted line of the monster's nomadic trajectory 
through "movement and doubt" resembles the lexia/link, presence/absence 
pattern of the screenic text. Following this trajecto ry, she goes on to become 
a writer herself. 
But what does she write-the narrative we are reading? If so, then the 
authorial function has shifted at some indeterminate point (or many inde­
terminate points) from Mary Shelley to the monster, recalling the earlier 
distribution of authorship between M/S. Just as the user can no longer be 
sure if, within the fictive world, the monster now writes herself or is writ­
ten by Mary, so the monster is similarly unsure, in part because her body, 
like her subjectivity, is a distributed function. "I wonder if I am writing 
from my thigh, from the crimp-edged pancakelet of skin we stitched onto 
me .... Mary writes, I write, we write, but who is really writing?" Faced 
with this unanswerable question (unanswerable for the user as for the nar­
rator), the monster concludes, "Ghost writers are the only kind there are" 
(story/rethinking/am I mary). 
The larger conclusions suggested by juxtaposing Patchwork Girl with 
eighteenth -century debates crucial to the formation of print literature go 
beyond showing how this text makes the unconscious of the earlier period 
into the stage for its performances of hybrid subjectivit ies. More broadly, 
Patchwork Girl testifies to the importance of materiality in its signifying 
166 S TOR I N G: P R I N TAN D E T EXT 
strategies-in the ways it mobilizes the specificities of the Storyspace soft­
ware and, beyond this, the specificities of the digital computer. It vividly 
demonstrates why a linear causal model would be doomed to inadequacy 
in accounting for its complexit ies. The text relies as much on print prede­
cessors as on electronic textuality to create meaning; it marshals language 
and code to produce the text in a literal sense and also to produce discourse 
about the text; and in the central trope of the dotted line, at once continuous 
and discrete, it enacts the complementary dynamic between the digital and 
analog. In short, it demonstrates on many levels and in diverse ways-in its 
aesthetic, its performance of subjectivity, and the multiple causalities that 
create its flickering connectivities-the importance of intermediatio n. 
Flickering Connectivities in Shelley Jackson's Patchwork Girl 167 
3 TRANSM ITTI NG 
Analog and Digital 
7 (Un)masking the Agent 
Stanislaw Lem's "The Mask" 
"Transmitting" in this part is considered not in the technical sense of send­
ing encoded packets through fiber-optic cables according to information 
protocols, an important topic covered in such seminal texts as Alexander R. 
Galloway's Protocol and Geert Lovink's Dark Fiber. Rather, here "transmit­
ting" refers primarily to the mechanisms and processes by which informa­
tional patterns are transferred between analog consciousness and digital 
cognition, understanding the latter variously as located in the computer, 
in human nonconscious processes, and in digital simulations. The focus on 
staging encounters of consciousness with digital cognition, anticipated in 
chapter 6, expands the considerations of parts 1 and 2 to subjectivity, nar­
rative, and the relation of the Regime of Computation to human culture 
and meaning. Chapter 1 raised the critical question of whether the Regime 
of Computation should be considered as a cultural construction or as an 
accurate description of reality, and the chapters in this part keep returning 
to this question from different perspectives. As anticipated in chapter 1, the 
kind of analysis pursued here will not so much opt for either the construc­
tivist or realist position as explore their co-constitution of each other. The 
present chapter initiates this broad inquiry by starting locally, that is, by 
locating the dynamic between digital cognition and analog consciousness 
within the same being. 
Although implant devices have become available only recently, specula­
tion on how coding enters into the deep structures of thought predates the 
technological actuality by several decades. At issue are questions of coop­
eration and competition between conscious mind and aconscious coding, 
free will and programmed outcomes, gendered enculturation and the non­
gendered operation of algorithms, language and the nonlinguistics opera-
tion of code. The assumption that a substrate of code underlies conscious 
mind profoundly affects concepts of agency and subjectivity. Whereas the 
Holocaust and other atrocities provide horrifying examples of humans not 
counting as persons, intelligent software packages offer the spectacle ofbots 
being mistaken for human interlocutors. 1 In light of these complex inter­
mediations, let me advance a proposition: to count as a person, an entity 
must be able to exercise agency. Agency enables the subject to make choices, 
express intentions, perform actions. Scratch the surface of a person, and you 
find an agent; find an agent, and you are well on your way toward constitut­
ing a subject, a dynamic explored at length in chapter 8 with regard to Karl 
Sims's virtual creatures. 
As I will demonstrate in this chapter, computer scientists are not the 
only ones speculating that computational mechanisms underlie and/or in­
terpenetrate human consciousness. Influential cultural theorists, particu­
larly Gilles Deleuze, Felix Guattari, and Jacques Lacan, also speculate on 
how the digital and analog interact in human cognition. The same kind of 
ontological perplexity that haunts the Regime of Computation also troubles 
these theories: is computation here to be considered a metaphor appropri­
ated from information technologies, or an accurate description of psychic 
processes? If skepticism toward the Regime of Computation is warranted 
(and I think it is), skepticism toward these cultural theories should not lag 
behind. The point as I see it, however, is not to determine whether the theo­
ries are correct or incorrect but to understand their roles in helping to create 
a "climate of opinion;' as Raymond Williams calls it, in which the complex 
intermediations between the analog and digital become central to under­
standing constructions of subje ctivity and agency. In the final portion of 
this chapter, I will turn to a literary text that enacts these issues in particu­
larly powerful ways, Stanislaw Lem's 1976 novella "The Mask." With a nar­
rator hovering between the human and nonhuman, "The Mask" ex plores 
with subtle potency the complexities of a conscious mind whose agency 
is circumscrib ed by an underlying program that partially dictates the ac­
tions mind can perform. As the mind probes the limits of its freedom, it 
undergoes a transformation into something other than human. Whether 
the eponymous mask refers to the human skin that encases a metallic robot, 
or to the mind from which the narrative voice emerges, is one of many am­
biguities the story performs as it probes the possibilities for a consciousness 
that coexists with an underlying program it can sense but never directly 
know. In imagining this configuration, Lem's fictional anticipation of the 
unconscious as digital algorithm remains remarkably prescient a quarter of 
a century later. 
172 T RAN 5 MIT TI N G: A N A LOG AND DIG I TAL 
The Machine within the Human 
In their radical reconceptualization of agency, Deleuze and Guattari reveal 
that intelligent artifacts played a seminal role in their thinking about agency. 
Early in A Thousand Plateaus they celebrate cellular automata (CA), con­
trasting them with the centered systems they deplore. As we saw in chapter 
I'S account of Stephen Wolfram's A New Kind of Science, cellular automata 
are composed of cells, each of which calculates its state depending on the 
state of its immediate neighbors. Deleuze and Guattari define cellular au­
tomata somewhat inaccurately as "finite networks of automata in which 
communication runs from any neighbor to any other" (17). In fact, as we 
know, each cell samples only the cells immediately adjacent to it (or in some 
cases, the next nearest neighbors). By claiming for cellular automata a less 
rule-bound dynamic than they in fact possess, Deleuze and Guattari im­
ply that any configuration whatever is possible, an idea they push to the 
extreme in their notions of "deterritorialization" and "reterritorialization." 
Cellular automata fit Deleuze and Guattari's purpose because they are com­
pletely mechanistic, computational, and non conscious but nevertheless dis­
play complex patterns that appear to evolve, grow, invade new territories, 
or decay and die out. Particularly relevant is the pattern called "Glider," 
in which a glider-like shape appears at one edge of the screen and moves 
toward the other edge, as if enacting what Deleuze and Guattari call a "line of 
flight." Cellular automata appear as well in their description of schizoanal­
ysis, which "treats the unconscious as an acentered system, in other words, 
as a machinic network of finite automata (a rhizome), and thus arrives at an 
entirely different state of the unconscious" (18). The implication is that the 
unconscious, like cellular automata, is mechanistic and rhizomatic. 
These ideas have obvious limitations when applied to the human or­
ganism. Unlike the free-form patterns of cellular automata, humans have 
biological requirements that make the skin an organ vital to survival. Yet 
Deleuze and Guattari leap over this limitation with a powerful performative 
rhetoric that makes it seem as if the body could deterritorialize and reter­
ritorialize as easily as cellular automata (which themselves, as noted, have 
limitations Deleuze and Guattari do not accurately represent ). As a result 
of this rhetoric, the body becomes the Body without Organs, an assemblage 
rather than an organism, which does away with consciousness as the seat 
of coherent subjectivity (a move alluded to in chapter 4, where it is linked 
with reconceptualizing the convergent "work" as Work as Assemblage ). In 
the idea of the Body without Organs, humans are conceived as mutating 
assemblages that can absorb a variety of entities into their environments, 
including both machines and organic matter. Instead of conscious thought, 
(Un)rnasking the Agent: Stanislaw Lern's "The Mask" 173 
the Body without Organs is driven by desire. According to Mark Hansen, 
desire is so central in A Thousand Plateaus that it assumes a fetishized qual­
ity, flaming with incandescent intensity that alone has the motive force to 
drive assemblages into new configura tions.2 Indeed, since consciousness is 
fragmented, the organism dispersed, and signification thrown out, desire is 
virtually the only agent left on the playing field. "Make consciousness an 
experimentation in life;' Deleuze and Guattari urge, "and passion a field of 
continuous intensities, an emission of particle-signs .... Desubjectify con­
sciousness and passion" (134). The net effect of this rhetorical transmutation 
is to construct the Body without Organs as an infinite set of cellular au­
tomata whose computational rules are re-encoded as desire. This is a much 
more direct "computationalization" of the human than that imagined by 
Wolfram, although here computation is understood in psychoanalytic and 
philosophical terms rather than in engineering and mathematical contexts. 
In A Thousand Plateaus, at the same time that humans take on attributes 
of computational media, machines acquire biological traits. Adopting the 
terminology of biological evolution, Deleuze and Guattari write, "We may 
speak of a machinic phylum, or technological lineage, wherever we find a con­
stellation of singularities, prolongable by certain operations, which converge, 
and make the opera tions converge upon one or several assignable traits of ex­
pression" (406). Endorsing Andre Leroi-Go urhan's ideas about a "techno­
logical vitalism" that takes "biological evolution in general as the model for 
technical evolution;' Deleuze and Guattari assert that "there is indeed a ma­
chinic phylum in variation that creates the technical assemblages, whereas 
the assemblages invent the various phyla. A technological lineage changes 
significantly according to whether one draws it upon the phylum or in­
scribes it in the assemblages; but the two are inseparable" (407). By making 
the phylum depend on the assemblages and the assemblages on the phylum, 
Deleuze and Guattari suggest that technological evolution produces distinct 
genetic forms emerging from a daisy chain of interconnections and eluding 
linear causal explanation. 3 Although Deleuze and Guattari speak of the ma­
chinic phylum as "matter in movement, in flux, in variation, matter as a 
conveyor of singularities and traits of expression" (409), it is not clear what 
drives these mutations. They attempt to solve the problem by returning to 
the prime mover in their theory, imagining that machines are also capable 
of desire. 4 
In "Machinic Heterogenesis," Guattari addresses this point by interpo­
lating the human and mechanical into one another, arguing that the "me­
chanosphere ... superimposes itself on the biosphere:' 5 Seeking to open 
Maturana and Varela's self-enclosing concept of autopoiesis to the produc-
174 T RAN 5 MIT TIN G: A N A LOG AND DIG I TAL 
tion of otherness, 6 Guattari argues that even a mechanism as simple as a 
lock and key has a repertoire of structural forms through which it can move. 
This deterritorializing or "smoothing" opens the discrete machine to trans­
formation and, by a nonrational leap of inference, to desire; 7 "all machinic 
orderings contain within them, even if only in an embryonic state, enun­
ciative nuclei [foyers 1 that are so many proto machines of desire" (25). Thus 
machines are made like humans because they are driven by desire, even as 
humans are configured like machines because they can be disassembled and 
reassembled. "It is thus impossible to refuse human thought its part in the 
essence of machinism;' Guattari writes (15). In this view, "human" connotes 
no essential quality but marks the historical starting point of a certain line 
of inquiry. If the human has been mechanical all along, anyone who repre­
sents it as "contaminated" by the mechanical mistakes his own process of 
discovery for the hybridization that was always already there. 
Clearly the performative force of language plays a crucial role here, as it 
does in A Thousand Plateaus: much is asserted, almost nothing is demon­
strated. If language thus possesses a kind of agency, the next step would 
be to suppose that language itself is a machine and hence subject to the 
same processes of deterritorialization and reterritorialization that charac­
terize "desiring machines:' Guattari edges toward this realization in "Ma­
chinic Heterogenesis" when he asks, "But how long can we continue to 
characterize the thought put to work here as human? Doesn't technico­
scientific thought emerge from a certain type of mental and semiotic ma­
chinism?" (15). Guattari takes structural semiotics to task because it fails 
to capture "figures of expression that work as diagrammatic machines in 
direct contact with technical-experimental configurations" (15). Whereas 
semiotic systems posit "distinctive oppositions of a phonemic or scriptural 
order that transcribe enunciations [enonces 1 into expressive materials that 
signify;' machines operate differently, using a signifying process that "does 
not derive from repetition or from mimesis of significations" (15). Obscurely 
expressed, the point here seems to be that semiotics has falsified the work­
ings of language by interpreting it through structuralist oppositions that 
covertly smuggle in anthropomorphic thinking characteristic of conscious 
mind. The model for language should instead be machinic operations that 
do not need structural oppositions; these operations have available to them 
a materialistic level of signification in which representation is intertwined 
with material processes. Although the word "code" does not appear in Guat­
tari's essay, it fits well with his vision of a signifying system that is tied di­
rectly to the material process of flickering voltages. "Existence is not dialec­
tic;' Guattari exclaims. "It is not representable. It is hardly even livable!" 
(Un)masking the Agent: Stanislaw Lem's "The Mask" 175 
(25). Guattari's lack of reverence for the Lacanian conception of the sig­
nifier now becomes explicit. Semiotics is flawed because it "does not get 
us out of structure, and prohibits us from entering the real world of the 
machine. The structuralist signifier is always synonymous with linear dis­
cursivity," whereas heterogeneous machines refuse to be "orchestrated by 
a universal temporalization" (23). Nonetheless, Lacan's views have more in 
common with Guattari's than he acknowledges, fo r they concur in conceiv­
ing oflanguage as a coding machine. Thus the very linguistic processes that 
reconceptualize human agency by describing it as an intelligent machine are 
themselves reconceptualized as essentially mechanistic in their operations. 
John Johnston, in his important analysis of Lac an's development of a the­
ory of the unconscious, shows that automata theory is crucial to Lacan's 
thought. 8 The key idea Lacan lifts from automata theory is the notion that 
inherent in symbol manipulation are certain structural relationships that 
can be used to program a Turing machine. Recall from chapter 1 that the 
Turing machine is an abstract computer that can perform any computation 
that any computer can do, including computing the algorithm that consti­
tutes itself.9 This very simple machine is composed of three components: a 
head that reads and writes binary symbols forward and backward on a tape; 
the tape itself; and the rules for producing a new state from the previous 
one. Working by analogy (although not always explicitly stating so), Lacan 
transposes these ideas onto the unconscious, conceiving of it as a machine 
operating upon language without needing anything like anthropomorphic 
awareness to perform its operations. Guattari is correct in asserting that lin­
earity is essential to the Lacanian conception of the signifier, but he underes­
timates the flexibility with which the Turing machine can operate. By fold­
ing the abstract operations of calculation into the material operation of the 
tape, Turing simplified the computational load and achieved an economy 
of operation that made his Universal machine so powerful an idea that it is 
routinely regarded as the theoretical basis for modern computers. 
Lacan's conception of the unconscious as a kind of Turing machine en­
ables him to accomplish a profound transformation of Freud's view of the 
unconscious (notwithstanding his claim that he merely makes explicit what 
is implicit in Freud). When Freud posited the death drive, he thought of it 
as an unconscious tendency to move toward the inanimate, a return to pre­
biological origins. There is a sense in which this view of the unconscious is 
deeply anthropomorphic, for it identifies the present state of the (conscious) 
subject with life, from which point the unconscious moves back toward the 
inanimate. By contrast, as John Johnston shows, Lacan envisions language 
as beginning in the mechanistic operations of the unconscious, from which 
176 T RAN S MIT TIN G: A N A LOG AND DIG I TAL 
emerge the higher order processes of conscious thought. The direction of 
the vector changes from back to up, that is, from regression to emergence; 
equally important, mechanistic operations are conceived as providing the 
basis for consciousness rather than as representing a return to the preani­
mate. Thus the important distinction shifts from living/nonliving to mecha­
nistic intelligen ce/conscious awareness. Given claims by researchers that ar­
tificiallife is indeed a form oflife, the divide between animate and inanimate 
has become increasingly problematic. 10 Like Lacan, theorists of artificial life 
focus on the intelligences that can emerge from mechanistic operations in 
both protein- and silicon-based life forms, an ideal formulated in different 
terms by Stephen Wolfram in A New Kind of Science, as we saw in chapter l. 
The difference between Lacan's linear model and Guattari's "heterogeneous 
machine" pales compared to the looming fact that both envision human 
cognition as always already interpenetrated by machinic processes, or as 
John Johnston puts it, as constituted through the "in-mixing" of human 
psychology with cybernetics. 
The net result of these feedback loops between artificial life forms and 
biological organisms has been to create a crisis of agency, a phenomenon 
described at length in my book How We Became Posthuman. II If, on the one 
hand, humans are like machines, whether figured as cellular automata or 
Turing machines, then agency cannot be securely located in the conscious 
mind. If, on the other hand, machines are like biological organisms, then 
they must possess the effects of agency even though they are not conscious. 
In these reconfigurations, desire and language, both intimately connected 
with agency, are understood in new ways. Acting as a free-floating agent, de­
sire is nevertheless anchored in mechanistic operations, a suggestion Guat­
tari makes in "Machinic Heterogenesis." Language, emerging from the op­
erations of the unconscious figured as a Turing machine, creates expressions 
of desire that in their origin are always already interpenetrated by the mech­
anistic, no matter how human they seem. Finally, if desire and the agency 
springing from it are at bottom nothing more than the performance ofbi­
nary code, then computers can have agency as fully authentic as humans. 
Through these reconfigurations, Deleuze, Guattari, and Lacan use automata 
to challenge human agency, and in the process they configure automata as 
agents. 
Machines acting as agents, and humans with their agency rooted in ma­
chinic processes -ideas explored in chapter 6 through Shelley Jackson's 
Patchwork Girl-vividly illustrate why notions of personhood have become 
destabilized. The uncanny similarities between Wolfram's speculations and 
the theories of Deleuze, Guattari, and Lacan (developed in large part, if not 
(Un)masking the Agent: Stanislaw Lem's "The Mask" 177 
entirely, independen tly of one another) illustrate how pervasive within the 
culture these human/machine dynamics have become. To bring into sharper 
focus the anxieties created by supposing that digital mechanisms underlie 
analog consciousness, I turn now to Stanislaw Lem's powerful story "The 
Mask." At the heart of this disturbing tale is a conflict between a conscious 
mind that can think and an underlying program that determines action. 
To make the conflict more intense, Lem arranges matters so that conscious 
mind has no direct access to program, much as we have no direct access 
to the interior computational modules that, in the view of some evolution­
ary psychologists, codetermine our behavior. 12 In the disjunction between 
the representations conscious mind makes to itself and the actions actually 
taken, the crisis of agency is bodied forth as an inescapable and tragic con­
dition of thinking mind(s). 
The Human within the Machine 
"The Mask" begins with a threshold. On one side is a consciousness that 
names "the it that was I" (181). In Polish, the narrator is named through­
out with feminine words (for example, "machina;' the feminine form of 
"machine;' and the feminine "Maska" of the Polish title). Jerzy Jarzebski 
and Michael Kandel have observed, however, that at the tale's beginning the 
narrator is constructed as neuter, a performance Lem enacts by using past­
tense verb forms with neuter endings that do not actually exist as such in 
normal usage (although the neologisms would be recognized immediately 
by Polish-sp eaking readers). 13 This linguistic creativity underscores from 
the outset the importance of gender (albeit here by its linguistic erasure). 
Using these neologisms, the narrator recounts an experience imaged simul­
taneously as a birth, a movement down an assembly line, and an erotic en­
counter. Here the narrator plays a passive role, object of unknown gazing 
eyes, "snoutlike flattened heads;' "pincer hands;' and "flat mouths in a rim 
of sparks" that give a final "quivering kiss" that "tautened the me" and cause 
the narrator to "crawl into a round opening without light" (181-82). At the 
moment the narrator crosses the threshold (which is both spatial and lin­
guistic), consciousness undergoes a dramatic change, feeling "the rush of 
gender so violent, that her head spun and I shut my eyes. And as I stood 
thus, with eyes closed, words came to me from every side, for along with 
gender she had received language" (182). At this liminal moment, the narra­
tor moves from an "it" already receding from awareness into a linguistically 
enculturated "she" whose movement over the palace threshold (for that is 
where she now perceives herself to be) plunges her into the Symbolic. As 
her perception snaps into cultural focus, the objects that an instant before 
178 T RAN S MIT TIN G: A N A LOG AND DIG I TAL 
it had described as a "colored confusion of vertical trunks;' with "globes" 
containing "tiny buttons bright with water;' become the lords and ladies at­
tending a court ball, whose eyes are turning to follow the beautiful woman 
the narrator has become (182). Thus from the beginning we have reason to 
doubt that the narrator's consciousness is the seat of identity, for it springs 
into existence only after another kind of awareness, an awareness that inhab­
its an "it" and not "she;' has moved the narrator through the birth channel 
and out into the world. 
These abrupt transitions between physical spaces are characteristic of the 
consciousness as long as the narrator remains a woman, suggesting that 
consciousness here operates as if it were a machine being turned on and 
off. Precisely because the sphere of consciousness is limited, its operation 
within that staging area is all the more frenetic as it seeks to establish its 
conditions of possibility. As the woman progresses into the ball, her con­
sciousness speeds along in a hyperrational mode that Jo Alyson Parker, in 
her Lacanian analysis of "The Mask;' finds impossible to accept as female. 14 
Indeed, consciousness suspects its own hyperrationality. As the narrator 
tries to make sense of her situation, she realizes that "this self-determined 
thinking of mine seemed in its correctness just a bit too cold, unduly calm, 
for fear remained beyond it-like a thing transcendent, omnipresent, yet 
separate-theref ore my own thoughts too I held in suspicion" (199). Know­
ing that she should be afraid but unable to feel the hormonal surges that 
make fear an experience inhabiting the self, she comes close to being the 
subject we call Cartesian, doubting everything including her own thoughts. 
Why should she feel fear? Although she can think whatever she pleases, 
she slowly realizes that she is only partially able to control her actions, a 
prospect that infuses consciousness with dread. She quickly determines that 
she is intended for Arrhodes, a brilliant thinker who has dared to question 
the authority of the king. This knowledge comes to consciousness but does 
not originate there, appearing to the narrator as a predetermined fact. When 
she drops her fan before Arrhodes in a cliched gesture of seduction, she feels 
a blush appear, but like fear, this blush does not inhabit her, appearing to 
consciousness as if it were a foreign intrusion. "The blush did not belong 
to me, it spread on my cheeks, claimed my face, pinkened my ear lobes, 
which I could feel perfectly, yet I was not embarrassed, nor excited .... I'll 
say more: I had nothing whatever to do with that blush, it came from the 
same source as the knowledge that had entered me at the threshold of the 
hall" (190). This separation between consciousness and the bodily actions 
consciousness observes reveals a fatal gap between thought and agency. Al­
though consciousness feels that it comprises an identity in itself-as if it is, 
(Un)masking the Agent: Stanislaw Lem's "The Mask" 179 
as the narrator says, "one" -it must face the fact that another kind of agency 
also inhabits the body, and moreover an agency to which consciousness has 
no direct access and that it must strive to apprehend through inferences and 
observations. "Everyone knows it is impossible to turn the eyeball around," 
she thinks, "such that the pupil can peer inside the skull" (194). 
In her dance of seduction with Arrhodes, the narrator displays a brilliance 
and satirical edge that both fascinates Arrhodes and makes him afraid, for 
he senses immediately that this is no ordinary woman, bluntly demanding, 
"Who are you?" Asking this question of herself, the narrator flashes onto the 
pasts of three entirely different women: Mignonne from the north, Angelita 
from the south, and Tlenix, each accompanied by intense though fragmen­
tary sensory memories. 15 She also senses that her choice will determine the 
"truth;' that "each one could take on substance if I acknowledged it;' and 
that "the images unmentioned would be blown away" (192). Consciousness 
here senses its position as a PROM, a programmable chip that can accept an 
initial choice of input but that, once the choice has been made, loses this flex­
ibility as input merges with software and software rigidifies into hardware . 
Significant ly, she chooses not to answer Arrhodes, thereby preserving an in­
determinacy that she seeks to fill instead with her own option, imagining 
herself as that quintessent ially marginalized female figure, the madwoman 
tenderly cared for by patronizing relatives. 
This identity cannot take, for it has not been included among the possi­
ble inputs. Yet the narrator's response is significant, for it shows that con­
sciousness is determined to assert her own agency over and against the other 
agency inhabiting the body. Conversing with Arrhodes, the narrator tests 
the limits to which she can go. She tries to say something stupid, knowing 
that it will be an effective turnof f for Arrhodes, but she finds herself unable 
to be anything but brilliant. When she tries to warn him outright, telling 
him in response to his request for an assignation, "Better to say: never and 
nowhere" (194), she can utter the warning only in the cliched language of a 
lover who feigns reluctance to spur on desire. She realizes this too late, des­
perately adding, "I do not toy with you, my fine philosopher, look within 
and you will see that I advised you well" (195), another articulation that 
goes awry because when Arrhodes looks within, he sees only the desire that 
is real enough to him but that she knows to be a fatal trap set by his deadly 
adversary, the king. "What I wished to add," consciousness thinks, "I could 
not utter. I was able to think anything, strange as it may seem, yet in no 
way find my voice, I could not reach those words. A catch in my throat, a 
muteness, like a key turned in a lock, as if a bolt had clicked shut between us" 
(195). As the narrator will come to realize more fully later, the most insidious 
180 T RAN S MIT TIN G: A N A lOG AND DIG I TAL 
threat to her agency is not a direct prohibition on her actions. Scary as that 
is, more frightening is a co-optation that turns whatever she tries to do to 
the purposes of the other agency inhabiting the body. 
The seductive dance continues when the narrator meets Arrhodes the 
next day in a garden-another abrupt transition preceded by a period of 
unknowingness; for when she left the ball, she entered into a carriage that 
was more like a coffin, imprisoning her within a space too small for her to 
stand fully upright. As she lies in the darkness, she thinks again of her three 
prearranged pasts and compares them to her dim memories, when she ex­
perienced herself as neuter. Becoming increasingly aware not only of the 
alien agency within her body but also of the exterior agents who arranged 
for it to be there, she muses on the fact that she can remember the time 
before. "I think it had to be that way, that it would have been impossible 
to arrange things otherwise;' she speculates (196). Desperately seeking fo r 
a way to make her own will count, she tries to put together an identity not 
predetermined by the other's agency: "Out of discrepant elements I could 
construct nothing of my own, unless I were to find in the design already 
existing some lopsidedness, chinks I might penetrate, thereby to rend open 
the structure and get to the core of it" (202). And so she returns to her mem­
ories as a neuter, ironically thinking that "certainly they should at least have 
wiped out that sequence on my back, the animation of my nakedness, inert 
and mute, by the sparking kisses, but that too had taken place and now was 
with me" (202). The memory functions as what evolutionary biologists call 
a "spandrel;' an effect not selected for that emerges because it is genetically 
entangled with attributes that are selected for. Out of this spandrel, this un­
planned excess, she hopes to find the chink that will let her assert agency. 
Her desire for an agency she can call her own becomes the driving force 
of the narrative-or rather, it drives a narrative of self-determination within 
the larger narrative scripted by the alien agency that also inhabits the body. 
Thus desire is multiple, living both in consciousness and program. While 
consciousness knows its desire from the inside, it knows the desire of pro­
gram from the outside, as if seen from a distance by an observer. "I had 
love, but elsewhere-1 know how that sounds. Oh it was a passionate love, 
tender and altogether ordinary. I wanted to give myself to him body and 
soul, though not in reality, only in the manner of the fashion, according to 
custom, the etiquette of the court .... My love was very great, it caused me 
to tremble, it quickened my pulse, I saw that his glance made me happy. 
And my love was very small, being limited in me, subject to the style, like a 
carefully composed sentence expressing the painful joy of tete-a-tete" (208). 
Her love is great within the scripted confines of the program that has been 
(Un)masking the Agent: Stanislaw Lem's "The Mask" 181 
written to make it so. But for consciousness, love is an alien utterance per­
formed without touching the pulse of thinking mind, which sees but does 
not experience it. "And so beyond the bounds of those feelings I had no 
particular interest in saving him from myself or another, for when I reached 
with my mind outside my love, he was nothing to me" (208-9). 
Rememb ering how she rebelled in the carriage as she realized the limits 
of her agency, she also recalls the extruded snake head that gave her an injec­
tion, turning consciousness off. For consciousness, Arrhodes is important 
not as a lover but as a potential ally against foreign agents, who themselves 
have formed an alliance with program across her body's boundaries. "Yet I 
needed an ally in my struggle against whatever had pricked me that night 
with venomous metal. ... Therefore I could not reveal the entire truth to 
him: that my love and the venomous prick were from one and the same 
source" (209). Love is a program; passing time is an injection; and both come 
from agency outside thinking mind. 
Because we know the narrator was manuf actured and not born, the ob­
vious inference is that her program is composed of algorithms running on 
some kind of digital mechanism. Lem never reveals the details of her pro­
gram's operation, however, keeping them deliberately obscure. This makes 
it possible to think of her program also in cultural terms, an analogy re­
inforced by the birth imagery at the story's beginning. In this sense, her 
"program" can also be understood anthropomorphic ally as equivalent to 
obsessive/compulsi ve formations in humans. These subtleties work to en­
courage our identification with the narrator and to suggest that there may 
be less difference between her and us than we imagined, a realization in line 
with the cultural and psychoanalytic theories discussed earlier. 
These subtleties come into play partly through the narrator's suggestion 
that Arrhodes may also be following a cultural program that dictates his ac­
tions. Realizing that his banter follows a predictable pattern of sexual fore­
play, the narrator intuits that Arrhodes "would surely be conventional in 
his love" and so "would not accept in me the kind of liberation I desired, 
the freedom that would cast him off. Therefore I could only act deceitfully, 
giving freedom the false name oflove" (209). For the narrator, one kind of 
agency comes from program and dictates love; another comes from con­
sciousness, which can exercise agency in this cultural context only by calling 
it love, although its object is not Arrhodes but the articulation of will inde­
pendent of program. Arrhodes is not so much a love object to consciousness 
as a tool she hopes to use to assert her own subjecti vity. 
The dance of seduction ends with another birth and, with it, a subtle 
transformation of agency. Ordering Arrhodes to leave her alone in her cha-
182 T RAN 5 MIT TI N G: A N A LOG AND 0 I G I TAL 
teau, the narrator stands before a full-length mirror and, following an inex­
plicable impulse, cuts herself open from sternum to crotch. When she parts 
the layers of skin, she sees nestled within her flesh the metallic body of an 
insectile robot and realizes "it was not it, a foreign thing, different and other, 
it was again myself" (213). At this moment, Arrhodes comes in and sees her 
exposed; "it was I, still I, I was' repeating to myself when he entered" (213). 
Gaping at her gaping open, he turns and flees. As the narrator works to free 
herself from her human mask, "Tlenix, Duenna, Mignonne first sank to her 
knees, then tumbled face-down to the side and I crawled out of her;' where­
upon the discarded human skin lies "like a naked thing, her legs thrown 
apart immodest ly" in a seductive pose of which the narrator no longer has 
need (214-15). 
Michael Kandel, in ''A Freudian Peek at Lem's Fiasco;' writes about the 
pervasiveness of insects in Lem's fiction, noting that "there is something 
ominous and repugnant about Lem's insects;' and observing further that in­
sects, particularly robotic ones, often function as representations of aliens so 
unlike humans that they remain unfathomable by human characters. "The 
Mask" uses a highly unusual configuration in combining this alien form 
with an anthropomorphic consciousness that, moreover, bears the mark of 
female gender. Throwing aside the shell of a beautiful woman that masked 
tlIe insectile robot, the narrator now performs a complex balancing act be­
tween maintaining the identity of consciousness and dissipating subjectivity 
tlIroughout the metallic robot body. 
In this struggle, gender plays a surprisingly central role. Carol Wald has 
written brilliantly about "The Mask" as part of a tradition of powerful men 
using female automata as tools against other men. 16 With the narrator's 
transformation, the king's plot to assassinate Arrhodes stands fully revealed, 
but female agency also asserts itself in this design. We learn that the king 
"had sworn to his dying mother that if harm befell that wise man it would be 
of his own choosing" (193). Hence the seduction plot. To keep his word to his 
mother, the king must arrange matters so that Arrhodes chooses the narrator 
and initializes the robot's program, whereupon she metamorphoses into an 
insectile assassin who will pursue him to the ends of the earth. Male power 
has the ability to act but only within the constraints imposed by female in­
fluence, a formation enacted in a different configuration within the narra­
tor, where male power manifests itself in actions performed by the male­
authored program and the consciousness that, as we shall see, continues to 
be constructed as female. 
After the narrator's transformation, consciousness undergoes a subtle but 
important change. Gone is the hyperrational quality of detached thinking, 
{Un)masking the Agent: Stanislaw lem's "The Mask" 183 
as if the mind were an engine racing at high rpm while disengaged from the 
drive train. Consciousness still thinks but now feels more at one with the 
body, yielding to the "shining metal [that] had written into it movements 
which I began to execute" (215). Consciousness also finds itself permeated 
by the exquisite distinctions of smell that the body's superb olf actory equip­
ment makes possible. However, despite this transformation, consciousness 
continues to desire her own agency, although what that agency might mean 
becomes more complicated as the sharp division between mind and body 
eases. 
For example, the robot wonders why she pauses for three days after Ar­
rhodes flees before taking up his pursuit. She suspects that this may be her 
program operating to make sure Arrhodes has time to realize the full terror 
of his situation. But she also thinks of it as a challenge to her skill as a hunt­
ing machine, an opportunity to demonstrate an expertise with which she 
identifies. Agency here is neither folded back under consciousness nor sep­
arated from it; rather, agency of mind and program have blended together 
to form an uneasy heterogeneous amalgam . Thinking from within this state, 
consciousness suspects that from the start her agency has been infected with 
the will of another. Recalling the moment when she split herself open, con­
sciousness realizes "that act of self-evisceration had not been altogether my 
rebellion .... It represented a foreseen part of the plan, designed for just 
such an eventuality, in order that my rebellion turn out to be, in the end, 
my total submission" (215). She suspects that the desire authenticating her as 
an autonomous subjectivity-h er intense desire to act as a free agent-has 
always already been co-opted by program, a thought so scary she can think 
it only after her metamorphosis, when she accepts program not merely as 
an exterior function but also an interpenetration of herself. "Thus the hope 
of freedom could have been just an illusion, nor even my own illusion, but 
introduced in me in order that I move with more alacrity, urged on precisely 
by the application of that perfidious spur" (231). 
Behind this realization lurks an even more unnerving question. Why does 
consciousness, obviously necessary for the seduction of the intellectual Ar­
rhodes, need to persist after the narrator's transformation into an insectile 
robot? The narrative supplies an ad hoc explanation in the monk's sugges­
tion that humans know how to disguise themselves so as to defeat the com­
putations of an algorithmic program; thus the robot's artificial intelligence 
has been constructed so that it can put "questions to the quarry, questions 
devised by the foremost experts on the individual characteristics of the hu­
man psyche" (229). However, this explanation scarcely suffices to explain 
the active thoughts of consciousness while on the chase, or her realization 
184 T RAN S MIT TIN G: A N A LOG AND DIG I TAL 
that "I was not (after all) a lifeless mechanism equipped with a pair of hunt­
ing lungs, 1 was a being that had a mind and used it" (221). She may have 
been given a mind for purposes other than her own, but having it, she in­
tends to use it for herself. Still, her mind in its insectile state struggles with 
other cognitions remote from consciousness. As she continues in the hunt 
for months, consciousness displays a disconcerting tendency to hibernate. 
"By now 1 had forgotten the appearance of this man, and my mind, as if 
lacking the endurance of the body, particularly during the night runs, drew 
into itself till 1 did not know whom 1 was tracking, nor even if 1 was tracking 
anyone; 1 knew only that my will was to rush on, in order that the spoor of 
airborne motes singled out for me from the welling diversity of the world 
persist and intensify" (218). Here agency emerges not from subje ctivity but 
from a cognition that operates independen tly of conscious mind. 
The ambiguity of agency becomes fully apparent when the narrator, hav­
ing lost the scent, appeals to a wayside monk for help. Woven together in 
her appeal are falsehood and truth, programmed fate and her own will, pre­
scripted determination to kill Arrhodes and her hope that she can spare him. 
The monk reveals that Arrhodes had sought sanctuary but was abducted by 
kidnappers who intended to exploit his fine mind as their tool. The narra­
tor responds by saying that she can kill the abductors, but the monk is also 
aware of her nature as a programmed assassin. After refusing to give the 
robot confession because he believes she lacks free will and therefore does 
not count asa person, the monk asks if she wants the monastery's physician 
(conveniently a former roboticist) to see ifhe can defeat the program. Rea­
soning that he can give her wrong directions to Arrhodes as well as right, 
she consents to the examination. 
The physician finds that her stinger cannot be removed without killing 
her. But in addition, he also sees "a mechanism which none of your pre­
decessors possessed, a multiple memory of things superfluous to a hunting 
machine, for these are recorded feminine histories, filled with names and 
turns of phrase that lure the mind, and a conductor runs from them down 
into the fatal core. Therefore you are a machine perfected in a way unknown 
to me, and perhaps even an ultimate machine" (229). Her female gender is 
thus revealed as somehow essential to her nature even after the seduction 
plot has ended, linking her femininity to her earlier search for "chinks" in 
tlIe program that would enable her to "get to the core of it." 
Reinforcing this revelation is imagery that figures Arrhodes as her mate as 
well as her prey. Driven simultaneously by desire and program, her thoughts 
display a complex ambivalence. When the physician, in one of the anachro­
nistic touches characteristic of Lem's humor, offers to sprinkle iron filings 
(Un)masking the Agent: Stanislaw Lem's "The Mask" 185 
on her core in a move he says will slightly increase her free will, she agrees 
because she notices that they "both look at me;' implying this is a ruse to 
gain their trust (229). But when she later addresses the reader directly, ac­
knowledging "no doubt you would like to know what my true intentions 
were in that final run," her thoughts reveal a deep ambivalence about her 
goal (231). 
She says she would like to kill Arrhodes on her own accord, because she 
knows he cannot possibly love her now that she is no longer a woman, a 
remark suggesting that she still desires him. She also thinks he owes her his 
death, for otherwise she would be "big with death, having no one to whom 
to bear it" (232), a bizarre image that positions him as father to the death 
her stinger contains and therefore responsible for supporting it. Yet again, 
she wonders whether, if she kills his abductors and saves him, she might 
force him "to exchange the disgust and fear he felt towards me for helpless 
admiratio n;' thus allowing her possibly to "regain-if not him, then at least 
myself" (232), an idea that links her agency with his admiration. 
Why does Lem explicitly include the assertion that gender is connected to 
her "fatal core;' a connection apparently superfluous to the plot now that the 
robot has shed her human mask? An interview with Lem by Zoran Zivkovic 
in 1976 throws fascinating light on this question. 17 Connecting his use of a 
female persona in "The Mask" with the female character of Rheya in Solaris, 
Lem suggests that the two stories represent a significant departure from his 
usual choice of male protagonists. The passage is so revealing that it deserves 
to be quoted at length. 
Of that which still remains a mystery to me, and there's quite a good deal of it, I would 
isolate the problem of the being-a being rationally created, evolving from an em­
pirical method, created so to speak just as a house is built. That being, or rather the 
heroine Hary [Rheyal, becomes a person and in that sense acquires a dominant po­
sition in relation to her creator. This problem obsessed and occupied me for so long 
that I returned to it last year, writing a story entitled "The Mask." This piece no longer 
deals with an artificial human in the third person, and he is not described externally; 
now it is the heroine herself who speaks in the first person, she is conscious of her 
origin and status, she gradually finds out the truth about herself. Here too, we have 
the classical problem of the freedom and non-freedom of the programmed mind. 
Why was this problem so interesting that I had to treat it on two occasions? I'm 
not entirely sure. I'm also not sure why I was interested in precisely a woman, and 
not in a man or some neutral gender-which is a much more frequent occurrence in 
my writings. Not only can I not explain this to others but I am unable to explain it to 
myself. (258) 
186 T RAN 5 MIT TIN G: A N A LOG AND 0 I G I TAL 
In Solaris, Rheya appears as a creation of the sentient ocean, culled from 
the deep memories of Kelvin's mind. Visually identical to the wife whom 
Kelvin lost when she committed suicide, Rheya begins to individuate as a 
person separate from his perceptions. She has a profoundly different physi­
cal structure than humans, and she slowly becomes aware that Kelvin is lying 
to her about her true nature. Racked by guilt at his wife's suicide, Kelvin tries 
to get rid of the memories the Rheya simulacrum embodies by ejecting her 
into outer space, but the simulated Rheya simply reappears, having been 
reconstituted by the ocean. She finally asserts her autonomy in the only 
way she believes possible-by committing suicide-and her suicide note 
is the only communication the reader has from her that is not mediated 
by Kelvin's perceptions. In "The Mask;' the narrator also physically differs 
from humans, but the split in Solaris between a male narrator who speaks 
and a nonhuman female who acts is now differently arranged, so that the 
female has the power of articulation and the male-conceived program has 
the power of action. In both stories, female agency is thrown into question 
and a female character struggles to assert her independence in her relation 
with a human male who is at once her lover and antagonist. 
Whatever the reasons for this formation, it seems clear that gender is cen­
tral to the power it exercises over Lem's Imaginary. If it would be presump­
tuous of me to psychoanalyze Lem, it would be especially so here, in view 
of his comment that he himself does not know why these female charac­
ters fascinate him. I conclude nevertheless that there are deep connections 
in these narratives between the female's struggle for autonomy within the 
story and her relation to her creator, understood as a consciousness beyond 
the reach of the character's introspections, whether a sentient ocean work­
ing in collaboration with Kelvin's unconscious, an all-powerful king, or Lem 
himself. The female's alien nature thus enacts not only her difference from 
humankind but also her gender-specific difference from her male creator. 
In these stories, the female is at once the intimate mate and the terrifyingly 
alien other, bearing within herself the imprint of her creator's will as well as 
her own ambiguous agency. It is as if the female, to succeed as a character, 
has to assert an agency independent of the male mind that conjured her into 
being. The more she tears herself away, the more she achieves reality as an 
autonomous subjectivity; but the more she achieves autonom y, the more 
she resists her creator's agency and thereby threatens to defeat her putative 
purpose for being. Given these complexities, is it any wonder that she is 
compounded of life and death, love and agony? 
These complex interrelations reach explicit articulation within "The 
{Un)masking the Agent: Stanislaw Lem's "The Mask" 187 
Mask" when the monk demands to know what the narrator will do, now 
that she has received the treatment to widen slightly her margin of action. 
When she answers that she does not know-w hich, given the confused mo­
tives described above, is probably accurate-the monk responds, "You are 
my sister." Stunned, the narrator asks him what he means. "Exactly as I say 
it;' he answers, "and it means I neither raise myself above you nor humble 
myself before you, for however much we may differ, your ignorance, which 
you have confessed to me and which I believe, makes us equal in the face of 
Providence" (226-27). 
Harboring an irreducible ambiguity, the monk's response reinscribes 
within the story Lem's own inability to understand his creative choices. The 
robot can be understood as like him because she does not know if program 
will completely determine her actions, which implies that she believes she 
has free will, however slim the margin. In this sense, she is his sister because 
she counts as a human person. She may also be like him because he operates 
according to biocultural programs that dictate his actions, making his con­
sciousness unsure of how he will act, an interpretation consonant with the 
theories espoused by Deleuze, Guattari, and especially Lacan. In this read­
ing, she is his sister because he counts as a programmed entity. The entan­
gling of meanings here is like the entangling of the female character's agency 
with her creator's will, so that the story can be understood to be simultane­
ously about human agency and robotic programming, male authorship and 
female self-birthing, alien creature and ordinary human being. 
When she was given birth by the assembly line, the narrator lay passively 
on her back for most of the journey (202), as she did when the monks op­
erated on her (229). In this position she cannot wield her stinger; for that, 
she needs to be standing upright so it can emerge from its "ventral shaft" 
and thrust forward. When she thinks back on the monk's words acknowl­
edging her as his sister, she remarks, "I still could not understand them, 
but when I bent over them something warm spread through my being and 
transformed me, it was as if I had lost a heavy fetus, with which I had been 
pregnant" (230). The image recalls her thinking of the death she carries as 
Arrhodes's unborn child. Here too the most likely reference for the "heavy 
fetus" is death, but this time it is her own death as a programmed robot, after 
which she could possibly be born again as an autonomous person. But the 
ambiguity lingers, for she also imagines herself bending over the monk's ut­
terance, the position from which she can enact the king's command through 
her phallic stinger. Thus in the same thought she figuratively gives birth 
to herself as an autonomous agent by losing the king-impregnated fetus of 
death and adopts the posture that makes her a vehicle for the king's will. 
188 T RAN S MIT TIN G: A N A LOG AND DIG I TAL 
The combination of male and female sexual imagery in this passage ap­
pears also in Lem's Fiasco, his last published fiction. Michael Kandel, inter­
rogating this story as Lem's farewell text, links the male/female imagery to 
narrative patterns suggesting that to be· born is to be mortal and, in this 
sense, to receive the sting of death. 18 Kandel quotes what he identifies as a 
favorite saying of Lem's, "We are born between urine and feces;' connecting 
it with the unremittingly negative associations women have in Fiasco. He 
further suggests that Fiasco's Quintans (versions of the unknowable aliens 
that populate Lem's fictions) are associated with female sexual imagery. The 
encounter of humans and aliens that leads to the apocalyptic fiasco of the 
title thus constitutes an engagement of the explorers with the femininity 
that marked them from birth as impure incarnations. Kandel reads Fiasco 
as transgressi ve revenge against humanity for being mired in a messy biology 
that ensures humans cannot attain the purity of completely rational mind. 
These narra tive patterns form a suggestive context for the female machine 
in "The Mask." 
Her female gender re-marks her phallic stinger with the mortality Lem 
associates with pregnancy and birth, rendering it at once masculine and 
feminine (as the image of the stinger as fetus suggests). Moreover, woman 
as mediating link between an unknowable alien and a male protagonist­
the pattern of Solaris-is here reimagined as a female consciousness me­
diating between a male protagonist and an unknowable (to her) program, 
which operates untouched by the emotional turbulence and irrational de­
sires that Lem hopes humans will overcome. Further complicating these 
connections is the narrator's metallic body, which is metaphori cally comin­
gled with the female pregnancy and birth that Lem associates with "urine 
and feces;' forming an oxymoronic amalgam that at once incarnates and 
transcends biology. Perhaps these complexities help to explain why "The 
Mask" (unlike Fiasco, with its dark ending) finds in the female mind a mea­
sure of compassion that, although it cannot save Arrhodes (described as 
having a superbly rational mind about to be forced into ignoble slavery), 
nevertheless restores to him respect and possibly even love. 
This ambiguous affirmation occurs when the robot finally tracks Ar­
rhodes to the castle where he has been taken by his abductors, only to dis­
cover that a mortal struggle has taken place and that he lies unconscious and 
bleeding on the stairs. "Had he opened his eyes and been conscious, and­
in an inverted view-taken me in entirely, exactly as I stood over him, stood 
now powerlessly carrying death, in a gesture of supplication, pregnant but 
not from him, would that have been a wedding-or its unmercif ully ar­
ranged parody?" (238-39). Both "bride and butcher;' the narrator exercises 
(Un)rnasking the Agent: Stanislaw Lern's 'The Mask" 189 
her agency in the only way she can, by delaying her fatal sting while she waits 
to see if Arrhodes will recover. Ifhe does, she knows that her programming 
will enact his death, and so enmeshed is her consciousness with program 
that she does not know "if I truly desired him to wake" (238). Only when 
he "groaned once more and ceased to breathe" does she alter her posture. 
Feeling "my mind at rest;' she lies down beside him and wraps "him tightly 
in my arms, and I lay thus in the light and in the darkness through two days 
of snowstorm, which covered our bed with a sheet that did not melt. And 
on the third day the sun came up" (239). 
Resonating with the Christian story ofJesus's three days in the tomb prior 
to his resurrection, the three days continue a pattern that has marked her life 
from the beginning: her courtship lasted three days; she lingered for three 
days before beginning the hunt; and she experienced three births, first on 
the assembly line, then in her entry into language and gender, and finally 
in her metamorphosis into the insectile robot. Does the faint promise of 
resurrection hint that she can experience a fourth birth, breaking the pat­
tern and becoming at last her own person, now that she has fulfilled her 
programming? Earlier she had thought about what she would become if she 
were to abandon her goal and strike out on her own. The king would order 
robotic dogs to hunt her down as mercilessly as she pursued Arrhodes, and 
even if she were by some miracle to survive, all human society would find 
her abhorrent. Significantly, this information comes in the middle of the 
tale, so that it lingers in the reader's mind as fading memory rather than 
active narration as the story reaches its end. Granted this slight margin of 
forgetfulness, we can edge toward asking the question forbidden by the clo­
sure of the plot: what kind oflife could she be born into? Certainly not into 
the coherent subjectivity of an independent human who has never had rea­
son to question whether she has free will. But perhaps in these posthuman 
days, when the crisis of agency is far from resolved, she might count as a 
person, albeit a nonhuman one. If so, then we can say to her, with all the 
rich ambiguities that attended the monk's utterance, "You are our sister:' 
Machine and Human Interpenetr ating 
In separating consciousness from program, Lem's story anticipates the post­
human subject envisioned by Deleuze, Guattari, and Lacan, a subject in 
which consciousness, far from being the seat of agency, is left to speculate 
why she acts as she does. The character in Lem's story is increasingly aware 
that the origin of agency lies beyond the reach of consciousness, enacted by 
a computational program ultimately controlled by the external agent that 
has programmed the code to operate as it does. Even at this deep level, the 
190 T RAN 5 MIT TIN G: A N A LOG AND DIG I TAL 
ambiguity of agency continues, for program is perceived to act both as an 
agent on its own behalf and as the surrogate for the king's will. The am­
biguity is repeated within consciousness, where she perceives herself to be 
exercising agency in the margins, as it were, the gray areas where the objec­
tives of code might be implemented in ambiguous ways. In these complex 
reconfigurations of agency, the significance of envisioning the unconscious 
as a program rather than as a dark mirror of consciousness can scarcely be 
overstated, for it locates the hidden springs of action in the brute machinic 
operations of code. In this view, such visions of the unconscious as Freud's 
repressed Oedipal conflicts or Jung's collective archetyp es seem hopelessly 
anthropomorphic, for they populate the unconscious with ideas comfort­
ingly familiar to consciousness rather than with the much more alien oper­
ations of machinic code. 
Yet the estrangement from traditional ideas of mind does not stop here, 
for an even more subversive implication lurks in Lem's story, an implica­
tion that the human -sounding voice of the narrator may prevent us from 
realizing except in retrospect. Given the mechanical origin of the creature, 
even consciousness must arise from code, for as noted earlier, she has been 
manufactured rather than born. In this �ense, consciousness may also be a 
mask created to mediate between human readers and an alien core. Even 
when the machine sheds her human shell, the anthropomorphic thoughts 
of consciousness function as a mask within the mask, inviting our identifi­
cation with what must also be a result of machine code. 
Whether consciousness can ever emerge from a coded mechanism re­
mains a matter of intense debate. Robotocists such as Hans Moravec and 
Ray Kurzweil are confident that the equivalent of conscious mind can arise 
from a coded program, whether evolved through intelligent robots or orig­
inating as human consciousness uploaded into a computer. 19 Researchers 
operating with deeper familiarity with the flesh, such as Antonio Damasio, 
argue that body and mind are inextricably linked through multiple recursive 
feedback loops mediated by neurotransmitters, systems that have no physi­
cal analogs in computers. Damasio makes the point that these messages also 
provide content for the mind, especially emotions and feelings: "relative to 
the brain, the body provides more than mere support and modulation: it 
provides a basic topic for brain representations.,, 2o It is precisely the dis­
ruption of this normal integration between mind and body that makes the 
intuition ofLem's narrator seem so enigmatic, as when she explains that the 
love she "feels" for Arrhodes is at once very great and very small. 
Nevertheless, with the advent of emotional computing, evolutionary al­
gorithms, and programs capable not only of learning but of reprogram-
(Un)masking the Agent: Stanislaw Lem's "The Mask" 191 
ming themselves (as in programmable gate arrays), it no longer seems fan­
tastic that artificial minds may some day achieve self-awar eness and even 
consciousness. Brian Cantwell Smith sees this as opening "a window onto 
something to which we would not otherwise have any access: the chance to 
witness, with our own eyes, how intentional capacities can arise in a 'merely' 
physical mechanism. It is sobering, in retrospect, to realize that the fact com­
puters are computational has placed a major theoretical block in the way of 
our understanding how important they are .... Only when we let go of the 
conceit that the fact is theoretically important will we finally be able to see, 
without distraction-and thereby, perhaps at least partially to understand­
how a structured lump of clay can sit up and think." 21 The central question, 
in other words, is no longer how we as rational creatures should act in full 
possession of free will and untrammeled agency. Rather, the issue is how 
consciousness evolves from and interacts with the underlying programs that 
operate analogously to the operations of code. Whether conceived as literal 
mechanism or instructive analogy, coding technology thus becomes central 
to understanding the human condition. 
In this view, agency-l ong identified with free will and rational mind­
becomes partial in its efficacy, distributed in its location, mechanistic in its 
origin, and bound up at least as much with code as with natural language. 
We are no longer the featherless biped that can think, but the hybrid creature 
that enfolds within itself the rationality of the conscious mind and the cod­
ing operations of the machine. Who then is the agent that acts? Anticipating 
these debates, "The Mask" helps us to understand how partial, complex, and 
intermediated may be the agency we call our own. 
192 T RAN S MIT TIN G: A N A lOG AND DIG I TAL 
8 Simulating Narratives 
What Virtual Creatures Can Teach Us 
Evolvi ng Vi rtua I Creatu res 
Yearning for the light, the creatures struggle after it. In water, they grow tails and learn to 
undulate like snakes. On land, they clump along, relegated by fate and biology to rectan­
gular shapes joined together with moveable hinges. They show extraordinar y ingenuity 
in making the most of these limitations, crawling, hopping, jumping, always toward the 
light. Then their creator gives them a new goal, a colored cube reminisc ent of a squared­
off hockey puck. Put into competition with one another, the creatures learn to jostle and 
shove their opponents, to encircle the cube, to knock it out of the way so their opponents 
can't reach it. When they meet a new opponent, they develop counterstrategies to meet 
these challenges. I marvel at their adaptability , cleverness, and determination. 
This passage describes my initial interpretations of Karl Sims's evolution­
ary simulation "Evolved Virtual Creature s:' 1 Having watched various au­
diences view this videotape, I can say that my interpretations are typical. 
Invariably, viewers attribute to these simulated creatures motives, inten­
tions, goals, and strategies. Even people (like me) who know perfectly well 
that they are watching visualizations of computer programs still inscribe the 
creatures into narratives of defeat and victory, cheering the winners, urging 
on the losers, laughing at the schlemiels. Much more is going on here than 
simple anthropomorphic projection. "Evolved Virtual Creatures" is a labo­
ratory not only in evolution (its intended purpose), but also in the impact 
of distributed cognitive systems on traditional modes of description, analy­
sis, and understanding. Here the interactions between analog consciousness 
and digital program are located at a more conventional site than in chap­
ter 7. Whereas that chapter traced the complex dynamics by which an ana­
log consciousness interacted with an algorithmic program within the same 
body, here the focus is on embodied humans outside the computer interact­
ing with digital simulations inside the computer. The intermediations that 
take place across the screenic interface operate in both directions at once: 
we anthropomorphize the virtual creatures while they computationalize us. 
In its broader implicatio ns, the dynamic suggests further insights into the 
realist/constructivist divide that we encountered in chapter 1, figured there 
as a tension between seeing computation as means or metaphor. The em­
phasis in this chapter will be on interpreting that tension in terms of the 
transmigrations of inscription versus the embodied instantiations of ma­
terial entities. But I am getting ahead of my story. Let us first explore the 
construction and dynamics of the virtual creatures. 
Compared to the world in which we live, the environment of "Evolved 
Virtual Creatures" is extremely simple, so simple that it can be described al­
most completel y.2 How to define the boundaries of this world is a centrally 
important issue to which I will return. For now, let us consider the world to 
be the computer programs, the hardware on which the programs run, and 
the visualization routines that render these programs as pixilated images of 
embodied creatures. Even this simple world requires three different modes 
of interroga tion: what it is (the material); what it does (the operational ); 
and what it means (the symbolic). Feedback loops connect the material, 
operational, and symbolic into an integrated, recursively structured hier­
archy reminiscent of the dynamic hierarchies central to the computational 
worldview discussed in chapters 1 and 2. Emergence is the desired goal of 
this simulation, as with many others. At the bottom of the hierarchy flicker 
changing voltages that join the material and operational to create bits, the 
semiotic markers of one and zero. Logic gates structure signals into bits; bit 
patterns are fashioned into compiler languages; compiler languages underlie 
programming languages; and programming languages such as LISP define 
functions. By the time we arrive at functions, the level at which Karl Sims 
discusses his design for "Evolved Virtual Creatures;' we have reached a point 
where the patterns created by the programmer become explicit. Instantiated 
in these patterns are the programmer's purposes in creating this particular 
hierarchy of materio-semiotic codes. 
Sims's design follows John Koza's proposal that evolutionary programs 
should take advantage of modular structures that can be repeated over and 
over to create more complex structures. 3 The strategy appears often in na­
ture; a fern, for example, displays a growth algorithm that uses the same 
basic shape for stems, branches, and leaves.4 Like the fern, Sims's creatures 
are built using functions that are repeated with variations to create self­
similar morphologies. One function specifies blocks that are multiplied and 
attached at various positions on a central rectangle to create a "trunk" with 
several "limbs:' Another function specifies the kind of articulatio n, or joint, 
194 T RAN S MIT TIN G: A N A LOG AND DIG I TAL 
between blocks; still another dictates the degrees of freedom through which 
a joint can move. Recursive loops within a function multiply the effects of 
that function to create more of the same, for example, more limbs of the 
same shape. Recursive loops between functions allow different parts of the 
creature to evolve together, so that the "brain" or central control circuits 
coadaptively change with the morpholog y. The advantages of these modular 
structures, achieved by using programs called directed graphs, are twofold. 
In addition to economy of description (because the same module can be 
used repeatedly with minor variations ), the modules also ensure that some 
structure will persist in the midst of mutation and variation. If all of the pro­
gramming elements were subject to mutation as independent entities, the 
resulting complexity would quickly become too chaotic to track effectively. 
When the elements are grouped and mutated as modules, the spectrum of 
possible variations is reduced to a manageable level. 
The next step moves from the d�sign of individual creatures to a pop­
ulation of creatures. With this step, the symbolic aspects of the program 
become apparent. The idea is to evolve creatures by introducing diversity 
into the population and defining fitness criteria that determine which crea­
tures get to reproduce. Diversity is accomplished through sexual reproduc­
tion that, following various schemes, combines portions of one creature's 
genotype with another's. Additional diversity is introduced through mu­
tation. Behaviors take place within an environment governed by an arti­
factual physics, which includes friction, inertia, momentum, gravity, light, 
three-dimensional space, and time. Fitness values are determined according 
to how successful the creatures are in reaching various goals-following a 
light, moving through fluids and across terrains, cornering the puck while 
keeping an opponent away from it. To facilitate adaptation to these goals, the 
creatures are given photo sensors that can evolve neurologica lly to respond 
to a beacon, the presence of the puck, and positions of competitors, each 
represented by a differently colored light source. 
The designer's intentions, implicit in the fitness criteria he specifies and 
the values he assigns to these criteria, become explicit when he intervenes 
to encourage '"interestin g''' evolutions and prohibit "inelegant" ones. 5 For 
example, in some runs of the program creatures evolved who achieved lo­
comotion by exploiting a bug in the way conservation of momentum was 
defined in the world's artifactual physics: they developed appendages like 
paddles and moved by hitting themselves with their own paddles. "It is 
important that the physical simulation be reasonably accurate when opti­
mizing for creatures that can move within it;' Sims writes. ''Any bugs that 
allow energy leaks from non-conservation, or even round-of f errors, will 
Simulating Narratives: What Virtual Creatures Can Teach Us 195 
inevitably be discovered and exploited by the evolving creatures." 6 In the 
competitions, some creatures evolved to exceptionally tall statures and con­
trolled the cube by simply falling over on it before their opponents could 
reach it. 7 To compensate, Sims used a formula that took into account the 
creature's height when determining its starting point in the competition: 
the taller the creature, the farther back it had to start. The conjunction of 
processes through which we come to narrativize such images clearly shows 
that the meaning of the simulation emerges from a dynamic interaction be­
tween the creator, the virtual world (and the real world on which its physics 
is modeled), the creatures, the computer running the programs, and (in the 
case of visualizat ions) the viewer watching the creatures cavort. In much 
the same way that the recursive loops between program modules allow a 
creature's morphology and brain to coevolve, so recursive loops allow the 
designer's intent, the creatures, the virtual world, and the visualizations to 
co evolve into a narrative that viewers find humanly meaningf ul. 
An adequate account of the simulatio n, then, requires expanding the 
boundaries of the system beyond the programs and the computer to include 
the virtual world, the creator, and the viewer. The evolutionary dynamics of 
this larger world function as a distributed cognitive system composed ofhu­
man and nonhuman actors, each of which acts as an independent cognizer. 
As Michael Dyer has noted in another context, with distributed cognitive 
systems there is no free lunch: because all the parts interrelate, if one part of 
the system can function only as a relatively low-level cognizer, the slack has 
to be taken up somewhere else by making another part smarter. 8 Compared 
to artificial intelligence, artificial-life simulations typically front-load less 
intelligence in the creatures and build more intelligence into the dynamic 
process of co adapting to well-defined environmental constraints. When the 
environment fails to provide the appropriate constraints to stimulate de­
velopment, the creator steps in, using his human intelligence to supply ad­
ditional adaptive constraints, for instance when Sims put a limit on how 
tall the creatures can get. But it would be a mistake to see the creator as the 
court oflast resort. The point of such simulations is that the creator does not 
always need to be as smart as his creatures, for he is counting on their ability 
to come up with solutions that have not occurred to him. "When a genetic 
language allows virtual entities to evolve with increasing complexity;' Sims 
observes, "it is common for the resulting system to be difficult to understand 
in detail. In many cases it would also be difficult to design a similar system 
using traditional methods. Techniques such as these have the potential of 
surpassing those limits that are often imposed when human understand­
ing and design is important. The examples presented here suggest that it 
196 T RAN 5 MIT TIN G: A N A LOG AND 0 I G I TAL 
might be easier to evolve virtual entities exhibiting intelligent behavior than 
it would be for humans to design and build them." 9 
Since distributed cognitive systems co evolve, the functioning of anyone 
actor can be understood fully only in relation to that actor's interactions 
with all the other actors. In this context, the narratives humans create for 
themselves when they watch "Evolved Virtual Creatures" become involved 
in the coevolutionary processes. Spliced into a distributed cognitive system, 
we create these narratives not by ourselves, but as part of a dynamic evo­
lutionary process in which we are coadapting to other actors in the system, 
including pixilated images on a CRT screen and voltages flickering beyond 
the scale of human perception. 
Evolving Narratives 
When we attribute motives and intentions to Sims's virtual creatures, we in­
terpolate their behaviors into narratives in which events are causally related 
to one another and beings respond to their environment in purposeful ways. 
As Alex Argyros, among others, has suggested, the creation of narrative may 
itself be an evolutionary adaptation of remarkable importance. 10 With their 
emphasis on causality, meaningf ul temporal sequence, and interrelation be­
tween behavior and environment, narratives allow us to construct models of 
how others may be feeling and acting, models that coevolve with our ongo­
ing interior monologues describing and interpreting to ourselves our own 
feelings and behaviors. When for some reason narratives cannot be con­
structed, the result is likely to be a world without order, a world of inex­
plicable occurrences and bewildering turns of events. Simon Baron-Cohen 
describes such a world in Mindblindne ss, suggesting that it is characteristic 
of how autistic people perceive their environment. As Baron-Cohen points 
out, autism is associated with an inability to construct narratives that will 
make sense of the behaviors of others. Autistic people have no model in 
their minds for how others act; consequen tly, they perceive most actions as 
inexplicable and frightening. Another graphic description of what happens 
when narratives fail is rendered by Joan Didion in The White Album. Re­
counting a time in her life when she "began to doubt the premises of all 
the stories I have ever told myself;' she lost her sense of living in a coher­
ent world; for as she emphasizes, "we tell ourselves stories in order to live" 
(11). These accounts demonstrate that narrative has an explanatory force 
that literally makes the world make sense. It is easy to see why the creation 
of narratives would confer evolutionary advantages on creatures who con­
struct them. Without the presuppositions embedded in narratives, most of 
the accomplishments of Homo sapiens could not have happened. 
Simulating Narratives: What Virtual Creatures Can Teach Us 197 
When we construct narratives about virtual creatures, we use an evolved 
behavior to understand the evolved behaviors acted out in the simulation. 
It is no accident that in this scenario a feedback loop appears whose recur­
sive structure resembles the recursive structures of the programs generat­
ing Sims's virtual creatures. We saw in chapter 1 that across a wide variety 
of research programs-Stephen Wolfram's cellular automata, Edward Fred­
kin's digital mechanics, Harold Morowitz's cosmic emergences, and Stuart 
Kauffman's claims for the evolution of life at the edge of chaos-recursi ve 
loops are associated with the emergence of complexity and, consequen tly, 
with life, consciousness, and intelligent behavior. 11 Humberto Maturana 
and Francisco Varela, for example, have suggested that consciousness con­
sists of the ability to make representations of representations (of represen­
tations of representations ... ).12 Luc Steels has named this phenomenon 
of spiraling recursions "second-order [and higher] emergence" and under­
scored its importance for artificial-li fe simulations. 13 First -order emergence, 
as discussed in chapter 1, is any behavior or property that cannot be found in 
either a system's individual components or their additive properties, but that 
arises, often unpredic tably, from the interaction of a system's components. 
Second-order emergence arises when a system develops a behavior that en­
hances its ability to develop adaptive behaviors-that is, when it evolves the 
capacity to evolve. 14 At this point, the simulation really takes off, so it is not 
surprising that creating such dynamic hierarchies is now the announced 
goal of artificial- life researchers, as discussed in chapter l. 
In addition to recursive structures, another important element in the 
creation of narrative is the ability to "see" a scene, either literally or meta­
phorically in the mind's eye. 15 With training and experience, humans are 
able to translate a large variety of inputs into these imagined scenarios. No 
doubt an experienced programmer such as Karl Sims can look at a pro­
gram's functions and "see" the morphologies and behaviors of his creatures 
with no more difficulty than an experienced reader of fiction can "see" Is­
abel Archer in Henry James's aptly entitled novel, The Portrait of a Lady. 
These translation processes draw upon and extend capabilities developed in 
evolutionary history. Our sophisticated perceptual/co gnitive visual process­
ing evolved coadaptively with our movement through three-dimensional 
spaces; it makes sense, then, that the creation of narrative is tied up deeply 
with imagining scenes in which actions can take place. When Sims chooses 
some of his creatures for visual rendering, he taps into this evolutionary 
history by creating pixilated images that, through culture and training as 
well as biologically determined capacities, we recognize as representations of 
three-dimensional creatures. Articulated in this lingua franca ofbio-cultural 
198 T RAN 5 MIT TIN G: A N A LOG AND DIG I TAL 
perception, the images allow narr ative to kick in with maximum force, for 
we "see" the action in terms we can easily relate to our ongoing narrativizing 
of the world. 16 
Let us turn now from the structural preconditions for the creation of 
narratives to their content. As Jerome Bruner has pointed out, one of the 
principal purposes narrative serves is to create a sense of why things hap­
pen.1? Typically, the narratives we create inscribe actions into a set of more 
or less canonical stories that invest actions with meaning. When Joan Lu­
cariello studied narratives created by young children, she discovered that 
unexpected actions (e.g., a description that has Mary crying when she sees 
her birthday cake and dumping a glass of water all over the candles) stimu-
1ated the most vigorous narrative creation. 18 To make sense of these strange 
actions, the children invented a wide variety of stories that had the effect 
of suturing the actions back into a predictable and expected range of be­
haviors. In one small child's account, Mary was upset because her mother 
would not let her wear the dress she wanted, and that is why she cried and ru­
ined her cake. Presented with noncanonical actions, the children sometimes 
employed another narrative strategy, namely, marking the behavior as un­
usual or deviant, which again allowed the social fabric of expectations to be 
maintained by bracketing this behavior as an exception. 19 It is surely no ac­
cident that in his evolutionary simulations Sims designs programs that can 
be "seen" as creatures striving after a goal and winning against competitors, 
for these are among the most canonical narratives in traditional accounts 
of evolutionary history (not to mention in Western capitalist society). The 
banality of the narrative content suggests that what needs to be sutured here 
is not so much deviant action as the deviant actor. When we "see" the virtual 
creatures engaging in these activities, we have models in our minds for what 
these behaviors mean, and so the creatures, despite their odd shapes and 
digital insides, seem familiar and understanda ble. 
At this point, some readers may object that however functional narrative 
may be for everyday social intercourse, it leads to serious mistakes when 
we use it to understand virtual creatures. Not only do these creatures have 
nothing in their heads; in a literal sense, they have no heads (because they are 
virtual, and because their morphology is a series of blocks, the uppermost of 
which we "see" as the head). Attributing desires to these clumps of blocks is 
as ridiculous as thinking that electrons have motives. Well, yes and no. Cer­
tainly the creatures are merely computer programs that have evolved certain 
behaviors (and therefore attributes we interpret as embodied action toward 
a goal) as a result of the fitness criteria used to select which genotypes will 
be allowed to reproduce-or more accurately, which coding arrangements 
Simulating Narratives: What Virtual Creatures Can Teach Us 199 
will be replicated with what variations, since "genotyp e" and "reproduce" 
are themselves metaphors designed to reinforce the analogy with biological 
life forms. On the other hand, these programs are designed to simulate bio­
logical evolution, and they are visually rendered so that narrative inscription 
will take place. Thus there is a sense in which we respond corr ectly, not mis­
takenly, when we attribute desires to these virtual creatures, for everything 
about them has been crafted to ensure that such interpretations will occur. 
One way to think about this situation is to note that distributed cognition 
also implies distributed causality. The creatures may not have motives and 
intentions, but the programmer does (at least in the conventional under­
standing of human actions). Remember that what we "see" in the visualiza­
tion is the global result of present and past in teractions between all the actors 
in this recursi vely structured complex adaptive system. When Sims decides 
which fitness criteria to use, which programs to eliminate, and which to 
render visually; he injects doses of his human intelligence into the system, 
along with the attributes we conventionally assign to humans, including de­
sires and intentions. Moreover, his published articles make clear that his 
intentions affected virtually every aspect of the design, so it is not possi­
ble to bracket out his intentions by saying that we should consider only the 
programs in themselv es, not the global system. 
Human intention ality, then, infects the creatures, marking them with a 
trace that cannot be eradicated. Recall that in this recursively structured 
complex adaptive system, all of the actors are involved in, and therefore 
affected by, the interactio ns. Is it also the case that the blind operations of 
the programs infect the humans, marking them with a trace that cannot 
be eradicated? To entertain this hypothesis is to suppose that the human 
tendency to anthropomorphize the creatures has as its necessary and un­
avoidable supplement a countertendency to "see" human behavior as a com­
puter program carrying out instructions, a proposition explored at length 
in chapter 7 through Stanislaw Lem's story "The Mask." We may think we 
have desires and intentions (just as we think the creatures do), but our be­
haviors can be explained materially and operationally in terms similar to 
Sims's programs, as we saw in the theories of Deleuze, Guattari, and Lacan, 
discussed in chapter 7. This argument also has been made (admittedly in 
different terms) by researchers in artificial intelligence and artificial life, in­
cluding Rodney Brooks and Marvin Minsky. 20 In their view, human behav­
ior is the result of many semiautonomous agents running simple programs. 
To illustrate, Minsky suggests that "love" is a combination of one agent run­
ning an "attraction" program and another agent running a program that 
shuts off the "critical" agen t.21 Such proposals indicate that anthropomor-
200 T RAN 5 MIT TIN G: A N A LOG AND DIG I TAL 
phizing Sims's creatures is accompanied by what I might call, for lack of a 
better term, "computationalizing" humans. According to the logic of this 
relation, blind programs engaging in human-like behaviors make plausible 
the interpretation of human behaviors as blind programs. We humanize the 
virtual creatures; they computationalize us; and the recursive loops cycling 
through the system bind both behaviors together in a network of complex 
coadaptations-which leaves us with an interesting question: what happens 
now to narrative and its function of making human sense of the world? 
Computing the Human:Analog and Digital Subjects 
Following the work of Michel Foucault on the death of the author,22 Mark 
Poster, in What's the Matter with the Internet? has expanded on Foucault's 
fourth and final stage of the author's disappearance to suggest that digital 
technologies and cultures are bringing about a significant reconfiguration 
of contemporary subjectivity.23 To illuminate this shift, Poster posits two 
kinds of subjects: analog and digital. The analog subject is based on re­
lations of resembla nce.24 Although Poster does not use this example, the 
mind/heart conjunction illustrates the concept. Feelings are imagined as 
conjoined with the heart, so that what is at the forefront of the mind is 
mirrored by what is deep inside. Similarly, in the English Renaissance-a 
period dominated, as Foucault has shown, by cultural relations based on 
analogy25-human sperm was thought to contain a homunculus resem­
bling the man who would grow from the sperm. Walnuts were considered 
to be "brain food" because walnut meat resembles the human cortex. Ana­
logical relations require that the integrity of the units taken to resemble one 
another be preserved; otherwise, the correspondence is lost and the rela­
tion broken. If one tosses a handful of walnuts into a blender and turns it 
on, the walnuts are pulverized and no longer resemble a cortex. If walnuts 
were available only in this form, it seems unlikely that they would have. been 
considered good food for thought. Attributes of the analog subject include, 
then, a depth model of subjectivity in which the most meaningful part of the 
self is seen to reside deep inside the body, and the self is further linked with 
units possessing a natural integrity of form and scale that must be preserved 
if the subject is to be maintained intact. 
Poster focuses his discussion of subjectivity on the "figure of the au­
thor" (86), whose construction during the seventeenth and eighteenth cen­
turies required a number of related events, including an increase in liter­
acy, "diminishing personal authority relations" (89), the spread of markets 
that made books into capitalist commodities, and legal systems of copy­
right (89). These developments facilitated defining an individual as "interior 
Simulating Narratives: What Virtual Creatures Can Teach Us 201 
consciousness, which could then be externalized first in manuscript, then 
in print" (89). Thus in Poster's view, analog subjectivity is bound up deeply 
with the dominance of print culture. The origins of print culture are rooted 
in alphabetic writing, which of course evolved much earlier than the devel­
opment of capitalism and copyright. Poster notes that alphabetic writing 
broke the pictorial resemblance that connected an ideogram to the object 
represented, and in doing so it forged a new connection between a sound 
and a mark. This connection differed from pictorial writing in that the asso­
ciation of sound with mark was entirely conventional, and the resulting ar­
bitrariness made alphabetic writing much more economical than ideograms 
(thousands of ideograms versus some thirty letters of the Greek alphabet ). 26 
The movement from ideogram to alphabet entailed another shift as well, 
for now the resemblance was not between word and thing but, as Poster 
puts it, between "a written symbol and its utterance, between two forms 
of language, writing and speech. The relation between the word and thing 
becomes conventional, arbitrary, whereas the relation within language be­
tween trace and voice is stronger, more direct" (81). Thus to the extent that 
print can be considered an analog medium, it connects voice to mark and 
thus author as speaker to the page. 
Reinforcing the sense that print texts are "voiced" by an individualistic 
creator is the uniformity, stability, and durability of print, a point Mark 
Rose touches upon in Authors and Owners, discussed in chapter 6 and de­
veloped independ ently by Poster. "The reader could return time and again 
to the page and re-examine the words it contained:' Poster writers. "A read­
erly imaginary evolved which paid homage to this wonderful author who 
was always there in his or her words .... The world of analog authors was 
leisurely, comforting, reassuring to the cognitive function, and expanding 
through continuous exercise of the visual function" (93). Literary history is 
largely outside the scope of Poster's analysis, but it has long been recognized 
in literary studies that the novel reinforced the depth model of interiority 
and the stability and individuality of the analog subject. As we saw in chapter 
6, the legal fight to insure copyright, the cult of the author, print technolog y, 
and print culture worked hand in glove to create a depth model of subjec­
tivity in which analog resemblances guaranteed that the surface of the page 
was matched by an imagined interior within the author, which evoked and 
also was produced by a similarly imagined interior in the reader. 27 
In contrast to this dynamic are the correspondences that produce the 
digital subject. Digital technologies employ hierarchical program structures 
similar to those we see at work in "Evolved Virtual Creatures:' The farther 
down into the coding levels the programmer goes, the less intuitive is the 
202 T RAN 5 MIT TIN G: A N A LOG AND DIG I TAL 
code and the more obscure the meaning; hence the importance of hiding 
levels of code with which one is not immedia tely concerned, as discussed in 
chapter 2. Moreover, with genetic algorithms and programs, the important 
developments are emergent properties that appear at the global level of the 
system once the programs are set running. The mantra for such programs 
is "simple rules, complex behaviors;' which implies that the farther down 
into the system one goes, the less interesting it is.28 Note how this digital 
model differs from the analog subject, where depth implies a meaningf ul 
interiority. 
Although the digital subject has depth, the structures governing the re­
lation of surface to interior differ dramatically from the analog subject. 
The digital subject-say, one of Sims's virtual creatures '----instantiates hier­
archical coding levels that operate through a dynamic of fragmentation and 
recombination.29 Unlike analog subjectivity, where morphological resem­
blance imposes constraints on how much the relevant units can be broken 
up, the digital subject allows for and indeed demands more drastic frag­
mentation. This difference can be seen easily in the greater fragmentation of 
digital technologies compared to print. In traditional typesetting before the 
advent of computers, each letter in the alphabet was treated as a distinct unit; 
in speech, the corresponding phoneme also acts as an intact unit. In contrast 
are digital sampling techniques, where sound waves may be sampled some 
forty thousand times a second, digitally manipulated , and then recombined 
to produce the perception of smooth analog speech.30 In fact, emergence 
depends on such fragmentat ion, for it is only when the programs are broken 
into small pieces and recombined that unexpected adaptive behaviors can 
arise. Instead of a depth model of meaningful interiority, the digital subject 
manifests global behaviors that cannot be predicted by looking at the most 
basic levels of code with which the program starts. As discussed in chapter 2, 
complexity becomes visible first at high levels of code, not at the basic levels 
of machine language. Moreover, the complex emergences bears no analog­
ical resemblance to the mind-numbing simplicity of ones and zeros. 
To summarize: the analog subject implies a depth model of interiority, 
relations of resemblance between the interior and the surface that guarantee 
the meaning of what is deep inside, and the kind of mind/soul correspon­
dence instantiated by and envisioned within the analog technologies of print 
culture. The digital subject implies an emergent complexity that is related 
through hierarchical coding levels to simple underlying rules, a dynamic 
of fragmentation and recombination that gives rise to emergent properties, 
and a disjunction between surface and interior that is instantiated by and 
envisioned within the digital technologies of computational culture. 
Simulating Narratives: What Virtual Creatures Can Teach Us 203 
What happens when we become part of a complex adaptive system by 
"seeing" the virtual creatures? I suggested earlier that two processes are at 
work simultaneously: on the one hand, humans anthropomorphize the vir­
tual creatures; and on the other hand, the virtual creatures computationalize 
the humans. The narratives we construct as we watch the virtual creatures 
inscribe their behaviors into an analog world, but observant viewers will no­
tice details that cannot be explained by supposing that the complex surfaces 
are matched analogically with equally complex interiors. One creature, for 
example, indicates through its movements that it samples the positions of 
the puck and the opponent once at the beginning of the competition and 
thereafter ignores all cues about position.31 Clearly, here is an instance of a 
relatively simple program creating an impression of surface complexity that 
contrasts with the simplicity of the underlying rules. As Rodney Brooks fre­
quendypoints out with the robots he builds, complexity is in the mind of the 
observer, who attributes to the robot's emergent behaviors more complex 
thought processes and motivations than in fact are there. 32 Another exam­
ple is provided by a small mobile robot made by Lego that, on the surface, 
appears to be capable of following a black line on a white ground. 33 A viewer 
might suppose that inside the robot is an intelligent program that has an in­
ternal representation of a line, and that the robot can so accurately match 
this representation with what it sees that it can distinguish many different 
kinds of lines, including ones that are curved and even looped. Underly­
ing the surface complexity, however, are three simple rules: if from white 
to black, turn right; if from black to white, turn left; if no change, continue 
straight. Although the robot follows the line overall, this is an emergent be­
havior. In fact, it simply swerves right when it first comes across a black line 
on a white background and then, as it begins to veer off the line, immedi­
ately turns again, so its "line-following" behavior consists of a series of small 
swerves that a viewer may interpret as corrections the robot initiates to make 
sure it follows the line. Simple rules, complex behavior. 
On the global level, our narratives about the virtual creatures can be 
considered devices that suture together the analog subjects we still are, as 
we move in the three-dimensional spaces in which our biological ancestors 
evolved, with the digital subjects we are becoming as we interact with virtual 
environments and digital technologies. In fact, this chapter can be read as 
one of several narratives in this book designed to accomplish just such a su­
turing. Hence my insistence on using the plural first person, despite the risk 
of indulging in oppressive universalisms, for I want to insist that my readers 
and I participate every day of our lives in the distributed cognitive complex 
adaptive systems created by digital technologies in conjunction with global 
204 T RAN S MIT TIN G: A N A lOG AND 0 I G I TAL 
capitalism. So pervasive have these technologies become that it would be dif­
ficult to find anyone who remains completely outside their reach. Certainly, 
here in the United States their presence is ubiquitous. In this sense, we do 
not need to slot Sims's videotape into the VCR to watch virtual creatures. 
We see them all the time, all around us, including when we look into the 
mirror. 
Scientific Realism and the Transmigration of Form 
Let me return to the traditional idea that literary texts are immaterial, cri­
tiqued in chapter 4, to explore how the intermediating dynamics of analog 
and digital extend this critique beyond literary texts to the broader field of 
inscriptions, including scientific inscriptions. As I hinted at the beginning 
of this chapter, such considerations are relevant because they shed light on 
the question posed in chapter I, namely, whether the Regime of Computa­
tion should be understood as a metaphor pervasive in contemporary culture 
and society, or as an accurate description of reality. It will be useful to place 
this discussion in the context of scientific realism and how it differs from 
constructi vism. 
For the realist, information about physical reality is structured so that 
it flows from the material (say, a field of morning glories of varied colors) 
through the operational (experiments in breeding that operate upon the 
plants and plant genomes to isolate colors from one another) to the sym­
bolic (graphs and charts showing how the colors migrate back to an equi­
librium distribution after being separated) . The closer the researcher is to 
the embodied reality of the plants, the fuzzier the picture is likely to be as 
various sources of "noise" and "contamination" complicate the regularities 
presumed to be revealed by such inscriptions as graphs and charts. The idea 
is to remove the noise or, failing that, to compensate for it as much as possi­
ble in the experimental design and subsequent analysis, so that the form of 
the underlying regularities becomes sharp and well-defined. 
In the movement from embodied reality to inscription, much is gained 
and some things are lost. The most important gains, of course, are the reg­
ularities revealed through the inscriptions, a point to which I will return. 
Also important is the implication that once these regularities are durably 
inscribed, they can circulate through different media without affecting their 
meaning. IfI xerox the chart showing morning glory color distribution and 
discuss it with my research seminar, everyone assumes we are seeing the 
same graph that appeared in the scientific journal, even though the method 
of producing the image and the materials composing it (toner ink and copier 
paper) differ from the original. Similarly, if the researcher illustrates a lecture 
Simulating Narratives: What Virtual Creatures Can Teach Us 205 
on her work with slides of the graphs, these count as the same graphs printed 
on the journal pages. The case would be otherwise if we examined morning 
glory plants. Say I buy morning glory plants at Home Depot and take them 
to my seminar. Since they are obviously not the same plants the researcher 
examined in her test fields some months earlier, questions would inevitably 
arise about material differences that may exist between our plants and hers. 
Material embodiments do not circulate effortlessly because they are always 
instantiated, specific, and located in a certain time and place. By contrast, 
inscriptions can circulate because cultural conventions privilege the forms 
expressed by the inscriptions over their instantiations in particular media 
such as print, Xerox, and photographic negative, which are regarded as pas­
sive vehicles for the transmission of the forms. 34 
Normally one says that inscriptions are transportable or transmissible, 
but perhaps a more appropriate term to describe their circulation is "trans­
migration:' Just as the soul, conceived as a disembodied entity, is thought 
to move from one corporeal body to another in transmigration, so the ab­
stract form of the inscription is counted as moving from one incorporation 
to another, despite differences between material instantia tions. A partial ex­
ception to this convention is the signature, which is presumed to embody 
the signer's material presence and so not to be transmigratable from one 
medium to another. A photocopy of a will does not count the same as the 
original signed document. This presumption of embodiment appears to be 
giving way with the spread of new communication technologies; faxes, for 
example, are increasingly accepted as legally binding documents. Even here, 
however, there continues to be some whiff of embodiment, for a fax occupies 
a different legal position than e-mail, which has no signatures that can be 
linked with embodiment. 
Inscription, then, is crucially important to the transformation of embod­
ied reality into abstract forms. Bruno Latour and Steve Woolgar, imagining 
themselves to be naive anthropologists visiting a biological laboratory, em­
phasize that what would first strike such observers is the "strange mania 
for inscription" that obsesses the scientific workers, from laboratory tech­
nicians scribbling in laboratory notebooks to senior scientists writing jour­
nal articles.35 Defining an inscription device as "any item of apparatus or 
particular configuration of such items which can transform a material sub­
stance into a figure or diagram," Latour and Woolgar note that "inscriptions 
are regarded as having a direct relationship to the original substance" (51). 
For our purposes, it is worth noting that many, perhaps most, scientific in­
struments produce inscriptions through morphological proportio nality to 
physical properties. Sound waves hit a membrane, and the vibrations cap-
206 T RAN 5 MIT TIN G: A N A LOG AND DIG I TAL 
ture an analog resemblance, which is conveyed through a linking mecha­
nism to a pen tracing a line on graph paper, and the line in turn bears an 
analog resemblance to the vibrations. Even though scientific instrumenta­
tion increasingly uses digital technologies for analysis and imaging, some 
portions of the chain that employ analog representation usually remain, 
typically at the beginning and end of the process. Further developing the 
discussions in chapters 1 and 2 about the synergistic interactions between the 
digital and analog, I will here call this digital/analog structure the "Oreo;' 
for like the two black biscuits sandwiching a white filling between them, the 
initial and final analog representations connected with embodied materi­
alities sandwich between them a digital middle where fragmentations and 
recombinations take place. 
An example of an Oreo structure is positron emission tomography, or 
PET images. The process begins with the ingestion of radioactive substances 
by the patient. Using analog proportiona lity, an instrument senses the decay 
of these substances, and the results are inscribed as an array of numerical 
data. These data are then digitally analyzed and manipulated to create life­
like analogical resemblances that humans interpret as metabolic processes 
occurring within the cortex. These images are often interpreted as "thinking 
in action;' but they may be understood more accurately as the Oreo effect 
in action. Analog resemblance appears at the bottom of the Oreo because 
the embodied materiality of radioactive decay connects to the apparatus of 
inscription through relations of resemblance. Only after this resemblance 
has been captured as a number indicating the level of radioactivity at a 
certain position in the brain can it be digitized and manipulated as part 
of a data array. Similarly, at the top of the Oreo analog resemblance is the 
mode best suited to the sophisticated visual/cog nitive perceptual skills we 
have developed through eons of moving through immensely complex three­
dimensional environments. Compare the accessibility of a PET image with 
that of a data array displaying numbers that stand for radioactivity levels. 
It would take hours or days to extract from this display the intuitive under­
standing we gain from a glance at the image. Where linkages between em­
bodied materialities are key, analog resemblances are also likely to be crucial. 
By contrast, the digital middle of the Oreo also offers distinctive advan­
tages. Moving from analog resemblance to coding arrangements opens pos­
sibilities for leveraging that is unthinkable with analog resemblance, which 
by virtue of being a resemblance must preserve proportional similarity. The 
difference can be illustrated with a typewriter and a computer word pro­
cessing program. To make a letter darker on a typewriter, proportio nately 
more ink and/ or pressure must be applied for each letter. To make a screen of 
Simulating Narratives: What Virtual Creatures Can Teach Us 207 
letters bold, a single keystroke will suffice. Coding arrangements have pow­
erful transformative properties precisely because they have been freed from 
the morphological resemblances of analog technologies. The power of codes 
should not, however, obscure the fact that the bold letters on screen also 
have a material basis; at the point where the embodied materiality of chang­
ing voltages is transformed into binary code, analog resemblance necessarily 
reenters the picture. 
To clarify this point, let us consider in more detail how electronic voltages 
are fashioned into a bit stream. As we saw in chapter 2, the voltages are rarely, 
if ever, captured in their initial phase as the discrete step function we are ac­
customed to call one and zero. Rather, the voltages as initially inscribed have 
a "fall-off" error, a trailing off that represents the noise of embodiment as it 
is registered by the electronic inscription apparatus. Sophisticated electron­
ics are necessary to rectify this "error" and make it into the binary signals of 
one and zero. Although we may think of the computer as the digital middle 
of the PET scan, it too has an analog bottom and, insofar as humans need to 
interact with its processes, an analog top as well. Wherever different embod­
ied materialities are linked, analog resemblance is likely to enter the picture, 
for it is the dynamic that mediates between the noise of embodiment and 
the clarity of form. 
Let me return now to inquire about the status of the forms transmigrat­
ing through inscriptions, an issue that goes to the heart of the differences 
between realist and constructivist viewpoints. From a realist point of view, 
the forms are always already instantiated in the embodied reality, and the 
inscriptions merely reveal their true nature. From a constructivist point of 
view such as that articulated by Bruno Latour in Science in Action, the forms 
do not precede the inscriptions but are produced by them. In making this 
argument, constructivists point toward the contingencies and local condi­
tions that always accompany embodied reality: the air pump cannot pro­
duce the same results in Holland as in England;36 two equivalent scientific 
instruments cannot be calibrated to produce the same results unless some­
one who knows how to calibrate the first instrument physically travels to the 
second one.37 Few doubt that regularities exist in nature, but the problem 
comes when these regularities are seen as "laws" that can be abstracted from 
embodied contexts and expressed as the transmigrating forms of scientific 
inscriptions. As Evelyn Fox Keller wittily puts it, every scientist knows what 
hard work it is to get nature to obey the laws of nature. Does nature count 
as the abstracted form or the embodied materiality, which is always more 
complex than the form allows? 
Whereas the realist assumes that information is structured so that it flows 
208 T RAN S MIT TIN G: A N A LOG AND 0 I G I TAL 
from the material through the operational to the symbolic, the construc­
tivist often assumes that it flows from the symbolic (Enlightenment ideas 
about clarity of vision as an enactment of rationality) through the opera­
tional (Bentham's plans for a model prison) to the material (the construc­
tion of the Panoptic on). Notice that the two positions are symmetrical, each 
tracing the flow in the opposite direction from the other. To break open the 
hegemony of scientific realism, no doubt it was helpful to take the strong 
counterposition that "truth effects" are produced by social processes rather 
than by experimental apparatus. But such strategies are limited in their op­
tions by the very assumptions they resist. Defining himself by what he revolts 
against, the revolutionary ends up looking like his opponent reflected in a 
mIrror. 
Work in the cultural and social studies of science has been marked by 
various strategies to escape the limitations imposed by these symmetry re­
lationships. For exam ple, the Latour of We Have Never Been Modern (1993) 
differs significan tly, it seems to me, from the Latour of Science in Action 
(1987), for in the later work Latour, acknowledging the limitations of ear­
lier constructivist arguments, insists that the objects of scientific research 
are at once discur sively constructed, socially produced, and materially real, 
a position he articulates even more forcefully in voicing concern about how 
radical constructivist positions can be appropriated for such reactionary 
purposes as denying the Holocaust. 38 I want to put Sims's virtual creatures 
into conversation with these ongoing debates, for I think these creatures 
have something important to contribute. They suggest other ways to skew 
the symmetry relations of the materialist/disc ursive divide and to rethink 
the transmigrations of forms through inscriptions that have the effect of 
leaving embodied reality behind. 
Digital Creatu res and Hybrid Subjectivity: From Form to Process 
Unlike the forms that experiments in the natural world abstract from em­
bodied materiality, often with great effort and ingenuity, the forms under­
lying the virtual creatures are easily accessible and open to view. At the bot­
tom of the hierarchy are the ones and zeros of binary code. Some see the 
emergence of complexity out of these simple elements as confirming the 
computational nature of reality, as we saw in chapter 1. Whereas scientific 
analysis leaves behind the complexity of the real world-which is to say, the 
messiness of embodied materiality-in the (necessary and useful) analytical 
division of an environment into discrete components and in the abstraction 
of form out of these components, complexity is precisely what is produced 
by the recursively structured adaptive systems of artificial life. 39 Although 
Simulating Narratives: What Virtual Creatures Can Teach Us 209 
this complexity is generated from simple elements, it is not reducible to their 
combined properties, nor it is predictable from them, for it emerges dy­
namically from their interactions -which implies that if you have only the 
inscription of abstractions understood as forms that transmigrate through 
media but that are not affected by media, then the most interesting part of 
reality may have slipped through your fingers. Focusing on the complexity 
of intermediating processes helps to remind us what is left out of account 
when embodied materiality is reduced to inscription. 
In the case of virtual creatures, it is difficult or impossible to think of 
forms transmigrating from embodied materiality to the electronic inscrip­
tions we see on the CRT screen, for the complex structure of the Oreo nec­
essarily complicates that picture. The complexity the creatures display is 
not inherent in the binary code; rather, it is produced as the program runs. 
"But you have forgotten;' the realist objects, "that the creatures are simu­
lations. As such, they occupy a different ontological niche than an inscrip­
tion emerging from an embodied materiality that is the object of an exper­
iment. It is no wonder that forms do not transmigrate, for the images do 
not represent preexisting reality." To this objection, I would respond that 
the simulations, although they do not represent a preexisting reality, nev­
ertheless are themselves real, in the sense that they exist as objects in the 
world. Moreover, the evolutionary processes by which they are generated are 
no less real than the evolutionary processes that produced us as viewers, as 
Harold Morowitz's cosmic view of emergence demonstrat es.4o In Latour's 
terminolo gy, they are quasi objects, hybrid entities produced through na­
ture/cultur e.41 They differ from the inscriptions of a biological laboratory 
not in being purely "artificial" in contrast to the "natural" organisms of the 
laboratory, but in the processes that produce them. When we see them, they 
are images on a CRT screen. Beneath that, they are functions in a LISP pro­
gram, on down through the coding levels to the bottom layer where the 
voltages are being fashioned into bit streams. Their "bodies" have a material 
instantiation, but this instantiation differs radically from the inferences we 
make when we "see" them as creatures moving in three-dimensional space. 
To bridge the gap between our narrative inscription of the creatures and 
the materio-semiotic apparatus producing them, I find it useful to think of 
them as processes rather than as bodies. As emphasized in chapter 2 in the 
discussion of code running in the machine, the creatures' bodies are literally 
processes-electron beams scanning across the screen, code being compiled 
or interpreted in the computer-and their morphological and neurological 
properties are the result of generations of processes congealed and expressed 
in what we "see" as their bodies. 
210 T RAN S MIT TI N G: A N A LOG AND DIG I TAL 
And how do we "see" the creatures, or anything else for that matter? 
Also through processes that bring the world into existence for us. As Brian 
Massumi argues elegantly in "The Brightness Confound;' there is a sense 
in which the world is not a collection of preexisting objects but a contin­
uing stream of processes. Although we customarily assume that the world 
preexists the processes, from a perceptual point of view the processes come 
first, and the objects we take as the world emerge from them. It is precisely 
this flux, this ongoingness of process from which the world emerges, that 
the realist in effect erases by privileging the underlying forms as the essen­
tial reality. Hence the significance of the virtual creatures, for they make 
this move impossible. There are no forms underlying them that are ade­
quate to account for their emergence, no mechanisms that can be seen as 
allowing preexisting forms to transmigrate out of embodied materiality to 
become the complex inscriptions we see. When I suggest that we are virtual 
creatures, I mean to foreground the importance of processes for us as well. 
Processes connect the embodied materiality of the creatures with the bodies 
we see; processes connect our visual! cognitive perceptions of them with the 
narratives we construct; and processes are reinscribed and reinterpreted as 
narrative representations when we make the creatures characters in stories 
of defeat and victo ry, evolution and development. In distributed cognitive 
environments like those created when humans and nonhuman actors col­
laborate to create and understand the virtual creatures, embodied materi­
alities interacting through complex processes disrupt the story of transmi­
grating forms and instead stimulate narrative inventions that foreground 
emergence and flux, perception and process. 
The shift, then, is not merely from analog to digital subjectivity, both 
of which could be described as realist entities. Rather, the more profound 
change is from form to process, from preexisting bodies to embodied ma­
terialities that are linked to one another by complex combinations of pro­
cesses based both in analog resemblances and coding relationships. When 
we inscribe ourselves as actors in these distributed cognitive environments, 
we become neither the interiorized analog subject of print culture nor the 
binary code of the digital subject; rather, we become a hybrid entity whose 
distinctive properties emerge through our interactions with other cognizers 
within the environment. These cognizers include the congealed processes 
embodied in such mundane objects as the chair I am sitting on, the key­
boards I tap, and the yellow legal pad on which I scribble notes as I peer at 
the screen. Print culture and print subjectivity do not disappear but mutate, 
as distributed cognitive environments stimulate new kinds of narratives, in­
cluding this one on the page you are reading. 
Simulating Narratives: What Virtual Creatures Can Teach Us 2n 
The hybrid subje ctivity emerging from distributed cognitive environ­
ments is playfully enacted in Jim Campbell's art installation "I Have Never 
Read the Bible." To make the installation, Campbell recorded his voice artic­
ulating the twenty-six letters of the alphabet while Mozart's Requiem played 
in the background. He then scanned an English translation of the Bible and 
converted it to binary code. A computer program was used to associate the 
sound of his voice articulating a letter with the corresponding mark, now re­
siding in the computer as a coding string. After these coding arrangements 
were complete, another program was used, in conjunction with a synthe­
sizer, to reproduce the articulated letters in the order in which they appear 
in the Bible. The result is a "reading" of the Bible letter by letter, from begin­
ning to end, a process that the installation takes thirty-seven days to com­
plete, running twenty-four hours a day. Meanwhile, the background music 
that in the original recording was a coherent performance of the Requiem 
has also been scrambled, with a bit of music playing only as long as it takes to 
articulate each letter. This musical soup serves as an audible reminder that 
we should not mistake the analog reproduction of sound for the coherent 
original, for the frothy digital middle of the Oreo has intervened and left 
tangible evidence of its process of fragmentation and recombination. 
In the installation, the voice and scrambled music issue from a nine­
teenth-century edition of Webster's Dictionar y. Heavy with materialit y, the 
dictionary testifies to the anarchic status of the book as it hangs on the wall, 
whispering to the viewer "
r -N-T-H -E-B-E-G-r -N -N-r -N-G-W-A -S-T-H -E-W-O­
R-D .... " Performing the "voiced" text of analog subjectivity, the installa­
tion simultaneously hybridizes this subjectivity by embedding it in a new 
context. Visibly testifying to this new context is the cable running out of 
the dictionary to an electronic (and presumably digital) device below. The 
choice of the dictionary as the "voiced" text foregrounds the issue of mean­
ing, for the dictionary's function is to define words, to match one signifier 
with other signifiers in correspondences that clarify meaning. In Campbell's 
installation, however, the signifier is not the flat mark of print culture. As if 
testifying to this change, the Webster's Dictionary that hangs on the wall can­
not be opened, for it has been hollowed out to conceal the electronic gear 
within. Rather, the signifier has become a complex chain of digital codes 
and analog resemblances with rich internal structures articulated together 
through a series of dynamic processes in a configuration that I have called 
the flickering signifier. 42 
Meaning emerges not through correspondences between the flat marks 
but through the interactions of human and nonhuman cognizers distributed 
throughout the environment. The hybridity of the situation is highlighted 
212 T RAN S MIT TIN G: A N A LOG AND 0 I G I TAL 
in the installation's title. The point, after all, is that "J Have Never Read the 
Bible;' that is, the artist as a singular subject has not read it. Rather, "reading" 
here is a distributed activity taking place partly in the articulations of the 
artist, partly in the "voiced" text, partly in the Oreo structures of the scan­
ner, computer, and synthesizer, and partly in the perceptions of the viewer 
who not only makes words out of the voiced letters but also makes meaning 
out of her interpolation into this distributed cognitive environment. 
What kind of subject am I as I stand musing before this installation? I cer­
tainlyam not the autonomous liberal self that located identity in conscious­
ness and rooted it in my ability, first and foremost, to possess my own body. 
Rather, as I think about my connection to virtual creatures, I am tempted to 
fashion myself in their image, seeing myself as a distributed cognitive system 
composed of multiple agents that are running the programs from which 
consciousness emerges, even though consciousness remains blissfully un­
aware of them. I am one kind of material embodiment; the virtual creatures 
are another; and we are connected through intermediations that weave us 
together in a web of jointly articulated cognitive activities. I think, therefore 
I connect with all the other cognizers in my environment, human and non­
human, including both the dynamic processes that are running right now as 
you decode these letters and all the dynamic processes that have run in the 
past and congealed to create this paper, this ink, this old language made of 
nouns and verbs that I am trying to fashion to new purposes that will allow 
you to see my body, your body, the bodies of the virtual creatures, not as 
nouns that enact verbs, but as dynamic intermediations that weave together 
the embodied materialities of diverse life forms to create richly complex dis­
tributed cognitions. That is what virtual creatures can teach us. 
Simulating Narratives: What Virtual Creatures Can Teach Us 213 
9 Subjective Cosmology and the 
Regime of Computat ion 
Intermediat ion in Greg Egan's Fiction 
I would like not to like Greg Egan's fiction. He espouses many of the ideas 
I argued against in How We Became Posthuman, including the near-future 
prospect of uploading human consciousness into a computer and, in the 
longer term, a postbiological future for (post)humanity in which embodi­
ment will have gone beyond even computers to become entirely optional, 
with people choosing whether to have bodies, grow new ones, or remain in­
corporeal. Moreover, he is still developing as a writer, and many of his works 
lack rich character development, sacrificing it for the sake of the highly spec­
ulative ideas he explores. Despite my disagreement with his conclusions 
about the future and notwithstanding the literary deficiencies, I find my­
self drawn to his fictions and admiring them almost in spite of myself. This 
chapter explores that reluctant fascination. The trajectory of the previous 
chapters has arced toward the conclusion that human bodies, cultures, and 
artifacts are becoming increasingly entwined with intelligent machines. Also 
at issue is the impact of the imagined future on the present, which as we saw 
in chapter 1 is an important dynamic braiding together the Universal Com­
puter as metaphor with it as means. Egan's fiction, pushing the possibilities 
for the Computational Universe to extremes, invites us to think about how 
far the entanglement of humans and computers can or should go. 
The Legacy of Alan Turing 
To set the scene for Egan's speculative fiction, let us flash back to that sem­
inal moment in 1950 when Alan Turing proposed the Turing test as an op­
erational procedure whereby the question "Can machines think?" could be 
answered. 1 Two related trains of development spun off from that influential 
paper. First, many researchers considered Turing's proposal an invitation 
to develop intelligent machines, and within a decade artificial intelligence 
had become a flourishing research field. When skeptics objected that these 
early computers were not able to exercise judgment (as Joseph Weizenbaum 
asserted in 1976) or to think creatively and intuitively, arguing that these 
modes of thought remain the exclusive province of humans, researchers 
turned their attention to creating programs that could achieve these quali­
ties.2 For example, John Koza and his collaborators have worked to use ge­
netic programs to design band-pass filters.3 They have demonstrated that 
these programs can successfully design circuits previously thought to re­
quire the creativity and intuition that only highly skilled and experienced 
electrical engineers possess. Although one could argue that Turing's provo­
cation has not been definitively answered in a philosophical sense, in my 
view it has met the fate of many such questions: it has not so much been 
answered as rendered increasingly uninteresting or even irrelevant. As the 
cognitions that intelligent machines can perform have deepened and broad­
ened, we can exclude what they do from our definition of "thinking" only 
if we narrow the range of what counts as thinking so significantly that it 
becomes questionable whether many humans can think. 
Similarly, tlIe proposition that intelligent machines can have minds seems 
highly controversial, if not downright false, to many people today. Yet al­
ready researchers are engaged in developing intelligent machines that can 
perform mind-like activities. Consider Rodney Brooks's "Cog" project, the 
information-filtering ecology developed by Alexander Moukas and Pattie 
Maes, neural nets of many different kinds, Gerald Edelman's neurologically 
accurate NOMAD robot (Neurally Organized Mobile Adaptive Device), and 
many others.4 In my view it is only a question of time before the activi­
ties performed by these and other machines become so mind-like that this 
too will become an uninteresting or irrelevant question. One development 
following from Turing's paper, then, has been the increasing sophistication 
of intelligent machines, as researchers have overcome barrier after barrier 
that has been postulated definitively to separate machines from the kinds of 
thinking that humans do. 
A second development from Turing's paper was to set off debates con­
cerning what we mean when we use words like "thinking;' "mind;' and 
"alive:' These are notoriously controversial terms, and there exists neither a 
universal consensus about what they mean nor definitive demonstrations of 
what they are. Instead, when someone maintains that machines can think, 
that computers have minds, or that digital simulations are alive (assertions 
with complex histories of debate, research, and controvers y), the terms 
themselves undergo transformation and modification as new players vault 
Subjective Cosmology and the Regime of Computation 215 
onto the field. A good example is the term "artificial life." Christopher Lang­
ton argues that the study of artificial life should be seen as part of theoretical 
biology, which, in turn, should endeavor to define life based on two distinct 
lineages: life forms based on carbon and those based on silicon. 5 Obviousl y, 
were one to reason on this basis the meaning of "life" would shift signifi­
cantly. Similar dynamics are at work with the proposition that computers 
have minds, and the results can be seen, for example, in Daniel C. Dennett's 
Kinds of Minds, where he argues that it makes sense to talk about the mind 
of a cell or even of DNA. 
These two dynamics-the continuing development of intelligent ma­
chines and the shifting meanings of key terms-work together to create a 
complex field of interactions in which humans and intelligent machines mu­
tually constitute each other. Neither kind of entity is static and fixed; both 
change through time, evolution, technolog y, and culture. In other words, 
to use an aphorism that cultural materialists have long realized as a truth 
of human culture: what we make and what (we think) we are coevolve. The 
parenthesis in the aphorism marks a crucial ambiguity, a doubleness indi­
cating that changes in cultural attitudes, in the physical and technolo gical 
makeup of humans and machines, and in the material conditions of exis­
tence develop in tandem. For example, upright posture and the use of tools 
are considered by anthropologists to have co evolved dynamically in syner­
gistic interactions. Walking upright made tool use easier, and tool use con­
siderably increased the fitness advantages of bipedalism. Moreover, tool use 
is associated with the beginnings of human culture. Along with language, 
the development of artifacts and technologies are routinely considered as 
distinguishing characteristics setting human societies apart from other pri­
mate groups. 
When I wrote in chapter 1 that I wanted to consider the Regime of Com­
putation as both means and metaphor, the complex interaction of "what 
we make" and "what (we think) we are" is what I had in mind. Almost 
certainly, some of the insights of the Regime of Computation will bring 
about change in theories of how complexity arises, for example, Wolfram's 
key point that simple cellular automata can create complex patterns, and 
his and his employee Matthew Cook's demonstration that the simple CA 
described by Rule no is interconvertible with a Universal Turing machine. 
Wolfram's other, more far-reaching claims put pressure on competing ideas 
and theories, forcing them to modify some of their conclusions and specu­
lations even as they, in turn, force the modification or rejection of some of 
Wolfram's claims. 6 The bold vision that Wolfram, Fredkin, Morowitz, and 
others espouse of a Universal Computer generating physical reality is mean-
216 T RAN 5 MIT TIN G: A N A LOG AND DIG I TAL 
while circulating in cultural arenas, as Greg Egan's novels, along with much 
else, testify. 
The Universal Computer is already providing new ways to make old ar­
guments about the contested term "human." For example, it transforms the 
scale at which claims about uploading consciousness might take place. In 
Hans Moravec's famous uploading scenario, published in 1990, conscious­
ness is transferred directly into a computer, based on Moravec's reasoning 
that if consciousness is essentially an information pattern, then reproducing 
that pattern in artificial media will re-create consciousness in the same form 
it is experienced in a human.7 As I observed in How We Became Posthu­
man, such a view ignores the vast differences separating human embodi­
ment from computer architecture, not to mention the complex feedback 
loops that connect human cognition with embodied processes, as Antonio 
Damasio has shown compellingly. 8 But in the Regime of Computation, one 
does not need to make such simplistic assumptions in order to see cogni­
tion as a computational process. If computation generates physical reality at 
the subatomic level, then one can claim that in this sense cognition is com­
putational, even while conceding differences in embodiment and the inte­
gral relation between embodiment and human cognition. The complexity of 
these dynamics simultaneously interacting with one another is intermedia­
tion in the broadest sense-claims about physical reality, cultural attitudes, 
and technological developments coevolving in relationships of synergy, con­
testation, competition, and cooperation. 
Obviousl y, this is a huge topic and the subject of hundreds of books, from 
such majestic works as Manuel Castells's Information Age trilogy and Alan 
Lill's The Laws of Cool to more specialized studies such as Mark Poster's 
What's the Matter with the Internet? 9 The area of my own interest-in dicated 
by the subtitle of this book, Digital Subjects and Literary Texts-focuses on 
making, storing, and transmitting as crosscutting topics that imply techno­
logical functions but that also engage cultural and artistic concerns. These 
concerns include the way code modifies our understandings of speech and 
writing systems, the interaction of print and electronic textuality, and the 
transformation of subjectivities as human and computer cognitions dynam­
ically alter the meaning of thinking and mind. The crucial point to which 
I keep returning is the necessity to think these dynamics together, which 
requires recognizing that multiple causalities simultaneously interact with 
one another as both means and metaphors. 
This is a more difficult, and perhaps more subtle, approach than I em­
ployed in How We Became Posthuman. I continue to think that my analy­
sis there of how information lost its body accurately depicts much of the 
Subjective Cosmology and the Regime of Computation 217 
cybernetic thinking of the last half of the twentieth century, but that ap­
proach must be modified to account for the complexities of the Regime of 
Computation, which is a larger and more ambitious project than even the 
far-reaching dreams of the mid-twentieth century cyberneticians. Indeed, 
since in many ways twentieth-century cybernetics prepared the way for the 
Regime of Computation, it would not be entirely inaccurate to name the 
contemporary emphasis on emergence "third-order cybernetics" because it 
subsumes and transforms the reflexivity characteristic of second-order cy­
bernetics. There are also, however, significant differences. The Regime of 
Computation is not a dematerialized theory, as was the Shannon/W eaver 
version of information theory central to the formation of cybernetics. 10 The 
Regime of Computation presumes and requires materiality at the same time 
that it transforms our understanding of the nature of materiality. This differ­
ence, among others, is why I have preferred to speak of the Regime of Com­
putation, so as not to obscure the ways in which this twenty-first-century 
vision differs from the cybernetic paradigm. 
Having presented a number of case studies showing that the complex dy­
namics of making, storing, and transmitting are changing contempora ry 
ideas about language, textuality, and cognition, I turn in this final chapter to 
test the limits of the Regime of Computation. Egan's novels are particularly 
rich resources in this regard because he envisions the human/computer con­
nection not as a question of technology (shades of Heidegger) but as an on­
tological inquiry into the relation of humans to the universe. In his "subjec­
tive cosmology" trilogy- Quarantine, Permutation City, and Distress-each 
of the novels speculates that there are deep connections between human 
consciousness and the computational processes that generate the universe, 
although each novel's vision of what this means remains distinct. Moreover, 
each novel carries within its fictional world seeds of resistance to the work's 
governing assumptions, thus performing many of the same ambivalences 
that I feel toward the Computational Universe. Indeed, in s@me ways my re­
lation to these texts mirrors and inverts the dynamics of the texts themselves. 
Whereas they enact ideological programs through which run threads of re­
sistance and subversion, I encounter them with major resistance through 
which run threads of admiration and fascination. 
From Egan's fiction and interviews, it is clear that he places a high value 
on intellectual honesty. "What's important to me in every book is to push 
the ideas as far as I can, and to be as honest about the subject as I can;' 
he remarks.11 For him, intellectual honesty includes the willingness both 
to follow an idea through to its logical conclusion and to look hard at the 
differences between what we wish were true and what is actually the case. 
218 T RAN S MIT TIN G: A N A LOG AND DIG I TAL 
A pithy bit of dialogue from Distress illustrates his commitment. Andrew 
Worth, in a moment of cynicism, remarks to Kuwale that "the truth is what­
ever you can get away with." Kuwale responds, "No, that's journalism. The 
truth is whatever you can't escape" (307). For Egan, humans can escape bi­
ology. What we cannot escape, in Egan's view, is the materiality of a physi­
cal universe that constitutes us as physical beings even as our participatory 
understanding co-constitutes it. In Egan's fiction, I encounter the farthest 
reaches of the Computational Universe. Whether I-indeed, all of us-can 
escape its implications is the scary and fascinating issue his novels invite us 
to engage. I begin the engagement by positioning the Computational Uni­
verse not only as a metaphor but as a pathological metaphor, that is to say, 
as a symptom. 
Computation as Symptom 
As outlined in chapter 1, if we read Stephen Wolfram's claims for the Com­
putational Universe as cultural metaphor, we can trace a feedback loop be­
tween Wolfram's cultural situation-his location at a moment in human 
history when computer technology is widely available and exponentially in­
creasing in memory capacity and processor speed-and his belief that phys­
ical reality is computational in nature. Such feedback loops (more clearly 
seen in retrospect than at the time) often develop, as in the example of 
eighteenth-century views of the universe as a clockwork mechanism, which 
I noted in the introduction. The appropriation of computation as a cultural 
metaphor is an instance of a more general dynamic in which cultural, histor­
ical, and linguistic presuppositions, invisible to someone because he simply 
assumes them to be true, constitute the framework in which problems are 
constructed and judgments made. This dynamic has much in common with 
the symptom. Useful for explicating its psychological aspects is Slavoj Zizek's 
Enjoy Your Symptom! 
Taking his cue from Lacan's notorious dictum that "the letter always ar­
rives at its destination;' Zizek identifies the characteristic structure of the 
symptom as "the mechanism of teleological illusion" (9). He explains it with 
a joke: "Daddy was born in Manchester, Mummy in Bristol and I in London: 
Strange that the three of us should have met!" (9).12 The mechanism, then, 
involves reasoning backward from one's present position and seeing prior 
contingent events as constituting a necessary and inevitable teleological pro­
gression to that point. The letter always arrives at its destination because, as 
Zizek points out, following Barbara Johnson, its destination is wherever it 
arrives. The metaphor of the letter is appropriate because a letter presumably 
contains a message addressed to someone other than the sender. Yet like a: 
Subjective Cosmology and the Regime of Computation 219 
psychoanalytic symptom that indicates not a supposed physical ailment but 
repressed psychological trauma, the letter reaches its destination as soon as 
it is sent because the message points back to the sender rather than to a 
supposed other. 
What letter does Wolfram send, and how does it function as a symptom? 
His vision of a Computational Universe is clearly indebted to the computer 
technology that makes his research possible. Creating complex patterns 
through CA simulations, he reasons backward to posit cellular automata as 
the mechanism that creates all complex systems, including the hardware and 
software running the simulations as well as his own perceptual/cog nitive 
system enabling him to arrive at this conclusion. In a symptomatic view, 
the letter Wolfram sends in A New Kind of Science has as its addressee Wol­
fram's beliefs themselves, or more accurately the cultural formations that 
make computation seem so fundamental that it must turn out to be at the 
bottom of things (and us). Like the fantastic premise of the film Paycheck, 
he shoots a laser beam out into the universe to have it return and illuminate 
the back of his head. The letter arrives at its destination when we understand 
the teleological illusions that complete the (short) circuit between Wolfram's 
interpretation of complex systems and the cultural context of computation 
in which he is embedded. 
As Zizek notes, similar backward reasoning is also characteristic of the 
so-called "anthropic principle:' The strong version of this principle puts to­
gether a series of contingent physical qualities-the expansion rate of the 
universe, the freezing point of water, and so on-to show that if everything 
had not been just this way, the evolution of intelligent life would have been 
impossible, with the implication that the universe has been constructed pre­
cisely to enable intelligent life to emerge. 13 The weak version of the prin­
ciple insists that any explanation about the origin of the cosmos must be 
consistent with the emergence of intelligent life, since it did after all evolve. 
Both versions reason backward to convert contingency into necessity and 
in this sense participate in symptomatic psycholo gy. One might imagine 
a computational version of the anthropic principle using reasoning sim­
ilar to Richard Dawkins's argument in The Selfish Gene, where he argues 
that humans are ways for genes to make more genes. In this scenario, the 
Universal Computer kept computing, computing, and computing through 
evolutionary eons until it was finally able to create consciousness capable of 
recognizing the Universal Computer's own natural mechanisms and then 
to re-create them in artificial media. Humans, in this view, are the com­
puter's way to make more computers. 14 Take away the implication of the 
220 T RAN S MIT TIN G: A N A LOG AND DIG I TAL 
Universal Computer's intentionality, and the scenario is close to Morowitz's 
postulation of the fourth stage of emergence as a reflexive turning back of 
computational mind to Computational Universe. However problematic this 
backward reasoning may be, the scenario makes clear why reflexivity is an 
important characteristic of the computational vision. 
Zizek further associates the symptom with the observation that "there is 
no metalanguage" (l2). He draws a connection between teleological reason­
ing and an insight central to quantum mechanics and contemporary science 
studies: we always participate in what we observe. He writes, "What we can 
see, as well as what we cannot see, is always given to us through a historically 
mediated frame of possibilities" (14-15). ''At this level;' he continues, "the 
impossibility of metalanguage equals the impossibility of a neutral point of 
view enabling us to see this 'objectively; 'impartiall y': there is no view that 
is not framed by a historically determined horizon of 'preunderstandin g'" 
(15). For Zizek, the reflexive entangling of subject and object takes the form 
of a certain excess or surplus, manifesting itself when the sender of a letter 
"always says more than he 'intended to say'" (14). In psychoanalytic terms, 
this becomes the repressed, with symptoms functioning to announce "re­
turns of the repressed" (14). 
In terms less oriented to psycholo gy, the surplus reveals that the sender 
is implicated in the message, in the sense that the message is never objec­
tively external to his perspective but is formed within and through that per­
spective, a dynamic central to Donna Haraway's concept of situated knowl­
edge. 15 This notion of surplus suggests that Wolfram's interpretatio ns of his 
simulations have a "repressed" aspect. Many commentators have remarked 
on his reluctance to credit the research of others and on his repeated insis­
tence that he alone deserves the credit for inventing the "new kind of sci­
ence;' His promotion of his own work implies that he puts his mark on the 
universe and sees that handprint as synonymous with the way the universe 
actually is. Moreover, he interprets objections to his conclusions as evidence 
that he is correct, asserting that "traditional science" always resists the ar­
rival of new paradigms. In Wolfram's self-insulating reasoning, the more 
other scientists object to his problematic extrapolations, the more certain 
he is that he is right. 16 We may conclude that Wolfram, more than most 
scientists, is blind to his own blind spots. 
In its broadest conceptual form, the "blind spot" results not from a spe­
cific failure of vision but from the inevitable partiality of the viewer's per­
spective. "In what I see, in what is open to my view," Zizek writes, "there 
is always a point where 'I see nothing,' a point which 'makes no sense.' ... 
Subjective Cosmology and the Regime of Computation 221 
This is the point from which the very picture returns the gaze, looks back 
at me" (15). For Niklas Luhmann, this blindness is implicit in the cut that 
distinguishes a system from its environment. "Observing means making a 
distinction and indicating one side (and not the other side) of the distinc­
tion:' he writes in a typical formulation. 17 While the cut enables the system 
to come into view as such, it also necessarily introduces an area beyond the 
realm of analysis that the cut makes possible. "Reality is what one does not 
perceive when one perceives it," as Luhmann puts it. 18 Whereas Luhmann 
emphasizes the blindness that unavoidably accompanies analytical insight, 
Zizek interprets the blind point as a gesture toward the frame that para­
doxically encloses it. "The 'horizon of meaning' is always linked, as if by a 
kind of umbilical cord, to a point within the field discovered by it; the frame 
of our view is always already framed (re-marked) by a part of its content" 
(15). Paradoxes of representations that contain within themselves the frames 
enclosing them have been explored extensively by Douglas R. Hofstader in 
Godel, Esch er, Bach. Their pertinence here is their association with the symp­
tom and the mechanism of teleological illusion. 
As we shall see, the overlaps between Zizek's analysis of the symptom and 
Egan's subje ctive cosmology are extensive. There is, however, a significant 
difference that I want to note here. Egan's orientation is toward computa­
tion and quantum physics rather than psychoanaly sis, and this difference in 
theoretical orientation leads him to conclusions very different from those 
Zizek espouses. A striking incongruity between Zizek and Egan lies in their 
attitudes toward death. For Zizek, death is the ultimate destination of the 
letter. "The only letter that nobody can evade, that sooner or later reaches 
us, i.e., the letter which has each of us as its infallible addressee, is death. We 
can say that we live only in so far as a certain letter (the letter containing our 
death warrant) still wanders around, looking for us" (20). By contrast, Egan 
views death as a consequence of our biological embodiment and speculates 
that it may become optional when technological advances allow human con­
sciousness to be simulated within computational media. In this aspect of his 
writing, Egan would seem to have a technophilic orientation that is dramati­
cally opposed to Zizek's psychoanalytic approach. I will argue, however, that 
his novels are ambiguously coded, and thus can be read both as technophilic 
extrapolations of the Regime of Computation and, more subtly, as critiques 
that interpret the Computational Regime as a symptom of our present cul­
tural condition. This ambiguity makes Egan's novels ideally positioned to 
interrogate the deeper implications of the Regime of Computation as means 
and metaphor, symptom and reality. 
222 T RAN S MIT TIN G: A N A LOG AND DIG I TAL 
Permutation City: The Letter Arrives as Death and Simulation 
If the ultimate message the letter carries when it arrives at its destination 
is our own death, then in Permutation City the letter, like a charmed ritual 
in a fairy tale, announces itself three times. The first announcement comes 
when Paul Durham, the novel's protagonist, has himself scanned and the 
information uploaded into a computer. 19 Awakening to consciousness as a 
Copy, the simulated consciousness (whom I will call Paul, to distinguish him 
from Durham, the "real" person) finds the simulated life not worth living, 
feeling deeply troubled by the knowledge that he, like his environment, is an 
artifact produced by a machine. If in creating a Copy, Durham sends a letter, 
then Paul is the faux Durham who reads in it the necessity of his death. He 
consequently tries to "bale out" [sic ]-the euphemism for Copies commit­
ting suicide. But this time the letter appears not to arrive, for he discovers 
that his original has illegally sabotaged the software and condemned him 
to continue living. Fifth in a line of Copies, all of whom "baled out" within 
fifteen minutes of (re ) gaining consciousness, Paul has no choice but to per­
form the experiments that his original has preestablished. 
The experiments are designed to test the nature of consciousness and, 
specifically, its relation to identity. They suggest that our sense of contin­
uous selfhood is an illusion-that we are never who we think we are. At 
first these conclusions seem to apply only to simulated consciousness, but 
through a bizarre twist of plot Egan generalizes them to "real" identities. The 
experiments consist of Durham altering the processor speeds so that Paul's 
consciousness is generated not continuously but once every thousandth of 
a second, then hundredth, tenth, and finally only every ten seconds. De­
spite the intervening times, Paul perceives his consciousness as a continu­
ous flow. This result is consistent with what we already know about com­
putation. Data can be stored randomly throughout computer memory and 
still assembled in the correct order by the program, so dispersion in com­
putational space has no relation to the simulation's continuity. Moreover, 
the simulation's outcome does not depend on processor speed. Whether a 
program runs fast or slow, the same result obtains, as we know from the or­
dinary practice of running simultaneous applications on our desktop. Hans 
Moravec, director of the mobile robotics laboratory at Carnegie-M ellon 
University and patron saint to uploaders, refers to these properties in Robot: 
From Mere Machine to Transcendent Mind: ''A simulation's internal relation­
ships would be the same if the program were running correctly on any of 
an endless variety of possible computers, sl owly, quickly, intermittentl y, or 
even backwards and forwards in time, with data stored as charges on chips, 
Subjective Cosmology and the Regime of Computation 223 
marks on a tape, or pulses in a delay line, with the simulation's numbers 
represented in binary, decimal, or roman numerals, compactly or spread 
widely across the machine. There is no limit, in principle, on how indirect 
the relationship between simulation and simulated can be" (192). Although 
Moravec's publication came too late for Egan to have consulted it, similar 
ideas were afloat at the time he wrote Permutation City; and indeed he notes 
explicitly in an interview that such ideas were paramount in his mind when 
he wrote the novel. 20 
There is, however, an apparent fallacy here that obtains if a simulation is 
computing emergent phenomena (and presumably there would be no point 
in doing the simulation if emergence were not the concern). The time can be 
delayed in any variety of ways, as Moravec and Egan suggest, but one cannot 
in the general case run a simulation backward or in random order and be as­
sured of producing the same outcome, for each successive clock-tick within 
the computer presupposes the previous one and uses its results as a basis for 
its own computation. (Exceptions that prove the rule are the special cases of 
reversible cellular automata, which can be run backward.) 21 Because there 
may be many paths to any given point in a simulation, running it back­
ward could easily result in creating a different "past" than existed when the 
simulation ran forward.22 Paul perceives that his consciousness continues 
uninterrupted, but this does not assure either him or us that the conscious­
ness so produced is the same consciousness he would otherwise have had if 
the simulation had run forward. In the novel, Paul recognizes this fact and 
develops the "dust" hypothesis, generalizing from his experience as a sim­
ulation that all consciousness is actually discrete and discontin uous. In this 
view, everyone assembles his or her consciousness (and therefore identity) 
from the random noise of the universe (the "dust") to produce the illusion 
of continuous mind. 
In effect, then, Paul recognizes the symptomatic mechanism of putting 
together contingent events so that they seem to reach a teleological end 
point. However, Paul's interpretation of this mechanism profoundly sub­
verts the symptom's meaning in psychoanalytic theory. Paul's recognition 
of the radical contingency of human identity does not signal that he has fi­
nally uncovered the short circuit the symptom creates and, by implication, 
the trauma it covers over. On the contrary, the teleological illusion is trans­
formed so that it now represents the ordinary "sane" belief that human con­
sciousness is continuous. Paul is judged insane because he believes that the 
symptomatic mechanism, far from being psychopathological, is the usual 
way that discontinuous consciousness interacts with the universe to con­
vince itself that it is continuous and ontologically stable. On a metaph ysical 
224 T RAN 5 MIT TIN G: A N A LOG AND DIG I TAL 
level, this formation implies that computation has been transformed from 
a metaphor into the means by which reality is generated, a means that in­
cludes the illusions of those who think the Universal Computer is (only) a 
metaphor. 
Paul's realization of this "truth" is accomplished through a plot devel­
opment so implausible that its only justification is the necessity to redirect 
the letter so that it is forwarded through Paul back to Durham. Paul dis­
covers that he is not the Copy but instead has been tricked into believing so 
by a plot Durham and his girlfriend hatched before erasing the knowledge 
of it from Paul's memory. Through this fantastic turn of events, Paul and 
Durham are reunited as Paul Durham. Awakened in the real world, Paul 
remains passionately convinced that all experience is digital and discontin­
uous. Moreover, he thinks that Paul and Durham really did have two distinct 
pasts, although the commonsense (i.e., "sane") view would be that he had 
simply been mistaken, the victim of an elaborate hoax. Because he believes 
that "Paul Durham" has at least two forking lifelines, and potentially many 
more possible permutations, he is declared insane and subjected to brain 
surgery. Although the operation supposedly cures him, he continues to be­
lieve in the dust hypothesis. "Paul Durham" now represents not so much a 
coherent identity as an inf usion of Paul the Copy into Durham the person, 
and Paul Durham sees everyone's consciousness, including his own, as an 
operating system running on the Universal Computer, plucking data from 
here and there to assemble a contingent reality that always could have been 
different-and in fact always is different, playing out diverse trajectories in 
multiple parallel universes. 
Computation in the conventional sense mimics this diversity on a small 
scale by multiplying the original into a Copy, which as soon as it is created 
begins diverging from the original. The Universal Computer operates on 
a vastly larger scale, creating infinite multiplicities whereby Paul Durham 
(and everyone else) is continually diverging from himself. He has the illusion 
of possessing a continuous identity, but the dust hypothesis dictates that we 
understand this identity as the result of tracing one contingent path through 
infinitely many branching points. Each branching produces an incremen­
tally different identity than the others, resulting in infinitely many selves, 
each of which presumes that it is the unique result of an illusory teleology. 
A similar idea is explored in Quarantine, Egan's novel preceding Permu­
tation City. Here the mechanism is not a Computational Universe but the 
"many worlds" hypothesis of quantum theory. In the novel, scientist Chung 
Po-Kwai explains in a lengthy info dump (as it is known in SF circles) that 
quantum wave equations predict the probabilities for such actions as ion 
Subjective Cosmology and the Regime of Computation 225 
deflection and radioactive decay, but they do not specify how a given ion will 
deflect or how a particular particle will decay, which must be determined by 
measurement (127-35). Before the measurement, the particle's state is inde­
terminate, but after the measurement, future measurements always give the 
same result. This fact has led some quantum theorists to suggest that mea­
surement (or more generally, observation) determines the result, in effect 
collapsing the wave function so that it leads to a unitary reality that did not 
exist as such before the measurement. 23 Egan takes this hypothesis and runs 
with it, postulating that the "observer function" is located in the human 
brain. Moreover, he also sets up the plot so that characters can learn to turn 
the observer function on and off. He further imagines that the ability to do 
so can be duplicated in software and computer viruses, making it potentially 
available to everyo ne. 
In the novel, when the wave functions are not collap sed, every particle 
in the brain exists in more than one state, leading to billions of possible 
selves, each generated from a state incrementa lly different than every other. 
In the same way that quantum computing uses quantum indeterminacies to 
create multiple computing states, each of which is capable of carrying out 
an independent computation, so all the possible selves of the protagonist 
Nick Stavrianos in his uncollap sed or "smeared" state can carry out different 
permutations of the same task to discover the one possibility out of billions 
that will successfully complete the task. 24 Thus in his smeared state Nick is 
able to open secure locks, break complex cryptological codes, and stroll past 
guards without being seen. When the wave function is collapsed, all but the 
successful self disappears. Since which self is successful varies from task to 
task, Nick's impression of having a continuous consciousness is revealed as 
an illusion produced by jumping from self to self to self, each of which exists 
for a brief time as an autonomous entity until the wave function collapses 
and all memories of alternate states are erased, leading to the impression 
that only one self has existed. 
As readers, we become aware of this process through discrepancies that 
reveal that the self narrating a given section is not the same as the self nar­
rating the next one. For example, an accomplice sets Nick the task of find­
ing the ten-digit code that will open a lock. This self tries the combination 
1450045409 (195). But then the narrator of the next section, the self who 
survived because his was by chance the winning combination, reveals that 
the correct code (which he used) was 9999999999 (196). The experience of 
a continuous self is thus the teleological obsession naturalized so that it be­
comes the normal way humans experience the world. Before human ob­
servers force the world to become a unitary chain of events by collapsing the 
226 T RAN 5 MIT TIN G: A N A LOG AND DIG I TAL 
wave functions of everything within their sphere of observations, the uni­
verse in its uncollapsed state proceeds as an unimaginably vast series of com­
putations continuously diverging from one another. This "smeared" state, 
although inimical to normal human consciousness, is by implication how 
the (inhuman) cosmos works. The anomalous position of humans within 
the universe becomes clear when unknown agents (presumably a vastly su­
perior alien race) "quarantine" our solar system by encapsulating it within a 
huge impenetrable barrier to protect themselves against the human activity 
of collapsing everything they observe into a single lifeline. By the standards 
of the smeared universe, human consciousness is pathological by its very 
nature, as the title Quarantine suggests. 
Egan's story suggests that recognizing the difference between the human 
teleological illusion and cosmic indeterminacy does indeed induce trauma, 
but with two crucial differences from Zizek's version. First, this is not the 
psychopathology of a single individual but the trauma of an entire world; 
and second, the pathological state for humans is revealed to be the un col­
lapsed, smeared state that is normal for the rest of the universe. Indeed, 
it is this "normal" state that leads to the disaster alluded to in Quaran­
tine's subtitle, A Novel of Quantum Catastrophe. When the inhabitants of 
New Hong Kong are infected with an engineered virus that causes them all 
to become smeared simultaneousl y, the bizarre and fatal results spawn all 
manner of monstrosities, fr om buildings growing flesh to people sprouting 
roots that sink into the ground. Astronomic ally improbable, these anoma­
lies show that for humans, the teleological illusion is an essential defense 
necessary for human existence. Indeed, the teleological illusion as Egan envi­
sions it is precisely that which is necessary to prevent human psychopathol­
ogy, whereas for the rest of the universe the reverse its true: the smeared state 
is healthy and the normal human state is pathological. The criteria defining 
psychopathology are thus rendered contingent, depending on whether the 
reference is to humans or the postulated alien races that have cordoned off 
human observers to protect their worlds from becoming collapsed. 
Like Quarantine, Permutation City supposes that a coherent identity is 
made to appear only by ignoring all the branching points and following a 
single trajectory through multiple proliferating selv es. Here, however, the 
mechanism is significantly different from the quantum mechanics of Quar­
antine; rather, it reenvisioned as an inference emerging from the Compu­
tational Regime. Pushed to its logical conclusion, the dust hypothesis im­
plies that not only multiple identities but multiple worlds can be assembled, 
all running on the underlying Universal Computer. The twenty-line poem 
that serves as an epigraph hints at this ontology. Each line is an anagram 
Subjective Cosmology and the Regime of Computation 227 
of "Permutation City" (as are the chapter titles of part 1).25 A note explains 
that the poem was "found in the memory of a discarded notebook" in a psy­
chiatric hospital, implying that it was written by Paul Durham while he was 
institutionalized. In addition, as Ross Farnell notes in one of the few critical 
articles on Permutation City, the short story "Dust," of which the novel is an 
expansion, is scattered throughout the novel's three-hundred-plus pages. 26 
This dispersion further suggests that the novel itself could exist in countless 
permutations, of which we know only one. Egan thus carries over into tlIis 
work Quarantine's subtle implication that the coherence of the narrator's 
voice amounts to a teleological illusion created by the reader. The logic of 
Egan's fictional world implies that there may be as many narrators (and dif­
ferent permutations of the novel we read) as there are billions of alternative 
selves created by the endlessly proliferating branchings. 
In Permutation City, the reflexive entwining of frame and picture that 
Zitek associates witlI the teleological illusion breaks into visibility through 
Egan's equivocation on a central point, namely, the position of conscious­
ness within the simulation. Recall that Morowitz had no qualms about sit­
uating an observer function inside the computation that would mimic the 
role of an observer outside the simulation, watching it evolve. Egan joins 
these two functions into a paradoxical reflexive loop when he supposes that 
consciousness can at once assemble the dust that produces the simulation 
and simultaneously be produced by the simulation, thus entangling the pic­
ture and the frame that encloses it. As if picking up Zitek's image of an um­
bilical cord that connects the frame to a mark within the picture, Egan re­
peatedly creates scenes in which an umbilical cord metaphorically appears 
at precisely the moment that the reflexive entwining of frame and picture 
creates a crisis, a point to which we will return. 
Yet despite this similarity between Egan's fiction and Zitek's analysis, 
there remain significant differences as well, particularly with regard to the 
teleological illusion. To develop these differences further, let us pick up the 
narrative at the point where Paul, in the grip of his obsession with the dust 
hypothesis, risks everytlIing to buy up for a brief few minutes most of the 
planet's computing power to launch his "Garden of Eden" configuration, 
on the chance that once a seed for a simulated world is created and given an 
initial push, it can take off on its own and begin to run directly on tlIe Uni­
versal Computer, envisioned as a TVC (Turing von Neumann Chiang) cel­
lular automaton (183).27 Because the platform would be the structure of the 
universe itself, Paul thinks it can grow and expand constantly as it assembles 
the dust, bringing space and time into existence through its computations. 
At this point, the fiction has only a tenuous connection to reality, for 
228 T RAN 5 MIT TIN G: A N A LOG AND DIG I TAL 
no simulation has ever succeeded in escaping the bounds of the program 
that creates it, not to mention catapulting out of the computer to run on 
the same platform that produces our reality. In this respect, Permutation 
City resembles David Cronenberg's surrealistic film Videodrome more than 
it does scientific research on artificial life. In supposing that a simulation 
can begin to run on the Universal Computer from the force of its inter­
nal coherence, Egan goes beyond Wolfram in making reality and simulation 
permeable to one another.28 In another sense, however, Egan's novel fully 
supports Wolfram's implication that the same computational mechanisms 
that create his simulations underlie physical reality; for once the Garden of 
Eden seed begins to run on the Universal Computer, there is no a priori 
ontological distinction between reality and simulation. Such a stance is in­
imical to the distinction between fantasy and reality on which the concept 
of the psychoanalytic symptom depends. 
Notwithstanding Egan's technophilic extrapolations, significant threads 
of resistance run through Permutation City. Having the simulation leap out 
of the computer to run on the Universal Computer opens Durham's project 
to a critique of the kind Robert Markley undertakes when he contrasts the 
"freedom" of cyberspace with its cost in economic and social resources. 29 
The novel makes clear that Durham's ambitions are severely constrained as 
long as he is confined to computing with finite resources. Only if the con­
figuration runs on the Universal Computer will memory storage be able 
to increase without limit and without the vulnerabilities to which physi­
cal hardware is subject. This premise enables Paul to persuade his wealthy 
clients to underwrite his project, for he offers them the ultimate insurance 
from all contingencies: immortality. In psychoanalytic terms, the promise 
of immortality is an attempt to delay the letter indefinitely so that it never 
arrives. The phantasmatic aspect of Durham's obsession is emphasized by 
Maria De Luca's skepticism toward his project. Although she agrees to help 
him, she voices continuing resistance to his ideas, making clear to him (and 
to us) that she regards his obsession as a pathological attempt to continue 
by other means the delusions he suffered while institutionalized fo r mental 
illness. 
Another aspect of the novel's resistance appears when the letter proves 
stronger than the fantasy of its infinite deferral. If the letter announces it­
self the first time to Paul, the Copy who finds simulated life not worth liv­
ing, then it proclaims its arrival a second time to the Paul Durham who 
remains behind in the "real" world after his Copy, along with some four­
teen other Copies (plus stowaways), are launched on the Universal Com­
puter. So convinced is Durham that this launch can become reality that 
Subjective Cosmology and the Regime of Computation 229 
after completing the send-off and spending a night of disastrous sex with 
Maria, he commits suicide in a disembowelment that metaphorically re­
sembles birth. This ghastly birth simulation, centered on his abdomen, con­
flates death and birth, the umbilical cord of a newborn with the intestines 
that spill from Durham's abdomen. This event transforms the meaning of 
the umbilical cord's appearance in psychoanalytic theory. Instead of func­
tioning as a recognition of reflexivity, Durham's suicide makes the situation 
less reflexive, for it invests all that might remain of his identity in the Copy 
residing in Permutation City, capitol of the simulated world Elysium. That 
Durham now finds "real" life not worth living ironically mirrors and inverts 
his Copy's earlier attempt at suicide. Thus the letter has circulated through 
the faux Durham to arrive at the original Paul Durham. 
In another permutation of this logic, the third letter arrives at its destina­
tion when a Copy chooses to accept himself as the addressee, even though it 
was sent by his original. The arrival of this letter enacts yet another variation 
on the theme of identity constantly diverging from itself. In Permutation 
City, how closely a Copy mirrors its original is negotiable, for a simulated 
consciousness can choose how much of the original personality and memo­
ries to retain, and how much to modify or edit. If one finds oneself unhappy 
in Permutation City, for example, it would be possible to edit one's pro­
gram so that unhappiness is impossible. Of course, precisely to the extent 
that such changes are made, the Copy diverges from its original identity, the 
preservation of which was the presumed reason to create the Copy. This is 
the dilemma facing Thomas Riemann, a multibill ionaire who had a Copy 
loaded into the Garden of Eden configuration as insurance against the pos­
sibility that his existing Copy, running on his own secure hardware after his 
death, might encounter political and economic backlashes that would en­
danger its existence. A Copy of a Copy, the Riemann consciousness in Per­
mutation City has chosen to retain a small scar on his forearm and the mem­
ory to which it is metonymically associated. The scar recalls for Thomas 
a moment of cowardice when as a young man he became involved with 
a woman of questionable reputation and during an argument pushed her 
against a brick wall, seriously injuring her. Rather than call an ambulance 
and face the resulting disgrace and probable disinheritance, Thomas bru­
tally continued to beat her until she died. 
This shameful memory has become so integral to his identity that he be­
lieves ifhe were to abandon it, his entire life would no longer make sense to 
him. He cannot resist playing the memory of that disastrous night over and 
over again, which he experiences each time as if it were happening anew. 
Since it is a simulation, at any point he can edit the memory or even change 
230 T RAN S MIT TIN G: A N A LOG AND DIG I TAL 
the outcome, but each time, for thousands of repetitions, he makes the same 
fatal choice at the decisive moment. After hundreds of thousands of repe­
titions resulting in a mounting score that he incises into his abdomen with 
a knife, he finally breaks clear and makes the ethical choice to call an am­
bulance. In doing so, he accepts the consequences of his actions, which is 
to say, he accepts the letter that has been following him around. He subse­
quently falls into a coma, an appropriate plot development that metes out a 
simulated death to a simulated consciousness. 
Riemann's acceptance of the letter coincides with the climactic final cri­
sis, marked by the arrival not so much of a different letter as the same let­
ter in different form. This crisis represents the novel's strongest resistance 
to its own premises. Significantly, it serves to disentangle metaphor and 
means. When Paul Durham designed Permutation City, he wanted to in­
clude the seed of another simulated world, differing from Permutation City 
because it is intended to evolve life from mutating bacteria, thus building 
a reality from the ground up. To facilitate the evolution of this simulation 
within the simulation, called the Autoverse, Paul arranged matters so that 
the processing time for the Autoverse runs much faster than for Permuta­
tion City. Whereas only seven thousand years have passed for the Copies, 
three billion years have elapsed for the Autoverse. During this time, highly 
intelligent life forms-human-sized insects called the Lambertian s-have 
evolved. In contrast to the evolutionary processes that create the Lamber­
tians, the Copies have been constructed using ad hoc algorithms that sim­
ulate respiration, circulation, and so on. The Lambertians are thus more 
coherent than the Copies, making sense as emergent processes all the way 
down to the atomic level. Their scientists have lately begun to question how 
their world came into existence. When Paul communicates the answer that 
he assumes is correct-the Autoverse was created by (the originals of) the 
Copies-the Lambertians reject the idea as an untenable ad hoc hypothesis. 
With that, they begin de constructing the world of Permutation City. 
This contestation can be understood in terms of metaphors versus means. 
In a certain sense, everything in the simulated world of Permutation City 
functions as a metaphor. One of the ways Thomas Riemann propped himself 
up, for example, was to take a swig from his C&O bottle. Although the name 
sounds like a whiskey, C&O stands for Confidence and Optimism, and the 
"bottle" is a metaphor for changing the code that computes his simulated 
consciousness so that he feels more confident and optimistic. Like the trash 
icon on a computer desktop, the "bottle" has no intrinsic relation to the un­
derlying code, connecting Riemann to a lost world of real objects rather than 
to the simulated world of Permutation City in which he actually lives. The 
Subjective Cosmology and the Regime of Computation 231 

Lambertians, by contrast, have no need of ad hoc metaphors unrelated to 
the materiality of their environment. Whatever metaphors they presumably 
use have co evolved in synchrony with their world, making their world epis­
temologi cally as well as ontologically superior to Permutati on City. Their 
triumph over Permutation City functions to distinguish metaphors that ob­
scure the material basis for existence from those that illuminate it (a distinc­
tion, as we have seen, crucial to Neal Stephenson's Cryptonomic on). Through 
the Lambertians, then, the novel enacts a cautionary tale about confusing 
metaphor and means, thus performing another resistance to its premises. 
When the Lambertians refuse to accept their subaltern status, the sup­
posedly infinite deferral implied by Paul's assertion that the denizens of 
Permutation City would be immortal abruptly collapses and the fatal letter 
arrives after all. Although Paul and Maria, as well as the other Copies, plan 
to re-create themselves (or more precisely, generate Copies of their Copies) 
by launching a new Garden of Eden configuration, they are unab le· to drag 
Riemman's unconscious body with them, so he becomes a remainder, sym­
bolically accepting the letter announcing their mortality. When the Lam­
bertians refuse to accept Durham's explanation, he is confronted with the 
realization that evolution is not teleological and that emergence will not nec­
essarily lead to the result its creator envisioned. If in one sense Permutation 
City supports Wolfram's thesis by deconstructing the distinction between 
simulation and reality, in another sense it reveals the power of simulation to 
determine its own future, independent of what its creator intends or desires. 
Juxtaposed with Wolfram's claims that he alone deserves credit for the "new 
kind of science," Permutation City implicitly critiques the creator's ability to 
lay claim to his creations. Precisely because Egan takes the Computational 
Regime seriously as the means by which reality is produced, he refuses to 
confine it within the preconceptions of its creator, whatever those might be. 
Distress and the Partici patory Universe 
As we have seen, Quarantine entangles human consciousness with the pro­
duction of a single lifeline for the solar system, whereas Permutation City 
suggests that human consciousness itself is produced by assembling the uni­
verse's "dust." In Distress, the last novel in Egan's subjective cosmology tril­
ogy, human consciousness is envisioned as essential to producing the uni­
verse's cosmolog y. Here Egan's fiction engages the most grandiose of the 
teleological illusions that Zizek discusses: the anthropic principle linking 
the evolution of the cosmos to the evolution of intelligent life. Distress also 
provides the trilogy's richest character development, as if Egan recognizes 
232 T RAN S MIT TIN G: A N A LOG AND 0 I G I TAL 
that a more vibrant sense of the narrator's humanity is necessary to comple­
ment the inhuman dimensions of the universe's birth and evolution. Indeed, 
bringing the scale of individual humans into connection with the scale of the 
universe is the novel's central project. 
Distress foregrounds the paradox hovering in the margins of the earlier 
texts, namely, a consciousness that simultaneously assembles the dust (or 
quantum states) and is assembled by it. Andrew Worth, a science journalist 
working on contract for the television channel SeeNet, grabs the assignment 
to cover a high-level scientific conference on competing versions of a Theory 
of Everything, or TOE. He stumbles across the Anthrocosmologists (ACs), a 
cult that believes that the articulation of a successful TOE will not so much 
describe a preexisting world as actually bring the postulated universe into 
being. Amanda Conroy, drawing on physicist John Wheeler's controversial 
interpretation of quantum indeterminacy (with a wink by the author to 
those who have read Quarantin e), explains that "it's easy enough to see that 
a coin is neither 'heads' nor 'tails' while it's still up in the air, spinning-but 
what if it's not even any particular coin? What if there really are no pre­
existing laws governing the system you're about to measure" (208).30 In this 
conjecture, observation (more precisely, articulation) determines not only 
quantum states but the very law-like structures that define and generate the 
states. In the view of the ACs, the more questions that scientists ask, "the 
more precisely the universe takes shape" (208). "If an event doesn't take 
place unless it's observed;' Conroy argues, "then a law doesn't exist unless 
it's understood" (209). As she points out, however, "understanding" here 
implies not simply a claim to understand, in which case the universe would 
be fractured into as many worlds as there are competing interpreta tions. 
Rather, an understanding powerful enough to affect the world would have 
to be coherent, consistent, and rich enough to account for the universe's 
diverse manifestations. 
The reasoning extends to the breaking point those arguments advanced 
by constructivist critics within science studies that laws of nature do not ex­
ist until they are discovered. Most critics acknowledge that something exists, 
but they argue that the ways in which that something is articulated and un­
derstood deeply affect how it will be integrated into existing frameworks of 
knowledge, transforming them in the process. 31 There is reason to think that 
Egan has little patience with social constructivism, which is lampooned in 
Distress through a caricature "Ignorance cult" called "Culture First." Char­
acteristically, however, Egan confronts this presumed enemy not by debunk­
ing but by appropriating and expanding its claims. The strategy recalls the 
Subjective Cosmology and the Regime of Computation 233 
motto that truth is "what you can't escape." Ifhe cannot escape the kernel of 
truth in the view that the laws of nature are invented rather than discovered, 
he will make the truth his own by pushing it to the limit. 
The strategy is enacted when the dialogue suddenly veers toward fringe 
cosmolog y. "Imagine this cosmology:' Conroy tells Worth. "Forget about 
starting the universe with just the right finely-tuned Big Bang needed to cre­
ate stars, planets, intelligent life ... and a culture capable of making sense 
of it. Instead, take as your 'starting point' the fact that there's a living human 
being who can explain an entire univ erse, in terms of a single theory. Turn 
everything around, and take it as the only thing given that this person exists" 
(212). This is the anthropic principle gone wild. As we have seen, even the 
strong version of the anthropic principle traces a historical trajectory, albeit 
one that has as its necessary teleological endpoint the emergence of intelli­
gent life. This version goes further: erase history, start with a single person 
(called the Keystone by those who take the theory seriously), and add the 
requirement that the Keystone bring history into being (instead of the idea 
that history brings intelligent life into being). 
If this theory were articulated by someone who believed himself to be the 
Keystone, we might justifiably consider him a megalomaniac. When pro­
nounced by someone who identifies another person as the Keystone (as do 
fringe ACs), it becomes enormously important who that person is. If the 
"wrong" person becomes the Keystone, that person could create an apoca­
lypse by theorizing a universe inimical to intelligent life and perhaps to life 
of any kind. Translated into psychoanalytic terms, the belief in the Keystone 
combines scapegoating with a strong teleological illusion, identifying as the 
letter's addressee a consciousness uniquely invested with cosmic powers of 
creation and uncreation. Conroy's comments set the stage for Andrew's dis­
covery of several groups of fringe AnthTocosmologists, from those who be­
lieve that their life depends on having the "right" Keystone, to even more 
extreme groups who prefer that the universe retain its infinite capacity for 
change, which they think they can accomplish by assassinating everyone ca­
pable of articulating a TOE at all. 
At the center of the maelstrom is Violet Mosala, the brilliant South Af­
rican twenty-nine-year-old Nobel Prize physicist who is one of the top three 
TOE contenders. Significan tly, her theory has something in common with 
the teleological illusion as analyzed by Zitek. It is abstract and formal, hav­
ing little content, which she supplies by putting in constants already known, 
such as the speed of light. She reasons that since we already know these 
things to be true, they must be consistent with a correct TOE; her critics 
(including Andrew Worth) suspect that this makes her theory tautological. 
234 T RAN 5 MIT TIN G: A N A LOG AND 0 I G I TAL 
In much the way that the teleological illusion reads backward through con­
tingent events to arrive at a present thus made necessary and inevitable, so 
Mosala's theory synthesizes her logical framework with what already exists 
to create a TOE that appears fated to be the correct interpretatio n. 
The addition of known data to Mosala's theory recalls the ad hoc nature of 
the Copies, whose reality was vulnerable to deconstruction precisely because 
it had not emerged from the ground up. Distress explores the inverse propo­
sition; instead of a more robust reality deconstructing Permutation City, 
Mosala's theory, because it lacks robust content, threatens to deconstruct 
the universe. Captured by an extremist AC group, Andrew tries desperately 
to dissuade them from their deadly designs on Mosala. They explain their 
violent intentions by running a simulation for him that first shows an in­
credibly complex web of interconnected threads representing the universe's 
knowledge content. When they put in Mosala's theory, these threads begin 
to unravel until finally there is nothing. One of their scientists explains, "Her 
TOE can't survive its own expression. It can make her the Keystone. It can 
grant her a seamless past. It can manufacture twenty billion years of cos­
mology. But once it's been stated explicitly, it will resolve itself into pure 
mathematics, pure logic" (321). The letter's arrival, as they see it, will be the 
uncreation of the universe, as Mosala's TOE "goes through all the labor of 
creating a past-only to reach the conclusion that it has no future" (321). 
As we have seen, Zizek uses the letter's arrival to signify an unraveling 
of the teleological illusion, so that the sender is finally forced to recognize 
the psychological mechanisms embedded within the illusion. In Zizek's con­
struction, the problem is precisely that the symptomatic patient mistakes his 
subjective contingencies for an objectively existing reality. Egan, by contrast, 
entwines the teleological illusion with an abstract and formal TOE, thereby 
situating the compound in a borderland indeterminably located between 
the subjective and objective. It is subje ctive insofar as it embodies Mosala's 
vision; if another scientist becomes the Keystone (as the fringe ACs hope 
will happen when they take Mosala out of the picture by infecting her with 
a deadly virus), the consequence would presumably be a different kind of 
universe. On the other hand, the compound is objective in the sense that 
her TOE expresses formal relationships that must logically cohere for her 
TOE (or any other) to have efficacy. Only if it coheres would it have the 
power to become objective in the strong sense of actually determining the 
universe's structure. 
This entanglement of the subjective and objective, the human with the 
cosmological, is bound up with another drama played out between human 
identity and embodied instantiation, a drama performed most powerfully 
Subjective Cosmology and the Regime of Computation 235 
through Andrew's role in the unfolding events. He has had implanted in 
his abdomen a sophisticated hardware and software system that can record 
events electronically; the implant is appropriately dubbed "Witness:' The 
implant promises objectivity, for it will simply record whatever is to be seen. 
Yet Andrew must evoke the software through a conscious act of will, and he 
also directs what it records by his glance, so the result is a synthesis of his 
subjective intention with the intelligent machine's operation. His psychol­
ogy therefore inevitably affects the electronic record, and there are early 
hints that his psychology is unusual. We learn that he has never had a re­
lationship last longer than eighteen months and that he lacks an intuitive 
feeling for intimacy, attempting to make up for it by a list of rules that he 
recites to himself, the first rule being to pretend to his partner that there are 
no rules. When he interviews a leader of Voluntary Autistics, subsequent 
events intimate that Andrew himself is probably a high-functioning autis­
tic, an inference that later becomes important in linking Andrew's subjective 
worldview with the nature of the world itself. 
Significantly, Andrew's realization of his own physicality is bound up with 
his intestinal tract and specifically with the small aperture through which 
the equipment was inserted into his abdomen. Infected with an engineered 
strain of cholera by the fringe ACs, he realizes that "this diseased body was 
my whole self. It was not a temporary shelter for some tiny, indestruc tible 
man-god living in the safe warm dark behind my eyes. From skull to putrid 
arsehole, this was the instrument of everything I'd ever do, ever feel, ever 
be" (272). Yet there are layers to this realization; he knows, but he does not 
know fully. Sliced across the abdomen by a military robot, he later feels an 
inexplicable impulse to probe the wound with his fingers, pushing until he 
feels his small intestine. Thinking "this was the part of me that had almost 
killed me" (when he had uncontrollable diarrhea), he realizes that "the body 
is not a traitor; it only obeys the laws it must obey in order to exist at all" (422). 
His confrontation with his own physicality is thus staged as a realization 
that he is bound by the laws that the TOE articulates. In a certain sense, 
his identity is nothing other than this articulation. The connection is fur­
ther strengthened when he is kidnapped and forced to pull the embedded 
coils of software out of his abdomen. As he extracts the umbilical-like ar­
tifact, he engages in a performance that demonstrates the inevitable en­
twining of the subjective and objective. The action eerily echoes and inverts 
the scene in Permutation City where Paul Durham stabs himself in the ab­
domen. Whereas Paul's suicide is a renunciation of embodiment, Andrew's 
extraction of his software is connected with his realization that he is his 
236 T RAN S MIT TIN G: A N A LOG AND DIG I TAL 
body. As he pulls the coils of optic fiber from his belly, the scene functions as 
if bringing literally into bloody view the symbolic umbilical cord that Zizek 
identifies with the place where the frame enters the picture. When he later 
probes his intestine through the reopened wound, he thinks, "I wanted to 
stare into a mirror and proclaim: This is it. I know who I am, now. And I 
accept, absolutely, my life as a machine driven by blood, as a creature of cells 
and molecules, as a prisoner of the TOE" (422). If the Lacanian mirror stage 
enables the subject to (mis)recognize himself as a coherent body, here the 
(missing) mirror reflects back to Andrew an image of himself as a manifesta­
tion of the universe's realization through the Theory of Everything, which as 
its name redundantly implies must include Andrew's subjective being within 
its scope. 
The point is made explicit when Andrew attempts to goad a fringe AC 
scientist by suggesting that he is content to be a bit player in a drama di­
rected by the successful TOE theorist. The scientist responds, "The universe 
is not a dream. The Keystone is not ... the avatar of some slumbering god­
computer in a higher reality, threatening to wake and forget us. The Key­
stone anchors the universe from within. There's nowhere else to do it" (319). 
Although events prove the scientist wrong in thinking that a single person 
would be the Keystone, the narrative sustains and expands the central in­
sight that we are always in the position of changing the world while simul­
taneously being changed by it, for the only possible positions we can occupy 
are inside that same world. 32 
Distress creates several metaphors for this reflexive entwining. Shortly af­
ter Andrew arrives at Stateless, the island anarchy where most of the novel 
is set, a woman tells Andrew her story of treading water with her sister for 
hours after a shipwreck, each holding up the other in a fashion that recalls 
Escher's drawing of a right hand drawing a left hand drawing a right hand. 
Stateless itself embodies the same reflexive metaphor, for it literally floats 
on top of the ocean through nano-engineered organisms that generate the 
gases holding up the island, even while the island holds them up. Although 
the island would seem to be hopelessly vulnerable to any attack, when En­
Genuity (the corporation claiming proprietary rights to the nanotechnol­
ogy that created the island) uses ruthless mercenaries and military robots to 
intimidate and slaughter the inhabitants, the anarchists triumph by simply 
allowing the portion of the island holding the invaders to sink. 
The scene of Andrew accepting his body as truly himself and not merely as 
a container sets the stage for the climax, in which the union of the subjective 
and objective rockets to cosmological proportions. Knowing she has been 
Subjective Cosmology and the Regime of Computation 237 
targeted, Mosala activates a Kaspar clonelet, an artificial intelligence soft­
ware that instantiates certain aspects of her mind. Yet as the clonelet com­
pletes and extends Mosala's synthesis, Distress (an informational disorder 
in which the victims feel unbearable anguish from informational overload) 
begins exponentially claiming victims. The problem, Andrew intuits, is that 
the TOE is being put together by a nonhuman intelligen ce. To integrate hu­
mans into the picture, the TOE must be interpreted by a human being, who 
turns out, as readers might have guessed, to be Andrew himself-and yet 
not him; for once he has given human form to the understanding, many 
others follow, so the TOE ends up being created not by a single Keystone 
but by millions of people working cooperatively together. 
In conveying the resulting transformation, Egan strives to represent a 
world that is at once infused with human meaning and objectively true; he 
calls this world the "participatory universe." Significan tly, the last remaining 
obstacle to Andrew's attempt to articulate the TOE is empathy, which he now 
understands in the terms set out earlier by the Voluntary Autistics: empathy 
is a trick evolution played on the human species to insure that pair bond­
ing, and thus sexual reproduction, would take place. The illusion that we 
can understand another person's feelings is replaced by the TOE, a greater 
understanding that does not require the exclusivity of pair bonding. The 
lasting relationship for which Andrew yearned is finally accomplished with 
Akili Kuwale, an "asex" who has had "vis" body surgically altered to remove 
sexual allure and the possibility for sexual union. "The deepest truth about 
the body;' Kuwale tells Andrew, "is all that restrains it, in the end, is physics. 
We can shape it into anything the TOE allows" (404).33 In this curious con­
figuration, the body is accepted as a "prisoner to the TOE" at the same time 
that it is liberated from its evolutionary bondage to reprodu ctive urges, as if 
to accomplish the former the latter must also take place. 
As this formation suggests, physics consistently trumps biology in Egan's 
work. In the later novel Schild's Ladder, set in the far future (i.e., from six 
hundred to one thousand years hence), humanity has become so thoroughly 
postbiological that most people no longer feel anxiety about losing their 
birth bodies. This is not the case in Quarantine, Permutation City, and 
Distress, all near future works (i.e., a few decades away). In this subjec­
tive cosmology trilogy, the protagonists struggle with their physicality and 
its limitations: witness Nick's anxiety when he realizes the discontinu ities 
of consciousness, Paul's intense horror at finding that his body is a simu­
lacrum, and Andrew's painful coming to terms with his embodiment. These 
texts suggest that this is the price that must be paid to achieve a subjec­
tive cosmology: humans must first recognize themselves as creatures of the 
238 T RAN S MIT TIN G: A N A LOG AND 0 I G I TAL 
cosmos before they are allowed to understand that they are creators of it 
as well. 
The friction between struggling with embodiment and Egan's belief in a 
postbiological future can be seen as an admirable commitment on his part 
to look hard at his own premises. In Egan's fiction, there is the lingering sus­
picion that humans represent one small part of an immense universe, and 
this suspicion often translates into a healthy skepticism that Egan seems to 
harbor with regard to his own assumptions. Like Zizek, Egan would agree 
that we always say more than we know, in the sense that the range of our 
knowledge has limits we do not see. For Egan, however, the letter's arrival is 
not associated particularly with repression (although he is not unaware of 
this possibility, as his characterization of Andrew Worth indicates). Rather, 
the letter points toward our local and limited understanding of the nature 
of the physical universe. Egan would almost certainly find Zizek's psycho­
analytical approach distressingly parochial. He has made his views clear in 
an interview: "When it comes to deep self -modification of the personal­
ity ... either while remaining in our bodies, as in Quarantine, or once we're 
uploaded as software, as in Permutation City-that 's a very complex issue, 
which ... the majority of my work is trying to address in various ways. It 
might take 50 years, or it might take 500, but eventually we're going to have 
unlimited control over whatever physical substrate is 'executing' our minds, 
and I'm trying to map out some of the benefits and some of the dangers of 
that." 34 To invest everything in a theory of the unconscious based on our 
physical and mental structures, as Zizek does, would in Egan's view be pre­
sumptuous because it holds the entire span of the far future hostage to our 
present local conditions. 
At almost every point where I find myself resisting Egan's vision­
notably his vision of a postbiological future and the expansion of human 
powers necessary to create the participatory universe-I find this resistance 
inscribed and recognized within the text. Egan has Andrew Worth acknowl­
edge, for example, that the participatory universe is not entirely benign. 
Nine million people, we are told, committed suicide (!) rather than join 
in this vision. Since they presumably would have resisted the instantiation 
of this vision if such resistance were possible, this revelation, arriving a page 
from the end, suggests that the participatory universe can also be seen as the 
compulsory universe. 
Finally what attracts me-compels me-to engage with Egan's fiction is 
his refusal to make things easy for himself, a refusal that might well be called 
by such names as "honesty" and "integrity." If I attempt to be equally hon­
est myself, I am forced to agree that it is difficult to imagine where humans 
Subjective Cosmology and the Regime of Computation 239 
will be in another thousand years; they might indeed invent a postbiologi­
cal future for themselv es. It seems certain that the next century will see in­
creasing convergences between humans and intelligent machines through 
such developments as implants, pervasive computing, robots with ever more 
sophisticated sensors and actuators, quantum computing, and the increas­
ing conve rgence of biology and computation through nanotechnology and 
other means. 
As the scope of our technological prowess increases, so do threats to our 
biological existence-through acid rain, greenhouse effects, and other en­
vironmental degradations, not to mention genocidal campaigns of ethnic 
cleansing and military adventures intent on making other cultures conform 
to what we think they should be. Amid these disasters, we could do worse 
than attend to the implication in Egan's subjective cosmology trilogy that 
"what we make" and "what (we think) we are" are deeply intertwin ed. What­
ever the future, the teleological illusion operates strongly in his fiction to 
remind us that we are both in the world and of it-a truth that becomes 
only more inescapable as we create machines in our image and reenvision 
ourselves as computational mechanisms like them. 
240 T RAN S MIT TIN G: A N A LOG AND DIG I TAL 
Epilogue 
Recursion and Emergence 
Long before Stephen Wolfram's book, Francis Bacon also called for a new 
kind of science that was even more ambitious and far-reaching than Wol­
fram's vision. Novum Organon, routinely regarded as providing the founda­
tions of modern science, envisioned a masculine science based on empirical 
practices that, in Bacon's high expectations, would repair the damage done 
with the Fall from Eden and restore to "man" dominion over the earth. Ba­
con understood full well the dangers of believing in cultural metaphors and 
constructed a typology of blind spots to warn practitioners against them. 
However necessary his strategic separation of the subjective and objective 
may have been at a time when alchemy flourished and astrology was a state 
science, it left a damaging legacy by associating science with mastery, con­
trol, and domination, underwritten by the premise that one can act without 
simultaneously being acted upon. Over the intervening centuries, the tragic 
implications of that assumption would be played out again and again in fic­
tion and reality, from Mary Shelley's Frankenstein to the looming problems 
in the new millennium of global warming. 
An important contribution of mid-twentieth-century cybernetics was the 
construction of theories and workable technologies that instantiated feed­
back loops connecting human and machine, dominator and dominated, 
subject and object. Yet even the most insightful and reflective of the cyber­
neticians stopped short of seeing that reflexivity could do more than turn 
back on itself to create autopoietic systems that continually produce and 
reproduce their organization. Heinz von Foerster's classic work Observing 
Systems shows him coming to the threshold of a crucial insight and yet not 
quite grasping it: the realization that reflexivity could become a spiral rather 
than a circle, resulting in dynamic hierarchies of emergent behaviors. By the 
time scientists began to use this idea as the basis for new kinds of technolo­
gies, cybernetics had already lost its utopian gloss, and the new fields would 
go by the names of artificial life, complexity theory, and cellular automata. 
The crucial question with which this book has been concerned is how 
the "new kind of science" that underwrites the Regime of Computation can 
serve to deepen our understanding of what it means to be in the world rather 
than apart from it, comaker rather than dominator, participants in the com­
plex dynamics that connect "what we make" and "what (we think) we are." 
Amid the uncertainties, potentialities, and dangers created by the Regime 
of Computation, simulations-computational and narrative-can serve as 
potent resources with which to explore and understand the entanglement 
oflanguage with code, the traditional medium of print with electronic tex­
tuality, and subjectivity with computation. 
A major implication of entanglement is that boundaries of all kinds have 
become permeable to the supposed other. Code permeates language and is 
permeated by it; electronic text permeates print; computational processes 
permeate biological organisms; intelligent machines permeate flesh. Rather 
than attempt to police these boundaries, we should strive to understand the 
materially specific ways in which flows across borders create complex dy­
namics of intermediatio n. At the same time, boundaries have not been ren­
de red unimportant or nonexistent by the traffic across them. Biological or­
ganisms are not only computational processes; natural language is not code; 
and fleshly creatures are composed of embodiments that differ qualitatively 
from artificial life forms. Boundaries are both permeable and meaningful; 
humans are distinct from intelligent machines even while the two are be­
come increasingly entwined. 
Informing these interactions is a viSIon of computational media as in­
stantiatio ns of the world's active agency. Disrupting the standard story of 
scientific realism, the computational processes that create and implement 
this agency have the potential to inspire another kind of narrative in which 
humans are not seen as subjects manipulating objects in the world. It is 
possible, of course, to inscribe computational media into scenarios of mas­
tery, familiar at least since Bacon, in which the subject/object dichotomy 
provides the basic assumption for action. Popular culture offers us myriad 
stories of this kind, from the Terminator films to A. I. and The Matrix to 
Philip K. Dick's Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? A central dynamic in 
these works is the artificial life form that refuses to accept its status as a pas­
sive object and asserts its right to become a subject capable of autonomous 
action, which when pitted against human agency generates the conflict on 
which the story turns. However this power struggle is played out and what-
242 E P I LOG U E 
ever its outcome, the subject/object dichotomy remains intact, as does the 
implication that subjects have the right to dominate objects. If we interpret 
the relations of humans and intelligent machines only within this paradigm, 
the underlying structures of domination and control continue to dictate the 
terms of engagement. 
This book has focused on narratives of a different kind that offer ways out 
of the subject/object divide. In these stories, human action and agency are 
understood as embodied processes sharing important characteristics with 
the processes taking place within computational media, including possi­
bilities for evolution and emergence. In my view, an essential component 
of coming to terms with the ethical implications of intelligent machines is 
recognizing the mutuality of our interactions with them, the complex dy­
namics through which they create us even as we create them. The preceding 
chapters have staged that central realization at many points and in different 
ways: Wolfram looking at his cellular automata; the monster in Patchwork 
Girl looking for her consciousness in the guts of the machine; humans gaz­
ing at Karl Sims's virtual creatures; Andrew Worth probing inside his wound 
to extract Witness. 
Encountering intelligent machines from this perspec tive enables me to 
see that they are neither objects to dominate nor subjects threatening to 
dominate me. Rather, they are embodied entities instantiating processes that 
interact with the processes that I instantiate as an embodied human sub­
ject. The experience of interacting with them changes me increment ally, so 
the person who emerges from the encounter is not exactly the same person 
who began it. What I think of as my human legac y-the language I speak, 
the books I read, the digital art and information I peruse, the biology I in­
herit from eons of evolutionary dynamics, the consciousness that generates 
my sense of identity-is already affected by the intermediating dynamics of 
my interactions with intelligent machines, and will surely be transformed 
even more deeply in the decades to come. The challenge, as I see it, is to 
refuse to inscribe these interactions in structures of domination and instead 
to seek out understandings that recognize and enact the complex mutuality 
of the interactions. "What we make" and "what (we think) we are" co evolve 
together; emergence can operate as an ethical dynamic as well as a tech­
nological one. Realization arrives not in an instant but in successive cycles 
of awareness, each building on what came before. So it has been for me in 
writing this book, and perhaps for you in reading it. As is always the case 
where dynamical emergences are involved, at the end we begin again. 
E P I LOG U E 243 
Notes 
Prologue 
1. Anne Balsamo, Technologies of the Gendered Body, 133. 
2. I have borrowed the term "Robo sapiens" from Peter Menzel and Faith D'Alusio, 
Robo sapiens, a photographic excursion into some of the newest accomplishments in robot 
engineering. 
3. Hans Moravec, Mind Children, passim. For example, in the prologue Moravec predicts 
that "a postbiological world dominated by self-improving thinking machines would be as 
different from our world ofliving things as this world is different from the lifeless chemistry 
that preceded it" (5). He continues his exploration of robot intelligence and a postbiological 
world in Robot. 
4. Bruno Latour, "A. N. Whitehead and Richard Powers:' 
5. Stephen Wolfram, A New Kind of Science. 
6. The similarity between the clockwork metaphor in the eighteenth century and the 
pervasiveness of computer metaphors in the twentieth century has been widely noticed in 
the scientific commun ity, by skeptics as well as advocates of the Computational Universe. 
See, for example, Seth Lloyd, "How Fast,' 
How Small, and How Powerful? Moore's Law and 
the Ultimate Laptop:' 
7. Marjorie Hope Nicolson, Newton Demands the Muse. 
8. Friedrich A. Kittler, Essays, 40. 
9. Friedrich A. Kittler, "The Mother's Mouth;' in Discourse Networks, 25-70. 
10. Nicholas Gessler, personal communicati on. 
11. Marie-Laure Ryan, Possible Worlds, Artificial Intelligence, and Narrative Theory. 
Chapter One 
1. Hereafter when "code" and "language" appear together, "language" refers to natural 
language and "code" to digital computer code, unless otherwise specified. 
2. The concept of the feedback loop was developed in first-order cybernetics during the 
1930S and 1940S. Although the idea of circulating the output of a system back into the system 
as input is ancient, dating back to self-governing devices developed by the Greeks in the 
classical period, it was not until the twentieth century that the feedback loop was explicitly 
linked with informational circuits, where it began to have much broader applicability. I use 
"feedback loop" to apply both to physical devices and to recursive conceptual structures. 
3. Ferdinand de Saussure, Course in General Linguistics. 
4. Stephen Wolfram, A New Kind of Science; Edward Fredkin, Introduction to Digital 
Philosophy; Harold Morowitz, The Emergence of Everything; Ellen Ullman, Close to the Ma­
chine; Matthew Fuller, Behind the Blip; Matthew G. Kirschenbaum, "Editing the Interface"; 
Bruce Eckel, Thinking in C++. 
5. See, for example, Jacques Derrida, Positions, 22. 
6. Quoted in Alan Bass, "Translator's Introduction;' in Jacques Derrida, Writing and 
Difference, xiii. In The Parasite, Michel Serres explored extensively the notion of the parasite 
in relation to noise in communication systems. Derrida's grammatology can be understood 
as an intense dose of noise injected in Saussurean linguistics. 
7. Leonard M. Adelman, "Molecular Computation of Solutions to Combinatorial 
Problem s"; Daniel Hillis, The Pattern on the Stone; John von Neumann, Theory of Self­
Reproducing Automata. 
8. Alan Turing, "On Computable Numbers, with an Application to the Entscheidungs­
problem." For an analysis of the evolution of the logic underlying Turing's construction of 
the Universal Computer, see Martin Davis, The Universal Computer. 
9. Von Neumann, Theory of Self-Reproducing Automata, 91-156. Steven Levy, in Artificial 
Life, gives an account of von Neumann's self-reproducing machine. His account is based on 
the rather sketchy information given by Arthur W. Burks (who edited and compiled von 
Neumann's incomplete manuscript after the latter's death) of what Burks calls the kine­
matic model of self-reproduction. Burks's version can be found in von Neumann, Theory 
of Self-Reproducing Automata, 74-90. 
10. Konrad Zuse, Rechnender Raum. 
ll. See, for example, Christopher G. Langton, "Computation at the Edge of Chaos:' 
12. For a downloadable version of the game in Java, see John Conway, Game of Life. 
13. The following scheme represents a typical configuration; many other arrangements 
are possible. The cells can be configured so that they can occupy more than two states; 
they can be arranged in one, two, or n-dimensions; and they can reference not only their 
nearest and next nearest neighbors but also states of their neighbors one or more steps back. 
Of course, the rules can also change, as can the colors used to represent the states. 
14. Rule llO is illustrated in Wolfram, A New Kind of Science, 53. The patterns are much 
easier to comprehend in the simple illustrations Wolfram gives, but if one must rely on 
words, the patterns can be described as follows. If a given cell and both its neighbors are 
the same color, in the next generation the cell will be white. If it and the left neighbor are the 
same color, in the next generation the cell will be black. If it and the right neighbor are the 
same color, in the next generation the cell will be that color. Ifboth the cell's neighbors are 
a different color than it is, in the next generation it will be black. 
15. Arthur K. Cebrowski and John J. Garstka, "Network- Centric Warfare." For a sobering 
analysis of the problems involved in this revolution in military affairs, see Stephen J. Blank, 
"Preparing for the Next War." 
16. It is possible, of course, to freight one and zero with considerable metaphysical bag­
gage, if one is inclined to do so. In "Language as Information;' Johanna Drucker instances 
246 NOT EST 0 P AGE S 1 6 -2 3 
the case of the Renaissance type designer Geofroy Tory, who argued that the "full set of 
symbols of human language, and thus of cosmic as well as human thought , are comprised 
at base of two elements: the I and O. For Tory these are essential elements: the masculine 
principle of the vertical thrust and the feminine principle of procreative fullness" (214-15). 
In Snow Crash, Neal Stephenson also includes a long disquisition by the Librarian (an arti­
ficial intelligence manifested as a hologram) on similar ideas in Sumerian culture regarding 
the one and zero. 
17. Edward Fredkin, "History;' in Introduction to Digital Philosophy, chap. 9, para. 7. 
18. In Order out of Chaos, Ilya Prigogine and Isabelle Stengers argue that dissipative pro­
cesses create new information, as, for example, in a multiparticle collision in which the 
collision serves as a coordination point correlating the particles' momenta and positions. 
Such creation explains, they argue, why time can go only forward, for as billions or trillions 
of such events occur, an infinite "information barrier" is created that separates the past 
from the future. 
19. Edward Fredkin, "Conservation of Information;' in Introduction to Digital Philoso­
phy, chap. ll, para. 3. 
20. Edward Fredkin, "Thinking about Digital Philosoph y;' in Introduction to Digital Phi­
losophy, chap. 34, para. 1. 
21. Edward Fredkin, "DP and Biology;' in Introduction to Digital Philosophy, chap. 4, 
para. 7. 
22. Ray Kurzweil, "Reflections on Stephen Wolfram's A New Kind of Science:' For an­
other review, see Lawrence Gray, ''A Mathematician Looks at Wolfram's New Kind of Sci­
ence:) 
23. In February 2003, Stephen Wolfram gave a lecture at the California Institute of Tech­
nology in Pasadena. After the lecture, Wolfram's work was discussed by a panel of Caltech 
scientists. In that discussion, artificial-l ife researcher Christopher Adami made the point 
that Wolfram had seriously underestimated the importance of evolution. 
24. See, for example, the UNITN call for papers for the conference "Dynamic Ontology: 
An Inquiry into Systems, Emergence, Levels of Reality, and Forms of Causality" (January 
24,2003). 
25. Pierre Teilhard de Chardin, The Phenomenon of Man. 
26. Stuart A. Kauffman, The Origins of Order; see also the more general version, At Home 
in the Universe. 
27. The role of the observer in evolutionary processes is central to second-order cyber­
netics. The observer also plays a crucial role in the interpretation of artificial- life simula­
tions. When Conway's Game of Life is perceived as a living entity, for example, this percep­
tion may be related analogically not so much to the evolution oflife itself as to the evolution 
of the perceptual mechanisms within humans that trigger the thought "This entity is liv­
ing:' An especially interesting treatment of processes within an observer that stand in a 
metaphorical or analogical relation to processes in the external world is presented in Mary 
Catherine Bateson, Our Own Metaphor. 
28. Thanks to Nicholas Gessler fo r drawing my attention to these agendas. See, for ex­
ample, AAAI, Computational Synthesis .. 
29. Nicholas Gessler, personal communicati on. 
NOT EST 0 P AGE 5 2 3 - 2 8 247 
30. Each year John Brockman poses a question on his Web site and invites well-known 
scientists to post their answers. In 2004 the question was "What is your law?" to which Seth 
Lloyd responded with "Lloyd's It from Qubit Law." A "qubit" is a quantum bit, that is, a bit 
generated by a quantum computer. His law implies that all of "it" -the universe-comes 
from quantum bits generated by the universe understood as a quantum logic circuit, in 
effect, a quantum computer. 
31. John Brockman, "What's Your Question?" More discussions on Seth Lloyd's vision 
of a Computational Universe can be found in Seth Lloyd, "How Fast, How Small, and How 
Powerful? Moore's Law and the Ultimate Laptop:' where he calculates the absolute limits 
of computations that could be performed by an "ultimate laptop" one liter in volume and 
one kilogram in weight; see also Seth Lloyd, "Ultimate Physical Limits to Computation:' 
Lloyd later realized that he was not sufficiently ambitious (as he says) and that the real 
issue was the computational limits of the universe understood as a quantum computer, a 
question he addressed in "Computational Capacity of the Universe." Thoughtful responses 
to Lloyd's vision of a Computational Universe can be found at John Brockman, "Joseph 
Traub, Jaron Lanier, John McCarthy, Lee Smolin, Philip W. Anderson, Anthony Valentini, 
Stuart Hameroff, and Paola Zizzi Respond to Seth Lloyd:' 
32. Nicholas Gessler, "Evolving Artificial Cultural Things-That-Think and Work by Dy­
namical Hierarchical Sy nthesis." Intermediation has a rich history that adds to its connota­
tions. "Intermedia" is the term for the hypertext authoring system developed at Brown Uni­
versity by the Institute for Research in Information and Scholarship (IRIS). It also appears 
in numerous corporation names and art groups, for example, the Palindrome Inter.media 
Performance Group, a German-American dance group based in New York and Niimberg, 
Germany. 
33. Lev Manovich, The Language of New Media; Friedrich A. Kittler, Gramophone, Film, 
Typewriter. 
34. Kittler, Gramophone, Film, Typewriter, 25-114, esp. 48-49. 
35. Friedrich A. Kittler, Discourse Networks. 
36. In my view, this helps to explain the notable resurgence of interest in the book in the 
twentieth century, both for artists' books and for book technology in general. 
37. Richard Grusin and Jay David Bolter, Remediation. 
38. Ibid., 273-
39. Referencing the full range of the extensive literature on the Prisoner's Dilemma is 
beyond the scope of my purposes here. For a good introduction to game theory in the con­
text of John von Neumann's seminal work in the field, see William Poundstone, Prisoner's 
Dilemma. For an explanation of how the Prisoner's Dilemma can be adapted for computer 
programs, and how it gives rise to emergent cooperation when it is iterated, see Robert 
Alexrod, The Evolution of Cooperation. 
40. Kittler, Gramophone, Film, Typewriter, 46. 
41. See, for example, ibid., 76. 
42. See Donald MacKay, Information, Mechanism, Meaning. 
43. To be fair, Hansen's work comes a decade after Discourse Networks, Kittler's major 
book. Kittler's prior entrenchment helps to explain why Hansen has to push hard on the 
position Kittler articulates to make room for his own ideas. 
248 NOT EST 0 P AGE 5 3 0 -3 5 
44. Hans P. Moravec, Mind Children and Robot; Ray Kurzweil, The Age of Spiritual Ma­
chines. 
45. Sha Xin Wei, "A Tgarden as a Phenomenological Experiment." 
46. In "It's Not the Technology, Stupid!" a presentation at the annual convention of the 
Modern Language Association in 2003, Jerome McGann articulated this belief with great 
conviction and force. 
47. Jerome J. McGann, D. G. Rossetti Hypermedia Archive. 
Chapter Two 
1. Brian Cantwell Smith, On the Origin of Objects, 76. 
2. Ferdinand de Saussure, Course in General Linguistics, 67. 
3. Jacques Derrida, Positions, 17. 
4. Jacques Derrida, OfGrammatology, 52. 
5. Jonathan Culler, Ferdinand de Saussure, 33. 
6. Working against these interpretations of Saussure are a number of critics who have 
argued that his theories were misinterpreted in poststructuralism. Among them are Ray­
mond Tallis, Not Saussure, a work that argues in favor of restoring the notion of reference, 
and Paul J. Thibault, Re-reading Saussure, a study that emphasizes Saussure's theory as a 
model of social/semiological interactions. In The Visible Word, a careful analysis of Saus­
sure's theory in historical context, Johanna Drucker seeks to recuperate from Saussure a 
revitalized role for the materiality of the sign. 
7. In The Visible Word, Johanna Drucker concludes that "there would seem to be no 
possibility of generating a concept of materiality out of Saussure's theory of the sign." She 
notes, however, that "there is one loophole in his argument, namely his view of inflection 
as altering the value ofthe sign" (23). 
8. Peter Gendolla, Jorgen Schafer, and Maik Pluschke, e-mail message, February 3,2004. 
See also, Peter Gendolla, Jorgen Schafer, and Maik Pluschke, "Literatur in Netzen/Netz­
literatur:' 
9. Friedrich Kittler, "There Is No Software;' in Essays, 147-55. 
10. Languages that are compiled perform the translation into binary code as a batch run, 
whereas interpreted languages perform translation into binary code command by com­
mand. The advantage of interpreted languages, although they eat up more run time, is 
increased flexibility and error control. 
11. Jacques Derrida, "Difference;' in Margins of Philosophy, 1-28, esp. 6. 
12. A trail-off error denotes a voltage packet that instead oflooking like a step function 
JL trails off at the end of the packet �. 
13. Jacques Lacan, Le Seminaire XX: Encore, 22, 35. "Function as intended" should be in­
terpreted in context of the program's structure and design. A virus, worm, or Trojan horse, 
for example, may be intended to crash the system. 
14. Jacques Derrida, "Signature Event Context;' in Limited Inc, 1-24, esp. 9. 
15. It is true that bits can be put in any context whatever, but their order signifies a 
specific meaning that is in general nontransf erable. To take Derrida's observation to this 
level (or for language, to the level of the individual letter ) would reduce iterability to a 
trivial proposition, so I assume this is not what he means. 
NOT EST 0 P AGE 5 3 5 -4 8 249 
16. Ellen Ullman, Close to the Machine. 
17. Ellen Ullman, "Elegance and Entropy." 
18. For a brief introduction to the lambda calculus, see Don Blaheta, "The Lambda Cal­
culus:' 
19. Alexander R. Galloway, Protocol, 165. 
20. J. L. Austin, How to Do Things with Words. Jacques Derrida, "Limited Inc abc ... ;' 
in Limited Inc, 29-110. This famous response to John R. Searle's "Reiterating the Differ­
ences: A Reply to Derrida" demonstrated with acerbic wit why writing cannot, in Derrida's 
view, be assimilated into speech. Indeed, Derrida's response to Searle's "Reply" launched a 
brilliant counterattack by assimilating speech into writing. 
21. William R. Paulson, Literary Culture in a World Transformed. Paulson decries the 
esoteric nature of much of literary theory, especially deconstruction, and calls for a return 
to language that ordinary people can understand. 
22. See the Open Source Initiative for a statement of principles: "The basic idea be­
hind open source is very simple: When programmers can read, redistribute, and modify the 
source code for a piece of software, the software evol ves. People improve it, people adapt 
it, people fix bugs. And this can happen at a speed that, if one is used to the slow pace of 
conventional software development, seems astonishing. We in the open source commu­
nity have learned that this rapid evolutionary process produces better software than the 
traditional closed model, in which only a very few programmers can see the source and 
everybody else must blindly use an opaque block of bits. Open Source Initiative exists to 
make this case to the commercial world:' The success of this and related initiatives can be 
seen in the movement of Macintosh to a Unix platform. 
23. Jonathan Culler briefly reviews this history in Ferdinand de Saussure, 45-56. Johanna 
Drucker in The Visible Word also reviews the historical context to evaluate the role of ma­
teriality in pre-Saussurean linguistics as well as in Saussure's own theory (9-47). 
24. There seems to be slippage here between the elementary unit of a language, such as 
a letter, and larger units such as words, pqrases, sentences, and so on. As indicated in note 
15 above, it is trivial to observe that letters are iterable, for this is the nature of alphabetic 
language. For Derrida's observation to have force, it must apply to larger units, and the 
larger the unit, the less the observation applies to content-bound code at the binary level. 
25. Rita Raley, "Machine Translation and Global English." 
26. The importance of this aesthetic to electronic literature is discussed in Rita Raley, 
"Reveal Codes." 
27. Harold J. Morowitz, The Emergence of Everything. 
28. Andrew Koenig and Barbara E. Moo, "Preface." 
29. Bruce Eckel discusses the distinction between early and late binding in Thinking in 
C++,40. 
30. For a discussion of this interpenetratio n, see Raley, "Machine Translation and Global 
English." 
31. Ibid. 
32. For discussions of these practices, see Rita Raley, "Reveal Codes" and "Interf erences." 
A discussion can also be found in N. Katherine Hayles, "From Object to Process." For a 
carefully nuanced analysis of works using "broken code" versus code that will actually run, 
see John Cayley, "The Code Is Not the Text (Unless It Is the Text)." 
250 NOT EST 0 P AGE S 4 8 -6 0 
33. Wendy Hui Kyong Chun, "On the Persistence of Visual Knowledge." 
34. A playful example of such subversion was the hack into the Google home page that, 
for a brief time, answered the Google search "Evil as the devil himself" by directing the 
user to the Microsoft home page. Alexander R. Galloway has an illuminating discussion of 
hacking as a social good in Protocol, 146-207. 
35. Matthew Fuller, Behind the Blip; Matthew G. Kirschenbaum, "Virtuality and VRML." 
Chapter Three 
1. G. M. Foster, "Peasant Society and the Image of Limited Good." 
2. Mark Poster, What's the Matter with the Internet? 
3. Charles Ostman, "Synthetic Sentience." 
4. For a discussion of the ambiguities in Stephenson's fiction, see N. Katherine Hayles, 
"From Utopia to Mutopia." 
5. C. B. Macpherson, The Political Theory of Possessive Individualism. 
6. The idea that virtual technologies subvert the traditional assumption that one body 
houses one subject is explored in Allucquere Rosanne Stone, The War of Technology and 
Desire at the Close of the Mechanical Age. 
7. Robert Markley, "Boundaries: Mathematics, Alienation, and the Metaphy sics of Cy­
berspace." 
8. In Networking, Laura Otis traces the extensive analogies in nineteenth-century British 
science and literature between telegraph lines (and communication lines generally) and the 
nerves of the human body. 
9. Stuart Hutchinson's stout defense of Mr. Mudge in "James's 'In the Cage': A New 
Interpretation" is no doubt correct, in that Mr. Mudge is shown to have virtues that the 
girl underpla ys in her desire to be superior to him. Nevertheless, Mr. Mudge has his feet 
planted firmly in the regime of scarcity; indeed, that is one of his principal strengths. 
10. For a discussion of information �s pattern and randomness, see N. Katherine Hayles, 
How We Became Posthuman, chap. 2. 
11. Ralf Norrman, Techniques of Ambiguit y in the Fiction of Henry James, 139-40. 
12. The girl's correction causes Lady Bradeen to blush and exit the office, never to return, 
for it indicates how much the girl knows about her putative affair with the captain. Andrew 
Moody, in '''The Harmless Pleasure of Knowing;" provides useful historical context for 
concerns about privacy in a telegraph service that was constituted through human interac­
tions rather than anonymous, impersonal service. 
13. RalfNorrman, in "The Intercepted Telegram Plot in Henry James's 'In the Cage;" 
carefully traces out the possibility that the girl's "correction" distracted Lady Bradeen from 
making the correction she likely intended, not to the place-name but the number code. I 
would add only that it is entirely possible that both the place name and the number code 
are m error. 
14. Jennifer Wicke, "Henry James's Second Wave." 
15. In "Philip K. Dick and Criticism;' Carl Freedman discusses the cultural context for 
the novels of the 1960s, pointing out that commodification and conspiracy assumed unusu­
ally large importance in those years in the United States. Scott Durham, in "P. K. Dick: From 
the Death of the Subject to a Theology of Late Capitalism;' has a fascinating analysis of the 
movement from the subversion of the subject to the subversion of the narrative viewpoint, 
NOT EST 0 P AGE 5 6 1 -7 2 251 
which is stabilized again in Dick's late works, particularly the VALIS trilogy, by the turn to 
theology. As the succeeding paragraphs will make dear, this argument is relevant to The 
Three Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch, which Durham briefly discusses. 
16. In the course of the narrative we learn that there are six off-world colonies, all of 
them dismal. 
17. In Dick's books, the instability in the subject is often preceded by a rift in the family 
corporation, as in We Can Build You and, in a different way, The Simulacra. 
IS. Kim Stanley Robinson, The Novels of Philip K. Dick, 61. 
19. In Networking, Laura Otis describes Samuel Morse's belief that telegraphy involved 
no temporal gap; before empirical evidence showed otherwise, Morse asserted that tele­
graph signals traveled at two hundred thousand times the speed of light. By the time of 
Tiptree's story, no such illusions about simultaneity were possible. 
20. As Andrew Moody ("'The Harmless Pleasure of Knowing''') and Ric Savoy ('''In the 
Cage' and the Queer Effects of Gay History" ) both note, it was a concern of the upper-class 
patrons of telegraphy that the telegraphists might learn information from the telegrams 
they sent, which they could then use to blackmail their wealthy clients. As Tiptree's story 
suggests, by the late twentieth century the object of this concern had shifted from the indi­
vidual agent to the corporation, for in her story it is the corporation who will intervene in 
the messages for its own profit. 
21. I am indebted to Carol Wald for her astute reading of this story in "The Female Ma­
chine;' where she closely analyzes the significance of the waldo as a potentially independent 
agent. 
22. In The Fiction of James Tiptree Jr., Gardner Dozois comments on the importance this 
casting of the story as a "tale of the future" has in the construction of the narrative voice. 
23. Wicke, "Henry James's Second Wave;' 14S. 
24. Savoy, '''In the Cage' and the Queer Effects of Gay HistorY:' 
25. For a discussion of gender politics in Dick's novels and its enactment in his character 
systems, see Hayles, How We Became Posthuman, chap 7. 
26. Timothy Lenoir, personal communication. 
Chapter Four 
1. Jorge Luis Borges, "The Don Quixote of Pierre Menard:' 
2. Dene Grigar, "Mutability and Medium:' 
3. Library of Congress, William Blake Archive. 
4. Jerome McGann, The Textual Condition. 
5. Matthew G. Kirschenbaum, "Materiality and Matter and Stuff:' 
6. Matthew G. Kirschenbaum, "Editing the Interface;' esp. 46. 
7. McGann, The Textual Condition. 
S. Peter 1. Shillingsburg, "Text as Matter, Concept, and Action." 
9. Hans Zeller, "A New Approach to the Critical Constitution of Literary Texts;' esp. 25S. 
10. Allen Renear, "Out of Praxis." 
11. Mats Dahlstrom, "When Is a Webtext?" 
12. Suggesting that the OHCO scheme "made a virtue of necessity;' John Unsworth com­
ments, "I think it is important to recognize that the necessity of ordered hierarchies ... 
252 NOT EST 0 P AGE 5 7 2 - 9 5 
is really a function of the exigencies of programming software to process SGML" (e-mail 
message, August 29,2002). 
13. Renear, "Out of Praxis;' sec. 5.3.15. See also Allen Renear, "Philosophy and Electronic 
Publishing." 
14. Dino Buzzetti, "Digital Representation and the Text Model:' 
15. Dahlstrom, "When Is a Webtext?" 
16. McGann uses the term "text" in a rather different way than it is used in deconstr uctive 
criticism, which he dismisses too lightly in a few condescending sentences. 
17. In a practical sense, of course, the D. G. Rossetti Hypermedia Archive also aims for 
accurate simulation of Rosseui's materials. 
18. Janet Murray, Hamlet on the Holodeck; Espen Aarseth, Cybertext. 
19. Relevant here may be the context in which Web material is often read, a mode of 
superficial perusing that Alan Liu, in "The Humanities: A Technical Profession," calls "low 
cognitive reading:' Given ilie low intellectual value of much material on the Internet (ban­
ner advertisements, spam e-mails, Web sites that contain misleading or incorrect infor­
mation, etc.), the expectation may naturally arise that first-generation digital content (as 
distinct from print materials translated onto the Web) will not be intellectually or aesilieti­
cally challenging. Adding to this impression is the fact iliat people often read Web material 
while undertaking other activities such as talking on the telephone, reading material in 
other windows, instant messaging, and so on, all contributing to what Walter Benjamin 
called a "state of distraction" ("The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction;' 
240). Of course, one could counter with the large amount of print materials that are also 
suitable for "low cognitive reading;' including junk mail, advertisements, glossy magazines 
devoted to Hollywo od celebrities, and so on. 
20. Matthew Kirschenbaum has a version of iliis argument in "Editing the Interface;' 
calling the contrast between stable print and fluid electronic text "patently false" (24). To 
my mind, this claim simply means that ilie argument has to be made more carefully; it 
cannot be taken to mean iliat important distinctions between electronic text and print do 
not exist. 
21. Mats Dahlstrom, "Drowning by Versions." 
22. In iliis essay, which appears in Essays (147-55), Kittler argues that because everything 
ultimately reduces to voltages, "there is no software:' One could equally well argue that with 
firmware, PROMs, programmable gate arrays, and other forms of evolvable hardware, ev­
erything is becoming software. Perhaps ilie more accurate point is that ilie multiple layers of 
coding and bit stream information are connected in complex ways iliat make hard -and-fast 
divisions difficult to maintain. In Dig[iTJal Poet(I)( c)s, Loss Pequeno Glazier quotes David 
Siegel to the effect that "documents are becoming applicati ons" (28), a cogent observation 
iliat sums up this situation. 
23. Rita Raley, "Reveal Codes;' 10. 
24. For a fuller version of iliis argument, see N. Katherine Hayles, Writing Machines. 
25. Similar problems of identity/diff erence emerge in many different fields concerned 
wiili data that cluster rather than converge into a point; a notorious example is predicting 
future outcomes when many variables are involved. Steven Bankes has developed sophisti­
cated software to analyze such data clusters and to draw conclusions from them that give 
NOT EST 0 P AGE S 9 6 -1 0 5 253 
workable prognostications, even when uncertainty is high. See, for example, Steven Bankes, 
"Computational Experiments and Exploratory Modeling:' 
26. David Silver has argued that such clusters should form part of the interpretive con­
text for any text in the cluster; I am indebted to him for drawing this kind of phenomenon 
to my attention. In "Looking Backwards, Looking Forward," he anticipates a third phase 
of cyberculture studies: "critical cyberculture studies;' which would include analyses of the 
discursive interactions between different Web sites and between virtual and real commu­
nities. 
27. In "Requiem for a Reader?" Jack Post writes about this Web site at length, clearly 
showing its complexities and identifying it as a new electronic genre. The Web site is at 
http:// www.requiemforadream .com. 
28. McGann, The Textual Condition. 
29. Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari, A Thousand Plateaus. 
30. Roland Barthes, S/Z. 
31. Glazier, Dig[iTJal Poet(I) (c)s, 96-125; John Cayley, "Of Programma to logy." 
32. Johanna Drucker, "Theory as Praxis:' 
33. John Cayley, "The Code Is Not the Text (Unless It Is the Text)"; Rita Raley, "In terfer­
ences." 
34. Warren Weaver, "Translati on:' I am grateful to Rita Raley for drawing this essay to 
my attention. 
35. Warren Weaver, "The New Tower," esp. vii. 
36. Weaver, "Translation;' 22. 
37. Rita Raley, "Machine Translation and Global English." 
38. W. J. Hutchins, "Warren Weaver Memorandum July 1949." 
39. In Chinese Dreams, Eric Hayot, exploring Ezra Pound's (and others') complex en­
gagements with China, comments on Pound's modernist poetry as "English-as- Chinese;' 
that is, English written as if it had been translated through Chinese (49ff.). These sino­
graphic influences serve as a serendipitous counterpart to Warren Weaver's imaginary 
Chinese- as-English. 
40. Weaver, "Translation;' 23. 
41. Marc Damashek, working under the auspices of the National Security Agency, has 
created a program that comes close to realizing Weaver's dream, for it can prepare a precis of 
any article in any language; see Damashek, "Gauging Similarity with N -Grams: Language­
Independent Categorization of Text." 
42. I am grateful to Jules Van Lieshout for providing me with a written copy of this 
presentation and for meeting with me in person to discuss further his ideas and experiences. 
43. Efrain Kristal, Invisible Work. I am grateful to Efrain Kristal for conversations regard­
ing his conclusions in this book, including the contrast between the views of Borges and 
Octavio Paz. 
44. Octavio Paz, "Translation." 
45. Kristal, Invisible Work, xv. In "The Homeric Versions;' Borges offers a succinct ex­
pression of the view that a translation can be superior to the original: "To assume that 
every recombination of elements is necessarily inferior to its original form is to assume 
that draft nine is necessarily inferior to draft H-for there can be only drafts. The concept 
of a 'definitive text' corresponds only to religion or exhaustion" (69). 
254 NOT EST 0 P AGE 5 1 0 5 - 1 14 
46. For books in which Johanna Drucker makes the argument that print is remarkabl y 
fluid and complex, see The Century of Artists' Books and The Visible Word. For a creative text 
that demonstrates and illustrates these possibilities, see her Otherspace. Matthew Kirschen­
baum makes a similar point in "Editing the Interface." 
47. Jules van Lieshout, e-mail message, December 2003. 
48. Anne Mellor, personal communication. 
49. Nicholas Gessler, "Sonnet:' 
50. Andrew J. Lurie, "Now May I Offer You a Poem." 
51. The history of "Chomsky bot;' as well as the program itself, can be found at John 
Lawler's Web site, see especially the links "Chomskybot" and "What's it all about?" 
52. Ibid., answer to the question "What the hell is this, anyway?" under the link "What's 
it all about?" 
Chapter Five 
1. Florian Cramer, "Digital Code and Literary Text," 1. 
2. Ibid., 2. 
3. See John Markoff, "Behind Happy Interface, More Complex Reality:' See also Harper­
Collins, ''A Talk with Neal Stephenson;' where the interviewer remarks of Quicksilver, a 
prequel to (though written after) Cryptonomicon, "This is the book you are writing with a 
fountain pen;' and Stephenson replies, "I've written every word of it so far with a fountain 
pen on paper:' Markoff also reports in June 1999 that Stephenson "now writes with foun­
tain pens on a thin masonite 'laptop' board that he travels with. He has taken to traveling 
without a portable computer, saying that he had decided to give up 'on the hassle.'" 
4. Now, of course, Macintosh itself has gone to a Unix-based operating system, as Ste­
phenson recognizes in this comment on his Web site: "In the Beginning Was the Command 
Line is now badly obsolete and probably needs a thorough revision. For the last couple of 
years, I have been a Mac OS X user almost exclusively" (under ''Author'' and "Juvenilia" ). 
5. This book was originally commissioned by Wired, which declined to publish it. It was 
then published online at the Avon Web site, but the demand was so severe, with one hun­
dred thousand people logging on, that it crashed the servers. On this basis, Avon decided 
it had sufficient audience for a print book. 
6. By "conventional narrative" I refer to the predictability of popular literature in pro­
viding readers with a beginning, middle, and end, enacted through a series of rising actions 
resulting in a climax and denouement. Of course, these expectations have been disrupted 
by all manner of modernist and postmodernist experimental fiction, from Virginia Woolf's 
The Waves to David Foster Wallace's Infinite Jest. In Cryptonomicon, however, the inability 
of the text to create a conventional narrative is, I argue, specifically linked to the interme­
diating dynamics of code and language, print and digital technologies. 
7. Jim McCellan reports in ''After Snow Crash's Cyberpunk, It's Cyberpunk" that when 
Stephenson read about this incident, he found it so intriguing it became the kernel for 
Cryptonomicon. 
8. For an insightful discussion of the abject in relation to cyberspace, transnational pol­
itics, and global capital, see Terry Harpold and Kavita Philip, "Of Bugs and Rats: Cyber­
Cleanliness, Cyber-Squalor, and the Fantasy- Spaces ofInformational Globalization." 
9. Markoff, "Behind Happy Interface, More Complex Reality." 
NOT EST 0 P AGE S 11 5 -1 2 4 255 
10. John Markoff (ibid.) reports that Stephenson "acknowledges that when he returned 
home he was able to salvage an earlier version from a backup disk. But the event was clearly 
traumatizing and it undermined his trust in the Macintosh operating system forever:' I 
thought it was possible that the "large file" may have been Cryptonomicon, published in 
the same year as Command Line. Although Stephenson makes a point on his Web page of 
declaring that he does not answer e-mail.asit detracts from the concentration he needs to 
do his writing, he does give the e-mail address of his literary agent, listed as Kristin Lang at 
Darnansoff , Verrill, Feldman Literary Agents in New York City. I sent Lang an e-mail with 
my question-was the large file Stephenson lost related to Cryptonomi con?-and she gave 
me the answer in return e-mail after checking with Stephenson: no. 
11. H. G. Wells, The Time Machine. 
12. As Alan Liu, a reader for the University of Chicago Press, pointed out, Unix also uses 
metaphors in the sense that it employs shell accounts controlled by the command core. To 
this extent, then, Stephenson's characterization of Unix tends to romanticize it. 
13. I am not alone in thinking that this part of the book is weak. Paul Quinn, in "The 
How of the Crypt;' writes of this part of the book, "The weakly worked idea that Randy's 
business partner, Avi, seeks wealth in order to educate the world in the prevention of an­
other Holocaust seems in this context ultimately muddled, if noble." 
14. The scene with the Sultan in which Randy and Avi survey their potential partners 
(316-17) makes clear how real the risk of co-optation is, as it includes, in addition to the 
Sultan, former bagmen for President Marcos, drug dealers, and international gangsters. 
15. Elizabeth Weise, "Cracking Cryptonomicon: Stephenson Weaves 50-Year Tale of In­
trigue:' 
16. Bruce Schneier, "The Solitaire Encryption Algorithm." 
17. The irony remains intact even though in the first edition the copy editors unfortu­
nately made an error that prevents the code from running, an error Stephenson corrects 
on the Web. See his "Cryptonomicon cypher-FAQ." 
18. The phrase "sequences of words and spaces" alludes, of course, to the arguments 
made in chapter 4. 
Chapter Six 
1. C. B. Macpherson, The Political Theory of Possessive Individualism. 
2. The fiction of individual authorship for collaborative work is visibly reinforced for me 
when I sit through film credits-a pervasive practice here in Los Angeles where the credits 
are often scrutinized more avidly than the film itself-and see roll up on the screen this dis­
claimer: "For purposes of copyright, [the film studio's name 1 is the sole author of this film:' 
3. The phrase "vaporous machinery" comes from Patchwork Girl (body of text/it thinks). 
A note on citations from Patchwork Girl: I identify them using slashes to indicate a jump 
in directory level, moving from higher to lower as is customary in computer notation. The 
uppermost level is always a name the user would see on the screen when opening the highest 
level of the map view in Storyspace, and the lowest level is the lexia in which the quotation 
appears. Thus the citation "body of text/it thinks" indicates that within the major textual 
component entitled "body of text" is a subsection entitled "it thinks;' which when opened 
also contains the quoted passage. 
4. This list omits the graphics, of which there are several as the hypertext opens. 
256 NOT EST 0 P AGE S 1 2 5 -1 4 8 
5. Gerard Genette, Narrative Discourse. 
6. Shelley Jackson, '''Of Dolls and Monsters:" 
7. Friedrich A. Kittler, "Gramophone, Film, Typewriter," in Essays, 238-49, esp. 240. 
8. Jackson, '''Of Dolls and Monsters ;" 1-2. 
9. Storyspace version 2.0.3 also lists John B. Smith as a coauthor. 
10. I used the 2001 copyright version, Storyspace 2.0.3, for pc. The PC version seems 
to be much buggier than the Macintosh version, perhaps because Storyspace was designed 
originally for Macintosh and the PC version was derived from that. 
ll. Jacques Derrida, "Signature Event Context:' 
12. Jackson, '''Of Dolls and Monster s;" 2. 
13. Elizabeth Grosz, Volatile Bodies. 
14. Anne K. Mellor, Mary Shelley, 52-69. 
15. Barbara Johnson, "My Monster/My Self." 
16. The lexia's explosive potential may explain why it is partially hidden. It can be seen 
in the Storyspace chart view but is not visible in the more frequently used map view. 
17. In a perhaps intentional iro ny, the Eastgate title screen inscribes Jackson's name as 
the "authorized" signature, along witlI the usual warnings about copyright infringement, 
even tlIough the entire thrust ofJackson's text pushes against this view of a sole author who 
produces an original work. 
18. M/S can also be read as an allusion to masochism and sadism, an erotics that weaves 
throughout the text, notably in the female monster's appropriation of a thief's leg and in 
other scenes of bodily fragmentation and recombinati on. 
19. Grosz, Volatile Bodies. 
20. Milorad Pavic, Dictionary of the Khazars. This marvelous work weaves a metanar­
rative out of discrete entries within a "dictionary" composed of three parts. The various 
entries are elaborately cross-linked, both thematically and through the author's eccentric 
link/symbol system. For a fuller explicatio n, see N. Katherine Hayles, "Corporeal Anxiety 
in Dictionar y of the Khazars." 
21. Jane Yellowlees Douglas, '''How Do I Stop This Thing?'" 
Chapter Seven 
1. The literature on this phenomenon is extensive. For a technical survey, see Derek 
Munneke, Kirsten Wahlstrom, and Linda Zaccara, "Intelligent Software Agents on the In­
ternet"; for a discussion of the psychological aspect ofbots, see Leena Saarinen, "Chatter­
bots;' which also discusses Joseph Weizenbaum's famous "Eliza" program. 
2. Mark Hansen, Embodying Technesis. Although he makes important points, Hansen's 
interpretation is flawed insofar as he fails to recognize the importance of agency in Deleuze 
and Guattari's rhizomatic philosoph y. For them, agency continues to playa central role, 
but its locus is displaced from consciousness into aconscious processes. 
3. In another context, Francisco Varela calls such dynamics "co-dependent arising;' to 
emphasize the mutual interdependence of each component on the otlIers; see Francisco J. 
Varela, Even Thompson, and Eleanor Rosch, The Embodied Mind. 
4. For a critique of the idea that computers and intelligent machines can be considered 
alive (and by implicati on, have such experiences as desire), see Peter Swirski, "A Case of 
Wishful Thinking." 
NOT EST 0 P AGE 5 14 9 -174 257 
5. See especially page 17. 
6. See Humberto R. Maturana and Francisco J. Varela, Autopoiesis and Cognition. 
7. In A Thousand Plateaus, Deleuze and Guattari contrast smooth and striated space. 
Whereas smooth space is continually transformative and fluid, striated space (by analogy, 
I suppose, with muscle tissue) is hierarchical, locked in, structurally rigid. 
8. John Johnston, "The In-Mixing of Machines: Psychoanalysis and Cybernetics." I am 
grateful to John Johnston for sharing this essay with me prior to publicati on. 
9. Alan M. Turing, "On Computable Numbers, with an Application to the Entscheid­
ungsproblem." 
10. Christopher Langton, ''Artificial Life." 
n. See especially chapters 4, 5, and 9. The crisis of agency is also implicit in such works as 
Marvin Minsky, The Society of Mind, which conceptualizes human intention and agency as 
subroutines run by semiautonomous agents. Also revealing is the furor over the research of 
Benjamin Libet, Anthony Freeman, and Keith Sutherland, The Volitional Brain; and Ben­
jamin Libet, C. A. Gleason, E. W. Wright, and D. K. Pearl, "Time of Conscious Intention 
to Act in Relation to Onset of Cerebral Activities (Readiness Potential )." Libet and his col­
laborators demonstrated that research subjects started the muscular actions to raise their 
arms before they were consciously aware that they were going to do so, thus bringing into 
question whether the conscious mind is the source of agency. Libet's experiments have been 
extensively critiqued in Daniel Dennett, Freedom Evolves, 228-42. 
12. Jerome Barkow, Leda Cosmides, and John Tooby, The Adapted Mind. 
13. I am grateful to Jerzy Jarzebski and Michael Kandel for this information. Kandel 
illustrates using the verb czuc (to feel). ''A man would say'czulem' ('I felt'); a woman would 
say'czulam' ('I felt'). A nongendered robot would say 'czulom' ('I felt'). Using the vowel '0' 
is Lem's neologism. The verb form is quite strange, but a Polish reader would understand 
immediately" (e-mail message, January 6,2004). 
14. Jo Alyson Parker, "Gendering the Robot:' 
15. There is a minor inconsistency in the story with regard to these three names, which 
I take to be an error on Lem's part. 
16. Carol Wald, "The Female Machine:' I am grateful to Wald for making her essay avail-
able to me before publicati on, and also for calling my attention to "The Mask." 
17. Zoran Zivkovic, "The Future without a Future:' 
18. Michael Kandel, ''A Freudian Peek at Lem's Fiasco:' 
19. Hans Moravec, Mind Children and Robot; Ray Kurzweil, The Age of Spiritual Ma­
chines. 
20. Antonio R. Damasio, Descartes' Error, xvii. 
21. Brian Cantwell Smith, On the Origin of Objects, 75-76. 
Chapter Eight 
1. My thanks to Karl Sims for making the videotape available to Nicholas Gessler, and 
to Nicholas Gessler for allowing me to view it. I am also indebted to Nicholas Gessler for 
many of the ideas in this chapter. He conveyed them to me over several years of ongoing 
discussions, and by now they are so woven into my own thoughts that I am no longer sure 
which started as his suggesti ons. Let me simply say, then, that this chapter could not have 
been written without his help. 
258 NOT EST 0 P AGE S 174 - 1 9 3 
2. The world of "Evolved Virtual Creatures" is described in Karl Sims, "Evolving Virtual 
Creature s"; his "Evolving 3-D Morphology and Behavior by Competition" is also relevant. 
A movie of "Evolved Virtual Creatures;' as well as an interview with Sims discussing his 
work, can be found at hup:/ /www.biota.org/ksims/index.html. 
3. John R. Koza, Genetic Programming and Genetic Programming II, where Koza shows 
how genetic programming can itself dynamically evolve the functions it needs to evolve fur­
ther. Koza calls these Automatically Defined Functions (AFTs) and remarks, "Hierarchical 
organization and reuse [of AFTs 1 seem to be required if automatic programming is ever to 
be scaled up from small problems to large problems" (4). 
4. Benoit Mandelbrot, in The Fractal Beauty of Nature, discusses how relatively simple 
computer algorithms can generate complex plant shapes. 
5. Sims, "Evolving 3-D Morpholog y;' 31, 29. 
6. Sims, "Evolving Virtual Creatures;' 18. 
7. Sims, "Evolving 3-D Morpholog y;' 29. 
8. Michael G. Dyer, "Toward Synthesizing Artificial Neural Networks That Exhibit Co­
operative Intelligent Behavior." I am indebted to Michael Dyer for conversations clarifying 
these issues for me. 
9. Sims, "Evolving 3-D Morpholog y;' 38. 
10. Alex Argyros, A Blessed Rage for Order. 
11. Stephen Wolfram, A New Kind of Science; Edward Fredkin, Introduction to Digital 
Philosophy; Harold Morowitz, The Emergence of Everything; Stuart A. Kauffman, The Ori­
gins of Order. 
12. Humberto R. Maturana and Francisco J. Varela, Autopoiesis and Cognition. 
13. Luc Steels, "The Artificial Life Roots of Artificial Intelligence:' 
14. A point made by Richard Dawkins in The Blind Watchmaker. 
15. I use "see" in quotations marks to imply not only the physical act of visual perception 
but also the culturally conditioned cognitive processes by which we invest what we see with 
meaning. 
16. I recently came across an advertisement for an academic job encouraging "visible 
minorities" to apply, a phrase I had not heard before and that immediately evoked thoughts 
of Ralph Ellison's Invisible Man. Leaving aside the complex cultural history embedded in 
this phrase, it serves the purpose here of highlighting the importance of making bodies 
visible if they are to enter into the canonical narratives of a culture, a requirement that 
seems both strange and familiar when applied to visualizations of virtual creatures. 
17. Jerome Bruner, Acts of Meaning. 
18. Joan Lucariello is cited in Bruner, Acts of Meaning, 81-82, 157 n. 26, where the source 
is identified as "private communication." 
19. Ibid. 
20. Marvin Minsky, The Society of Mind; Rodney A. Brooks, "Intelligence without Rep­
resentation." See also Luc Steels and Rodney A. Brooks, The Artificial Life Route to Artificial 
Intelligence. 
21. Marvin Minsky, "Why Computer Science Is the Most Important Thing That Has 
Happened to the Humanities in 5,000 Years." I am grateful to Nicholas Gessler for providing 
me with a transcript of this lecture. 
22. Michel Foucault, "What Is an Author?" 119. 
NOT EST 0 P AGE S 194 - 2 0 1 259 
23. See especially the chapter "Authors Analogue and Digital;' 78-100. I am grateful to 
Mark Poster for making this chapter available to me before its publication and for his cor­
respondence on the ideas it expresses. 
24. Poster's discussion can be clarified by noting that analog technologies do not neces­
sarily rely on resemblance, only on morphological proportio nality. A phonograph record, 
for example, does not look like the sound waves it captures and reproduces, but there is 
a morphological proportionality between the sound waves and the spacing of the record 
grooves. Analog relations that depend on resemblance are more properly called analogies 
(or analogizing relations). Analogies are a subset of analog relations, which also contain the 
relations, typical of analog technologies, that depend on morphological proportiona lity. 
25. Michel Foucault, The Order of Things. 
26. For a discussion of the digital nature of alphabetic language versus ideogrammatic 
writing, see John Cayley, "Digital Wen." Robert K. Logan, in The Alphabet Effect, also ar­
gues that the switch from pictorial representations to alphabetic representati on, in its much 
greater economy, is a move toward the digitalization of language. In this view, alphabetic 
writing is not primarily analog but digital. See also Logan's interesting arguments about 
computational language as an advance on natural languages, in The Fifth Language. 
27. See Mark Rose, Authors and Owners. 
28. For a discussion of this mantra in the context of artificial life, see N. Katherine Hayles, 
How We Became Posthuman, 222-46. 
29. In City of Bits, William J. Mitchell highlights the importance of fragmentation and 
recombination across a variety of architectural sites and social practices in the digital age. 
30. This example comes from Poster, ''Authors Analogue and Digital;' 79. 
31. This behavior was pointed out to me by Nicholas Gessler. 
32. Rodney A. Brooks, Cambrian Intelligence. 
33. The robot was displayed in an art show entitled "The Art and Aesthetics of Arti­
ficial Life;' which featured images, simulations, and installations created by artificial- life 
techniques; the show, curated by Nicholas Gessler, was exhibited at the UCLA Center for 
Digital Arts from June 22-July 23,1998. 
34. In How We Became Posthuman, I discuss the dialectic between incorporation and 
inscription as two alternating ways of understanding written documents. In Writing Ma­
chines, I explore the implications of seeing all texts, especially literary ones, as material 
instantiatio ns. 
35. Bruno Latour and Steve Woolgar, Laboratory Life, 50. See also Timothy Lenoir, "In­
scription Practices and the Materialities of Communication," his excellent introduction to 
Inscribing Science. 
36. Steven Shapin and Simon Schaffer, Leviathan and the Air Pump, 235-44. 
37. H. M. Collins, Changing Order. 
38. Bruno Latour, We Have Never Been Modern; Bruno Latour, "Why Has Critique Run 
Out of Steam?" 
39. In How the Laws of Physics Lie, Nancy Cartwright clearly analyzes the kinds of com­
plexities that are left behind when a holistic interactive environment is divided into separate 
components. 
40. Morowitz, The Emergence of Everything. 
260 NOT EST 0 P AGE 5 2 0 1 -2 1 0 
41. Latour, We Have Never Been Mo dern, 50. 
42. See my discussion in How We Became Posthuman, chap. 2. 
Chapter Nine 
1. Alan M. Turing, "Computing Machinery and Intelligence." 
2. Joseph Weizenbaum, Computer Power and Human Reason. 
3. John R. Koza et aI., Genetic Programming III. 
4. For a description of the "Cog" project, see Rodney Brooks, Flesh and Machines; for 
the information -gathering ecology of Alexandros Moukas and Pattie Maes, see their "Amal­
thea"; for a description of the NOMAD project, see Neurosciences Research Foundation, 
"NOMAD:' 
5. Christopher Langton, "Artificial Life;' 1. 
6. For an example of this kind of negotiation already underway, see Scott Aaronson, "On 
A New Kind of Science by Stephen Wolfram:' Aaronson argues that Wolfram's prediction, 
reasoning from his cellular automata model, of "long-range threads" between quantum 
particles is not consistent with Bell inequality violations, which have been verified as quan­
tum effects. In the same review, however, he shows that some of Wolfram's claims can be 
upheld, although he argues that they are not as new or revolutionary as Wolfram asserts. 
7. Hans Moravec, Mind Children, 109-10. 
8. Antonio R. Damasio, Descartes' Error and The Feeling of What Happens. 
9. Manuel Castells, The Rise of the Network Society; The Power of Identity; and End of the 
Millennium. 
10. Claude Shannon and Warren Weaver, The Mathematical Theory of Communi cation. 
11. Greg Egan, "Interview with Greg Egan;' by Russell B. Farr. 
12. The joke recalls Stanislaw Lem's spoof review of a nonexistent text on "my impossible 
life;' in which the narrator recalls the details of how his mother and father met, calculates 
the probability of each event, and concludes that, statistically speaking, the odds of him 
existing are so infinitesimal that his life must be considered an impossibility; see Stanislaw 
Lem, "De Impossibilitate Vitae and De Impossibilitate Prognoscendi by Cezar Kouska;' 
13. The central text is John D. Barrow and Frank J. Tipler, The Anthropic Cosmological 
Principle. For an overview of similar effects both within the fields of cosmology and quan­
tum mechanics, and more generally, see Nick Bostrom, Anthropic Bias. 
14. I first heard this idea in a conversation with John Cayley, but since he expressed 
horror at the thought, I am not sure he would want it attributed to him. Consider it an 
emergent phenomenon from our conversation in March 2004. 
15. Donna Haraway, "Situated Knowledge:' 
16. In February 2003, Stephen Wolfram gave a lecture at the California Institute of Tech­
nology in Pasadena. After the lecture, a panel of Caltech scientists discussed Wolfram's 
work. When the moderator, Steven Koonin (a physicist), asked the panel if Wolfram's "new 
kind of science" would be viewed as a paradigm shift in twenty years, the answer was a 
unanimous "no." Wolfram riposted that this reaction is exactly what one would expect in 
response to a revolutionary paradigm shift. Koonin replied that this is also what one would 
expect if the "new kind of science" was not a paradigm shift, implicitly acknowledging 
Wolfram's self-insulating reasoning. 
NOT EST 0 P AGE S 2 1 0 -2 2 1 261 
17. Niklas Luhmann, "The Paradox of Observing Systems;' esp. 43. 
18. Niklas Luhmann, "The Cognitive Program of Constructivism and a Reality That 
Remains Unknown"; quoted in N. Katherine Hayles, "Theory of a Different Order;' esp. 14. 
19. For a fascinating account of actual communities of uploaders, see Richard Doyle, 
"Uploading Anticipation, Becoming Silicon;' in Wetwares: Experiment s in Postvital Living, 
121-41. 
20. Greg Egan, ''An Interview with Greg Egan: Counting Backwards from Infinity." 
Egan states, "I believe that all of Durham's computer experiments would work exactly as 
described-the Copy would be oblivious to whether it was being run on one computer in 
one place, or scattered all over the planet. You could certainly argue that, with the time­
reversed experiments, the experience of the Copy would first arise whenever the 'subjec­
tively final' state of mind was pre-loaded with memories-by whatever means-as well 
as when that state of mind was played backwards, later. But I don't think that changes 
anything:' 
21. Stephen Wolfram discusses reversible cellular automata in A New Kind of Science, 
435-57, 1017-21. See also Kwangh Yung Paek, "Reversible Cellular Automata." 
22. Nicholas Gessler drew my attention to this apparent fallacy in Permutation City, al­
though on consideration I believe that it is not actually a mistake Egan makes but an inten­
tional provocation to further thought, a provocation evident in Paul's "dust" hypothesis, 
which I discuss in the following paragraphs. 
23. For a discussion of quantum indetermi nacy, see Arkady Plotnitsky, Complementar­
ity. In ''Agential Realism;' Karen Barad also has an interesting discussion of Bohr's inter­
pretation of quantum mechanics and its implications for feminist theory. The fact that the 
wave function equations have more than one solution implies the possibility of branching 
worldlines, an interpretat ion developed in the so-called "many worlds" hypothesis. 
24. For an explanation of quantum computing, see Michael A. Nielsen and Isaac L. 
Chuang Quantum Computation and Quantum Information, which includes discussions of 
quantum cryptography (relevant to Nick's opening a lock), quantum temporality, and 
quantum algorithms. For a somewhat more technical treatment, see Mika Hirvensalo, 
Quantum Computing. 
25. All but two of the chapters in part 1 (before Paul commits suicide) are entitled "(Rip, 
tie, cut toy man);' if focalized on Paul, or "(Remit not paucity);' if focalized on other char­
acters; both titles are anagrams of "Permutation City:' The two anagrammatic variations 
of the repeating titles are "(Toy man, picture it)" for chapter 16, where Paul's realization 
that he never was the Copy deepens his obsession, and chapter 20, "(Can't you time trip?);' 
which recounts the realization of Peer, another simulated Copy, that he can never know 
how many identical cycles he may have acted out if his memory has been programmed to 
erase them, further reinforcing the idea that continuity of consciousness is an illusion. 
26. Ross Farnell, ''Attempting Immortality"; Greg Egan, "Dust." 
27. While Turing and von Neumann are, of course, well-known names, to my knowledge 
"Chiang" has yet to make a contribution worthy of adding his name to this illustrious list. 
28. Permutation City was published seven years before Wolfram's master work, so this 
work is not a direct influence on Egan's novel. However, Egan has remarked in interviews 
that he has a background in computer programming, and he clearly knew about CAs prior 
262 NOT EST 0 P AGE S 2 2 2 - 2 2 9 
to the publication of Wolfram's book. When A New Kind of Science appeared, Egan wrote a 
favorable review of it and published it on his Web site; see Greg Egan, "Stephen Wolfram's 
Science." 
29. Robert Markley, "Boundaries:' 
30. Hugh Everett, a Ph.D. student working with John Wheeler as his advisor, advanced 
the "many worlds" hypothesis in 1957. Everett suggested that when a quantum system en­
counters a measuring device, it splits into many waveforms, each representing a differ­
ent value of the quantum states. To account for the fact that these multiple states are not 
recorded by the measuring device, Everett suggested that the measurement device itself 
must split into as many versions of itself as there are quantum states. Following this logic 
to its conclusion then leads to the idea that for every such splitting, multiple worlds are 
constantly proliferating. 
31. The arguments are too extensive to rehearse here. Crucial texts, however, are Bruno 
Latour and Steve Woolgar, Laboratory Life; Steven Shapin and Simon Schaffer, Leviathan 
and the Air Pump; and Donna Haraway, Simians, Cyborgs, and Women. For my own modest 
contribution, see N. Katherine Hayles, "Constrained Constructivism." 
32. The situation is beautifully captured in the fictional Nobel Laureate address that 
Stanislaw Lem imagines in "The New Cosmogony." The narrator has received the Nobel 
Prize for inferring the existence of beings so advanced that they have learned how to trans­
form the laws of physics. When they do so, however, they also necessarily alter the condi­
tions of their existence, for they are part of the universe they are transforming. Like Egan, 
Lem imagines a species that can transcend the biology that evolution has given them; what 
they cannot transcend is the reflexivity inherent in their position within the universe upon 
which they are experimenting. 
33. Far from seeing the sexual drive as an essential and major component of human psy­
chology, Egan's fiction consistently represents sex as painful, unsatisfying, and ridiculous. 
In Permutation City, when Paul Durham attempts to have sex with Maria (the only time 
we see him engage in sexual activity), he is wrenched by testicular cramps so excruciating 
that he cannot continue. In Distress, sexual relationships are associated either with pain, as 
when Andrew lacerates his chest with knife wounds when Gina tells him she is leaving him, 
or with a pleasurable intimacy that exists only when penetrative sex is constituted as im­
possible or forbidden, as in the scene where Andrew encounters Kuwale's surgically altered 
body. When in Schild's Ladder Tchicaya proposes a sexual interlude with Yann, an "incor­
poreal" who has never known a permanent bodily form, Yann finds the activities Tchicaya 
proposes so ludicrous that he breaks out laughing. In the subjective cosmology trilogy Egan 
insists that his protagonists struggle with their embodiments , but the disappearance of sex 
is nevertheless more often greeted with relief than nostalgia. 
34. Greg Egan, "Interview with Greg Egan:' in Ibn Qirtaiba. 
NOT EST 0 P AGE S 2 2 9 -2 3 9 263 
Works Cited 
AAAI. Computati onal Synthesis: From Basic Building Blocks to High Level Functionalit y, Pa­
pers from the 2003 AAAI Spring Symposium. Technical Report SS-03020. Menlo Park, 
CA: AAAI Press, 2003. 
Aaronson, Scott. "On A New Kind of Science by Stephen Wolfram:' Quantum Information 
and Computation 2, no. 5 (September 2002): 410-23. 
Aarseth, Espen J. Cybertext: Perspectives on Ergodic Literature. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins 
University Press, 1997. 
Adelman, Leonard M. "Molecular Computation of Solutions to Combinatorial Problems." 
Science 266 (November 1994): 1021-24. 
Alexrod, Robert. The Evolution of Cooperation. New York: Basic Books, 1985. 
Argyros, Alex. A Blessed Rage for Order: Deconstruction, Evolution, and Chaos. Ann Arbor: 
University of Michigan Press, 1991. 
Austin, J. L. How to Do Things with Words. 2nd ed. Edited by Marina Sbisa and J. O. Urms­
son. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1975. 
Bacon, Francis. The New Organon. Edited by Lisa Jardine, Michael Silverthorne, Karl Amer­
iks, and Desmond Clarke. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000. 
Balsamo, Anne. Technologies of the Gendered Body: Reading Cyborg Women. Durham, NC: 
Duke University Press, 1996. 
Bankes, Steven. "Computational Experiments and Exploratory Modeling." http://www. 
evolvinglogic.co m/Learn/absandpaper s/validati on.html. 
Barad, Karen. ''Agential Realism: Feminist Interventi ons in Understanding Scientific Prac­
tice." In Science Studies Reader, edited by Mario Biagioli, 1-11. New York: Routledge, 
1999· 
Barkow, Jerome, Leda Cosmides, and John Tooby. The Adapted Mind: Evolutionary Psychol­
ogy and the Generation of Culture. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1992. 
Baron-Cohen, Simon. Mindblindness: An Essay on Autism and Theory of Mind. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, 1995. 
Barrow, John D., and Frank J. Tipler. The Anthropic Cosmological Principle. New York: Ox­
ford University Press, 1986. 
Barthes, Roland. S/Z. Translated by Richard Miller. New York: Hill and Wang, 1974. 
Bateson, Mary Catherine. Our Own Metaphor: A Personal Account of a Conference on the 
Effects of Conscious Purpose on Human Adaptation. Washington, DC: Smithsonian In­
stitution Press, 1972. 
Benjamin, Walter. "The Task of the Translator:' In Illuminations: Essays and Reflections, 
edited by Hannah Arendt, translated by Harry Zohn, 69-82. New York: Schocken Books, 
1969. 
--- . "The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction." In Illuminations: Es­
says and Reflections, edited by Hannah Arendt, translated by Harry Zohn, 217-52. New 
York: Schocken Books, 1969. 
Birkerts, Sven. The Gutenberg Elegies: The Fate of Reading in an Electronic Age. New York: 
Ballantine Books, 1995. 
Blaheta, Don. "The Lambda Caleulus." http://www.cs.brown.edu/cour ses/cs173/2003/Text 
book/le.p df. 
Blank, Stephen J. "Preparing for the Next War: Reflections on the Revolution in Military 
Affairs." In In Athena's Camp: Preparing for Conflict in the Information Age, edited by 
John Arquilla and David Ronfeldt, 61-77. Washington, DC: Office of the Secretary of 
Defense by National Defense Research Institute, RAND, 1997. 
Bolter, Jay David, and Richard Grusin. Remediat ion: Understanding New Media. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, 2002. 
Borges, Jorge Luis. "The Don Quixote of Pierre Menard:' In Ficciones, translated by An­
thony Kerrigan, 79-88. New York: Grove Press, 1989. 
--- . "The Homeric Versions." In Selected Non-Fictions, edited by Eliot Weinberger, 
translated by Esther Allen, Suzanne Jill Levine, and Eliot Weinberger, 69-75. New York: 
Penguin, 1999. 
Bostrom, Nick. Anthropic Bias: Observation Selection Effects in Science and Philosophy. Stud­
ies in Philosophy. New York: Routledge, 2002. 
Brockman, John. "Joseph Traub, Jaron Lanier, John McCarth y, Lee Smolin, Philip W. An­
derson, Anthony Valentini, Stuart Hameroff, and Paola Zizzi Respond to Seth Lloyd:' 
Edge. http://www.edge.org/discours e/informati on.html. 
---. "What's Your Question?" Under "World Question Center." Edge. www.edge.org. 
Brooks, Rodney A. Cambrian Intelligence: The Early History of the New AI. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press, 1999. 
--- . Flesh and Machines: How Robots Will Change Us. New York: Panilieon, 2002. 
--- . "Intelligence without Representation." Artificial Intelligence 47 (1991): 139-59. 
Bruner, Jerome. Acts of Meaning. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1990. 
Buzzetti, Dino. "Digital Representation and the Text Model:' New Literary History 33 
(2002): 61-88. 
Cartwright, Nancy. How the Laws of Physics Lie. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1993. 
Castells, Manuel. End of the Millennium. London: Blackwell, 2000. 
--- . The Power of Identity. London: Blackwell, 2003. 
---. The Rise of the Network Society. London: Blackwell, 2000. 
Cayley, John. "The Code Is Not the Text (Unless It Is the Text):' Electronic Book Review 
(September 2002). http://www.electronicbookreview .com/v3 /servletl ebr? command = 
view_essay&essay --.id=cayleyele. 
266 W 0 R I( SCI TED 
--- . "Digital Wen: On the Digitization of Letter-and Characte r-Based Systems of 
Inscription:' In Reading East Asian Writing: The Limits of Literary Theory, edited by 
Michael Hockx and Ivo Smits, 227-94. London: Routledge Curzon, 2003. 
--- . "Of Programma to logy." Mute (Fall 1998): 72-75. 
Cebrowski, Arthur K., and John J. Garstka. "Network -Centric Warfare: Its Origin and 
Future." Naval Institute Proceedings Magazine (January 1998). http://www.usni.org/Pro 
ceedings/ Articles98/PR Ocebrowski .htm. 
Chun, Wendy Hui Kyong. "On the Persistence of Visual Knowledge:' Paper presented at 
the annual convention of the Modern Language Association, San Diego, CA, December 
28,2003. 
Collins, H. M. Changing Order: Replication and Induction in Scientific Practice. London: 
Sage Publicati ons, 1985. 
Conway, John. Game of Life. http://www.bitstorm.org /gameoflif e/. 
Coover, Robert. "The Babysitter:' In Pricksongs and Descants: Fictions, 206-39. 1969. Re­
print, New York: Grove Press, 2000. 
Coverley, M. D. The Book of Going Forth by Day. http://califia.hispeed.com/Egypt/. 
Cramer, Florian. "Digital Code and Literary Text." Beehive 4, no. 3 (November 2001). http:// 
beehive.temporalimage.com/a rchive/43arc.html. 
Culler, Jonathan. Ferdinand de Saussure. Rev. ed. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1986. 
Dahlstrom, Mats. "Drowning by Versions." Human IT 4, no. 1 (2000): 7-38. 
---. "When Is a Webtext?" TEXT Technology: The Journal of Computer Text Processing 
11, no. 1 (2002): 139-6l. 
Damashek, Marc. "Gauging Similarity with N-Grams: Language -Independent Categoriza­
tion of Text." Science 267 (February 10,1995): 843-48. 
Damasio, Antonio R. Descartes' Error: Emotion, Reason, and the Human Brain. New York: 
Putnam, 1994. 
--- . The Feeling of What Happens: Body and Emotion in the Making of Consciousne ss. 
New York: Harvest, 2000. 
Danielewski, Mark Z. House of Leaves. New York: Pantheon, 2000. House of Leaves. http:// 
www.houseofleav es.com. 
Davis, Martin. The Universal Computer: From Leibniz to Turing. New York: W. W. Norton, 
2000. 
Dawkins, Richard. The Blind Watchmaker. New York: Norton, 1986. 
--- . The Selfish Gene. New York: Oxford University Press, 1989. 
Deleuze, Gilles, and Felix Guattari. A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia. 
Translated by Brian Massumi. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1987. 
Dennett, Daniel C. Freedom Evolves. New York: Vintage, 2003. 
--- . Kinds of Minds: Toward an Understa nding of Consciousne ss. New York: Basic 
Books, 1996. 
Derrida, Jacques . Limited Inc. Translated by Samuel Weber. Evanston, IL: Northwestern 
University Press, 1998. 
--- . Margins of Philosophy. Translated by Alan Bass. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1984. 
--- . Of Grammatology. Translated by Gayatri C. Spivak. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins 
University Press, 1977. 
W 0 R K 5 CIT E D 267 
--- . Positions. Translated by Alan Bass. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1982. 
--- . Writing and Difference. Translated by Alan Bass. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1980. 
Dick, Philip K. The Simulacra. London: Metheun Paperbacks, 1964. 
--- . The Three Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch. 1964. Reprint, New York: Doubleday, 
1965· 
--- . We Can Build You. London: Grafton Books, 1969. First published as A. Lincoln, 
Simulacrum. 
Didion, Joan. The White Album. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1979. 
Douglas, Jane Yellowlees. '''How Do I Stop This Thing?' Closure and Indeterminacy in 
Interactive Narratives:' In Hyper/Text/Theory, edited by George P. Landow, 159-88. Bal­
timore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1994. 
Doyle, Richard. Wetwares: Experiments in Postvital Living. Minneapolis: University of Min-
nesota Press, 2003. 
Dozois, Gardner. The Fiction of James Tiptree Jr. San Bernadino, CA: Borgo Press, 1984. 
Drucker, Johanna. The Century of Artists' Books. New York: Granary Books, 1996. 
--- . "Language as Information: Intimations of Immater iality." In Figuring the Word: 
Essays on Books, Writing, and Visual Poetics, 213-20. New York: Granary Books, 1998. 
--- . Otherspace: A Martian Typography. Atlanta: Nexus, 1992. 
--- . "Theory as Praxis: The Poetics of Electronic Textuality." Modernism/M odernity 
9, no. 4 (2002): 683-91. 
--- . The Visible Word: Experimental Typography and Modern Art, 1909-1923. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1994. 
Durham, Scott. "P. K. Dick: From the Death of the Subject to a Theology of Late Capital­
ism:' Science-Fiction Studies 15 (1988): 173-86. 
Dyer, Michael G. "Toward Synthesizing Artificial Neural Networks That Exhibit Coopera­
tive Intelligent Behavior: Some Open Issues in Artificial Life:' Artificial Life 1, nos. 112 
(Fall 1993/Winter 1994): 111-35· 
Eckel, Bruce. Thinking in C++. Englewo od Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1995. 
Egan, Greg. Distress. London: Orion/Millennium, 1995. 
--- . "Dust:' In The Year's Best Science Fiction: Tenth Annual Collection, edited by Gard­
ner Dozois, 87-112. New York: St. Martin's Press, 1993. 
--- . "An Interview with Greg Egan: Counting Backwards from Infinity." Eidolon.net: 
Australian SF Online. http://eidolon. netlindex.html (accessed August 8, 2004). Site now 
discontinued. 
---. "Interview with Greg Egan:' Ibn Qirtaiba 18 (September 1996): n.p. 
---. "Interview with Greg Egan:' By Russell B. Farr. Piffle and Other Trivia 26 (Septem-
ber 1997). http://gregegan .customer. netspace .net.au/ INTERVIE WS/ Interviews.html# 
Piffle. 
---. Permutation City. London: Orion/Millennium, 1994. 
---. Quarantine. London: Century/Legend, 1992. 
--- . Schild's Ladder: A Novel. New York: EOS, 2003. 
---. "Stephen Wolfram's Science:' Under "Bibliography" and "Non Fiction:' Greg 
Egan's Home Page. http://gregegan.customer.netspace.net.au/index.html. 
268 W 0 R K 5 CIT E 0 
Farnell, Ross. ''Attempting Immortality: AI, A-Life, and the Posthuman in Greg Egan's Per­
mutation City!' Science-Fiction Studies 27 (2000): 69-91. 
Foerster, Heinz von. Observing Systems. 2nd ed. New York: Intersystems Publications, 
1982. 
Foster, G. M. "Peasant Society and the Image of Limited Good." American Anthropologist 
67, no. 2 (1965): 293-315. 
Foucault, Michel. The Order of Things: An Archeology of the Human Sciences. New York: 
Vintage Books, 1970. 
--- . "What Is an Author?" Language, Counter-Memory, Practice: Selected Essays and 
Interviews by Michel Foucault, edited by Donald F. Bouchard, translated by Donald F. 
Bouchard and Sherry Simon, 113-138. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1977. 
Fredkin, Edward. Introduction to Digital Philosophy. http://www.digitalphilosophy .org. 
Freedman, Carl. "Philip K. Dick and Criticism." Editorial introduction to Science-Fiction 
Studies 15 (1988): 121-30. 
Fuller, Matthew. Behind the Blip: Essays on the Culture of Software. New York: Autonomedia, 
2003· 
Galloway, Alexander R. Protocol: How Control Exists after Decentralization. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press, 2004. 
Gendolla, Peter, Jorgen Schafer, and Maik Pluschke. "Literatur in Netzen/Netzliteratur." 
http://www.litnet.uni-siegen.de/ Literatur % 20in % 20 Netzten %20-% 20 Netzliteratur . 
pdf. 
Genette, Gerard. Narrative Discourse: An Essay on Method, translated by Jane E. Lewin. 
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1983. 
Gessler, Nicholas. "Evolving Artificial Cultural Things-That-Think and Work by Dynam­
ical Hierarchical Synthesis." http://www.sscnet. ucla.edu/ geog/ gessler/ cv-pubs/ 03naacs 
os. pdf. 
---. "Sonnet:' http://www.sscnet.ucla�edu/geog/gessler/borland/samp les.htm. 
Glazier, Loss Pequeno. Dig[iT}al Poet(I) (c)s: The Making ofE-Poetries. Tuscaloosa: Univer­
sity of Alabama Press, 2002. 
Gray, Lawrence. ''A Mathematician Looks at Wolfram's New Kind of Science:' Notices of the 
American Mathematical Society 50, no. 2 (February 2003): 200-11. http://www.ams.org/ 
notices/200 302/fea-gray.pdf. 
Grigar, Dene. "Mutability and Medium." Paper presented at a conference on Computers 
and Writing, Normal, IL, May 2002. 
Grosz, Elizabeth. Volatile Bodies: Toward a Corporeal Feminism. Bloomington: Indiana Uni­
versity Press, 1994. 
Grusin, Richard, and Jay David Bolter. Remediatio n: Understanding New Media. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, 2000. 
Guattari, Felix. "Machinic Heterogenesis." In Rethinking Technologies, edited by Verna A. 
Conley, 13-27. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1993. 
Gunder, Anna. "Forming the Text, Performing the Work-Aspects of Media, Navigation, 
and Linking." Human IT 5, nos. 2-3 (2001): 81-206. 
Hansen, Mark B. N. Embodying Technesis: Technology Beyond Writing. Ann Arbor: Univer­
sity of Michigan Press, 2000. 
w 0 R K SCI TED 269 
--- . New Philosophy for New Media. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003. 
Haraway, Donna. Simians, Cyborgs, and Women: The Reinvention of Nature. New York: 
Routledge, 1991. 
--- . "Situated Knowledge: The Science Question in Feminism as a Site of Discourse 
on the Privilege of Partial Perspective:' Feminist Studies 14, no. 3 (1988): 575-99. 
HarperCollins. ''A Talk with Neal Stephenson:' Cryptonomicon. http://www.cryptonom 
icon. com. Under the link "Chat with Neal (4119):' 
Harpold, Terry, and Kavita Philip. "Of Bugs and Rats: Cyber-Cleanliness, Cyber-Squalor, 
and the Fantasy- Spaces of Informational Globalization:' Postmodern Culture 11, no. 1 
(2000). http://muse.jhu.ed u/journals/postmod erILculture/toc /pmcll.l.html. 
Hayles, N. Katherine. "Constrained Constructivism: Locating Scientific Inquiry in the The­
ater of Representation:' In Realism and Representation: Essays on the Problem of Realism 
in Relation to Science, Literature, and Culture, edited by George Levine, 27-43. Madison: 
University of Wisconsin Press, 1993. 
--- . "Corporeal Anxiety in Dictionary of the Khazars: What Books Talk about When 
They Talk about Losing Their Bodies:' Modern Fiction Studies 43 (Fall 1992): 800-820. 
---. "From Object to Process: Cinematic Implications of New Media Poetry." Future 
Cinema: The Cinematic Imaginary after Film, edited by Peter Weibel and Jeffrey Shaw, 
316-23. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003. 
---. "From Utopia to Mutopia: Recursive Complexity and Nanospatiality in The Di­
amond Age." In World Weavers: Globalization, Science Fiction, and the Cybernetic Revo­
lution, edited by Wong Kin Yuen, Gary We stfahl, and Amy Chan Kit Sze. Hong Kong: 
Hong Kong University Press, forthcoming. 
--- . How We Became Posthuman: Virtual Bodies in Cybernetics, Literature, and Infor­
matics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999. 
--- . "Theory of a Different Order: A Conversation with Katherine Hayles and Niklas 
Luhmann." Cultural Critique 31 (Fall 1995): 7-36. 
--- . Writing Machines. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 200l. 
Hayot, Eric. Chinese Dreams: Pound, Brecht, Tel Que!. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan 
Press, 2004. 
Hillis, Daniel. The Pattern on the Stone: The Simple Ideas That Make Computers Work. New 
York: Perseus Books Group, 1999. 
Hirvensalo, Mika. Quantum Computing. Berlin: Springer Verlag, 2001-
Hofstader, Douglas R. Gode!, Escher, Bach: An Eternal Golden Braid. New York: Basic Books, 
1979· 
Hutchins, W. J. "Warren Weaver Memorandum July 1949." http://ourwor ld.compuserve. 
com/homepages/ WJHutchins /Weaver4 9.htm. 
Hutchinson, Stuart. "James's 'In the Cage': A New Interpretation:' Studies in Short Fiction 
19 (1982): 19-26. 
Jackson, Shelley. "'Of Dolls and Monsters': An Interview with Shelley Jackson." By Rita 
Raley. The Iowa Review on the Web (March 1, 2002): 1-4. http://www. uiowa.edu/% 7Eiare 
view/tirweb/feature/j ackson/jackson.htm. 
---. Patchwork Girl by Mary/Shelley and Herself. Watertown, MA: Eastgate Systems, 
1995. http://www.eastgate.com/c atalog/Patchw orkGirl.html. 
270 W 0 R K 5 CIT E 0 
--- . "Stitch Bitch: The Patchwork Girl." Paradoxa 4 (1998): 526-38. 
James, Henry. "In the Cage:' In The Complete Tales of Henry James. Vol. 10, edited by Leon 
Edel, 139-242 . London: Rupert Hart-Davis, 1964-
Johnson, Barbara. "My Monster/My Self." Diacritics 12 (1982): 2-10. 
Johnston, John. "The In-Mixing of Machines: Psychoanalysis and Cybernetics." Unpub­
lished manuscript. 
Kandel, Michael. ''A Freudian Peek at Lem's Fiasco:' Paper presented at a conference on 
The World according to Lem: Science Fiction and Futurolo gy, University of Alberta, 
Edmonton, AB, September 29, 2003. 
Kauffman, Stuart A. At Home in the Universe: The Search for Laws of Self-Organization and 
Complexit y. New York: Oxford Press, 1996. 
--- . The Origins of Order: Self-Organization and Selection in Evolution. New York: Ox­
ford University Press, 1993. 
Kirschenbaum, Matthew G. "Editing the Interface: Textual Studies and First Generation 
Electronic Objects." In TEXT: An Interdisci plinary Annual of Textual Studies. Vol. 14, 
edited by W. Speech Hill and Edward M. Burns, 15-51. Ann Arbor: University of Michi­
gan Press, 2002. 
--- . "Materiality and Matter and Stuff: What Electronic Texts Are Made Of:' Electronic 
Book Review 12 (2002). http://www.altx. com/ebrlriposte/rip 12/rip12kir.htm. 
---. "Virtuality and VRML: Software Studies after Manovich." In The Politics of In for­
mation: The ElectronicMediation of Social Change, edited by Mark Bousquet and Kather­
ine Wills. Alt-X Press eBook, 2004. http://www.altx .com/ebooks/inf opol.html. 
Kittler, Friedrich A. Discourse Networks, 1800/1900. Translated by Michael Metteer. Stanford, 
CA: Stanford University Press, 1992. 
--- . Essays: Literature, Media, Information Systems. Edited by John Johnston. Amster­
dam: G+B Arts, 1997. 
---. Gramophone, Film, Typewriter. Translated by Geoffrey Winthrop-Young and 
Michael Wutz. Writing Science Series. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1999. 
Koenig, Andrew, and Barbara E. Moo. "Preface." In Accelerated C++. Redwood City, CA: 
Addison -Wesley, 2000. http://www.accelerated cpp.com/details/pref ace.html. 
Koza, John R. Genetic Programming: On the Programming of Computers by Means of Natural 
Selection. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1992. 
---. Genetic Programming II: Automatic Discovery of Reusable Programs. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, 1994-
Koza, John R., Forrest H. Bennett III, David Andre, and Martin A. Keane. Genetic Program­
ming III: Darwinian Invention and Problem Solving. San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann 
Publishers, 1999. 
Kristal, Efrain. Invisible Work: Borges and Translation. Nashville, TN: Vanderbilt University 
Press, 2002. 
Kurzweil, Ray. The Age of Spiritual Machines: When Computers Exceed Human Intelligence. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000. 
--- . "Reflections on Stephen Wolfram's A New Kind of Science. " KurzweilAL net. http:// 
www.kurzweil ai.net/article s/art0464.html. 
Lacan, Jacques. Le Seminaire XX: Encore. Paris: Seuil, 1975. 
WORKS CITED 271 
Langton, Christopher G. "Artificial Life:' In Artificial Life, edited by Christopher Langton, 
1-17. Redwood City, CA: Addison -Wesley, 1989. 
--- . "Computation at the Edge of Chaos: Phase Transition and Emergent Computa­
tion:' Physica D 42 (1990): 12-37. 
Latour, Bruno. "A. N. Whitehead and Richard Powers." Paper presented at a conference of 
the Society for Literature and Science, Paris, France, June 24, 2004. 
--- . Science in Action: How to Follow Scientists and Engineers through Society. Cam­
bridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1987. 
--- . We Have Never Been Modern. Translated by Catherine Porter. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press, 1993. 
--- . "Why Has Critique Run Out of Steam? From Matters of Fact to Matters of Con­
cern:' Critical Inquiry 30, no. 2 (Winter 2004): 225-48. 
Latour, Bruno, and Steve Woolgar. Laboratory Life: The Social Construction of Scientific 
Facts. London: Sage, 1979. 
Lawler, John. John Lawler. http://www-personal.umich.edu/-j lawler. 
Lem, Stanislaw. "De Impossibilitate Vitae and De Impossibilitate Prognoscendi by Cezar 
Kouska." In A Perfect Vacuum, translated by Michael Kandel, 141-66. New York: Harvest, 
1983. 
--- . "The Mask." In Mortal Engines, translated by Michael Kandel, 81-239. San Diego: 
Harcourt, 1992. First published in English 1977 by Seabury Press. First Polish edition 
1976. 
---. "The New Cosmogony." In A Perfect Vacuum, translated by Michael Kandel, 197-
238. New York: Harvest, 1983. 
---. Solaris. Translated by Joanna Kilmartin and Steve Cox. New York: Berkley, 1971. 
Lenoir, Timothy. "Inscription Practices and the Materialities of Communication." Intro­
duction to Inscribing Science: Scientific Texts and the Materiality of Communic ation, 
edited by Timothy Lenoir, 1-19. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1998. 
Levy, Stephen. Artificial Life: The Quest for a New Creation. New York: Pantheon Books, 
1992. 
Libet, Benjamin, Anthony Freeman, and Keith Sutherland. The Volitional Brain: Neuro­
science of Free Will. Thorverton, UK: Imprint Academic, 1999. 
Libet, Benjamin, C. A. Gleason, E. W. Wright, and D. K. Pearl. "Time of Conscious Intention 
to Act in Relation to Onset of Cerebral Activities (Readiness Potential): The Unconscious 
Initiation of a Freely Voluntary Act:' Brain 106 (1983): 623-42. 
Library of Congress. William Blake Archive. Edited by Morris Eaves, Robert Essick, and 
Joseph Viscomi. http://www.blakearchi ve.org. 
Liu, Alan. "The Humaniti es: A Technical Profession:' Paper presented at the annual con­
vention of the Modern Language Association, San Diego, CA, December 28, 2003. 
--- . The Laws of Cool: Knowledge Work and the Culture of Information. Chicago: Uni­
versity of Chicago Press, 2004. 
Lloyd, Seth. "Computational Capacity of the Universe." Physical Review Letters 88, no. 23 
(June 10, 2002): 237901. 
--- . "How Fast, How Small, and How Powerful? Moore's Law and the Ultimate Lap­
top:' July 23,2001. http://www.edge .org/3rcL culturellloydllloyc Lprint.htmL 
272 WORKS CITED 
--- . "Lloyd's It from Qubit Law." http://www.edge.org/q2004/page5.ht ml#1l0yd. 
--- . "Ultimate Physical Limits to Computatio n:' Nature 406 (2000): 1047-54. 
Logan, Robert. The Alphabet Effect: The Impact of the Phonetic Alphabet on the Development 
of Western Civilization. New York: St. Martin's Press, 1987. 
--- . The Fifth Language: Learning a Living in the Computer Age. North York, ON: Stod­
dart, 1997. 
Lovink, Geert. Dark Fiber: Tracking Critical Internet Culture. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
2002. 
Luhmann, Niklas. "The Cognitive Program of Constructivism and a Reality That Remains 
Unknown." In SelJorganization: Portrait of a Scientific Revolution, edited by Wolfgang 
Krohn, Gunter Kuppers, and Helga Nowotny, 64-85. Dordrecht: KIuwer Academic, 
1990. 
---. "The Paradox of Observing Systems." Cultural Critique 31 (Fall 1995): 37-56. 
Lurie, Andrew J. "Now, May I Offer You a Poem:' http://develop.www. umich.edu/luriea­
bin/queneau. 
MacKay, Donald. Information, Mechanism, Meaning. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1969. 
Macpherson, C. B. The Political Theory of Possessive Individualism: Hobbes to Locke. New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1988. 
Mandelbrot, Benoit. The Fractal Beauty of Nature. San Francisco: W. H. Freeman, 1982. 
Manovich, Lev. The Language of New Media. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002. 
Markley, Robert. "Boundaries: Mathematics, Alienation, and the Metaphysics of Cyber 
space:' In Virtual Reality and Their Discontents, edited by Robert Markley, 55-77. Balti­
more: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1996. 
Markoff, John. "Behind Happy Interface, More Complex Reality." New York Times, June 3, 
1999, sec. G7, col. 1. 
Massumi, Brian. "The Brightness Confound:' In The Body Mechanique, 81-94. Wexner 
Center Exhibit Catalogue� Columbus: Ohio State University, 1998. 
Maturana, Humberto R., and Francisco J. Varela. Autopoiesis and Cognition: The Realization 
of the Living. Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1980. 
McCellan, Jim. "After Snow Crash's Cyberpunk, It's Cyberpunk." Guardian (London), Oc­
tober 14, 1999, 2. 
McGann, Jerome J. The D. G. Rossetti Hypermedia Archive. http://www.iath.virgini a.edu/ 
rossetti/f ullarch.html. 
---. "It's Not the Technology, Stupid!" Paper presented at the annual convention of 
the Modern Language Association. San Diego, CA: December 28, 2003. 
--- . Radiant Textuality: Literature after the World Wide Web. London: Palgrave Mac­
millan, 2001. 
---. The Textual Condition. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1991. 
McKenzie, D. F. Bibliography and the Sociology of Texts. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1986. 
Mellor, Anne K. Mary Shelley: Her Life, Her Fiction, Her Monsters. New York: Routledge, 
1988. 
Memmott, Talan. Lexia to Perplexia. http://www.uiowa.edu/ -iareview/tirweb/hyp ermedia/ 
talaILmemmott/. 
w 0 R K 5 CIT E 0 273 
Menzel, Peter, and Faith D'Alusio. Robo sapiens: Evolution of a New Species. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, 2000. 
Minsky, Marvin. The Society of Mind. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1988. 
--- . "Why Computer Science Is the Most Important Thing That Has Happened to 
the Humanities in 5,000 Years:' Keynote address at a conference on artificial life. Nara, 
Japan, May 15, 1996. 
Mitchell, William J. City of Bits: Space, Place, and the Infoban. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
1996. 
Moody, Andrew. "'The Harmless Pleasure of Knowing': Privacy in the Telegraph Office and 
Henry James's 'In the Cage.'" The Henry James Review 16 (1995): 53-65. 
Moravec, Hans. Mind Children: The Future of Robot and Human Intelligence. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 1990. 
--- . Robot: Mere Machine to Transcendent Mind. New York: Oxford University Press, 
2000. 
Morowitz, Harold. The Emergence of Everything: How the World Became Complex. New 
York: Oxford University Press, 2002. 
Moukas, Alexandros, and Pattie Maes. ''Amalthea:' MIT Media Lab. Research Group Proj­
ects and Descriptions. http://www.media.mit.edu/ research/ResearchP ubWeb.pl?ID= 
284. 
Munneke, Derek, Kirsten Wahlstrom, and Linda Zaccara. "Intelligent Software Agents on 
the Internet:' http://www.cis .unisa.edu.au/ -cisdm/ papers/ iagentslIntelligentAgents 
Internet.html. 
Murray, Janet. Hamlet on the Holodeck: The Future of Narrative in Cyberspace. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, 1998. 
Neurosciences Research Foundation. "NOMAD:' Neurosciences Institute. http://www.nsi. 
edu. 
Nicolson, Marjorie Hope. Newton Demands the Muse: Newton's "Opticks" and Eighteenth­
Century Poets. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1946. 
Nielsen, Michael A., and Isaac 1. Chuang. Quantum Computation and Quantum Informa­
tion. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000. 
Norrman, Ralf. "The Intercepted Telegram Plot in Henry James's 'In the Cage.'" Notes & 
Queries 24 (1977): 425-27. 
---. Techniques of Ambiguity in the Fiction of Henry James, with Special Reference to "In 
the Cage" and "The Turn of the Screw." Acta Academiae Aboensis, ser. A, Humaniora, 54, 
no. 2. Abo: Abo Akademi, 1977. 
Open Source Initiative. Open Source. http://www.opensource.org/. 
Ostman, Charles. "Synthetic Sentience:' Interview with Galen Brandt. Mondo 2000 16 
(1998): 35· 
Otis, Laura. Networking: Communi cating with Bodies and Machines in the Nineteenth Cen­
tury. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2001. 
Paek, Kwangh Yung. "Reversible Cellular Automata:' http://sjsu.rudyruck er.com/ -kwangh 
yung. paek/pap er/. 
Parker, Jo Alyson. "Gendering the Robot: Stanislaw Lem's 'The Mask:" Science-Fiction 
Studies 19 (1992): 178-91. 
274 W 0 R K 5 CIT E D 
Paulson, William R. Literary Culture in a World Transformed. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University 
Press, 2001-
Pavic, Milorad. Dictionary of the Khazars: A Lexicon Novel. Translated by Christina 
Pribicevic -Zoric. New York: Vintage, 1989. 
Paz, Octavio. "Translati on: Literature and Letters:' In Theories of Translation, edited by 
Ranier Schulte and John Biguenet, 152-62. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992. 
Plotnitsky, Arkady. Complementarity: Anti-Epistemo logy after Bohr and Derrida. Durham, 
NC: Duke University Press, 1995. 
Post, Jack. "Requiem for a Reader? A Semiotic Approach of Reader in Text in Electronic 
Literature:' Unpublished manuscript. 
Poster, Mark. What's the Matter with the Internet? Minneapolis: University of Minnesota 
Press, 2001. 
Poundstone, William. Prisoner's Dilemma. New York: Anchor, 1993. 
Prigogine, Ilya, and Isabelle Stengers. Order out of Chaos: Man's New Dialogue with Nature. 
New York: Bantam Books, 1986. 
Queneau, Raymond. Cent mille milliards de poemes. Paris: Gallimard, 1961-
Quinn, Paul. "The How of the Crypt." Times Literary Supplement, November 5, 1999, 24. 
Raley, Rita. "Interferences: [Net.Writing] and the Practice of Codework." Electronic Book 
Review (September 2002). http://www.electronicbo okreview. com/v3 I servlet! ebr?com 
mand=view_essay&essay _id=rayleyele. 
--- . "Machine Translation and Global English." Yale Journal of Criticism 16, no. 2 (Fall 
2003): 291-313. 
--- . "Reveal Codes: Hypertext and Performance;' Postmodern Culture 12, no. 1 (Sep­
tember 2001). http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/postmode rILculture/t ocipmc12.1.htm!. 
Renear, Allen. "Out of Praxis: Three (Meta)theories ofTextuality;' In Electronic Text: Investi­
gations in Method and Theory, edited by Kathryn Sutherland, 107-26. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 1997. 
---. "Philosophy and Electronic Publishing: Theory and Metatheory in the Develop­
ment of Text Encoding;' The Monist 80, no. 3 (1997): 348-67. 
Requiem for a Dream. http://www.requiemf oradream.com. 
Robinson, Kim Stanley. The Novels of Philip K. Dick. Ann Arbor, MI: UMI Research Press, 
1984. 
Rose, Mark. Authors and Owners: The Invention of Copyrigh t. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 1993. 
Ryan, Marie-Laure. Possible Worlds, Artificial Intelligence, and Narrative Theory. Blooming­
ton: University ofIndiana Press, 1992. 
Saarinen, Leena. "Chatterb ots: Crash Test Dummies of Communicati on:' Master's thesis, 
Media Lab, University of Art and Design, Helsinki, Finland. http://www.mlab.uialdi/ 
www/projectLan<Lpublica tions/finaLthesislsaarineILleena. 
Saussure, Ferdinand de. Course in General Linguistics. Translated by Roy Harris. Peru, IL: 
Open Course Publishing Co., 1988. 
Savoy, Ric. "'In the Cage' and the Queer Effects of Gay History." Novel 28 (1995): 284-307. 
Schlossberg, Edwin. Wordswordswords. West Islip, NY: Universal Limited Arts Editions, 
1968. 
W 0 R K 5 CIT E 0 275 
Schneier, Bruce. "The Solitaire Encryption Algorithm:' In Cryptonomicon, by Neal Ste­
phenson, 911-18. New York: Avon, 2002. 
Searle, John R. "Reiterating the Differences: A Reply to Derrida." Glyph 1 (1977): 198-208. 
Serres, Michel. The Parasite. Translated by Lawrence R. Shehr. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins 
University Press, 1982. 
Shannon, Claude, and Warren Weaver. The Mathematical Theory of Communi cation. Ur­
bana: University of Illinois Press, 1949. 
Shapin, Steven, and Simon Schaffer. Leviathan and the Air Pump: Hobbes, Boyle, and the 
Experimental Life. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1986. 
Sha Xin Wei. ''A Tgarden as a Phenomenological Experiment:' http://www.gvu.gatech.edu/ 
people/sha.xinwei/ topologicalmedia/tgarden/index.html. 
Shelley, MaryWollstonecraft. Frankenstein: The1818 Text, Contexts, Nineteenth-Cen tury Re­
sponses, Modern Criticism. Edited by Paul J. Hunter. New York: W. W. Norton, 1996. 
Shillingsburg, Peter L. Scholarly Editing in the Computer Age: Theory and Practice. 3rd ed. 
Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1966. 
--- . "Text as Matter, Concept, and Action:' Studies in Bibliography 44 (1991): 43-83. 
Silver, David. "Looking Backwards, Looking Forward: Cyberculture Studies 1990-2000:' 
In Web Studies: Rewiring Media Studies for the Digital Age, edited by David Gauntlett, 
19-30. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000. 
Sims, Karl. "Evolved Virtual Creatures." http://www .biota.org/ksims/index.html. 
--- . "Evolving 3-D Morphology and Behavior by Competition." Unpublished manu­
script. 
--- . "Evolving Virtual Creatures." Paper presented at tlIe SIGGRAPH annual confer­
ence, Orlando, FL, July 24-29, 1994. Published in Annual Conference Series, Computer 
Graphics 28 (July 1994): 15-22. 
Smith, Brian Cantwell. On the Origin of Objects. Cambridge, MA: Bradford Books, 1996. 
Steels, Luc. "The Artificial Lif e Roots of Artificial Intelligence:' Artificial Life 1, nos. 1/2 (Fall 
1993/Winter 1994): 75-110. 
Steels, Luc, and Rodney A. Brooks, editors. The Artificial Life Route to Artificial Intelligence: 
Building Embodied Situated Agents. Hillsdale: Erlbaum Associates, 1995. 
Stephenson, Neal. Cryptonomicon. New York: Avon, 2002. 
--- . "Cryptonomicon cypher-FAQ:' Under question 13, "Hey, tlIe perl script doesn't 
work! What's the deal?" http://www.w ell.com/us er/neal/cypherF AQ.html. 
--- . The Diamond Age; or, A Young Lady's Illustrated Primer. New York: Bantam, 2000. 
---. In the Beginning Was the Command Line. New York: Avon, 1999. 
--- . Neal Stephenson. http://www.nealstephenson.com. 
---. Snow Crash. New York: Bantam, 2000. 
Stewart, Garrett. Reading Voices: Literature and the Phonotext. Berkeley: University of Cali­
fornia Press, 1990. 
Stone, Allucquere Rosanne. The War of Technology and Desire at the Close of the Mechanical 
Age. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996. 
Swirski, Peter. ''A Case of Wishful Thinking." In Between Literature and Science: Poe, Lem, 
and Explorations in Aesthetics, Cognitive Science, and Literary Knowledge, 127-32. Mon­
treal, QC: McGill-Queen's University Press, 2001. http://www.scienceboard.net/commu 
nity/perspectives .64.html. 
276 WORKS CITED 
Tallis, Raymond. Not Saussure: A Critique of Post-Saussurean Literary Theory. London: 
Macmillan Press, 1988. 
Teilliard de Chardin, Pierre. The Phenomenon of Man. New York: Perennial, 1976. 
Thibault, Paul J. Re-Reading Saussure: The Dynamics of Signs in Social Life. London: Rout­
ledge, 1997. 
Tiptree, James Jr. "The Girl Who Was Plugged In." In Her Smoke Rose Up Forever: The Great 
Years of James Tiptree Jr., 44-79. New York: Arkham House Publishers, 1990. 
Turing, Alan M. "Computing Machinery and Intelligence." Mind 59 (1950): 433-60. 
--- . "On Computable Numbers, with an Application to the Entscheidungsproblem." 
Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society, ser. 2, 42 (1936): 230-65. 
Turkle, Sherry. Life on the Screen: Identity in the Age of the Internet. New York: Simon and 
Schuster, 1997. 
--- . The Second Self: Computers and the Human Spirit. New York: Simon and Schuster, 
1984. 
Ullman, Ellen. Close to the Machine: Technophilia and Its Discontents. San Francisco: City 
Lights Books, 1997. 
--- . "Elegance and Entropy." Interview with Scott Rosenberg. Salon 21St (October 9, 
1997). http://archiv e.salon.com12 1 st/featurel 1997/1 OI09interview .html. 
UNITN. "Dynamic Ontology: An Inquiry into Systems, Emergence, Levels of Reality, and 
Forms of Causality, Trento University, Trento, Italy." September 8-11,2004. http:// www. 
unitn.itl eventsl dol. 
Unsworth, John. "The Importance of Failure:' Journal of Electronic Publishing 3, no. 2 (De­
cember 1997). http://www.press.umich.edu/jep/03- 02/unsworth.html. 
Van Lieshout, Jules. "The New Alchemists." Paper presented at the annual convention of 
the Midwest Modern Language Association, Chicago, IL, Novemb er 9, 2003. 
Varela, Francisco J., Even Thompson, and Eleanor Rosch. The Embodied Mind: Cognitive 
Science and Human Experience. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991. 
Von Neumann, John. Theory of Self-Reproducing Automata. Edited by Arthur. W. Burks. 
Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1966. 
Wald, Carol. "The Female Machine: From von Neumann to Richard Powers." Unpublished 
manuscript. 
Weaver, Warren. "The New Tower." Foreword to Machine Translation of Languages, edited 
by William N. Locke and A. Donald Booth, v-vii. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press; New 
York: John Wiley & Sons, 1950. 
--- . "Translation." In Machine Translation of Languages, edited by William N. Locke 
and A. Donald Booth, 15-23. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press; New York: John Wiley & Sons, 
1950. 
Weise, Elizabeth. "Cracking Cryptonomicon: Stephenson Weaves 50-Year Tale of Intrigue:' 
USA Today, April 28, 1999, D1. 
Weizenbaum, Joseph. Computer Power and Human Reason: From Judgment to Calculation. 
New York: W. H. Freeman, 1976. 
Wells, H. G. The Time Machine: An Invention. New York: Modern Library, 2002. 
Wicke, Jennifer. "Henry James's Second Wave:' The Henry James Review 10 (1989): 146-51. 
Winson, L. J. Dark Lethe. http:// www.darklethe.net. 
Wolfram, Stephen. A New Kind of Science. New York: Wolfram Media, 2002. 
WORKS CITED 277 
Zeller, Hans. "A New Approach to the Critical Constitution of Literary Texts:' Studies in 
Bibliography 28 (1975): 231-65. 
Zivkovic, Zonran. "The Future without a Future: An Interview with Stanislaw Lern:' Pacific 
Quarterly (Moana); An International Review of Arts and Ideas 4, no. 3 (1979): 255-59. 
Zizek, Slavoj. Enjoy Your Symptom! Jacques Lacan in Hollywood and Out. New York: Rout­
ledge, 2001. 
Zuse, Konrad. Rechnender Raum. Schriften zur Datenverarbeitung, Band 1. Braunschweig: 
Friedrich Vieweg & Sohn, 1969. 
278 W 0 R I{ SCI TED 
Index 
Aarseth, Epsen: Cybertext, 36-38, 99; 
textonomy and, 44 
abject, the, in Cryptonomicon, 122 
absence and presence, dialectic of, 66, 70 
abstracti on: in C++, 58; in Cryptonomicon, 
130 
Accelerated c++ (Koenig and Moo), 58 
access, 66; in Cryptonomicon, 138 
Addison, Joseph, 158-59 
Adelman, Leonard M., 17 
agency/agent, 172, 177; in Deleuze and 
Guattari, 173-75; distributed, 31; human, 
242; in "The Mask," 180-92 
algorithm, 6, 49; in Cryptonomicon, 118; 
evolutionary, 191; in "The Mask;' 182; 
pruning, 26; Solitaire, 141; unconscious 
as, 172 
alien, 76; in "The Mask;' 187, 191; in The 
Three Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch, 
76-78; unknowable, in Lem's Fiasco, 
189 
alphabet, 202 
Althusser, Louis, 60 
analog, 6, 7, 56, 167, 172; importance of, 27; 
media, 117; of mind, 27; reflexivity and, 
27 
analog patterns, 16 
analog processes, 25, 29 
analog resemblance, 202, 207-9, 212 analog subjects, 10, 201-5 
Anthony, Susan B., as character in 
Patchwork Girl, 164-65 
anthropic principle: in Distress, 234-40; in 
Zizek, 232-40 
anthropomorphic projection, 5, 193 
anthropomorphizing, of virtual creatures, 
200-201 
appetite, animal, 119-24, 126 
Argyros, Alexander, 197 
artifactual physics, 195 
artificial intelligence, 196; in Turing test, 
214-15 
artificial life, 28; embodiment different 
than flesh, 242; heir of cybernetics, 
242; and Lacan, 177; part of theoretical 
biology, 216; simulations, 193-212 
Artificial Life Journal, 28 
assassin, in "The Mask;' 185 
assemblages, 9; and Body without Organs, 
173-74; monster's body in Patchwork 
Girl as, 150 
Austin, J. 1., 51 
Authors and Owners (Rose), 143-47, 202 
authorship, multiple distributed, 10 
autism, 197 
autonomous person, in "The Mask;' 
188 
autopoeisis ,174 
Bacon, Francis, 145 
Balsamo, Anne, Technologies of the 
Gendered Body, 1 
Baron-Cohen, Simon, Mindblindne ss, 
197 
Barthes, Roland, 108 
BASIC, 57 
Baudrillard, Jean, 19, 86 
Baum, Frank, Patchwork Girl of 02, 159, 
163-64,248 
Beauvoir, Simone de, 155 
Beer, Gillian, 127 
Benjamin, Walter, 19; "The Task of the 
Translator;' 112 
Berkerts, Sven, The Gutenberg Elegies, 32 
Bernstein, Mark, Storyspace, 152 
binding: early, in procedural languages, 59; 
late, in C++, 59 
biota, artificial, 5 
birth: in "The Mask;' 189; as simulation, in 
Permutation City, 230 
Blackstone, Justice, 144 
Blake, William, 115; William Blake Archive, 
90-91, 96, 98 
Bletchley Park, 120 
body: monster's, in Patchwork Girl, 150; 
textual, in Patchwork Girl, 151, 164-65 
Body without Organs (Bw O), 106-7, 115, 
173-74 
Bolter, Jay: Remediation, 32-33; Storyspace, 
152. See also Body without Organs 
Book of Going Forth By Day, The (Coverley), 
54 
Borges, Jorge Luis, 9; "The Don Quixote 
of Pierre Menard;' 89, 109; "Library 
of Babel;' 96; translation, idea of, 
114-15 
Brockman, John, 30 
Brooks, Rodney, 42, 200, 204; Cog project, 
215 
Brotherhood of Code, 131-41 
Brotherhood of Hackers, 137-38 
Bruner, Jerome, 199 
Buzzetti, Dino, 96 
280 IN DE X C++, 48, 57-60 
Calvino, Halo, 99 
Campbell, Jim, "I Have Never Read the 
Bible;' 212-13 
cannibals: in Cryptonomicon, 126; in The 
Time Machine, 126 
capital: cultural, 144; economic, 144 
capitalism, 51, 202 
Castells, Manuel, 217 
causality: distributed, 200; linear, 26, 28, 
30-33, 38; multiple, 4, 7, 31-33, 38, 167, 
217; recursive, 4 
Cayley, John, 110 
Cebrowski, Arthur K., 20 
cellular automata, 41, 55; in Deleuze and 
Guattari, 173-74; as metaphor, 220; in A 
New Kind of Science, 18-28, 216 
Cervantes, Don Miguel de, 91 
Chomsky, Noam, 116 
Chun, Wendy Hui Kyong, 60 
citability, 48 
citation, 51 
clockwork, as metaphor for universe, 3 
Close to the Machine (Ullman), 16, 48-49 
clusters, oxymoronic, 136 
code: arbitrariness of, 68; Arethusa, 
in Cryptonomicon, 122; ASCII, 56; 
assembler, 152; bibliographic, 90-91; 
Brotherhood of Code, 131-41; and 
coding chains, 67; compared to 
speech and writing, 16-38, 39-61, 217; 
cryptographic, 129, 133; cryptological, 
in Quarantine, 226; definition of, 108; 
documentation of, 111-12; as executable 
language, 50; in Foggy simulation, 116; 
grammar of, 111; and Guattari, 175; 
hierarchy of, 59, 64; and language, 7, 8,9, 
11, 16, 118, 167; levels of, 202-3; as lingua 
franca of nature, 15; linguistic, 90-91; 
machine, in Patchwork Girl, 163; Morse, 
67; ontology of, 20; performative, 10, 
50; permeating language, 242; and 
print texts, 95; programming languages 
and, 15; and signification, 8; signified, 
signifier, and, 68; unconscious and, 191; 
worldview of, 8, 16, 30-31, 38 
code book, 75 
codework, as a creole, 60 
coevolution: in Prisoner's Dilemma, 32-33; 
processes, 197 
cognition, 200, 212-13; distributed, 197, 200, 
212-13; human, 217 
command: executable, 53; lines, 141; "reveal 
code;' 54-55 
commodification, and literary work, 144, 
147 
compiling, 59 
complexity: in cellular automata, 
216; emergence and, 26, 198; as 
emergent property of computation, 
41; emerging from simple program, 
20; of evolutionary simulations, 210; 
of flickering signifiers, 157; levels of, 
29; location of, 41, 85-86; surface, 204; 
theory, 3, 242 
computation, 2; and computational 
irreducibility, 18; and computational 
perspective, 21; and computational 
practice, 4; as cultural metaphor, 219; 
definition of, 17-18; as fundamental 
process, 30; as generator of reality, 
55, 217; as ontology, 3; in Permutation 
City, 225-32; requirements for, 22; 
simulations and, 6; worldview of, 
17, 30, 39, 47· See also Regime of 
Computation 
computational universe, 22; ambiguity in, 
20; as cultural icon, 4; in Egan's fiction, 
214-43; as means, 4, 20, 22; as metaphor, 
4, 20, 22, 219-22 
computer: in Permutation City, 225-32; 
quantum, 30, 222. See also Universal 
Computer 
computer games, 5, 36 
consciousness, 10, 11; analog, 193; simulated, 
in Permutation City, 223-32; uploading, 
217 
constraints, 42-43; adaptive, 196; in C++, 58; in Cryptonomicon, 120; in dream 
of information, 62-86; environmental, 
196; imposed by morphological 
resemblance, 203 
constructivism, 50; in Distress, 233; social, 
205-9 
Conway, John, Game of Life, 18 
Cook, Matthew, and cellular automata, 216 
Coover, Robert, "The Babysitter," 162 
Copy, in Permutation City, 11, 223-32, 235 
copyright, 10, 106, 202; in Authors and 
Owners, 144-47 
cosmology, subjective. See subjective 
cosmology 
Coverley, M. D., The Book of Going Forth by 
Day, 54 
Cramer, Florian, 117 
creatures, virtual, 193-213 
criticism, textual, 104-8 
crypt, in Cryptonomicon, 121, 124, 133 
cryptanaly sis, in Cryptonomicon, 129 
cryptography: in Cryptonomicon, 121, 129, 
131; and relation to writing books, 124 
cryptolo gy, in Cryptonomicon, 121, 135 
Cryptonomicon (Stephen son), 1, 10, 31, 
117-41, 232; Bobby Shaftoe, 119, 121-22, 
131; Earl Comstock, 1, 123, 131, 136; Enoch 
Root, 128-29, 131; the Good Hacker, 
129-32, 134; Randy Waterhouse, 121, 
127-30 
Culler, Jonathan, 43-44 
cybernetic difference, 90 
cybernetics : contribution of, 241-42; 
in-mixed with human psychology, 177; 
paradigm, 218 
cyberspace, 162; in Cryptonomicon, 120; in 
Permutation City, 229-32 
cybersystem, in "The Girl Who Was 
Plugged In;' 80-83, 85 
Cybertext (Aarseth), 36-38, 99 
Dahlstrom, Mats, 95, 97-98, 101-2 
Damasio, Antonio, 191, 217 
Danielewski, Mark, House of Leaves, 105-6 
IN DE X 281 
Dark Lethe, 105 
database, 53 
Davis, Martin, The Universal Computer, 48 
Dawkins, Richard, The Selfish Gene, 220 
death: fetus of, 188; in "The Mask;' 186-92; 
simulated, 231; as ultimate destination 
ofletter, 222 
deconstruction, 68; theory of, 98 
deformation, as critical practice, 98 
Deleuze, Gilles, 172; Body without Organs, 
106-7,115,173-74,177; and "The Mask;' 
190-91; and schizanaly sis, 173; and 
Sims's "Evolved Virtual Creatures;' 200; 
A Thousand Plateaus, 173-76 
de Man, Paul, 40 
dematerializati on, in Saussure, 44 
Dennett, Daniel c., Kinds of Minds, 216 
Derrida, Jacques, 8, 30; citation and, 154; 
classical metaphy sics and, 17; differance, 
45-46; early texts, 16; and iterability, 
48, 52; Limited Inc., 48, 52; Logos and, 
41-42; Margins, 46; and metaphysics 
of presence, 40, 42; Of Grammato logy, 
40-61; suppleme ntarity, 68 
dialectic: in Cryptonomicon, 119-42; in 
Patchwork Girl, 165 
dialectical transformation, in Cryptonomi­
con, 139 
Dick, Philip K., Do Androids Dream of 
Electric Sheep? 242. See also The Three 
Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch 
Didion, Joan, The White Album, 197 
differance, 45-46 
difference, cybernetic, 90 
digital and human cognition, 172 
digital computer, 167 
digital creatures, 10 
digital mechanics, 24 
digital processes, 16 
digital representations, 6, 7 
digital subject, 10, 11, 201-5 
digitization, 56-57 
Discourse Networks, 1800/1900 (Kittler), 4, 
32 
282 IN 0 EX discursive explanations, 5, 6 
disembodiment, 2 
Distress (Egan), 22, 214, 232-40; Amanda 
Conroy, 233-34; Andrew Worth, 219, 
233-38; Anthrocosmologists, 233-40; 
Keystone, 234-35; Kuwale, 219, 238; 
Stateless, 237-38; Violet Mosala, 
234-35 
DNA, 29, 216 
document, definition of, 91-97 
documenta tion, of code, 111-12 
Dos Passos, John, 139 
Douglas, Jane Yellowlees, 165 
Doyle, Richard, Wetwares, 22 
Dreamweaver, 54 
Drucker, Johanna, 44, 109 
Dyer, Michael, 196 
dynamics: evolution ary, 196, 243; 
intermediating, 205 
Eckel, Bruce, Thinking in C++, 16, 57, 60 
Edelman, Gerald, 215 
editing, textual, 9 
Egan, Greg, 214-43; fiction of, as subjective 
cosmolog y, 214-40; honesty and, 218; 
Quarantine, 22, 225-27. See also Distress; 
Permutation City 
electronic literature. See literature, 
electronic 
electronic text. See textuality, electronic 
embodiment, 2, 35; coming to terms with, 
238; in Distress, 236-38; and human 
cognition, 217; of information, 120; of 
literary work, 144; material, 206; noise 
of, 144; in Patchwork Gir� 150 
emergence, 18, 21; arrow toward complexity, 
26; and discontinuous simulation, 224; 
emergent processes, 265, 32, 38; 
emergent reorganizat ions, 29; as ethical 
dynamic, 243; first-order, 198; fourth 
stage of, 220; Lacan's view of, 177; 
Morowitz and, 25-28, 210; patterns, 28; 
in Permutation City, 231-32 
emergent possibilities, 7 
encapsulation, in C++, 58 
encoding, of print texts, 95-96 
Enigma codes, in Cryptonomicon, 122 
ergodic literature, 36-38, 44 
errors: coding, 68; control, 43; file, in Unix, 
125; trail-off, 46 
evolution: biological as model for 
technological, 174; cosmological, 
233-40; in humans and intelligent 
machines, 216; of the posthuman, 26; of 
virtual creatures, 193-97, 211 
explanations, discursive, 5, 6 
feedback: intermediating, 62, 64; in 
simulations, 25 
feedback cycles, 22 
feedback loops, 15, 20, 31-33, 37-39, 116, 177, 
194,198 
figurative language, in Cryptonomicon, 10 
Finlay, Ian Hamilton, 108 
fitness criteria, 195, 199 
fitness values, 195 
Foggy, computer simulation, 116 
FORTRA N,57 
Foster, G._M., 62 
Foucault, Michel, 34, 147, 201 
Fredkin, Edward, 15-16, 54, 216; digital 
mechanics, 198; Digital Philosophy, 
22-23 
free will, in "The Mask;' 190, 192 
Fuller, Matthew, 16, 61 
function, wave, in Quarantine, 226 
Galloway, Alexander R., 50; Protocol, 171 
Game of Life (Conway), 18 
garble, in "The Girl Who Was Plugged In;' 
80,82 
gender: implications of, in information 
technologies, 1; implications of, with 
copyright, 144; in "The Mask;' 178, 
183-92; in Patchwork Girl, 155 
gendered enculturation, 171 
gender hierarchies, 85-86 
Genette, Gerard, 149 genotypes, of virtual creatures, 199-200 
Gerstack, John J., 20 
Gessler, Nicholas, 5, 28, 31, 116 
"Girl Who Was Plugged In, The" (Tiptree), 
79-86; Delphi, 79-83, 85; GTX, 79-83, 
85; P. Burke, 79-83, 85; Paul Isham, 
79-83, 85 
Glazier, Loss Pequeno, Dig(iT)al 
Poet(I)(C)s, 54, 108-9 
grammatology, 40-61 
Grigar, Dene, 89 
Grosz, Elizabeth, 155, 160 
Grusin, Richard, Remediation, 32-33 
Guattari, Felix, 172; Body without 
Organs, 106-7, 115, 173-74; "Machinic 
Heterogenesis;' 174-75, 177; and 
"The Mask," 190-91; schizanalysis 
in, 173; and Sims's "Evolved Virtual 
Creatures," 200; A Thousand Plateaus, 
173-76 
Gunder, Anna, 91-94 
Hackers, Brotherhood of, 137-38 
Hansen, Mark B. N., 33-36; embodiment 
and, 35; New Philosophy for New Media, 
34 
Hayles, N. Katherine: How We Became 
Posthuman, 2, 63, 177, 214, 217; My 
Mother Was a Computer, 7; Writing 
Machines, 2 
Herbert, George, 158-59 
hierarchies, dynamical, 25, 28, 30, 194, 198, 
241; emergences, 28 
Hillis, Daniel, 17 
Hofstader, Douglas, 222 
Homo sapiens, 1 
How We Became Posthuman. See under 
Hayles, N. Katherine 
humanist tradition, 2 
human lifeworld, 6, 7, 62 
Hutchins, W. J., 110 
hybridity: in "I Have Never Read the Bible," 
212; in Patchwork Girl, 165 
hybridization, 125 
IN 0 EX 283 
hybrid subjectivity, 209-13; as realist entity, 
210-11 
hyperrea lity, 86 
hypertext, electronic, 36; Jackson's 
comments on, 154, 156; Patchwork Girl 
as, 143, 147-67; writing space and, 153 
idealization, in Saussure, 44 
identity: in "The Mask," 179, 183; multiple, 
in Quarantine, 227; in Permutation City, 
223-32 
ideogram, 202 
ideology, software as, 60-61 
illusion, teleological. See teleological 
illusion 
Imaginary: cultural, 5; Lem's, 187; the 
readerly, 202 
immortality, in Permutation City, 229 
implant devices, 171; in Distress, 236-37; in 
"The Girl Who Was Plugged In;' 81 
individualism. See possessive individualism 
information: dream of, 62-86; economy 
of, 64, 66; embodied, 120; Mackay's 
theory of, 34; Shannon's theory of, 
34 
inheritance, in C++, 48, 58 
inscription device, 206 
inscriptio ns, 205-8 
intelligence. See artificial intelligence 
intelligent machine, 15; in Egan's fiction, 
214-16, 236; humans distinct from, 
242-43 
intentional ity, in "Evolved Virtual 
Creatures," 200 
interactions, recursive, 7 
intermediation, 9, 143; between analog and 
digital, 172; and complex dynamics, 217, 
242; definition of, 7, 45; dynamic, 213; 
in Egan's fiction, 214-40; in embodied 
texts, 104; feedback cycles and, 64; 
modalities, 11; and Patchwork Girl, 160, 
167; between print and electronic text, 
116; reason for, 33; recursivity and, 31 
interpolation, 61 
284 IN D EX "In the Cage" (James), 9, 64-86; 
Captain Everard, 66; epistemological 
assumptions in, 74; girl in the cage, 
68-70,83-84 
iterability, 48, 51-52 
Jackson, Shelley: interview with Rita Raley, 
149,152,154; "Stitch Bitch;' 148, 150, 152, 
155-58,161. See also Patchwork Girl 
James, Henry, 198. See also "In the Cage" 
J arzebski, J erzy, 178 
Johnson, Barbara, 156, 219 
Johnson, Mark, 155 
Johnson, Samuel, 146 
Johnston, Admiral Jay, 20 
Johnston, John, 176-77 
Joyce, Michael: afternoon, 153, 165; 
Storyspace, 152 
Kabala, 141 
Kandel, Michael, 178, 183, 189 
Kauffman, Stuart, 27, 198 
Keller, Evelyn Fox, 208 
kinship category, 1 
kinship implications of "My mother was a 
computer;' 5 
Kirschenbaum, Matthew, 16, 61, 91, 143 
Kittler, Friedrich, 4, 45; Discourse Networks 
1800/1900, 4, 32; Foucault and, 34; 
Gramophone, Film, Typewriter, 34; and 
reading as "hallucination;' 4, 6, 32; 
strategy of, 33-36; and Turing's universal 
machine, 31 
knots, oxymoronic. See oxymoronic knots 
Koenig, Andrew, 58 
Koza, John, 194, 215 
Krista!, Efrain, 114 
Kristeva, Julia, 42 
Kurzweil, Ray, 91; criticism of Wolfram, 24 
Lacan, Jacques, 72; "the letter always arrives 
at its destination," 219; and "The Mask;' 
190-91; mirror stage, 237; theory of the 
unconscious, 176-78 
lambda calculus, 49 
Langton, Christopher, 18, 216 
language, figurative, in Cryptonomicon, 10 
Latour, Bruno: Laboratory Life, 206; 
"matters of concern," 3; and quasi 
objects, 210; Science in Action, 208; We 
Have Never Been Modern, 209 
Lawler, John, 16 
Lem, Stanislaw: Fiasco, 189; Imaginary of, 
187; interview with Zoran Zivkovic, 186. 
See also "The Mask"; Solaris 
Lenoir, Timothy, 86 
Leroi-Gourhan, Andre, 174 
Lexia to Perplexia (Memmot t), 54 
Lieshout, Jules van, 111-12 
life, artificial. See artificial life 
Life on the Screen (Turkle), 20 
"Limited Good;' 62 
Limited Inc. (Derrida), 48, 52 
links, hypertext, 148-63 
Linux, 118, 140 
literariness, 54 
literature, 103, 146; electronic, 8, 9, 17, 38, 
53,94-104; ergodic, 36-38, 44; hypertext, 
54; net, 44; non-inno vative, 108-9; print, 
99-100. See also textuality 
Liu, Alan, 5; The Laws of Cool, 217 
lizard, in Cryptonomicon, 119-20, 130 
Lloyd, Seth, 30 
Locke, John, 145-46 
lock-out, in military terms, 20 
logic gates, 56 
loop: connecting body and mind, 217; 
feedback (see feedback loops); recursive, 
11, 194, 196, 198, 201; reflexive, 228 
love, in "The Mask;' 181-92 
Lovink, Geert, Dark Fiber, 171 
Lucariello, Joan, 199 
Luhmann, Niklas, 222 
machine, intelligent. See intelligent 
machine 
machinic phylum, 174 
MacKay, Donald, 34 Macpherson, C. B., 63, 145. See also 
possessive individualism 
Maes, Patti, 215 
"making discrete;' 8, 10, 56-61 
making, storing, and transmitting, 6-7, 
217-18 
Manovich, Lev, The Language of New 
Media, 32, 53 
Margins (Derrida), 46 
Markley, Robert, 63, 229 
"Mask, The" (Lem), 172, 178-92, 200; 
Arrhodes, 179-82, 189-90; humor in, 185 
Massumi, Brian, "The Brightness 
Confound," 211 
Materialism, New, 142 
materiality, 2, 9; and code, 43; in 
Cryptonomicon, 119-20, 138; in 
Cybertext, 37; definition of, 3, 103; 
embodied, 207-13; an emergent 
property, 104; information and, 7, 137; 
in Patchwork Girl, 166; in Saussure, 
43-44; in theories of textuality, 97-104; 
in William Blake Archive, 90 
Maturana, Humberto, 198; and autopoeisis, 
174 
McGann, Jerome, 36-38, 94, 95; and 
author's "final intentions," 92; Radiant 
Textuality, 97-104, 107-8; Rossetti 
Hypermedia Archive, 98 
McKenzie, D. E., and social texts, 103-4 
media: electronic, and hypertext 
link, 162; networked and pro­
grammable, 35, 59; specificities of, 93, 
106 
media ecology, 34, 97 
media-specific effects, 32 
mediation, 50 
"Medienumbruche;' 44 
Mellor, Anne, 115, 156 
Memmott, Talan, 54, 60 
memory: as chimerical, 165; computer, 162, 
223; human, in Patchwork Girl, 164; in 
"The Mask;' 185 
Merleau- Ponty, Maurice, 155 
IN 0 EX 285 
messages: decrypted, 138; encrypted, 131, 
135; in "The Girl Who Was Plugged In;' 
81 
metalepsis, 149 
metamorphosis, in "The Mask," 184 
metaphor, 4 
metaphy sics: classical, 17, 22, 51-52; of 
presence, 40, 42, 46-47 
MEZ (Mary-Anne Breeze), 60 
Microsoft, 60, 118, 125; Windows, 118, 127, 
140; Windows 95, 51; Windows XP, 51; 
Word, 46 
Miller, J. Hillis, 40 
Milton, John, 127 
Minsky, Marvin, 200 
monster, female: in Patchwork Girl, 147-63; 
subjectivity of, 148 
Moo, Barbara E., 58 
Moravec, Hans, 1, 35, 191; Robot, 223-24; 
uploading scenario of, 217 
Morowitz, Harold, 5, 15-16, 54, 198, 
216; emergence, 210; The Emergence 
of Everything, 25-27; and observer 
function, 228 
morphology: self-similar, 194-95; of virtual 
creatures, 196, 198-99 
mother, as computer, 1 
Mother Nature, 4 
mother's voice, in print texts, 4 
Moukas, Alexander, 215 
Moulthrop, Stuart, 99; Victory Garden, 153 
Murray, Janet, 99 
mutation, in virtual creatures, 194 
My Mother Was a Computer (Hayles), 7 
Myst (game), 105 
nanotechnolog y, 63 
narrative, 6, 55; in Cryptonomicon, 10, 139; 
importance of, 199; in the Regime of 
Computation, 27; and simulatio ns, 242 
narrative ambiguities, 53 
narrative pathways, 50 
narrative viewpoint of virtual creatures, 
197-205 
286 IN 0 EX nature: code the lingua franca of, 8, 55; 
Mother Nature, 4 
navigation, in William Blake Archive, 90 
network: autocatalytic, 27; economic, 
146-47 
network-centric warfare, 21-22 
Newton, Sir Isaac, laws of motion, 3 
Nicolson, Marjorie Hope, 3 
noise: and alteration of identity, 75; and 
artistic effects, 94; of code, 68; of 
embodiment, 35, 145, 205, 208; in "The 
Girl Who Was Plugged In;' 85; in 
telegram, 69; in The Three Stigmata of 
Palmer Eldritch, 75 
nonlinear behavior, 5 
noosphere, 26 
Norrman, Rolf, 67 
OfGrammat ology (Derrida), 40-61 
OHCO (Ordered Hierarchy of Content 
Objects), 95 
Ong, Walter, 39-40 
ontology, 4; dynamic, in simulatio ns, 25; in 
The Three Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch, 
76 
Operation Mincemeat, 121-22 
Oreo, structure of, 207-8, 212 
originality, Shelley Jackson's comments on, 
157; ofliterary work, 146; in Patchwork 
Girl, 161 
Ostman, Charles, 63 
oxymoronic knots, in Cryptonomicon, 119, 
132-39, 141-42 
Parker, Jo Alyson, 179 
Patchwork Girl (Jackson), 10, 107, 143-67, 
177, 243; dotted line in, 148-49, 152, 159, 
166-67; encoding and decoding in, 151; 
sewing in, 152-55; writing in, 152-55 
pattern, 66, 70, 81 
Paulson, William R., 57 
Pavic, Milorad, Dictionar y of the Khazars, 
91,161 
Paycheck (film), 220 
performance, in electronic texts, 103 
Permutation City (Egan), 22, 223-32; 
Autoverse in, 231-32; dust hypothesis in, 
225-27; "Garden of Eden" simulation in, 
228-29; Lambertians, 231-32; Maria De 
Luca, 229, 232; Paul Durham, 223-32; 
Thomas Riemann, 230-31 
person, autonomous, in "The Mask," 188 
phonemes, 56 
photograph, 46 
phylum, machinic, 174 
physicality, of texts, 97-104; difference from 
materiality, 103-4 
physics: artifactual, 195; quantum, 222 
Plotnitsky, Arkady, 127 
polymorphism, in C++, 48 
Pope, Alexander, 127 
Portrait of a Lady, The (James), 198 
possessive individualism, 63, 76, 82, 83-86, 
145-46 
possibilities, emergent, 7 
possibility space, 26 
"possible worlds;' 6 
Post, Jack, 106 
postbiology: in Egan's fiction, 214-40; 
future in relation to, 2, 11, 239-40 
Poster, Mark, 63; What's the Matter with the 
Internet? 201-3, 217 
posthuman, 2; age of, 35; in Egan's fiction, 
214-40; evolution of, 26 
posthuman collectives, 68 
posthuman future, 11 
r'Joststructuralism, 43 
1}, pregnancy, in "The Mask;' 189 
presence and absence, dialectic of, 66, 70 
Prigogine, Ilya, 23 
Principle of Computational Equivalence, 18 
print: age of, 97; compared to electronic tex-
tuality, 89-116; interpenetration of, 117 
print books, 117-18 
print-centric notion of electronic media, 93 
print environment, 94 
print subjectivity, 211 
print tradition, 143-47 Prisoner's Dilemma, 32-33 
process, 209-13; computational, 242; 
embodied, 217, 243; intermediating, 210 
program: digital, and analog consciousness, 
193; evolution ary, for virtual creatures, 
193-213; ideological, 218; object­
oriented, 58, 60; in "The Mask;' 
182-92 
projection, anthropomorphic, 5, 193 
property: intellectual, 143-47; literary, 143-
47; morphological and neurological, in 
virtual creatures, 210 
prosthesis, in The Three Stigmata of Palmer 
Eldritch, 7}, 76 
prostitution, 67, 83-86; male homosexual, 
83-84 
Protocol (Galloway), 171 
quantum mechanics, 3; Digital Philosophy 
and, 24 
quantum physics, 222 
Quarantine (Egan), 22, 225-27 
Queneau, Raymond, Cent mille milliards de 
poemes,115-16 
Radiant Textuality (McGann ), 97-104, 
107-8 
Raley, Rita, 54, 103; Global English and, 60; 
interview with Shelley Jackson, 149, 152, 
154 
randomness, 66, 121 
Reading Voices (Steward ), 53 
realism, scientific, 205-9, 242 
reflexivity, 26; in von Foerster, 241 
Regime of Computation, 8, 18, 21-30, 38, 
40-42,54,55,76, 86,171-72,205,216-18, 
242. See also computation 
remediation, 32-33 
Renear, Allen, 95-96; analysis of OHCO, 
95; antirealism in text encoding, 96-97; 
and Platonism in text encoding, 96; and 
pluralism in text encoding, 95 
representati on: analog, 6, 207; digital, 6 
Requiem for a Dream (film), 106 
IN DE x 287 
Riven (game), 105 
Robinson, Kim Stanley, 76 
Robo sapiens, 1 
robot: insectile, in "The Mask;' 183-92; 
Lego, 204; military, in Distress, 236; 
NOMAD, 215 
Rose, Mark, 10; Authors and Owners, 
143-47,202 
Rosenberg, Scott, 48 
Rossetti Hypermedia Archive, 98 
Ryan, Marie-Laure, 6 
Sacks, Oliver, 40 
Saussure, Ferdinand de, 16; and arbitrari­
ness of sign, 42; Course in General 
Linguistics, 42-55; and la langue, 42-44; 
semiotics of, 8, 30, 41-59; speech system 
of, 40-61 
scarcity, regime of, 62-86 
Schlossberg, Edwin, 103 
Schneier, Bruce, 141 
scientific realism, 205-9, 242 
scriptons, 36 
second law of thermodynamics, 20, 62 
Second Self, The (Turkle), 20 
seduction, in "The Mask;' 179-80, 183-85 
self, autonomous liberal, 213 
self-organization, 20; simulation and, 24 
semiotics: critiqued by Guattari, 175-76; 
Saussurean, 8, 30, 41-59 
sexuality, in Cryptonomicon, 123 
SGML (Standard Generalized Markup 
Language ), 95 
Shakespeare, William, 51, 104, 145 
Shannon, Claude, information theory of, 
34 
Sheldon, Alice. See Tiptree, James, Jr. 
Shelley, Mary: as character in Patchwork 
Girl, 154-59, 166; Frankenstein, 147, 156, 
241; and Victor Frankenstein, 154-55 
Shillingsburg, Peter, Scholarly Editing in the 
Computer Age, 92-94 
shit, in Cryptonomicon, 122-23 
sign: arbitrariness of, 8; and code, 68; dy-
288 IN DE X namics of in electronic communication 
technologies, 64 
signification: flickering, 161; mimesis of, 125 
signified: Derrida's critique of tran­
scendental, 47; in Saussure, 43-47; 
transcendental, 17, 22, 47, 145 
signifier: in code, 45; flickering, 119, 
151, 157-59, 161, 212; floating, 47, 49; 
Lacanian, 176; in Saussure, 43-47, 68; 
sliding, 47; in telegram, 69 
Silver, David, 105 
Sims, Karl: "Evolved Virtual Creatures;' 6, 
193-213; virtual creatures and, 172, 196, 
243 
simulacrum, 76 
simulation, 6, 8, 17, 22, 26-28, 171; artificial 
life, 5, 193-205; of birth, 230; computer, 
5; continuity of, 223-24; digital, 215; 
in Distress, 235; evolutionary , 193-99; 
in Permutation City, 223-32; Regime 
of Computation and, 22; in The 
Three Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch, 
78-79; transcomputable, 26; of virtual 
creatures, 193-210; in William Blake 
Archive, 90 
simulation modeling, 5, 6 
Smith, Brian Cantwell, 41, 192 
Solaris (Lem), 186-87, 189; Kelvin, 187; 
Rheya,186 
Sondheim, Alan, 60 
spandrel, 181 
speech: acts of, 50; as analog, 203; 
compared to writing and code, 16-17, 
202; worldview of, 8, 16, 30-31, 38 
Sperberg-McQueen, Michael, 95 
Steels, Luc, 198 
Stein, Gertrude, 127 
Stephenson, Neal: The Diamond Age, 63; In 
the Beginning Was the Command Line, 
118, 125-30; Snow Crash, 127-28, 131. See 
also Cryptonomicon 
Stewart, Garrett, 53 
storing, 217-18; as a dynamic, 6-7 
Storyspace manual, 164 
Storyspace software, 148, 151-54, 160, 167 
subject: analog, 201-5; as assemblage, 
150; autonomous, 82; Cartesian, in 
"The Mask;' 179; digital, 5, 10, 201-3; 
embodied, 33-38; fragmented, 10; 
liberal, 10, 63, 76, 79-80, 84 
subjective cosmology: in Distress, 232-40; 
in Egan's fiction, 214-40; fringe, 234-40 
subjectivity, 3, 10, 11, 172, 242; analog, 
202-3, 212; connected with writing, 
4; constituted through bits, 16; and 
copyright, 143-47; depth model of, 201; 
in "The Girl Who Was Plugged In;' 81; 
hybrid, 5, 166, 212; liberal, 72, 146; in 
Patchwork Girl, 147-67; postbiological, 
6; print, 211; transformation of, 217; 
unified, 166; and Work as Assemblage, 
106 
supplementari ty, 68 
surgery, in Patchwork Girl, 158 
Surrealists, 146 
Suvin, Darko, 72 
swarms, 20 
Sydney, Philip, 127 
Symbolic, in "The Mask;' 178 
symptom: in Permutation City, 223-32; in 
Slavoj Zizek, 219-22 
system: complex, 5; complex adaptive, 
200, 204; cryptological, 118; distributed 
cognitive, 193, 196-97, 204, 213; legacy 
of speech and writing, 39-61; machinic, 
61; multiagent social, 18; multilaye red 
hierarchical, 32, 175; multileveled 
complex, 24; operating, in computer, 
126, 140-42; semiotic, 175; signifying, in 
Guattari, 175 
Teilhard de Chardin, Pierre, 26 
TEl (Text Encoding Initiative), 95 
telegraph, 8, 65; in In the Beginning Was the 
Command Line, 129; in "In the Cage;' 
62-71, 83-85; and telegraphist, 64, 66; 
and telegraph y, 64 
telegraph boys, 83 telegraph cage, 64, 65 
teleological illusion, 219-22; in Distress, 
234-40; in Permutation City, 234-40 
text: algorithmic, 99; definition of, 
91-97; electronic, 10, 38, 98, 154, 159; 
monstrous, in Patchwork Girl, 160 
textons,36 
textuality, 3, 11; electronic, 16, 37, 44, 90-116, 
167; embodied, 97-104; instantiated, 103. 
See also literature 
thermody namics: first law, 62; second law, 
20,62 
Thousand Plateaus, A (Deleuze), 173-76 
Three Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch, 
The (Dick), 9, 64-65, 71-86; Anne 
Hawthorne, 77; Barney Mayerson, 
73-79; Can-D, 71-74, 85; Chew-Z, 72-79, 
85; code book in, 75; Leo Bolero, 73-79; 
Palmer Eldritch, 72-80; Perky Pat, 71-74, 
79, 84; Roni Fugate, 84-85; stigmata in, 
74; Walt, 71-72 
TIB (The Information Block), 112 
time-travel, 83 
Tiptree, James, Jr., 9, 64. See also "The Girl 
Who Was Plugged In" 
Tower of Babel, 110 
tower oflanguages, 54-55 
trace, the, 41, 46 
transcendental signified. See signified 
transformation, dialectical, in Cryptonomi-
con, 139 
Transistor to Transistor Logic (TTL), 43 
translation: in "The Don Quixote of Pierre 
Menard;' 109; of language, 110-16; of 
media, 89-116, 143 
translation machine, 111-12 
transmigration, 194, 209 
transmitting, 171, 217-18; as a dynamic, 6-7 
trauma: in Quarantine, 227; and the 
symptom, 220 
Turing, Alan: in Cryptonomicon, 121-22, 
124, 140; and Universal Computer, 228 
Turing machine, 18, 176-77 
Turing test, 214-15 
IN 0 EX 289 
Turkle, Sherry, 20 
typography, innovative, 10 
Ulam, Stanislaw, and cellular automata, 18 
Ullman, Ellen, Close to the Machine, 16, 
48-49 
Universal Computer, 27, 30, 55, 64, 217-22 
Universal Computer, The (Davis), 48 
universe, 3; compulso ry, 239; smeared, 227 
universe, computatio nal. See computa-
tional universe 
Unix, and Neal Stephenson, 118, 125-28 
Unsworth, John, 99 
uploading consciousness, 22, 217 
Varela, Francisco, 198; and autopoeisis, 74 
virtual creatures, 193-213 
virtual world, 196 
visualization, of virtual creatures, 193-210 
voice in print texts, mother's, 4 
Volpa, Galvano della, 98 
Voluntary Autistics: in Distress, 236-40; 
and empathy, 238 
von Foerster, Heinz, Observing Systems, 241 
von Neumann, John, 17, 43; and cellular au­
tomata, 18; and Universal Computer, 228 
Wald, Carol, 183 
warfare, network-centric, 21-22 
wave function, in Quarantine, 226 
Weaver, Warren, 9, 110-11, 113 
Wei, Sha Xin, "Tgarden," 36 
Weise, Elizabeth, 141 
Weizenbaum, Joseph, 215 
Wells, H. G., The Time Machine, 126-27; 
Eloi, 126-27; Morlocks, 126-28 
290 1 N 0 EX Wetwares (Doyle), 22 
Wheeler, John, 233 
Whitehead, Alfred North, 159 
Wicke, Jennifer, 83 
Wiener, Norbert, 110 
Wilkins, John, 140 
Williams, Raymond, 20, 172 
Windows. See Microsoft 
Winson, 1. J., 105 
Wolfram, Stephen, 15-16, 54-55; cellular 
automata and, 18-25, 198; claims as 
metaphor, 219; complex patterns and, 
216; in contrast to Deleuze and Guattari, 
174; letter as symptom, 220; A New 
Kind of Science, 3, 18-25, 28-30, 41, 
173, 177; Principle of Computational 
Equivalence, 18 
Woolf, Virginia, 139 
Woolgar, Steve, Laboratory Life, 206 
work, 9; definition of, 91-97; ideal, 98, 144; 
immaterial, 149; literary, and copyright, 
144-47 
Work as Assemblage, 105-8, 115, 173 
world, virtual, 196 
writing: alphabetic, 202; compared to 
speech and code, 16-17, 39-61; elec­
tronic, 55; worldview of, 8, 16, 30-31, 38 
Writing Machines (Hayles), 2 
Young, Edward, 146 
Zeller, Hans, 94 
Zizek, Slavoj: analysis of the symptom, 
22; Distress, 234; Enjoy Your Symptom! 
219-23 
Zuse, Konrad, 18 
