. ; 'Man has always moved outwards ... If there was an ocean. we sailed 
across it. If there was a continent we walked across it. All this space 
out there ... we will somehow sail across that to get to the other 
physical body, .. we shall go there. It's the nature of the beast.' 
N.ASA nn·dical docror 
Applying recent thinking on gender and the environment to original 
; research in science and technology, this unique book explores 
postcolonial relationships with 'the wild' using the US and Russia as 
examples. The authors analyse contemporary categorizations of'human 
self versus 'wild other' through three twentieth century icons that best 
illustrate ambivalent ideas about self and other: spa'ceships, horoscopes 
and dolphins. 
The book includes interviews with astrologers, wilderness guides, 
dolphin trainers and academic staff of space agencies from both Russia 
and the US. The interviews highlight some interesting differences 
between these two cultures in ideas both about gender and about 
self/ other boundaries. The authors also look at representatiOns of the 
space race in film arld science fiction in both cultures, as well as New 
Age and other texts on dolphins, astrology and space travel. 
Cosmodolphit1S shows how all three icons partly reproduce and partly 
alter the earlier, colonial self/ ot:b--;r dichotomy of woman, native and 
nature against the 'civilized' technologically masterful male self. We see 
how a p::trtin1br icon of the wild-the dolphin- is elevated to 
mytholo~cal status. hov,.' a secularized society loob for spiritt.wl 
fultilmcnt i.n the 'beyond'- astrology- ~md in its own technological 
~1clvanccs- space tr:wcl. 
Theoretically innovatiVL'. this book represents :1n :1\tcrnativc appn.1:1ch 
to ccofeminist thL'll1CS linking them up with swdies of Ill'\V 
technondtures and cybor~TS. It forms :m excellent exemplar of 
feminist cultmal studies. 
ZED BOUI<S 
( ;cndo.:r & Wtlllll'll \ Sm...lie\/Cultur.1l Stutiil.'\/ 
Sl"il.'llt'l.' & Litc•r,ltlln:/Em·irunlm'nt/S,,n,ll Th,·nry 
I ,-.;;;r,-4') N I.S S l-Ib I S.:ir,-I'J SIr, r, ll\1 ISBN 1 s: 
11111111111 9 781851 306 
Bryld, Mete 
C(f Cosmodolphins: Feminist Cultural 
Studies of Technology, Animals and 
the Sacred 
Mette Bryld and Nina Lykke 
J UNIVERS!TE 1 SBIBLIOTEKET 
,! 
I, .1QOI 
UNKOPINB 
Zed Books 
LONDON • NEW YORK 
Cosmodolphins: Feminist Cultural Studies of Technology, Animals 
and the Sacred was first published by Zed Books Ltd, 7 Cynthia 
Street, London NI 9JF, UK and Room 400, 175 Fifth Avenue, 
New York, NY IOOIO, USA in 1999· 
Distributed exclusively in the USA by StMartin's Press, Inc., 
175 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY rooro, USA. 
Copyright© Mette Bryld and Nina Lykke, 2000 
Cover designed by Andrew Corbett 
Set in Monotype Ehrhardt and Franklin Gothic by Ewan Smith 
Printed and bound in the United Kingdom by Biddies Ltd, 
Guildford and King's Lynn 
The rights of Mette Bryld and Nina Lykke to be identified as the 
authors of this work have been asserted by them in accordance 
with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act, 1988. 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British 
Library 
Library of Congress G.taloging-in-Publication Data 
Bryld, Mette. 
Cosmodolphins: feminist cultural studies of technology; 
animals, and the sacrediMctte Marie Bryld and Nina Lykke. 
p. em 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN I-85649-SI5-8 (hb)-ISBN I-85649-8I6-6 (pb) 
r. Feminist theory. 2. Nature-Effect of human beings on. 
3· Human-animal relationships. 4· Outer space­
Exploration-Social aspects. 5· Dolphins--Research--Social 
aspects. 6. Astrology-Social aspects. 7. Science-Social 
aspects. I. Lykke, Nina. II. Title. 
HQII90.B78 2000 
306-4'5--d.C21 
ISBN I 85649 Sxs 8 cased 
ISBN I 85649 816 6 limp Contents 
List of Tables and Plates 
Acknowledgements 
Prelude 
From 'Earth Dolphins' to this book ... l7 
Introduction 
To rewrite the master narratives of space flight I 12 
Inappropriate contiguities: the spaceship, the horoscope 
and the dolphin I 14 Cosmos and ocean: the extraterrestrial 
'commons' I 19 To cannibalize and worship the Wild: in 
early modernity and today l21 Amazing stories l23 
1 Map of Matrices 
Methods and materials /26 To speak as implicated 
strangers I 27 On the inclusion of 'nature' in feminist 
cultural studies I z8 Human, non-human, posthuman I 30 
Are animals a feminist issue? I 32 Do feminists need a 
cosmology? I 34 Feminism, science and spirituality I 36 
Philosophy's shadows :.md the female divine I 37 
Feminism, story-telling and extraterrestrialism l39 
To widen the geographical map of cultural studies /40 
Amazing Stories 1-111: The Spaceship, the Horoscope 
and the Dolphin 
Touch the moon! I 44 A coincidental meeting I 46 
This is a trick! I 48 
2 Between Amazement and Estrangement 
The space age adventure: to leave human marks in outer 
space /53 'The Space Mural- a Cosmic View' /54 
'To the conquerors of space ... ' I 55 The masculine 
adventure story I 56 The New Age pilgrimage: to be 
pervaded with macrocosmic meaning I 58 Celestine Vlll 
IX 
1 
9 
25 
44 
50 
messages and meaningful coincidences I 59 A world of 
reversals 16r Dolphin fables of New Age and Space Age: 
between pastoral and science fiction I 63 The dolphin as 
noble savage l63 To be imprinted with cetacean wisdom l64 
Pastoral precursors I 66 The dolphin as cyborg I 67 
'Uplift' and 'education in humanity' 168 To read out of 
context l69 
3 The Big Mission 
To devote one's life to the Big Mission l73 The adventurous 
journey l76 The high frontier /78 The enigma 18r To will, 
to know, and to know-how l84 The masculine hero l87 
4 Terraforming: Farmers in the Sky 
Bio-power: from human to planetary bodies I 93 Civilizing the 
deserts of Earth and space I 96 Human and divine will to cosmic 
bio-power I 99 Panspermia or the New Genesis I 103 Out of 
the cradle I 106 The bodyscapes of men of steel and of their 
mock mirrors I rog From superman to post(hu)man cyborg I I IJ 
Conclusion: bio-power and the sacred I I r 5 
Amazing Story IV: The Dark Side of the Moon 
5 As Above, So Below 
To devote your life to cosmic guidance I 123 To be imprinted 
with cosmic meaning I 126 . Astrology and gender I IJO 
The dyadic relationship ir36 
6 One Does not Stir without the Other 
Astrology- a cosmic tcriture fbninine? I I40 An outline of 
the approach I I41 Cosmos as living body -the rebirth of an 
ancient episteme I 143 To be guided by fate I 144 How to 
think in the image of the body I 145 The universe as mother 
body ir48 The universal mother body in New Age guise ir49 
The Great Cosmic Mother -as phallogocentric or feminist 
construction IISI To speak the cosmic or the female body lr53 
A divine of one's own I ISS 
7 Voices from Inner and Outer Space: Refiguring 
Mother Sea and Father Sky 
The message of the cosmodolphins ir59 Voices from the global 
commons !r6r Refigured Mother Sea !r64 The sea as pastoral 
source ir66 The noble dolphin-speak !r68 Refiguring Father 
Sky I 171 The broadcasting universe I 172 An era of space 
messages ir75 72 
. 92 
118 
122 
139 
159 Amazing Story V: Dolphin Versatility- from Living 
Missiles to Healers 
8 Rocket State and Dolphin State 
Dolphin ambiguities ir84 A modern rebirth of dolphin 
lore II86 The 'father' of the post-Second World War 
dolphin script ir89 Lilly's talking cyborg dolphins !rgr 
Elite scientists on a cyborg dolphin: cosmic encounters I 194 
Cohabitation in a flooded house I 197 From cyborg to noble 
savage lzoz Socialism with a dolphin face lzoz The noble 
savage of the New Age lzo6 The dolphin in a perpetuum 
mobile of circulating meanings I 209 
9 Conclusion: Inappropriate Contiguities Revisited 
Conquerors of space in the underground lzr6 To posit a 
Fathergod through an illusory Genesis l218 To posit a female 
divine, a carnival may be necessary l220 Ocean and cosmos 
revisited: a feminist reconfiguration lzzz 
Bibliography 
Index 180 
183 
215 
227 
239 
Tables and Plates 
Tables 
z.r Main features of the master narratives of the spaceship, the 
horoscope and the dolphin icons 
7.1 'Voices' from inner and outer space. Scientists picking up noises 
from the ocean and the cosmos via high-tech equipment = 
secondary orality 
Plates 
I 'Earth Dolphins' 
4·' The right place for the 'wrong stuff'? Valentina Tereshkova, the 
first woman in space, depicted in a New Age astrology book 
IV. I 'Do you see what I see?' 
8.r 'Can Man and Dolphin comffiunicate? Dr. Lilly "talks" with a 
flippered stttdent in a sound-proof room at his Communication 
Research lnstitttte in Florida.' 
8.2 The Soviet Russian vision of socialism with a dolphin face: 
a civilization of caring grandmothers 
8.3 Cyborg-dolphins! Advertisement for computer software 
8.4 One more cyborg-dolphin. Advertisement for telecommunication 52 
X 
II2 
II9 
192 
204 
2!2 
213 Acknowledgements 
We feel a deep sense of gratitude towards all the humans and non-humans 
who have so generously helped us with this book. In particular, we want 
to thank Elizabeth Sourbut, whose clever advice, brilliant suggestions and 
linguistic revision kept the manuscript afloat. The Institute of Cosmic 
Research in Moscow, NASA's Kennedy Space Center, Space Camp, Dolphin 
Plus, and the Dolphin Research Center in Florida all received and assisted 
us with great hospitality and patience, as did the California Institute of 
Integral Studies in San Francisco and astrological organizations such as 
Omega, the Academy of Astrology, and the astrological club in Ulitsa 
Baumanskaya in Moscow. We also cherish the time we spent with our 
wilderness guide, Captain Victoria Impallomeni from the Florida Keys. 
We would like to thank Eigil Bryld for his terrific photos of the US 
space visions, Trisha Lamb Feuerstein for graciously sharing her fantastic 
bibliographic knowledge of the cetacean world with us, and Susan Squier 
from Penn State University for her unfailing encouragement and support. 
Financial support for the linguistic revision was provided by Mollerens 
Fond and the University of Southern Denmark. Special thanks to Professor 
Mogens Brondsted. 
We also thank Stanley, the spotted dolphin 'rocketrnan', and the black 
and white cat, Bandini, who both taught us about the trickster souls of 
animals. 
Finally, we dedicate this book to the human dolphins of the future -
Asker and Sofus. 
Parts of Chapter 8 have been published in slightly different versions in 
Lykke and Braidotti (1996: 47-71) and Bryld (1998). 
PLATE r 'Earth Dolphins' Image @'95, Daniel McCulloch 
DESIGN SYNERGY, U.S.A. 
369 Montezuma Ave, Suite# I ro, 
Santa Fe, NM 87501, USA 
Tel: 505 986 rzr5 
Fax: 505 986 rzo7 
synergy@dolphinsynergy.com 
URL: www.dolphinsynergy.com 
(Reproduced by permission of Daniel McCulloch) Prelude 
Two Earth dolphins, launched as Cosmodolphins in the cyberspace or 
dream-machine of the computer: 
leaping innocently in the cosmic ocean around our unique Blue Island; 
forming with the S-shape of their bodies a yin/yang symbol in the 
mandala of Gaia, the Holy Earth Mother, our sacred home; 
happily unaware of the distant camera-eye, observing them and the 
Blue Planet from the high-tech panopticon of outer space. 
Two boundary-creatures: 
confronting us with mammalian life in the strange border zone between 
water and air; 
signalling with bodies that offer no decisive visual clues as to their 
individual sex, a sex that is not one; 
but evoking by etymology the Greek word for womb and vagina = 
delphys, closely akin to the word de/phis = dolphin. 
Are the two leaping dolphins, as noble extraterrestrial savages, trying to 
convey to us an ancient wisdom about harmony between macro-and 
microcosmos? 
Or do their spaceship-bodies and artificial environment indicate that 
they are cyborgs, simulations created in the galactic high-tech laboratory 
of a distant super-civilization? 
Or are they rather jesters who ironically expose ambivalent late 
twentieth-century attitudes of 'civilized' selves vt's-ii-vis 'wild' others? 
The picture, 'Earth Dolphins', was produced by the photographer Daniel 
McCulloch in I995 to support a 'Save the Dolphins' campaign organized 
by the eco-NGO Earth Island Institute in San Francisco. We have chosen 
this picture to provide the keynote to our book because, as one in a plethora 
of related examples, it presents a cluster of late twentieth-century icons 
Cosmodolphins 2 
that are central to the themes we shall explore. McCulloch's picture is a 
computer amalgamation. It merges the famous NASA photo of the Earth, 
seen from outer space, with dolphins as evocative icons of interfaces 
between feminine and masculine, water and air, Earth-bound and extra­
terrestrial spheres of existence. Popular culture of today is obsessed with 
the two icons. It explores them separately, or combined into one. In 
merging the two icons, McCulloch's picture stirs up an evocative network 
of circulating meanings, which in different ways will be in our spotlight: 
gender, race, animal and cosmic nature, spirituality, extraterrestrialism and 
technoscience are all negotiated by the picture. 
In terms of iconography, the picture allows the Holy Earth Mother, 
Animals (enigmatic sea mammals) and Sacred Nature to displace one 
another in apparently innocent and idyllic ways. At fir_s~ sight we seem to 
"" · ·be confronted with a New Age pastoral, a dream of a prelapsarian and 
_paradiSiC:$ii1£ of.6.~"if;;IU:~·wh~;; 'wlioleiless and harmony, joy and na~;J pleasure reign. ---- . -. -·---. ...----. . . --
I; th~ lltt~ twentieth century, the Blue Planet, Gaia, the Holy Earth 
Mother, plays a similar· role to the nineteenth-century Romantic image of 
the white cottage with a thatched roof, an idyllic garden and a good wife 
and mother who tends the sacred hearth for children and husband. The 
Blue Planet Earth is presented as a unique 'pearl of space' (Borisenko and 
Romanov 1982: 21), a 'sacred blue' planet (Sagan 1995: 156). Floating in 
the infinite wilderness of black space without visible national borders, the 
Blue Eartlj_appear_s as l!..P~rfect iniage of sacred dom~ticity, inter~ed 
:;vjth_cgntemporary origin fant;;;;ies-~f wild-and UiiSp~il~d-na1:ln:<;: N'A:SA?s 
Blue Planet photo -p~s~tS~~Wiih. a "n:iOdeX:n ·verSi~~--~f -th·e~-StOry of the 
Garden of Eden, mingled with a radically updated narrative of the 'sacred 
home' of nineteenth-century Romantic evangelism, which depicted it as 
A little spot enclosed by grace 
Out of the world's wide wilderness. 
(from the 'Puritan Poet' by Isaac Watts)' 
When two dolphins are positioned leaping in front of the Blue Planet, 
using the S-shape of their bodies to transform it into a yin/yang symbol 
of wholeness, the original, paradisic harmony becomes even more con­
spicuous. Since the 19!/<:>s,_jplphins ll!l:"e occupied the cultural iniaginary' 
as bearers of alternative values such as coll~ti~ity, cot;p-:.15-SiC)ll, frienc:iliness, 
cr.;,tivi_ty;· joyfu(;e;(il:i[t):, androgyny, spiritual wisdom and intuitive 
intelligence. With their huge-bialns-:ind legenci;;ry·h~liif'Uk.S;!~;.ards ---- ··c--·~-::.-,-Prelude 3 
humans, the enigmatic sea mammals have been cast by popular culture as 
well as by scientific discourse as our extraterrestrial doppelganger .. Like 
another double, _the 'noble savage' of early !llodernity, the dolphin and_the 
whale will allegedly guide us 1:0 iu~ight in!o...tlt<O.)r.ue.and sacr:ed:pleasJl!e~ -
;;t·a-·Simp1e'life'iii"liarmony With." the natural_ environment. . •• 
---Tafen. -at-lrs-mno·cent face value, the-PicW~· ;~fl~;;~~ili~~Ostalgic imagin­
ary of postindustrial culture, longing for an alternative world where the 
wounds inflicted by the destructive logic of present-day social relations 
between humans, technoscience and nature are healed; a world in which 
humans no longer seek to profit from the technoscientific control and 
domestication of nature; and where instead we may use the two dolphins 
as role models and abandon ourselves to nature and its cosmic rhythms; a 
world in which a primordial mother-<:hild dyad between human and nature, 
between micro-and macrocosmos has been restored as a stable reference 
for our lives. 
liowever, the pastoralidyll.oLthe holy Earth_ JV[other, the noble dolphin 
savage, and a primordial_ worl~L~it:_h_Q_l:"!t_ technology is not the __ <~I~~y--story 
conveyed_ by-McCulloch) _ _pjcture. An--~POrtant excess of meaiiiilgs- -
surTa;;es when ,;;include what-film theory calls a space-off perspective­
that is, when we ask questions about the invisible framing of the picture, 
the apparatus behind its production, the visualization technologies, the 
construction of the spectator's position. If we take into account the space­
off position, a complex set of intersections emerges that reveals a world 
quite different from the primordial one that first catches the eye. ~-ee.n_ 
from the obliq~!_<, _ _of the space-off ~t::_<O!ive, the picture becomes 
perV.id~_dby lll:.e.~ngS-that link it. to high-tech scien~ the epistemo=­IOt;ies-Of ·th~-modern scientific Wo-rld ~i~;,.--~ ··--- ·~c-_,_ • -·--·~~-·------. 
-"First of all, space flight-teclii:iologTano advanced photographic tech­
niques are, of course, a sine qua non for 'Earth Dolphins'. Although NASA, 
following Hollywood rather than postmodern film making, has done its 
best to keep the high-tech enterprise needed to position photographer and 
camera in outer space away from the Blue Planet photo, this is an unavoid­
able part of its apparatus of production. And when we come to McCulloch's 
recycling of the NASA photo, computer amalgamation techniques also 
play a vital role in its creation. 
Secondly, the lofty panopticon view of Earth, created by space flight, 
is definitely not an innocent one. This was emphasized in an insightful 
analysis of the NASA photo by Garb (Diamond and Orenstein 1990: 264-
78), and in somewhat different ways by Bordo (Berry and Wernick 1992: 
165-78) and Haraway (1992). The spectator position invited by NASA's 
.. 
Blue Planet picture demonstrates perfectly the vantage point of the scien---"--·-- -- -tific world view. in general, and positi~st episteinology iii -pa:rticular:-the· 
diSSociated_ gaze, which can· command and .keep __ everythirigurmer-·contrOI:­
The hidden camera::CyO, looking at E_;:th .from far away, lsiiOViously Placed 
in the most favourable position for playing the 'god-trick' of modern science 
(Haraway 1991: 189). The 'God's eye view' (Diamond and Orenstein 1990: 
264) of the camera lens sustains the illusion that it is possible to act from 
an allegedly omniscient and omnipotent epistemological position. 
A study of the space-off of the NASA photo also offers an appropriate 
illustration of the thesis formulated by Heidegger, on the modern creation 
of the world as picture. According to him, 'the conquest of the world as 
picture' (Heidegger 1979: 13), as representation, which the subject can 
stand back and perceive in its totality, is a specifically modern phenomenon. 
---The total condensation of the world into one visual representation con-r· ----·--·-· -----···-----~--· '-------------- ·--· --·-----····----------stitutes,. the German._ philosopher argues, nothing less than the founding 
act of modern epistemology. It is the act_through.which themod~;nsuSject 
'fights focthe position in wiii£h he ~.he that .. existentwhi~h ;~t; the 
st_anda_rdJo~. alLexistence..and .forms .. the .. dit:-(;:~t;iv~. f~r it' (Heidegger I979; 
13). The synonymy_ o.f. the. totalizing, _.the dominating. and the _phallog<e 
centric gaze ~oukfliarCUy15e-iifticufited. ill-a ~l~~er way. 
'·----·seen ·&om-thectlsSociate(f~~tr~t~;e5truil pOsition Of the camera's eye, 
representing humans who have left the 'cradle'3 of Earth's gravitational 
field, the innocent idyll of McCulloch's picture becomes thoroughly dis­
turbed. The space-off perspective transforms Earth into a small, and 
apparently easily manageable, visual object, which can be taken in at one 
glance -or contained within the circumference of the thumb, as Apollo 8 
astronaut Jim Lovell (a member of the first crew to orbit the Moon) 
evocatively describes his most amazing experience in space. 4 Simultaneously 
with the transformation of Earth, the meanings of the two dolphins also 
begin to change. If their background, Earth, appears as the dominated 
object of a distant, totalizing gaze, it may well be that we are hoodwinking 
ourselves when we insist on seeing nothing but wild and free dolphins as 
referents of the picture. Instead, it seems appropriate to include the staged 
performances of captive dolphins -kept for show or research -in our 
network of references. ~ollq~g this line of interpretation, we may aclmow­
ledgl;_that_ti)_e.J1i~.~~'s:JJ!esentati0ii~onaftli Mother, noble savage·aolplilii-f and_"'il~, 'unwuci)~d:..natu~~ matches·th~ (ri;;ity}\'oman::.N~pv~Nat).u£ -· 
that we find in colonialist and patriarchal discourses. of ..;:ly modernity. 
Thus_it_obviousJ:y-::;n"Oies~an unportant difference wlieth"Or we'mclude 
1 the ;p.ce-off perspective in our reading ofth;;~i~e-;,;;:;;;;:: By alterDarely-
,r------- _______________ --------- . "--------·~--- ·----··--------'---Prelude 5 
~~E~!~:!~~g~fuw:e~~;;;:f~e~i:i~~al~~::~j~~t~l 
and'~ a·non..:.mn~oCent vi~;·· of Nature performing aS-dOr;.IeStiCa!ed 'objCCt, "I 
seentllrOuihtl·le·-d}·s~~~gaze.: o( ~n __ ell~~P.t:i;i~_i _h~an_manag£~!!.~Ctf~_-...._ 
tlie god::-trick"ofmodern scientific e.l'istemology. McCulloch's picture is in 
thiS;~y;~;par~bl~ to-th~se puz~i~ Pictu.reSWnere immediate observation 
shows us, for example, a tree, while closer scrutiny discloses a human face: 
'now you see it, now you don't'. As puzzle picture, 'Earth Dolphins' 
presents us with a significant narrative of deeply ambivalent trends in 
high-tech culture. It tells the story of a simultaneous cannibalizing and 
resacralizing of 'Wtld Nature', which we consider typical of postindustrial 
culture, constructing it now as resource for technoscientific, military or 
commercial projects and now as a site for the inscription of nostalgic 
desires for a sacred, motherly Eden. 
By suggesting a reading of 'Earth Dolphins' as puzzle picture, full of 
changing meanings and patterns of ambivalence, we wish to avoid one­
dimensional interpretations. It would, of course, be naive just to take the 
picture at its innocent and idyllic face value. But it would be just as 
reductive to read it exclusively as yet another homage to the technoscienti:fic 
conquest of Nature and a celebration of the omniscient and omnipotent 
subject of positivist epistemology. 
Garb is well aware of the excess meanings that still remain after the 
second kind of reading. Having interpreted NASA's Blue Planet picture as 
'magnum opus of patriarchal consciousness' (Diamond and Orenstein r990: 
275), he does wonder why the Whole Earth image, despite the very prob­
lematic spectator position, has attracted 'peace activists, environmentalists, 
and proponents of a new Earth-based spirituality' (Diamond and Orenstein 
1990: 275). How can the picture appeal_to-many.o[thosewho rebel against, 
,r~ath~ee.r__,th=an"-'~"'e"lec:b::.:~";,"te the dissociated-andoSjectiTyirlg g~Tihekitower ~ . ..2_ _______ ---------------~-------~-. 
of modern science? 
-~ shall -s~gi{;st an answer by taking our interpretation of 'Earth 
Dolphins' as a multi-layered puzzle picture one step further, displaying an 
array of ambivalences present in contemporary culture. We have mentioned 
some of the contradictions between the immediate message of the picture 
and its space-off perspective. However, it should be acknowledged that the 
latter itself is affected by puzzles and ambivalences. To reduce the position 
of the camera-eye exclusively to the totalizing, objectifying and god-like 
gaze of the omniscient and omnipotent subject of science is in a sense to 
confirm the epistemological illusions of positivism. It would be more 
appropriate to displace them along lines suggested by Heidegger, who tells 
Cosmodolphins 6 
us how the shadow of 'the incalculable' (Heidegger 1979: 14) intrudes on 
the quantifYing processes that are activated in order to define the world as 
picture. Moreover, a matching act of displacement can be initiated by 
reference to social constructivist critiques of modern scientific epistemo­
logies. When pointing out that the technoscientific gaze in total control of 
its object is an imagz"nary construction, a conjuring trick (cf. Haraway's 
term 'god-trick'), these critiques also emphasize that the controlling eye 
may indeed produce uncontrolled, unintended and subjective side-effects 
and excess meanings. 
We therefore suggest that the spaceman's 'God's eye' position, which 
NASA's Blue Planet photo has made vicariously accessible to billions of 
people, is fraught with ambivalences. As noted by Garb, it represents an 
instrumentalizing act of technoscientific visualization that reduces Nature 
to manageable object. Clearly, however, the NASA camera is doing more 
than just repeating the classic act of mechanistic science and its reduction 
of Nature to material resource for capitalist cannibalism. A high-tech 
resacralization process seems involved as well, which inscribes Wild Nature 
in quite different kinds -of cannibalistic images than those of industrial 
society and classic mechanistic science. With the help of highly sophisticated 
visualization technologies, Nature is being reinterpreted and transformed 
from object of material consumption to virtual-reality object of worship, 
awe and aesthetic-spiritual consumption. The multi-billion-dollar photo of 
the Blue Planet, born out of advanced technological apparatus, undoubtedly 
performs as such a virtual-reality icon, displaying the Sublime Beauty of 
Sacred Nature and Sacred Mother, welcoming her cyborg-sons back to 
their 'natural' home after their dangerous voyage in the extraterrestrial 
wilderness of ( cyber)space. In all its Technicolor beauty, the NASA photo 
aligns itself with the current plethora of highly aestheticized photos of 
endangered species and wilderness areas. Like them, it is circulated as a 
sacred icon of a mythical Garden of Eden, a lost origin, which, like the 
flesh and blood of Jesus, may reappear endlessly, transubstantiated through 
the 'miraculous' intervention of the virtual reality of high-tech images -
through a politics of simulation that pretends to be a politics of 'true' 
representation.5 
When McCulloch adds the two dolphins to the Blue Planet photo, these 
cyber-sacral dimensions of the puzzle picture become even more distinct 
than on the origioal NASA image. The two dolphins, leaping in beautiful 
synchrony in the Cosmic cyber-ocean, Mthout any trace of the real-life sea 
from which they were origioally jumping when the camera shot them, set 
off the virtual-reality character of the picture. These literally dislocated Prelude 7 
dolphins, circling like spaceships around the Blue Planet, make it plain 
that they inhabit a virtual world without any real-life referents. Further­
more, they effectively draw our attention to the links between the origioal 
NASA photo and the numerous techno-images of Wild Nature in general, 
and dolphin or whale pictures in particular. They emphasize its connection 
with this plethora of images, which, like the NASA picture itself, have had 
enormous commercial success. These images seem to appeal to strong 
contemporary desires to worship and sacralize icons which claim to convey 
the double message that a 'truly' transcendent, Sublime and Sacred Nature 
exists, and that a happy and carefree high-tech future is on its way. 
As a vehicle for this kind of wishful thinking, 'Earth Dolphins' inscribes 
itself in the new religious Utopianism, which since the 196os has invoked 
in varying forms the coming of a new era of human history, simply called 
'the New Age' or named along the Jines of the ancient astrological calendar 
as the (Age of Aquarius'. It is an age that is expected to call forward a 
higher human consciousness, which, sustained by feelings of global oneness 
and empathic communication across the borders of space and time, will 
bring salvation and heal the spiritual relations between human beings, 
technoscience and Earth Mother. 
From 'Earth Dolphins' to this Book ... 
As multi-layered puzzle picture, 'Earth Dolphins' causes the spectator 
to waver between nostalgic longings for an original bliss, the triumphant 
gaze of the distant technoscientist and conqueror, and awe-struck worship 
of new cyber-sacral miracles of transubstantiation. In so doing, it both re­
enacts and displaces classic colonialist and patriarchal self--<>ther images. It 
is a high-tech reconfiguration of early modern constructions of the trinity 
of others: Woman-Native-Nature. Not a mere repetition. There are con­
tinuities at play, but also transformation and excess meanings. 
The colonial quest for ail elsewhere in th~-~:r_opean Renaissance and 
e_ar~y ffiodernit)r-gaVe -r_~;!o co~S~COOrls of th~~~~-th~.-~avage ;rtn-­
the -trinity Woman~ Native andffifure-asCentral icons. They Were caSt-as­
vVlld. ~thers~ioOd or evil, chailenging or threatening, inherently inferior 
and Jacking, but also capable of producing sublime experiences in the 
observer. Their opposite emerged as Universal Man, the 'civilized', enlight­
ened self. In contrast to Woman, Native and Nature, he was supposed to 
carry the 'white man's burden'. 
One of these 'burdens' was that the projects and endeavours of the 
white man seemed to link up in an ambivalent picture. The overall project 
Cosmodolphins 8 
could be unambiguously defined: to civilize and modernize the world, and 
to pursue freedom and happiness by seeking control and mastery over wild 
others through technoscience, and colonial and capitalist power. An intrinsic 
goal lay, moreover, in secularization: the liberation of knowledge-seeking 
and political institutions from the obscure twilight zones of occultism and 
superstition, identified, for example, with the 'childish' and 'irrational' 
attitudes of Woman and Native. However, the fact that civilization, secu­
larization and Enlightenment reason obviously failed in any simple or 
unambiguous way to bring about the Utopian goal of paradise on eartb 
engendered cultural ambivalences and contrasting trends. _Rebuking the 
civilized world for having alienated itself from the true and·sacre-dpl"a8ures 
"of the natui'iflife, ... eiiiooaieif )Jy tlinrinity""Of"otheri,"&eamieltse!faj)" 
i:ntegral part of early modern philo-s~Phy:·· ----· ----~--- --~----:;--
----oUr bOoK· Is ·rremllUSt--CUlrur;l studY ~f Contemporary transformati~-n{ 
or re-enactments of these classic constructions of ambivalent self-other 
images. We shall focus on the entangled stories of space flight, New Age 
spirituality and dolphin mythology, which are all evoked by McCulloch's 
picture. We shall read them as significant post-Second World War narratives 
of quests for a wild elsewhere. With this perspective, we will analyse how 
they reproduce or displace the classic colonialist, patriarchal and 'naturist' 6 
oppositions between 'civilized' selves and 'wild' others, as well as Enlight­
enment constructions of occult and spiritual thought systems as the reverse 
of 'masculine' ratio. 
Notes 
I. Q.toted in Dawson (1994: 65). 
2. 'The imaginary' is a concept oriiinating in Lacanian psychoanalysis; here it refers 
to the self-images of the child in its mirror stage (6--18 months of age). In a broader 
sen_se, the concept is used within cultural studies to characterize the fantasy images· in 
which a culture mirrors itself, and which thereby come to act as points of reference for 
its identity-production. 
3-With genealogies in a quote from the writings of the Russian 'father' of modern 
space flight, Konstantin Tsiolkovsky, American as well as Russian space flight discourses 
often depict man's future in space with the metaphor 'out of the cradle', cf. e.g. the title 
of a popular US book on this theme Out of tlte Cradle. Explor-ing the Frontiers Beyond 
Earth {Hartmann et al. 1984). Cf. also Chapter 4 of this book. 
.4· Cf. Jim Lovell's c~mments on the NASA tape that was played during the sight­
seemg t?urs on the pretruses of Kennedy Space Center in 1998. 
5-For an interesting discussion of the ways in which a politics of simulation can be 
~sed critically to ?o beyo_nd a politics of representation instead of uncritically simulating 
1t, see the analys1s of Kim Stanley Robinson's Martian trilogy in Markley (1997). 
6. The term 'naturism' was coined by ecofeminists in analogy to sexism and racism 
(Warren 1990: 132-3). It refers to abusive and violent treatment of non-human Nature. Introduction 
The first inspiration for this book grew out of an alien encounter. In rg87 
we participated in the Third International Interdisciplinary Congress on 
Women, which took place in Dublin. The congress was attended by well 
over a thousand Women's Studies researchers from all over the world. 
They discussed their work in about 250 different workshops on topics 
covering a broad spectrum from 'Feminization of Poverty in a Global 
Perspective' to 'Experiences of Women on Test Tube Baby Programmes'; 
from 'War and Patriarchy' to 'Goddesses and Feminist Spirituality'. 
The alien encounter took place in a workshop on 'New Technologies as 
a Challenge to Women's Work Roles'. One of the papers was given by a 
high-ranking NASA employee, JoAnn Morgan, who had taken on the 
amazing mission 'to inform the community of international women about 
one aspect of the depth and variety of responsibility women have in the 
United States civilian space program' (Cullen et a!. rg87: 433). The con­
gress had attracted a diversity of women in terms of different disciplines, 
approaches and cultural backgrounds. Nevertheless, the majority of 
participants shared political commitments, inspired by feminist and left­
wing orientations, and in this context Morgan appeared to be alien and 
politically out of touch. Nobody was inclined to celebrate the statistics on 
which her paper was based, nobody seemed impressed by her figures that 
showed a small increase in women's participation in academic work at 
NASA's Kennedy Space Center from only a few to around 9 per cent. Her 
presentation was questioned from quite different angles from the liberal 
affirmative action politics for which it argued. Her undisguised and proud 
promotion of American nationalist goals created a great deal of hostility 
in the audience. Feminist peace activists asked about NASA's concealed 
involvement with the military. Mrican feminists, engaged in programmes 
for poor rural women, angrily pointed out that the billions of dollars spent 
on man's space adventures should have been transferred to initiatives that 
sought to counter the feminization of poverty, especially in Third World 
Cosmodolphins 10 
countries. All in all, the workshop session was transfor~ed into a veritable 
confrontation between liberal and left-wing feminism:.,"' 
In itself, this confrontation did not stir our imaginations. Having been 
committed ourselves to left-wing feminist activism for many years, we 
were thoroughly familiar with the differences between the two sides. This 
was not new. But what did catch our attention was the extraordinary and 
amazing topic of the discussion. Should feminists embrace or repudiate 
space flight -not as a theme in science fiction, but as a real-life issue? 
Although we had worked within the field of feminist cultural studies of 
technology for several years at that time, it had never occurred to us that 
space flight might be a feminist issue. Peace feminists had for some time, 
of course, been bringing a critical focus to bear on war technologies, 
including rockets and missiles, which obviously played important roles in 
the development of space flight technologies, and vice versa. But space 
exploration in general appeared to be a totally 'dark continent' in the 
otherwise extremely diverse and multi-faceted landscape of feminist 
concerns. 
The heated debate on space flight was evoked, like a bolt from the blue, 
by JoAnn Morgan's unlikely presence in this left-wing and radical feminist 
setting. While listening, it suddenly struck us as somewhat conspicuous 
that the otherwise mistrustful and vigilant feminist cultural critics had 
turned a deaf ear to what was happening in this highly political and 
sociotechnically powerful field. The more we considered the forceful his­
torical marks left on post-Second World War culture by the space race 
between the USA and the Soviet Union, and also its technological con­
sequences, the more we asked ourselves why a critical feminist gaze was 
lacking in this field. The same questions ~aised themselves when we looked 
at Morgan's statistics, which, contrary to what she had been trying to 
argue, showed space flight to be not the next step in women's liberation, 
but rather an extreme residuum of the unfolding of classic, national­
romantic and phallocentric myths of masculine superheroes. 
Besides wondering about the conspicuous lack of critical feminist eyes 
in the no-woman's land of space flight, a different train of thoughts and 
feelings caught our imagination as well. We had to admit that we were 
attracted by the adventure tale that performed as a hidden layer in Morgan's 
very matter-of-fact and down-to-earth presentation. The extraordinary 
point of reference for the speech made by this nice, white North American 
middle-class woman was the amazing and fascinating story of real-life travel 
to distant and alien worlds. Our childhood fascinations with Jules Verne's 
novels of thrilling voyages to exotic places beyond the dull, mundane world Introduction 11 
of everyday life and with Tarzan's adventures among the apes in jungles far 
away from the conventions of European upper-class life were re-awakened. 
Morgan had actually spent most of her adult life sending people and 
human-made things into 'the unknown', the vast world beyond the limits 
of Earth's gravitational field. She appeared alien not only because her 
patent nationalism and her liberal feminism clashed with the left-wing and 
radical feminist audience. She also carried a touch of a much more thrilling 
kind of alienness '-that of the world beyond. Seen in retrospect, this was 
obviously one of the reasons why her appearance in Dublin remained 
intriguing to us and prompted us to write to her three years later when we 
were due to visit the USA for another interdisciplinary world congress on 
women. This time, Morgan did not attend, but she kindly invited us to visit 
her at NASA's Kennedy Space Center in Florida. This visit became the 
actual starting point of this book. It was impressive in two respects. 
On the one hand, we felt much more amazed and awe-strUck than we 
had e.xpected. Everything smelled of adventure. We interviewed people for 
whom preparations for the cosmic exodus of humankind was not science 
fiction, but the way they earned their living. On the sightseeing tour for 
special guests, we were allowed to touch the tiles of the space shuttle 
Discovery and inhale the cathedral-like atmosphere of the building, which 
during the days of the Apollo project had been used to assemble the 
gigantic Saturn V rocket-the one that launched the moonships. Although 
we do not normally consider ourselves to be gadget-fetishistic techno­
freaks, we were, nevertheless, caught by the spirit of adventure. 
On the other hand, the visit confirmed us strongly in the belief that the 
story of space flight is not ouly amazing and fascinating, but also very 
much in need of critical inquiries. The more so as the military's reliance 
on space grew in the 1990s in both the old spacefaring nations, the USA 
and Russia. A recent analysis of the space politics of the two nations notes 
that 'U.S. Department of Defense space spending exceeded NASA's budget 
every year from 1982 to 1995, and points to the remarkable integration of 
space in the military operations in the Persian Gulf War (Von Beneke 
1997: 190). Moreover, Ronald Reagan's Star Wars project has not been 
buried, ouly redesigned (Newsweek, 22 February 1999). And Russia, whose 
government is unable regularly to pay salaries to coalminers, teachers and 
medical doctors, not to mention old-age pensioners, has managed not only 
to 'maintain its military space constellations at Cold War levels', but actually 
to improve and expand certain aspects (Von Beneke 1997: t9o-r). So, 
whether seen through the lens of post -Second World War high politics 
and post-Cold War military strategies or from the perspective of the 
Cosmodolphins 12 
adventure story, it is a tale in need of feminist deconstructions and critique 
far beyond the limits of Morgan's liberal affirmative action politics. 
To Rewrite the Master Narratives of Space Flight 
In her book NASA/TREK, Constance Penley (1997) rewrites the NASA 
story from the point of view of feminist cultural studies. She provokes 
sceptical European readers like us by declaring herself a fan of NASA, 
and surprises us by cleverly emphasizing the critical potentials of the 
reading strategies of fans. In her opinion, critical fans transgress the 
impasse of standpoint criticisms and Enlightenment critiques of ideology. 
In particular, she underlines the subversive potential of the many female 
slash-writers, 1 who for years have been rewriting the Star Trek series as a 
pornographic and Utopian romance of male homosexual love. Her in­
tention is to view the NASA story from the oblique angle of the Star Trek 
adventures, which in their turn she re-reads from the consciously improper 
and inappropriate perspective of the slash-writers. NASA's high-flown 
rhetoric of masculine superheroes, national symbols of the USA, is by 
contiguity associated with the slash fans' lustful constructions of a homo­
sexual love affair between Star Trek's Kirk and Spock. In this way, Penley 
builds herself a platform for a critical discussion of NASA's extremely 
repressive attitude towards the taboo subject of sexuality, and also of 'its · 
inability to manage the meanings of women in space' (Penley 1997: 3). 
Like Penley, we want to engage in a cultural critique without excluding 
our fascination with the space adventure. We also feel a feminist urge to 
rewrite the master narratives of space 1light in a Bakhtinian way, that is, 
to subvert their national-romantic and phallocentric rhetoric via reading 
strategies that put improper and carnivalesque contiguities on display. 
Our book is, however, different from Penley's. First of all, we are too 
sceptical to write as critical fans and, unlike her, we did not grow up in the 
neighbourhood of the Kennedy Space Center launch site. We are, on the 
contrary, offspring of a small North European nation that constructs its 
national identity around an unheroic, pragmatic, down-to-earth attitude 
that makes the high-flown, national-romantic NASA rhetoric sound very 
alien and pompous to our ears. Rather than writing as fans, we write as 
implicated but sceptical strangers since, due to the cultural hegemony of 
the USA in the post-Second World War period, we are both a part of 
American culture and outside it. But although we do not share the en­
thusiasm of American NASA fans, we bluntly admit that the adventurous 
quest stirred our imagination. Introduction 13 
Second, our focus is not only on the USA. We have expanded our 
perspective to include Soviet Russian versions of the master narrative of 
space flight. We take into consideratiOn the space race and the competition 
between the political superpowers over global hegemony, both of which 
have left their historical marks on the master narrative of space flight. The 
early space race was, among other things, a discursive battle over entitle­
ment to represent Universal Man in the biggest story told in modern 
times. Who was going to be the script-writer and the protagonist of the 
master narrative of humankind's cosmic exodus? This was and is a question 
that matters a great deal when the official story of space flight is retold in 
the two countries. The Russian Yuri Gagarin is inscribed in world history 
as the unmarked representative of universal man by being 'the first man 
in space'. In return, the authors of the American version of the master 
narrative have had to construct a marked category: John Glenn is celebrated 
as 'the first American in orbit'. To appropriate the prestigious unmarked 
position is, of course, not only a matter of linguistics, but a serious question 
of national pride. By drawing on both American and Russian materials, we 
can follow such constructions with a cross-cultural perspective. 
Third, we share Penley's desire to subvert by putting improper con­
tiguities on display, but we link the space narrative with other kinds of 
mock images, carnivalesque representations and inappropriate others. In 
our story, the spaceship icon of the heroic master narrative of the American 
and Russian space adventure will be confronted with the horoscope and 
the dolphin, two popular contemporary icons that, like the spaceship, have 
significant genealogical roots in the 1960s. Invoking the eagerly awaited 
New Age as the Age of Aquarius, countercultural movements of the time 
initiated a revival of astrology and other ancient occult practices. Also 
coinciding with the space race, the scientific discovery of the 'intelligence' 
and outstanding communicative skills of dolphins made its first and much 
debated headlines around rg6o. In this way, our three icons touch one 
another in terms of historical emergence on the cultural scene of post­
Second World War society, while the stories they generate put strange and 
inappropriate interference patterns and reversals on display. 
We stumbled upon the dolphin icon as a mock image of spaceman and 
his alter ego, cosmic high-tech aliens, because in a literal sense it interfered 
with the space narrative and the scientific search for extraterrestrial intel­
ligence in the early r96os. The horoscope icon came forward as the other 
improper mirror, because, to our rationalistic and matter-of-fact minds, it 
appeared to match the space narrative in weirdness, while reversing the 
way gend~r was discursively invested in the story. 
--••VU'Vrplllll.::t 
Inappropriate Contiguities: The Spaceship, the Horoscope 
and the Dolphin 14 
Our Prelude presented a first description of some inappropriate con­
tiguities between Space Age and New Age narratives. In the analysis of 
McCulloch's picture, we pointed out how New Age stories of unity with 
a 'pure', 'authentic' nature clashed with the master narrative of techno­
scientific power and control in the shaping of the ultimate story of the 
world as picture and manageable object. What caroe to the fore seemed to 
be a mixture of attraction and repulsion, embrace and collision. We shall 
define this as inappropriate contiguity, while drawing inspiration from the 
notion of 'the carnivalesque' of the Russian cultural historian Mikhail 
Bakhtin (1984).2 
'Earth Dolphins' negotiates the proximity between two opposing kinds 
of discourses that the adoption of NASA's Blue Planet photo by New 
Agers, deep ecologists, etc., has engendered. The picture bonds together 
stories of a mystical unity with 'nature', Earth Mother Gaia3 and her 
dolphin-human offspring, and narratives of the controlling gaze of the 
distant scientist-engineer. But the discursive bonding is clearly not based 
on mere harmonious attraction. Indirectly, the picture also reveals the 
repulsion such a misalliance is bound to evoke. In order to mediate between 
the discourses on unity and detachment, of merging and control, of 
mystery and technoscientific rationality, the picture has to repress and, 
police the surfacing of certain obvious links. Thus the technological 
apparatus of production -the spaceship, the camera of the astronaut­
photographer, etc. -were kept away from the eyes of the spectator. To 
sustain the illusion of unity, merging and sacred mystery, the emblems of 
detachment, control and rationality had to be hidden and repressed, 
relegated to the invisible space-off. To show the contiguity openly would 
be inappropriate and make the picture ambiguous. 
The specific mixture of attraction and repulsion, which apparently 
ensures the New Age career of NASA's Blue Planet.photos (with or without 
dolphins) as spiritual symbol of holism and healing, is, however, not the 
only way of working out the complex relationship between the Space Age 
and New Age narratives. A kind of reversed version of the repressions of 
the Whole Earth image also seems to be operative. When we shift the focus 
to the national-romantic American and Russian narratives of the spaceship 
and the rocket as vehicles of the heroic 'conquest of space', we see a high­
tech aesthetics and a gadget-fetishism brought into full play that show how 
the 'technological sublime' (Nye 1994) is celebrated intensively in ,both Introduction 15 
countries. The USA and Russia have both sustained their space narratives 
by celebrations of the powerful hardware and the super-brave steel men 
who made the 'conquest' possible. This has been done through innumerable 
pictures, videos, books, exhibitions, official events (parades, etc.), that run 
counter to the conspicuous erasure of any trace of technology from the 
surface of the Whole Earth image, but at the saroe time maintain their owo 
set of repressions. Whereas the Blue Planet picture keeps the question of 
technology, power and control out of sight, it is precisely these issues that 
the fiercely nationalistic American and Russian demonstrations of space­
ships, rockets, launch-pads, astro- and cosmonaut equipment, mission 
control centres, etc., put on display. Conspicuously absent from these 
gadget-fetishistic representations is, in return, any shadow of the in­
calculable and any trace of the uncontrollable, even though these are an 
inescapable part of any story of interactions between human and nature. 
Both the USA and Russia like to demonstrate their technopower and 
indulge in narratives of technological infallibility and the highest potency 
of human power, control, cool detachment and rationality. In its own way, 
the traumatic shock evoked by the Challenger catastrophe in 1986 shows 
how forceful and persistent the myth of infallible technopower and complete 
human control is. The disaster clashed too discordantly with the narrative 
of total calculability and controllability to which NASA had contributed 
heavily, underplaying risks and safety problems when promoting the 'teacher 
in space program' that the 'ordinary school teacher' astronaut, Christa 
McAuliffe, should have conducted on board the space shuttle. 
We shall explore the attractions and repulsions between Space Age and 
New Age discourses through analyses of a range of stories clustering around 
our three icons: the spaceship, the horoscope and the dolphin. After a 
contextualization of our epistemological position and theoretical approaches 
(Chapter I), we present the patterns of similarities and differences, opposi­
tions and reversals, binding together the three icons (Chapter 2). In the 
following chapters (3 to 8), we analyse them further one by one. The 
concluding Chapter 9 returns to the general question: whether or not this 
contemporary configuration of stories reinvents and recirculates the classic 
trinity of others, Woman-Native-Nature, in new versions. Through a brief 
analysis of three subversive novels, Victor Pelevin's Omon Ra (1992h996), 
Jeanette Winterson's Boating for Beginners (1990) and Vonda Mcintyre's 
Superluminal (1983), we also summarize the acts of destabilization and 
denaturalization at which the book has aimed. 
The spaceship icon, which is the focus of Chapters 3 and 4, will serve 
as a signifier of the gadget-fetishistic dream of unbounded power and 
Cosmodolphins 16 
control that is articulated by the American and Russian space narratives. 
We unravel some of the stories in the spectacular quest for an extra­
terrestrial elsewhere, for a place never before visited by earthlings. We 
discuss how the spacecraft refers to a web of myth, politics, reinvention of 
nature and technoscientific desires to domesticate as yet untamed wilder­
ness areas, and how intermingling stories of steel men and heavenly powers 
sustain the illusion that the god-trick of modern science, the vanquishing 
of incalculable and uncontrollable coincidences, is possible. 
As part of the discussion, we look at the consequences of the cultural 
historic semantics that lends significance to the spaceship icon as a vehicle 
designed to bring humans to the sphere that, for centuries, has been 
associated with the divine realm of the white Christian Fathergod. In 
addition, we analyse how space exploration, in both an American and a 
Russian context, invokes a discursive field in which classic, national­
romantic myths of the masculine hero seem able to survive in immaculate 
form. True to tradition, this hero is totally dedicated to performing sacred 
deeds for the benefit of the nation and all mankind (Dawson 1994). Just 
a brief glimpse of the tough, serene and determined faces of the astronauts 
in Hollywood's blockbusting film from 1995 about the Apollo 13 disaster 
(Apollo 13) is enough to convince that the myth of the Man made of the 
'right stuff' (Wolfe 1988) has not yet become extinct. In his screen in­
carnation, he appears to be as absorbed as ever in the effort to carry out 
his national-heroic duties. He may be threatened by Fate-the film plays 
on the ominous number 13 =: but the will of the genius Godfather of 
teclmoscientific controllability and calculability, the modern Cyber-Apollo, 
is definitely on the side of our heroes. Therefore, they survive the near­
fatal attacks of the hostile wilderness 'out there'. 
In order to analyse the reverse side of the inappropriate contiguities 
between Space Age and New Age discourses, to which recyclings of the 
Blue Planet picture as Earth Mother, Gaia, call attention, Chapters 5 and 
6 zoom in on New Age astrology. In contrast to the high-tech gadget­
fetishism, which sticks to the spaceship, the horOscope icon mediates the 
same kind of nostalgic longings for holism, healing, home-coming, that 
have also been projected onto the Whole Earth image. New Age astrology 
reinvents ancient, occult symbols of spiritual and bodily unity between 
micro-and macrocosmos, human and universe, and promises salvation 
through a 'pure' and sacred bond to Cosmic Nature. 
Other popular New Age revivals of ancient forms of occultism- tarot, 
I Ching, channelling, etc. -might just as well have sustained our discussion. 
But we chose the horoscope, because it provides a particularly good match Introduction 17 
for the spaceship in its explicit reference to cosmic themes. In addition, the 
horoscope has a special iconographic value since the upcoming astrological 
Age of Aquarius has served as a powerful explanatory metaphor for the 
fundamental shift of mentalities that the New Age is supposed to bring 
about. A third reason for taking the horoscope as our direction-finder is 
that astrology, more than other kinds of New Age occultism, makes visible 
an obsession with calculability and predictability that matches the teclmo­
scienti.fic rationality of space flight as a mock-image. Like modern science, 
the practice of astrology is based on complex computations and calculations 
that, at the same time, are inscribed in a totally 'unscientific' context of 
intuitive feelings and a mystic interconnectedness between human and 
cosmos. 
We will interpret New Age astrology as a paradoxical counter-image to 
the spaceship. As an icon of the Space Age, the spacecraft embodies 
modern scientific epistemology and the will to technoscientific power, 
knowledge and control. In significant contrast to this, the horoscope icon 
of New Age astrology signifies a will to give up the cult of ratio, command 
and control and instead to accept the guidance of occult messages created 
by the rhythmic movements of Earth and cosmos, which, nevertheless, has 
to be decoded by means of a 'quasi-scientific' grammar of calculable 
astronomical constellations. 
As a kind of reversal of each other, the spaceship and the horoscope 
can illustrate a lability that may be characteristic of high-tech societies. 
For many people, the semantics of cosmos seem able to change as easily 
as a puzzle picture, now displaying a 'frontier to be conquered' by techno­
scientific power and reason, and now a screen full of occult messages of 
holism and healing. Such lability may be an expression of widespread 
present-day oscillations between belief in the explanatory frameworks of 
science and a br£colage of alternative world views (Eastern mysticism, 
ancient occultism, etc.). The latter seems to be evoked in order to explain 
existential excess meanings, for which science, obsessed with total rational 
control, command and calculability, cannot account. 
When exploring the inappropriate contiguities between the master nar­
ratives of Space Age and New Age, we will also consider how gender 
reversals is at stake. The configuration of the spaceship and the horoscope 
thus refers to a certain division of labour by gender. On the one hand, the 
victorious mission of the spacecraft is discursively linked with the sacred 
image of the masculine national hero, whose voyage shall bring us closer 
to the omnipotent Cyber-Godfather. On the other hand, both popular 
New Age and spiritual feminist stories of astrology and horoscope casting 
CosmOdolphins 18 
evoke the feminine: they tell of salvation via (re)constructions of ancient 
world views, based on the celebration of a mother-child symbiosis of 
macro-and microcosmos. This may remind us once more of the lability 
of the present-day disourses on cosmology, gendering the universe now 
masculine, now ferriinine. 
While the configuration of spaceship and horoscope will give us the 
opportunity to highlight patterns of repulsion, opposition and reversal, 
our third icon, the dolphin, is by contrast fitted to stress the contiguity 
and proximity of Space Age and New Age discourses. Chapters 7 and 8 
present a wide spectrum of cetacean stories that unfolds an extreme poly­
semy. Included are both dolphin and whale narratives, for, in spite of some 
differences in lifestyle and iconography,' there are so many parallels 
between contemporary constructions of these two marine mammals that 
we use them interchangeably. As generic term we prefer the evocative 
word 'dolphin' instead of the -stricdy speaking- more precise 'cetacean'. 
It will be evident from the context whether we refer to dolphins or to 
whales. 
As a multi-layered image, the dolphin can link up with the opposing 
themes evoked by the other rwo icons in our configuration. Adapted to be 
one with their oceanic element as well as to perform as 'mind in the 
waters' (Mcintyre 1974) and 'intellectuals of the sea' (Belkovich et al. 
1965, 1967), dolphins leap smoothly into the role of boundary figures. 
With the same effortless ease, they relate to narratives of a wet and 
symbiotic, motherly past and a future enlightened by consciousness, com­
munication and brain activity, to New Age spirituality and to the master 
narrative of space flight, to ancient beliefs and to high-tech science, to a 
feminization and to a masculinization of the universe. Therefore, they can 
also perform in the carnivalesque role of the jester and the mock-hero, 
who expose the improper proximity and deconstruct the opposing spheres 
of meaning of the other rwo icons. In this way, they function analogously 
to the 'undecidable' signifier 'Woman', which Jacques Derrida (1979, 1987) 
promoted as the perfect expression of dijfirance, the unending chain of 
displacements characteristic of signifying processes. 
One part of the dolphin stories allows the enigmatic marine mammals 
to perform as noble savage in a pastoral, pre-technological environment; or 
as spiritual messenger from an other-worldly site, endowed with alternative, 
feminine values similar to those evoked by New Age astrology. But the 
flexible animal can equally well take up a role as emblem of high-tech 
communication. We encounter them, for instance, in computer and telecom 
ads, signifying global communication, speed, nomadism and a carefree Introduction 19 
future in cyberspace; in the rg6os they even popped up as stand-ins for 
the cosmic Cyber-Godfather. The second part of the paradoxical post­
Second World War dolphin script thus connected this animal icon with 
space flight and its new science project: the search for extraterrestrial 
intelligence in the vast cosmic ocean. All of a sudden, these sea creatures 
jumped smilingly out of the blue as stand-ins for the citizens of the cosmic 
super-civilizations that possessed techno-godfatherly wisdom, and with 
whom it was believed the Space Age would bring us into contact. 
Cosmos and Ocean: The Extraterrestrial 'Commons' 
Besides the inappropriate contiguities displayed in the patterns of 
repulsion and attraction between the spaceship, the horoscope and the 
dolphin, another shared, but much more streamlined, framework of mean­
ings links the three icons. In different ways, they all refer to twentieth­
century stories of two rather special kinds of wilderness areas: the cosmos, 
and the world beneath the ocean surface. This joint framework of reference 
is analysed in Chapter 7, which marks the transition between the chapters 
on the cosmos (3 to 6) and the dolphin (8); the latter features the animal 
icon leaping energetically up and down benveen the cosmic and the oceanic 
world. 
There are several reasons for choosing to study the role of the cosmos 
and the ocean in the search for answers to the question we posed in the 
Prelude, as to how the classic trinity Woman-Native-Nature is re-enacted 
or displaced in present-day quests for a wild elsewhere. 
One reason is the difference of both spaces from the current terrestrial 
abodes of 'civilized selves' that makes them a perfect match for con­
temporary desires for a 'truly' wild and vast elsewhere. For they present 
us with images of alien sites that today are very difficult to conjure up on 
the dry land of Earth. Domesticated land and cities have extended their 
space at an ever-accelerating pace throughout the last few centuries. The 
remaining wilderness areas on Earth's continents have be~_:r:t!9!'~,Qr_less 
tr~Sformed intotlieoppOSite-·ofWildei-D:ess~.Q($1gnO,; predominantly --..,._. ------·-----·· ·--~----- ~----·"· -------. ' -·-··. -·-··---;---------··--..__,_ ___ ._ well-ordered nature ~eserves and wildhfe sanctlla_nes w1th paths, p1cruc~ 
ar~ -~d taggecCailliilai~ or •. else vast. eroded ancl:pollui:e<CwasteTancfs':_., 
However, this J:~t:raforming5-or-demestica~9P.P.I:o_~e-~s _has_ so _far only begun to to~~h uP~~ th~_cosmos-and.J:4e ocean. Underwater nation-aT·~e----
.....,____ --~ -----~ '"· --· ·-:·---indeed emerged; industrial fishing, off::sliore oil drilling, sewage discharges 
etc. are placing increasing pressure on marine environments; and the 
pollution of orbital space is beginning to create problems. But, unlike the 
< 
Cosmodolphins 20 
continental areas of Earth, the cosmos and the ocean can still represent 
vast spaces, different and distinct from the domesticated environments of 
everyday life in postindustrial societies. 
As vast wilderness spaces, the cosmos and the extraterrestrial world 
beneath the ocean surface constitute a joint frame of reference for our 
three icons. A shared semantics can be found in the fact that the images 
these extraterrestrial spaces evoke have obvious points of resemblance to 
one another. 
One resemblance is that outer space and the oceans are both regarded 
as 'global commons', to use the official language of the United Nations 
(UN). This concept was espoused by the organization in the early 1970s, 
and applied to outer space, the oceans and Antarctica in a later, much 
debated report from the UN's World Commission on Environment and 
Development (WCED 1987). In an ambivalent act of revitalizing and 
transforming the classic discussion of the 'tragedy of the commons' that 
occurred in seventeenth-century England, the 'global commons' of today 
are depicted as reservoirs of rich resources waiting for a human manager. 
Guided by a rather ill-concealed wish to exploit these resources, the 
Brundtland Report refers suggestively to 'managing the commons' (1987: 
z6r). At the same time distancing itself from the worst excesses of capitalist 
greed, the report constructs the 'development' of the global commons as 
a 'common', international project. In this way Brundtland indirectly claims 
to promote a different attitude from the one that governed the classic 
transformation of the English commons into private property. 
A further affinity concerns the way in which the two spaces, the cosmos 
and the ocean, are cast as settings for human experience of the unbounded, 
vast and natural sublime. Both represent borders between 'human civiliza­
tion' and 'wild nature' that cannot easily be transgressed. In this sense, they 
resemble the terresiriallandscapes that two hundred years ago sustained the 
creation of classic theories of sublimity in nature (Burke I756lr990). 
However, unlike those once-powerful terrestrial wilderness sites, both the 
cosmos and the ocean depths, so-called 'inner space', 6 can still perform as 
vast and sublime areas beyond human control. Both continue to be 
apparently unfathomable and therefore terrifying and awe-inspiring in a 
classic sense. The 'insurmountable' mountains, 'impenetrable' forests and 
deserts of early modernity have long since been 'conquered', as have the 
'dark' continents and 'virgin lands' of the classic colonialist period. But 
outer and inner space are still unchanged in embodying powerful natural 
barriers to human enterprise. 
Consequently, in the USA, outer space is often referred to as 'the high Introduction 21 
frontier'. The expression echoes the conquest of the American West, but 
it also signals the enormous obstacles confronting anybody who attempts 
to travel even a short distance beyond the atmosphere of Earth. The dark 
side of the Moon is still the most exotic place humans have ever visited. 
Compared to the nearest star, the Moon is, however, very close to home. 
Just as the imaginary world maps of contemporary culture are marked 
by a 'high frontier', so they are also demarcated by a 'deep frontier', an 
expression used by marine explorers. It is true that electronic listening 
devices, scuba-diving technology and bathyscaphes (deep sea exploration 
vessels) have changed our relations to the world beneath the ocean surface. 
However, like the cosmos, this world still remains a wilderness outside of 
human control. Indeed, many more humans have been to the Moon than 
to the deepest part of the ocean. Thirty-three astronauts took part in the 
American Apollo project, of whom twelve set foot on the Moon; so far 
only two human beings have descended the 37,8oo feet down to the bottom 
of the Marianas Trench (Jacques Piccard and Don Walsh in 1960). 
As our 'high' and 'deep' frontiers, the two extraterrestrial commons fit 
perfectly into the role of objects to satisfy the desire for vast and sublime 
wilderness areas. Challenging and awe-inspiring, they fill our mindscape 
with new imaginary sites, whose significance we will attempt to decode with 
the spaceship, the horoscope and the dolphin icons as prism. 
To Cannibalize and Worship the Wild: In Early Modernity 
and Today 
Last, but not least, we shall emphasize the joint frame of reference of 
our three icons that lies in their shared relationship with the concept of 
wilderness in both· its cultural historical and current meanings. 
We consider the classic dichotomy between 'civilized' masculine selves 
and the trinity of 'wild' others to be an invention of so-called civilized 
society. Just as madness, according to Foucault (1989), emerged forcefully 
in the Age of Enlightenment and Reason, so are the topos, the wilderness, 
and the tropes, such as 'wild' and 'savage', used to characterize feanrres of 
a site and its inhabitants, constructed by the 'civilized' sel£ Madness 
became an important object of cultural interest when the modern subject 
began to define itself as governed by the light of reason. Likewise, the 
wild and the savage caught the attention of white Europeans of the Renais­
sance and early modernity as they began to engage in the technoscientific 
and colonial enterprise aimed at the control of nature and the opening up 
of a globally unrestrained access to raw materials and slave labour. The 
Cosmodolphins 22 
wild and the savag~ were the human and non-human others who inhabited 
the wildernesses b~yond the frontiers of civilization. 
A high priority of the early modern age was to 'civilize', i.e. tame, 
domesticate, control and enslave the 'wild' other in order to transform 
her /him/it into a docile object and a resource for the greedy colonizer and 
the enterprising frontiersman. But, as earlier suggested, the civilized self 
of the Enlightenment and Romanticism sometimes characterized the 
wilderness in other ways as well, defining the wild other as noble savage 
or sublime nature, both of which might guide a civilization gone astray 
back to <authentic' values. The powerful resonances of Rousseau's philo­
sophy and the call for a <return to nature' may be seen as the early 
!..--beginnings of a modern sacralization process and a wilderness cult (Nash 
rgSz), in which the securely positioned civilized self could indulge. 
Thus, from the beginning, modern constructions of a civilized self 
versus a wild other were criss-crossed by intersecting approaches, and 
linked together in a pattern of ambivalence. We will discuss what has 
happened to these ambivalences, and explore the thesis that the simul­
taneous act of cannibalizing and worshipping the wild, which shaped early 
modern patterns of ambivalence, is being replayed today. Powerful new 
versions of deeply ambivalent and contradictory self-other images are 
surfacing. They appear in discourses on the extraterrestrial commons in 
general, and in stories of our three icons in particular. 
At the end of the twentieth century, the colonial quest for new territories 
on the continents of Earth, which in early modernity engendered the 
problems of civilized selves versus wild others, has in a way become 
obsolete. The goal of 'modern man', limidess growth and unrestrained 
cannibalizing of terrestrial territories, has proved itself to be dangerous to 
our survival on Earth. Nevertheless, it Seems difficult for ease-loving 
citizens of the postmodern world to deconstruct this particular part of 
modern Utopianism. The deceased utopias of European and American 
modernity, and the languishing belief in their 'civilizing' techno-political 
world-mission, persevere, as it were posthtunously, in lending legitimacy 
to cannibalistic acts and new quests for resource-abundant areas of wilder­
ness. This is one of the important factors behind the interest in the 
extraterrestrial commons, and pardy the reason why they caught the 
imaginations of post-Second World War politicians and technoscientists. 
The resources and riches of outer space and the ocean depths, it is argued, 
might compensate for the lost terrestrial ones. 
At the same time, however, a deep fascination with the wild and a 
desire to worship it are sweeping millennium minds. The more rapidly our Introduction 23 
'civiliz_e.d~ways_of living devour the wild, the more we middle-class people 
;r·--Postindustrial cultures become obsessed with a radl"Cai nost3.Tgla-foy-­
llealmgme broken -15onas-15etweenliumari-a1.-d-Wifd-narure:-viii.!Sli:irrg 
terrestrra1Wi1dernesses are-·remvente·crin·-me··SfiipeC;f'Wifderness parks', 
or reconstructed as 'virtual reality' images, and new extraterrestrial-ones, 
the cosmos and the ocean, brought into focus. We suggest that an important 
driving force behind this trend is the longing for a spiritual and meta­
physical guarantee of the continued existence of a 'truly' wild and wise 
beyond-ness. This may also be one of the reasons why astrology and other 
kinds Of ancient beliefs in cosmic messengers experience a renaissance-in 
secularized countries. And explain why selected and ennobled icons of the 
wild, such as the enigmatically brainy and helpful dolphins, have been 
turned into cult figures and inscribed in new religious mythologies. There 
seems to be a strong desire today to merge with the presumed wise and 
wild extraterrestrial other, be it an astrological constellation of the Zodiac, 
perhaps conveying messages from the goddess of fate, or a Sibylline marine 
mammal. 
Amazing Stories 
Scattered between the chapters are five amazing stories. Some of them 
we took part in ourselves, others simply sent a current of high-voltage 
amazement through our bodies as we stumbled upon them in various 
texts. The stories act as prisms for the discussions of the spaceship, the 
horoscope and the dolphin in the regnlar chapters. But aside from brief 
comments, we retell the amazing stories in medias res, leaving it largely to 
the reader to trace links and draw conclusions about the connections. In 
this way we hope that others may spontaneously tune in on the amazement 
we felt ourselves, and which we consider a vital element of analyses. As we 
shall show in Chapter 2, we favour a balancing act between critical distance 
and amazement. Hence cultural critique and cultural amazement are both 
cues to a reading of this book. 
Notes 
1. 'Sbsh' refers to fiction writing of fm-cultures who rewrite popular television 
series, inventing homo-erotic relationships, most often male/male, between the characters. 
Specifically, the term refers to the use of a grammatic:.U 'slash' to signify the relationship, 
for example Kirk/Spock from the Star Trek series, which is very popular '"ith slash 
, writers. Women produce most of the slash writings. 
2. According to Bakhtin, the carnival in the Middle Ages was a forum for celebration 
Cosmodolphins 24 
of inappropriate and improper contiguities between the official ideologies of Church 
and King and the 'inferior' world of ordinary people -that is, between 'high' and 'low'. 
The jester, who ridicules the King, and the Testament of the Ass (a popular text in the 
Middle Ages) that makes fun of the Holy Scripture are examples of how 'the carnival­
esque' works on the basis of contiguities that are both inappropriate and improper when 
seen from the perspective of the official ideology. The role of the jester plays on a pattern 
of contiguity or attraction: he acts as if he were the King, but in doing so he produces 
mock-images of the royal performance. Since everybody knows that the jester is not the 
King, the contiguity or attraction is countered by a pattern of difference and repulsion. 
The laughter, evoked by the jester, is based on the interference of the two patterns. 
J. The theory of Earth as Gaia, i.e. as one organism, which has become a popular 
part of New Age thought, was developed by the British scientist James Lovelock (r987). 
His first inspiration for the theory came during his work for NASA in the rg6os. It had 
two important sources: his engagement in the search for life on Mars and the idea of 
looking at Earth from outside (the Blue Planet picture). His own story and the popularity 
of his Gaia hypothesis illustrate the intertwinement between the Space Age and New 
Age stories from another angle than McCulloch's picture. 
4· Dolphins can be classified as small whales. Since dolphins are much more easily 
studied -and captured -than the large whales, they were the first to enter the oceanaria 
and laboratories, and to draw public attention to the species (see Chapter 8). The main 
iconic difference lies in the serene distance and majestic monstrosity of the whales as 
opposed to the lively dolphins that often live closer to land. 
5· The concept 'terraforming', to which we return in Chapter 4. is frequently used 
in futuristic space flight discOurses. Normally, it describes the processes by which other 
celestial bodies may be made habitable with Earth, Terra, as the model. See also Fogg 
(1995' 9)-
6. The expression 'inner space' was deliberately coined in the USA in the late 1950s 
in order to reinforce the parallel between deep sea exploration and space flight; cf. the 
expectations that 'the rush into outer space will be matched by an international invasion 
of inner space' (Piccard and Dietz rg6r: r82-3); see also Sc-ience (rg6o: 1592) on ocean­
ography as 'the exploration of "inner space"'. For a more recent example, sec Earle 
(1995' 1J). Map of Matrices 
In our analysis of contemporary relationships between 'civilized selves' 
and 'wild others', we intend to display and deconstruct the traps of the 
former, which oscillate between two problematic alternatives. They tend 
either to behave as if they could control the wild other, or, conversely, to 
reinvent themselves as mere receptacles and channels for its enigmatic 
messages. The former position is common in some scientific communities, 
whereas the latter is typical of trends within the New Age movement. 
While exposing these traps, we want, of course, to avoid them ourselves. 
What strategy do we use to steer clear of these rocks? Epistemologically, 
we share with many researchers within feminist cultural studies a disbelief 
in the traditional dichotomies between theory and empirical objects of 
study, between knowing subjects and objects of knowledge. We believe in 
accountable story-telling and theoretically informed articulations by 
embodied and localized subjects in dialogue with other human and non­
human subjects - a dialogue that should not, however, amount to a simple 
fusion (cf. Haraway 1991: r88f£; 1992: 309). In this way, it seems possible 
to avoid the pitfalls not only of the command-control paradigm of some 
'civilized selves', but also of its reversal to New Age romanticism and 
attempts to merge With 'wild others'. 
Our epistemological position demands self-reflection, and in order to 
situate ourselves we shall, first of all, emphasize that the object for which 
we want to account is the set of narrations of the 'we' who engage in late 
twentieth-century quests for a wild elsewhere. The book is an analysis of 
the positions of 'civilized selves' in this period, and not of an essentialized 
wild and savage other. But, second, we will make it abundantly clear that 
we ourselves are part of the questing 'we' that is the focus of the analysis. 
In collecting materials for the book, we have undertaken many journeys, 
both real and imaginary, to alien and exotic places and spaces and enjoyed 
the spirit of adventure. This book is a situated reflection upon those 
journeys. 
Cosmodolphins 26 
In this chapter we shall contextualize ourselves in more detail, outlining 
the map of matrices from which the book emerged: our methods and 
materials, our location and our theoretical inspirations -in order to make 
the point of departure for our reflections transparent. 
Methods and Materials 
The methodological pivots about which the book turns are discourse 
analysis, narratology, and semiotic and deconstructive readings of various 
kinds of textual and non-textual materials. Intertwined with these ap­
proaches, we make use of qualitative research interviews and inspirations 
from anthropology. 
Like anthropologists, we have travelled a great deal in real life -and, 
as literary theorists, also in fantasy. We have visited worlds that were foreign 
to us and to each other. We crossed real and imagil;tary borders between 
Russia and the USA; between the cosmos and the ocean; between the 
apparently rational world of high-tech science and the occult world of 
New Age astrology; between worlds heroized as masculine or mystified as 
feminine; and we confronted the Mona Lisa smiles of dolphins and the 
beautifully serene monstrosity of whales. 
Through textual and visual media, we followed astronauts to the 'high 
frontier' as well as aquanauts to the 'deep frontier'; we lent our ears to the 
voices of the cosmos as interpreted by New Age astrologers; and we shared 
the peepholes of researchers and dolphin lovers who were trying to catch 
a glimpse of the enigmatic world of these intelligent marine manunals or 
to construct interspecies encounters. 
Consuming a lot of fuel in long-distance flights, we tried to meet in 
person with informants from both Russia and the USA. Our journeys 
made it possible for us to conduct z6 qualitative interviews with women 
and men belonging to the academic staff of space research centres in the 
tvvo countries, and I 5 interviews with female and male astrologers in 
Moscow and San Francisco. We also interviewed six women and men 
involved in dolphin studies in the USA, some of them affiliated with 
dolphin research centres, and others freelancers. The interviews took place 
during the period 199~8. While the words of the space researchers and 
astrologers are considered separately in two different chapters, the per­
spectives of the dolphin-people mingle with our general depiction of 
cetacean iconography. 
Our travels also gave us the opportunity to do field work and make 
observations at space flight facilities, space flight museums, Sea Worlds Map of Matrices 27 
and dolphinaria, dolphin research and education centres, ocean areas with 
wild dolphins, ceo-organizations and New Age fairs. We stroked Gagarin's 
spaceship Vostok, the tiles of the space shuttle Discovery and the smooth 
rubbery skins of dolphins. We swam close to wild dolphins and felt the 
splash-down of huge killer whales performing in the sad surroundings of 
the simulated ocean of Sea Worlds. We touched stones brought down from 
the Moon, we were invited into astrological mysteries and were even 
perceived as cosmic messengers ourselves. ·we could not have written this 
book if it had not been for these alien encounters. We are grateful to all 
the human and non-human inhabitants of the -to us -exotic and alien 
worlds we visited. They made the encounters possible and gave us the 
opportunity to try out the role of questing selves in search of adventure. 
To Speak as Implicated Strangers 
As we criticize the position of the questing selves that we scrutinize in 
the book, we are perfectly well aware that, on the one hand, it includes 
ourselves. On the other hand, we are on the margins in several respects, 
when, as female, feminist intellectuals with a background in the humanities 
and citizens of a small and densely populated Scandinavian country, we 
approach the worlds of space flight, astrology and dolphins. 
First and foremost, we are different from people who grew up in big 
countries such as Russia and the USA, because 'wilderness' in our im­
aginary connotes exoticism and places far away. Our permanent location is 
in Denmark, whose main territory h~ for centuries, been more or less 
devoid of anything that might live up to the name of 'vast untouched 
wilderness areas'. Contrary to the situation in countries such as the USA 
and Russia, our national identity includes neither the topos 'wilderness' 
that is such a popular component of the 'American mind' (Nash rg82), nor 
the 'immense space' that Russian literature back to Pushkin has celebrated 
as part of the special features of Russia (Edmonds 1994: 201). 
Educated in the humanities, we are, moreover, only tourists in the world 
of high-tech science that makes up the context of space flight and of 
much dolphin research as well. As citizens of a small and unheroic nation, 
we are gazing from the margins at the web of major politics and national 
romantic mythologies, such as the ones constructed by the two superpowers 
around the first heroic deeds in space. As women, we are also confronting 
a very different world when peeping into the masculine subculture of 
space flight and inhaling the odour of brotherhood that unites the space 
heroes and their many fans. As individuals brought up in a rationalist 
Cosmodolphins 28 
tradition and rooted in an atheistic world view, a belief in astrology strikes 
us as extremely exotic as well. The same is true of the New Age sacral­
ization of whales and dolphins. 
Thus situated, we look upon the worlds of the spaceship, the horoscope 
and the dolphin as might anthropologists when they are interpreting foreign 
cultures. Nevertheless, we are analysing modern and postmodern cultures 
that, seen from a global perspective, are also our own. We are implicated 
in the global web that produced the twentieth-century configuration of 
these three icons. Hence we find it appropriate to define ourselves as 
implicated strangers. 
On the Inclusion of 'Nature' in Feminist Cultural Studies 
In theoretical terms, the book maps out a field of innovative approaches 
to feminist cultural studies of technoscience, animals and spirituality. 
Feminist studies in their intersections with poststructuralism, semiotics 
and cultural studies make up an important foundation. In particular, we 
found major sources of inspiration in Western feminist science studies, 
and we shall, therefore, begin with a survey of these. As of yet a feminist 
approach to this huge field has not emerged in Russia. 
Feminist science studies constitute a hybrid in the sense coined by 
Latour (1993). They address the natural sciences and hence 'nature', but 
at the same time they intersect with another hybrid: feminist cultural 
studies that deal with 'culture'. When we join Haraway in defining 'science 
studies as cultural studies' (Haraway 1992: 296), we end up with a field 
that deals purely neither with 'nature', nor with 'culture'- i.e. a monstrous 
construct that lurks subversively in between the humapities-and the natural 
sciences in their classical sense (Lykke and Braidotti 1996). 
Feminist science studies as cultural studies expose the ways in which 
modern science has contributed to the othering of Woman, Native and 
Natur..e. Therefore, they became important critical matrices for our research 
on gendered and racialized constructions of 'wild nature' (dolphins and 
outer space). Especially influential were the works of Merchant (198o), 
Haraway (1989, 1991, 1997), Schiebinger (1993) and Birke (1994) who, in 
different ways, made the gender/nature nexus a central theme of their 
science critiques. Haraway and Schiebinger explore its intersections with 
race; together with Birke they also discuss constructions of animals, while 
Merchant for her part analyses cultural iniages of macrocosmic nature, the 
Earth and the Universe. 
When we, working along similiar lines, emphasize the network of mean-Map of Matrices 29 
ings that circulate around gender/race/nature, we implicitly argue for a 
more systematic inclusion of 'nature' (on both a micro-and macro-level) 
in the intersecting aspects of otherness on which feminist cultural studies 
focus. Widespread consensus exists within the field as to the importance 
of scrutinizing the intersections of gender and race. But as the philosopher 
Val Plumwood argues (1993: 2), the human domination of nature is still 
a 'missing piece' in feminist cultural theory. 
It is true that various kinds of ecofem.inists have insisted on the parallels 
between sexism, racism and 'naturism'. 'When social ecofeminist Karen 
Warren coined the term 'naturism' (Warren 1990), she intended to make 
visible the analogies between sexism, racism and degrading and violent 
treatment of non-human nature, or 'earth others' as Plumwood poetically 
names the worlds of animals, plants and minerals (Plumwood 1993: 137). 
From angles different from that of ecofeminism, researchers within femin­
ist science studies have likewise encouraged a more extensive interest in 
non-human others and nature. 
Nevertheless, Plumwood has a point. Earth others are marginal in the 
overall framework of feminist cultural theory. Considering the obvious 
proximity between constructions of gender I race, on the one hand, and 
gender I earth others, on the other, this is problematic. As discussed in 
Lykke and Braidotti (1996), the nexus of gender/race/nature generates a 
whole chain of signifiers between which modern culture, sustained by 
science, establishes a plenitude of links that allow for rich and diverse 
displacements and metonymical substitutions. In our opinion this speaks 
for an integration of the human/nature axis into the framework of inter­
secting othering processes that are scrutinized by feminist cultural studies. 
A related reason for an inclusion of nature lies in the rapidly changing 
meanings of the concept. We agree with the editors of the collection 
FutureNatural (Robertson eta!. 1996), when they argue that cultural studies 
cannot avoid the political question of the future of non-human nature, 
given 'the fragility of the concept (<nature" and the instability of its 
referent'. Due to large-scale technoscientific transformations and reinven­
tions of the once apparently secure 'ground of being' and 'stable otherness 
to the human condition', nature has, today, more or less lost its meaning 
as a 'foundational concept' (ibid.: r). 'Nature' is currently being intensely 
renegotiated by technoscientists, politicians, etc., and considering the 
traditional proximity between the semantics of Woman and Nature, it is 
important that feminist cultural theorists in-terfere critically in these 
negotiations. 
Together with different kinds of ecofeminism (social or spiritual), 
Cosmodolphins 30 
feminist science studies have laid the foundations for an inclusion of the 
human/nature axis in the feminist cultural studies matri'X of othering 
processes in need of critical scrutiny. We chose to base our work primarily 
on inspirations from the latter, because we think that ecofeminism often 
discusses 'nature' in ways that are too naive. Many ecofeminists writf: of 
nature as if they were dealing with an innocent concept that referred 
mimetically to an essentially given and stable referent. Feminist science 
studies, in contrast, have paid much attention to 'nature' as a construct in 
a textual as well as a material sense. They have developed sophisticated 
analyses of the non-innocent and constructed dimensions inherent in any 
view of nature, without evading the fact that science is also a dialogue with 
·a material, not exclusively discursive, reality. 
As important as it is to include 'nature' in the discussion of othering 
processes, it is crucial to . do so without essentializing the category. To 
insist on multi-layeredness and hybridity is in our opinion decisive in 
order to avoid the cui-de-sacs of both romantic naivety and the reduction­
ism of positivist beliefs in 'nature' as a phenomenon supposedly 'out there', 
waiting to be discovered by 'pure', natural science. 'Nature' should be 
understood from at least a triple perspective: as 'ethno--specific' category 
(Haraway r992: 296), as reinvention or 'co-construction' among human 
and non-human (machine, organic, non-organic) actors (ibid.: 297) and, 
finally, as something that, as Keller points out,· cannot be 'named out of 
existence' (Keller 1989: 43). 
Human, Non .. human, Posthuman 
When feminist science studies renegotiate the meanings of 'nature', the 
traditional antipode 'human' starts changing as well. This becomes very 
clear in the work of Haraway and her recycling of the cyborg metaphor 
(Haraway 1991, 1997; Gray et a!. 1995) as a critical posthuman figure 
arti.fUlating subversive stories that deconstruct the privileged positions of 
humans, whiteness, and the masculine mind. In order to clarify how changes 
in the category 'nature' engender displacements along the whole of the 
human/nature axis of domination, we will briefly explain the concept. 
The cyborg concept demonstrates that 'nature' today is normally neither 
'pure' nor 'innocent', but 'reinvented' or 'co-constructed', as Haraway 
phrases it -mediated by sociotechnical interventions. A cyborg is an 
organism whose physiological functions are modified/ transformed/ simu­
lated by technical control systems: a human-machine or an animal-machine. 
Not coincidentally, it was early space research that originally gave birth to Map of Matrices 31 
the cyborg. If earthlings were to adapt to life in the hostile environment 
of outer space, their bodies would have to change radically. A fish that 
wanted to live on land would either have to bring along an aquarium or to 
learn to breathe air, wrote the fathers of the cyborg concept, the American 
biomedical researchers Manfred Clynes and Nathan Kline, in 196o. Like­
wise, the human who ventured into outer space would either have to carry 
huge oxygen tanks or to 'stop breathing': 
[T]here may be much more efficient ways of carrying out the functions of 
the respiratory system than by breathing, which becomes cumbersome in 
spa.ce. One proposed solution for the not too ·distant future is relatively 
simple: Don't breathe! (Oynes and Kline 1960: 30) 
Hence the 'simple' idea behind the scheme of Clynes and Kline maintains 
that the best solution to the problem is technologically to redesign the 
human body -i.e. to integrate the necessary life-support system directly 
into the organism. The word that the two researchers proposed for such 
a new, 'non-natural' creature was not 'man' or 'human', but 'cyborg': a 
cybernetic organism. 
Since the days of early space research, cyborgs have proliferated rapidly 
within many other fields of technoscience. This has made the perspective 
transparent: in the cyborg world 'nature' certainly is not what it used to 
be. But neither is Universal Man. When cyborgs start multiplying in his 
world, Man changes too. According to Haraway, cyborgs have to· be viewed 
from several angles, negative as well as positive. On the one hand, they tell 
horror-stories of manipulations and power demonstrations that sustain the 
dominance of Universal Man, but, on the other hand, they may also 
challenge and deconstruct his superior position. As a boundary-figure that 
does Dot fit into such dichotomies as 'man versus nature', 'man versus 
machine' etc., the cyborg acts as a deconstructive device in a discursive as 
well as material sense.1 In the post(hu)man world of cyborgs, 'man' is so 
fused with machines and reinvented natures, and nature so intertwined 
with culture, that the dichotomies become unstable and eventually break 
down. 'Man' is therefore not what he used to be, nor is the humanism of 
the 'civilized selves'. Cyborgs threaten the essential core of their identity, 
founded as it is on the Cartesian split between the superior, thinking subject 
(alias Universal Man) and the inferior world of non-human matter (alias 
earth others, machine others, etc.), which, through metonymically circula­
ting meanings, is also linked up with (Woman' and 'Native'. 
When we focus our spotlight on 'civilized selves' and their constructions 
of the cosmic and oceanic worlds of wild others, and argue for the integra-
COsmodolphins 32 
tion of the human/nature axis into feminist cultural theory, therefore, we 
do not speak of human versus natural essences. Seen from the post(hu)man 
position of cyborgs, all such essences need to be deconstructed. This is an 
important perspective for our analyses of some significant, contemporary 
master narratives of 'human' selves and 'wild others'. 
By turning to -the issue of 'wild others', however, we also aim to explore 
some analytical limits of the cyborg concept. What happens when we want 
to confront aspects of 'nature', which, as Keller says, cannot be 'named 
out of existence', and which in the shapes of wild animals and cosmos 
meet us as a 'beyondness' whose emergence seems in more ways than one 
to transgress human intervention? As we shall discuss later, this question 
has directed us towards poststructuralist analyses of spirituality and the 
divine as a supplement to feminist science studies. 
Are Animals a Feminist Issue? 
Ask a Feminist for Animal Rights activist this question, and you will 
hear an immediate 'Yes'. But if we go beyond this particular branch of 
feminism it seems that, until not so long ago, animals have been avoided, 
as though they were taboo, or a non-issue. It is true that certain authors 
(Haraway 1989; Birke 1994), have indeed contributed towards making 
animals an issue for feminism. The same goes for ecofem.inist works such 
as Adams (1990), Gaard (1993) and Adams and Donovan (1995). But both 
groups deplore the general feminist neglect of animal perspectives. Gaard 
notes that the issue is conspicuously absent in major collections of ceo­
feminist thought (Gaard 1993: 4). In a somewhat parallel vein, Birke 
observes that animals are missing from feminist science studies as well: 
Yet despite the fact that much of the feminist literature on science focuses 
on biology, and despite the fact that much biological knowledge inevitably 
depends on information gained from animals, animals are scarce in that 
, writing. (Birke 1994: 10) 
Birke, Haraway, Gaard and others muster impressive arguments support­
ing the need for a feminist spotlight on animals. Aninaals play a prominent 
role in the definition of what is human in science as well as in the broader 
culture, and as 'human' is definitely not a neutral and innocent category, 
but a highly gendered and racialized one, discourses on animals, gender 
and race are deeply intertwined ... 'We', the humans, construct animals as 
our mirrors whether we use them as substitutes for ourselves in pain­
inflicting scientific experiments, degrade them as mindless, machinelike, Map of Matrices 33 
brutish others in opposition to our own 'superior' human subjectivity (free / 
will, intelligence, language), anthropomorphize them and educate them in 
humanity, or sacralize them as bearers of a transcendent wisdom that 'we', 
citizens of high-tech urban cultures, have lost. This mirroring business is 
a widespread activity in modern culture, and when 'we' engage in it, 'we' 
are rarely· displaying either gender or race neutrality. 'She does not look 
Jewish at all', the diabolic entertainer in the well-known musical of the 
1970s, Cabaret, sings of his wife in the song 'If You Could See Her with 
my Eyes', where he poses as a Nazi married to a monkey in women's 
clothing. The satirical scene is a striking reminder of how discourses on 
animals, gender and race intersect: in this playing of joint mirror games, 
racism and sexism blend with 'naturism', degradation of animals. 
The clear discursive links between animals, gender and race provide 
excellent reasons for embracing animals as a feminist issue. Paradoxically 
enough, they can also explain the taboo. Easily activated substitutions and 
metonymical contiguities have been used so heavily throughout the modern 
period to sustain biological determinism and to legitimize social exclusions 
and· hierarchies, that feminists reacted by denying any kind of connection 
between the free-willed, gendered subject and sexual biology. As Birke has 
suggested (1994: u), this denial, promoted in the name of social construc­
tionism, may account for the common feminist unease about and outright 
tabooing of animal issues, because behind the sex/ gender dichotomy there 
lurks yet another. This is the dichotomy between static animal nature and 
dynamic human culture: when sexual biology is relegated to the status of 
a non-issue, so are animals and biology in general. However, we now find 
a growing recognition among feminists that the dichotomous detachment 
of the gendered subject from sex and biology had too many costs in the 
long run. It led to a loss of 'the body itself as anything but a blank page 
for social inscriptions' (Haraway 1991: 197). Therefore, it is time both to 
rethink the role of biology and to zoom in on the closely allied animal issue. 
This book is inspired by a conviction that animal issues are of crucial 
importance. Our decision to centre on dolphins stems from an interest in 
the displacements between gender, race and animal discourses. In an even 
more radical sense than the terrestrial primates, which, as Haraway pointed 
out, perform in Eden, our imaginary origin, as well as in future-oriented 
space (Haraway 1989: 133ff.), cetacean iconographies mirror the contra­
dictions of contemporary culture. The incredible polysomic bodies of 
dolphins and whales ·seem to be perfect screens for projections of ambivalent 
desires to reinvent nature as cyborg or, conversely, to reconstruct it as 
divine other beyond human intervention. 
COsmodolphins 34 
Do Feminists Need a Cosmology? 
Ask a feminist astrologer if feminists need to think about cosmos, and 
she will answer 'Yes' just as promptly as· the animal rights activist confirmed 
the importance of animal issues. Beyond this particular corner of the 
feminist- landscape, interest in cosmos has also been cultivated by some 
social and spiritual ecdfeminists, who emphasize planetary and cosmic 
perspectives as part of their holistic world view; by feminist science fiction 
writers and theorists, since outer space is often the stage where their stories 
are enacted; and by French sexual difference theorists who touch on cosmic 
themes as part of their evocations of the feminine in writing and philosophy. 
In feminist science studies, a majority of texts have focused on biology 
and biomedicine; hence outer space has remained on the margins, albeit 
not totally absent. We have already mentioned that macro-cosmic nature 
plays an important part in Merchant's feminist science history (198o); she 
analyses the transition from an organically to a mechanically conceptualized 
cosmos in the European Renaissance and early modernity. In scattered 
comments, Haraway, too, refers to outer space, discussing primate per­
formances in space flight and generally designating the space beyond the 
'bounded globe' as a fertile place for the proliferation of science fiction 
cyborgs as well as those of science fact (Haraway 1989: 136ff., 1992: 315ff.). 
It is, however, significant that Penley's book (1997) is the first one to take 
up American space flight from a feminist cultural studies perspective. Aside 
from this study, two sociologists have published an interesting report on 
their interviews with NASA employees on gender, sex and reproduction in 
outer space (Casper and More 1995). 
Although outer space has been themati2ed in different ways in feminist 
cultural studies, its position is still marginal, and the parallel with the 
sidelining of animal issues conspicuous. However, this marginalization 
needs an explanation different from that of the taboo on animals. Clearly, 
cosmos does not resonate with discourses sustaining biological determinism 
as those on animals do. Instead, we suggest that cosmological issues have 
escaped the critical eyes of many feminists for the following two reasons. 
First of all, it is likely tlfat the metonymic contignity between cosmos 
and another taboo triggers an immediate stop-light: namely, its closeness 
to the sacred and the spiritual. Emerging out of a secular materialist 
modernity, major trends in feminism have for a long time denied such 
themes any relevance whatsoever. 
But this is probably only part of the reason for .the avoidance of cosmic 
issues in feminism. Another stop-light may be triggered by the extreme Map of Matrices 35 
versions of the Law of the Father and phallogocentrism that, in mutually 
reinforcing ways, permeate dominant scientific, technopolitical and religious 
discourses on cosmos. The modern scientific world view has engendered 
an apparently empty vastness beyond Earth's atmosphere (discursively 
identified as cosmos, the universe, outer space, or simply space)2, but at 
the same time it has set up an immense screen for projections of a mascu­
line imaginary. 
In a classic definition, the science fiction genre is described as speculative 
fabulation about man's place within the system of the universe, as it is 
reconceived by twentieth-century science (Scholes 1976: 54-5). Building 
upon several studies of the gendered world of physics, which acts as the 
science of cosmology par excellence (Easlea 1983; Traweek 1988; Keller 
1985, 1992), it seems appropriate to recycle a slightly twisted version of 
this definition. We may thus assert that cosmological science fact dis­
courses, too, address Universal Man's place in the Universe, and construct 
powerful master narratives about it. As feminist physicist Renee Heller 
points out, it is, for example, not a coincidence that the European Particle 
Physics Laboratory, CERN (Conseil Europeen pour Ia Recherche Nucleaire) 
popularizes the origin story of the universe in pictures that position Auguste 
Rodin's Thinker as the central human icon (Lykke and Braidotti 1996: 
72ff.). The. white..Chcistian-fathergod..may be 'crossed out' (Latour 1993: 
32f£) in. the modern scientific .. world view,:i)utthe:mythof the numi11ous 
and awe-inspiring thinking_. male __ g_e_nius,_ .whose _mind and_~~ords .generi!e 
' the. ~~d~~~'~{--the --i:J~l~e~se~- is nevertheless thriving. He can appear ~ 
&i-diC£ied to ·the. p~re. e~Plo~~tiO:n of _the fund~efltallaws of astrophysics, 
Or -he can bC ·obsessed with ~ore mundane affairs, such as applying his 
Ga;l~ knowledg~ t~-sp~~e···;nis~iO~s. ~Ut ~h;tever Ills sp~ciai _task_ is,. _it ~eems 
as if this universallY tfiinidll'gm;le mind has pervaded the imaginary cosmic 
void as th~;;;-ughly as hisi~o~ographic precurs~r, the (;hristian fathergod. 
I~ _so-d;i~g~~e..has c~ntributed to. the_historical. construc:tio!l of cosmos as 
a black hole of condensed masculine fantasies, collapsing into oneanother .. ) 
in such an intense way thitt critical ferriinist energies have so far apparently 
only-had space enough to unfold outside; they aie, m· other wordS, left with 
i:fie limited alternatives of either reinventing premodern cosmologies (as 
feminist astrology does), or conjuring up ,new poetic or science fictional 
ones. 
In undertaking a feminist cultural study of the cosmic issue with a focus 
on both space flight and astrology, we attempt to assist in the deconstruction 
of the boundary between them that has protected the cosmos of high-tech 
science from feminist critique. We attempt to engage this masculine cosmos 
CoSmodolphins 36 
on two fronts. We shall deconstruct and carnivalize it from within, i.e. from 
a feminist science studies-inspired analysis of the phallogocentric master 
narratives of space flight that reconstruct the universe as a high-tech 
laboratory for cyborg activities. But we will also confront it from without, 
by a critical cultural study of New Age and feminist reinventions of 
premodern cosmologies, which, as if in a negation or reversal of the 
masculine cyborg-cosmos, celebrate the natural rhythms of a cosmic body 
conceived as female. With this pincer movement, we aim to expose and de­
naturalize a perfect gender stereotype inherent in modern cosmological 
thought: high-tech science/masculinity versus occultism/femininity - a 
stereotype that remains unchallenged as long as both space flight and 
astrology are more or less shunned by critical, feminist cultural studies. 
Feminism, Science and Spirituality 
In choosing to position our analysis in the intersections between techno­
science, ecocultures and spirituality and by focusing on aspects of 'nature', 
which represent a 'beyondness', we are, as hinted, moving beyond the 
traditional scope of' feminist science studies. While ecocultural themes 
have been embraced by these studies from Merchant (1980) to Haraway 
(1992), analyses of spirituality seem, at least at first sight, to be alien to the 
field. Grounded in social constructionist, poststructuralist or in other ways 
materialist thinking, major trends in feminism have committed a fair 
number of calories to keeping spiritual ecofeminists, goddess-worshippers 
and the like at a safe distance. Haraway's final words in her famous cyborg 
manifesto, 'I would rather be a cyborg than a goddess', .testify to this 
(Haraway 1991: 181). 
Nevertheless, one striking similarity between the discourses of feminist 
science studies and aspects of spirituality does catch the eye. In spite of 
pronounced differences and the wish to maintain a distance, feminist 
science studies seem to have one urge in common with spiritual ceo­
feminism. Both desire to subvert mechanistic science's image of nature as 
passive, inert other and to let the agency and subject-status of non-human 
others co-write the discursive universes of science. 
A shared target of several otherwise different feminist science critiques 
is the discursive killing of non-human nature that has been brought about 
by modern science. Merchant (r98o) mourns 'the death of nature', and 
pinpoints the historical moment o~ this holocaust in the scientific revolution 
of early modernity; her goal is to make it clear that a rethinking is possible 
and long overdue. Keller deconstructs the scientific discoill-ses of nuclear Map· of Matrices 37 
physics and molecular biology and the way they have exorcized mystery 
from nature's 'secrets of life and death' (Keller 1992: 39f£); she also praises 
Nobel Prize winner Barbara McClintock for her dialogical approach that 
allowed the corn molecules she studied to 'speak' to her (Keller 1983). 
Birke (1994) turns against the biological sciences' reduction of animals to 
subjectless beast-machines. Haraway criticizes the widespread discursive 
positioning of the natural scientist as 'ventriloquist' for a passive and muted 
non-human other (Haraway 1992: 312). Although she warns us that nature 
is a difficult concept, whose ethno-specific genealogies have to be borne in 
mind, she also confesses to her belief in its agency, its status as 'material­
semiotic actor' (Haraway rggr: zoo). According to her, non-human nature 
is a 'witty agent', to be compared with Coyote, the American prairie wolf, 
who plays the role of trickster in Native American myths (Haraway 1991: 
199; Haraway 1991a; Penley and Ross 1991). 
It would, of course, be a distortion to collapse feminist science studies 
into spiritualist thought but, conversely, a sheer denial of certain resemb­
lances also misses the point. The affinity, when it comes to questions of 
the agency and subject-status of non-human nature, seems to be especially 
clear in Merchant's holistic understanding of nature as imbued with life 
and in the scattered references to the mythic Coyote-figure in Haraway's 
texts. Indeed, Haraway's Coyote marks out the borders between her con­
struction of wild nature and that of feminist goddess-worshippers. Coyote 
is invoked to act as an ironic, non-gendered alternative to an essentializing 
cult of nature as 'primal mother' (Haraway 1991: 199). But Coyote also 
seems to be interpellated into Haraway's texts because Cyborg needs a 
wild cousin, who -like the goddess -can tell stories of a spiritual agency 
beyond human intervention. 
In this book we will explore a new hybrid: feminist cultural studies of 
science and spirituality. But, as the references to the discussion of nature's 
agency in feminist science studies discourses show, we follow a line of 
thought that can be traced in embryonic form here. 
Philosophy's Shadows and the Female Divi~e 
The most important theoretical impulse behind our approach to spiritual 
themes comes from French poststructuralism, primarily Irigaray, Cixous 
and Kristeva. Over the years, several French poststructuralists have touched 
on 'philosophy's shadows' (Berry and Wernick 1992: 2): the sacred, the 
spiritual and the divine, through their exploration of concepts such as 
jouissance, ecstasy and the sublime. Irigaray in particular brought a thought-
Cosmodolphins 38 
provoking slant to the discussion, asking what the lack of access to a divine 
mirror means for the female subject (Irigaray 1993). 
Although the sacred has thus been on the agenda of French post­
structuralism for a number of years, it was a long time before it began to 
attract the attention of a broader audience of poststructuralist scholars. It 
is, for example, symptomatic of the Anglo-American situation that a collec­
tion on postmodernism and religion from the early 1990s speaks about an 
'unexpected emergence' (Berry and Wernick 1992: 3) and a 'recently 
revived interest in religion [ . . . ] that has surfaced within the new 
postmodernist [ ... ] intelligentsia' (ibid.: 57). As Berry and Wernick 
observe, spiritual thought, the shadow side of thinking, was othered by 
Enlightenment ratio, but this othering continued in post-Enlightenment 
philosophies. However, as we approach the Millennium, it is no longer a 
prerogative of narrow circles of Parisian intellectuals, marginalized New 
Age scholars or feminist goddess-worshippers to theorize new-religious 
insights. By contrast, spirituality and mysticism seem to impose themselves 
with increasing power on the post-Marxist agendas of secularized Western 
intellectuals as well as to participate forcefully in the final devaluation of 
the special Marxist version of secular materialism in the former Soviet 
Union. 
The emergence of the sacred and the spiritual within secular, post­
structuralist thought is a sign of this changing situation (Berry and Wernick 
1992; Wyschogrod 1990). We may also note that New Age spirituality has 
become an object of interest to cultural studies iii the rggos. It is suggestive 
that a comprehensive survey of cultural studies includes a chapter on 
'New Age Technoculture' (Grossberg eta!. 1992: 531-56) and that critical 
but elaborate discussions of New Age mysticism from a cultural studies 
point of view can be found, for example, in Coward (1989), Ross (1991) 
and Hess (1993). Another collection, whose explicit aim is 'to fill the gap 
that exists in the scholarly literature' on the New Age (Lewis and Melton 
1992: x), testifies in much the same way to the growing fascination with 
the New Age movement as a cultural phenomenon. 
Our book is informed by a comparable commitment to a theoretical 
widening of the scope of cultural studies, and a desire to move beyond an 
exclusion and othering of the sacred, the spiritual and the divine. We 
want, on the one hand, to transgress the paradox of much postmodern 
cultural critique that displays a disbelief in Enlightenment thought while 
simultaneously giving in to its rules when it comes to the repression and 
rejection of 'philosophy's shadows': spiritual thought. On the other hand, 
we do not want to be snared by the traps of universalism and essentialism, Map of Matrices 39 
which characterize a major part of New Age and spiritual feminist thought. 
This is our reason for choosing to draw inspiration from French post­
structuralism, and in particular from the works of lrigaray, CL"\:ous and 
Kristeva, in our analysis of New Age astrology. This approach makes it 
possible to keep clear of acting as ao auxiliary arm of Enlightenment 
repression and at the same time to avoid siding with the universalist, 
essentialist, and sometimes extremely phallogocentric truth claims of New 
Age astrology. Irigaray's notion of the female divine will, for example, 
allow us to highlight the desire for a feminine elsewhere, exposed by New 
Age astrology, while deconstructing the essentialist notion of a Great 
Cosmic Mother, which, in different forms, is conjured up by both patri­
archal and feminist astrologers. 
Feminism, Story-telling and Extraterrestrialism 
A shared feature of the otherwise different texts of Haraway and Irigaray, 
from which we have drawn inspiration, is that they make the boundaries 
between theory and literature permeable. This is the case as far as their 
writing styles are concerned, but it applies to their reading strategies as 
well. Irigaray reads philosophy as psychoanalytic narrative (Irigaray r985a), 
while Haraway interprets science as 'story-telling practice', likening, for 
example, biology to Romantic literature (Haraway 1989: 4-5). With all their 
theoretical and political differences, their common goal is nevertheless to 
create critically disruptive and deconstructive reading positions. By tackling 
philosophy and science discourses from these oblique angles, both Irigaray 
and Haraway generate eye-opening denaturalizations. At the same time, 
their reading strategies make it possible to avoid both the pitfall of simplistic 
either/or, good/bad dichotomies as well as the impasse of having to choose 
between one-dimensional standpoint criticism or political relativism. 
Inspired by these disruptive reading strategies, we transliterate the 
discourses of space flight, astrology and dolphins into various narrative 
genres. The aim is to make critical interventions by the creation of oblique 
reading positions, which differ from the ones immediately offered by texts 
that, for example, are explicitly asking to be read-aS science fact reports or 
spiritual doctrines. For much the same reason, we mix readings of scientific 
reports, astrological doctrines, spiritual revelations, etc., with texts that 
willingly expose their fictionality, such as novels and films. In the conscious 
blurring of these genre-boundaries, we follow Haraway in particular in her 
double move, when, deliberately reading 'out of context' (Haraway rg8g: 
377; Strathern 1987: 251ff.), she transcribes science fact discourses into a 
Cosmodolphins 40 
branch of science fiction, while provocatively 'converting' science fiction 
texts into a kind of science fact (Haraway 1989: 5). 
Our choice of extraterrestrialism as thematic pivot has much the same 
background as our fo~us on story-telling and reading 'out of context'. Being 
outside the world of terrestrial everyday life, extraterrestrialism also involves 
oblique perspectives that may sustain the creation of disruptive reading 
positions. So the two strategies we use are both rooted in the wish to carry 
out a feminist meditation on contemporary culture from strange angles that 
will be capable of stirring up inconvenient and improper questions. 
As far as the extraterrestrial perspective is concerned, we are particularly 
inspired by feminist appropriations of science fiction. The genre demon­
strates that the extraterrestrial wilderness, whether cosmic or oceanic, 
constitutes an evocative backd10p for siagings of hyperbolic and giOtesque 
extrapolations from contemporary culture. In the hall of distorting and 
diffracting mirrors created by an alien enviromnent that is totally dislocated 
from the everyday world, selected features of this mundane and familiar 
setting may be effectively scrutinized, denaturalized and questioned. Re­
cycling Robert Scholes's analysis of science fiction as 'fabulation' on a 
different world, designed to make us confront our own in a cognitive way 
(Scholes 1976: 46ff.), Marlene Bart coins the term 'feminist fabulation' to 
characterize feminist science fiction and its re-readings and revisions of 
patriarchal myths: 
Feminist fabulation, a new .reading practice, critiques patriarchal master 
narratives. It is feminist metafiction: fiction about patriarchal fictions ... 
Feminist fabulation is feminist fiction that offers us a world clearly and 
radically discontinuous from the patriarchal one we know, yet returns to 
confront that known patriarchal world in some cognitive way. (Barr 1993: 
Io-II) 
We absorb into our work an analogous reading strategy to the one Barr 
ascribes to feminist science fiction. Hence we read not only fictional but 
also non-fictional (scientific or spiritual) discourses on the wilderness of 
extraterrestrialism as fables that reflect current constructions of the gender I 
race/narure nexus in a hyperbolic and grotesque form by situating them 
in an alien environment. 
To Widen the Geographical Map of Cultural Studies 
Since their beginnings in the 196os, cultural studies have had a marked 
Anglo-American focus. So have feminist cultural studies. This state of Map of Matrices 41 
affairs is the result of the history of the concept and its emergence in a 
British context. However, culru.ral srudies need not, of course, remain within 
this restricted territory. They are able to act as 'genuinely international 
phenomena' (Grossberg et a!. 1992: u). We venture into this potential 
when we base our discussion of the three icons -the spaceship, the 
horoscope and the dolphin -on American as well as Russian3 discourses 
and narratives. 
This double gaze unveils certain asymmetries between the conditions for 
studying the two cultural areas. First of all, the availability and accessibility 
of sources and critical studies are often greater in the USA than in Russia. 
This is true not only of those with a feminist approach, which, in Russia, 
have had to overcome many more obstacles to publication than in the West, 
but also of others. Although the censorship that supervised the Soviet world 
of media and manuscripts is long gone, the policies of concealment and the 
ideological monopoly of the old Soviet sute are still casting long shadows. 
The example of space flight provides a good .illustration of this. While 
the military side of American space flight has largely been camouflaged 
beneath a mask of openness towards the mass media and the public, 
embodied by NASA as an allegedly civil organization, Soviet space flight 
was, from its very first days, deliberately shrouded in the kind of secrecy 
and misinformation that reveals its military character. For instance, the 
rocket specialist Sergei P. Korolev, who masterminded the Soviet space 
triumphs in the late rgsos and early 196os, had to remain a mystery man, 
unknown to the world during his lifetime. Similarly, the name of the 
Soviet launching site, Baikonur, was chosen with the purpose of misleading 
the public as to its whereabouts, 4 and the launches themselves were so 
secret that not even the cosmonauts' families wer~ informed before lift-off. 
As a consequence of this huge difference in policies, there are plenty of 
media portrayals and public stories of individual American astronauts from 
the r96os onwards, including critical ones, available for analysis, allowing 
us to explore American myths of the masculine space hero; but it is far 
more difficult to document and contexru.alize the Soviet versions. Due to 
heavy censorship and a long tradition of doctoring reality with textual 
makeup, the latter appear uniformly hagiographic in the sense that they 
reflect only the official, ritualized ideology of the militarized 'red right 
stuff'. It is precisely this hagiographic character that the Russian author 
Victor Pelevin, 5 to whom we will return in Chapter 9, so apdy exposes in 
his satirical novel, Omon Ra (19921I996), which is dedicated to the 'Heroes 
of the Soviet Cosmos'. 
Another striking asymmetry that has affected Eastern and Western 
Cosmodolphins 42 
cosmology stems from the different ways in which the Soviet Union and 
the USA reproduced the ideologies that are meant to keep large, mission­
oriented institutions together. In accordance with its technophilic belief in 
productive forces as carriers of progress, the Soviet government created a 
uniform and abstraCt picture of the big mission assigned to space flight. 
Although permeating the institutional walls of 'big science', this set of 
monotonous abstractions was apparently unable to mould the m.indscapes 
of its staffs into an organizational unity in the way that the US government 
and NASA have jointly achieved. Rich in high-flown rhetoric, yet deprived 
of the glamour of things, of the lush decors and seductive desire radiating 
from the spin-off commodities that act as personal and societal encourage­
ments in the USA, the Soviet authoritarian monologue on the mission in 
space has failed for decades to deliver the evocative commonplaces that 
could generate a unifying iconography in organizations such as the Institute 
of Cosmic Research (IKI), which we visited in Moscow in 1991. 
The collapse of the Soviet Union at that time only underlines our 
point. There were no internalized imageries strong enough to hold the 
nation's body together. In the case of institutions like IKI, this meant that 
the official purpose of the space enterprise ('to benefit mankind') was not 
transformed into the invisible mind-web that makes up a community 
consciousness. Aside from distant, utilitarian goals, the universe that the 
state depicted in its official slogans on the big mission of space flight left 
nothing except a vacuum for the individual imagination to fill. The cosmo­
graphy the IKI staff presented to us during our interviews was as a result 
less uniform than the one displayed by the Americans, but more coloured 
by private, individual and self-made fantasies. An unexpected paradox 
seems to arise from this comparison: the totalitarian regime fosters signs 
of individualism, whereas the democratic one gives birth to uniformity. 
Because of its authoritarian and abstract character, the former neither 
would nor could generate the community spirit that bonds large, mission­
oriented organizations into a homogeneous whole within which the public 
imagery is closely allied with that of the individual; the latter, conversely, 
succeeded very efficiently in creating such an organizational unity. NASA 
has thus been capable of internalizing and regenerating the missionary 
quality of its national goals, an achievement that depends on the staff 
believing, as dedicated actors, in the master narrative of the enterprise. 
However, amid these differences, our double gaze also unveils a dis­
course of sameness that emphasizes some striking continuities between the 
two cultures, including their in many ways homonymous master narratives 
of space flight. Map of Matrices 43 
Notes 
r. Haraway emphasizes that the acts of deconstruction engendered by cyborgs differ 
from the traditional poststrucruralist definition. While poststructuralist deconstruction, 
as conceived by Dcrrida (1987), is a textual process, cultural studies of technoscicnce 
have led her to 'a gesture of materialized deconstruction that literary Derrideans might 
envy' (Haraway 1997: ro2). For a further discussion of Harnway's notion of decon­
struction and the cyborg concept, see Lykke (1997). 
2. Note on terminology: 'cosmos' is the preferred term in Soviet space flight. 'Outer 
space' or simply 'space' are the terms normally used in the USA. 
3· At times our use of the name Russia also covers the Soviet Union. 
4· Geographical confusion formed part of the official Soviet strategy. Thus all more 
or less accurate maps of the Soviet Union disappear around 1930 only to return in 1990. 
5· An excellent interview with V. Pelevin may be found in Laird (1999). It is part of 
the historical irony that when Pelevin's satirical depiction of the Soviet Cosmos as nothing 
but Potemkin fac;ades came out, even the sky into which Russia launches its piloted 
missions was no longer what it used to be. Today it belongs to Kazakhstan, the rightful 
owner of the gigantic Baikonur Cosmodrome after the breakdown of the old Union. In 
1994, a long-term lease agreement was signed, transferring control of the cosmodrome 
to the Russian Space Agency. 
. . 
~ -------------------------------Amazing Stories 1-111: The Spaceship, 
the Horoscope and the Dolphin 
Amazing Stories is the title of the first pulp science fiction magazine 
published in the USA. It was founded in 1926 by an emigre from Luxem­
bourg, Hugo Gernsback, who later lent his name to the Hugo Awards, 
given each year to the best works of science fiction. The idea for Amazing 
Stories grew out of his obsession with stories of futuristic hardware, for 
which he first coined the term 'scientifiction'. Another inspiration came 
from adventure pulps and magazines such as Weird Tales, which told stories 
of the supernatural. With Amazing Stories, Gernsback established a trend. 
In the wake of its publication, many more popular SF magazines sprang 
up, with such dashing titles as Science Wonder Ston-es, Air Wonder Stories 
and Astounding Stories of Super-Science (Scholes and Rabkin 1977: 36--7). 
We have borrowed Gernsback's title as the heading for a number of 
stories that we tell in between some of the chapters in order to spotlight 
the amazement, the feelings of disbelief and wonder, that we, as iniplic~ted 
strangers, often experienced during our research on the foreign cultures 
and unfamiliar domains into which we ventured. The condensed form in 
which the spaceship, the horoscope and the dolphin icons are pre.;ented in 
the following cluster of stories, is meant to serve as a general appetizer; it 
should tune the reader in on amazement as part of the critical reading 
strategy that we lay out more clearly in Chapter 2. 
Touch the Moon! 
In a specially constructed vault-cum-laboratory beneath Johnson Space 
Center in Houston, Texas, behind a 14-ton door strong enough to meet 
Bank Protection Act requirements, the American government treasures 
one of its most precious relics. Here lie NAS.Ns lunar rock samples, or at 
least the major part of them. Amazing Stories 1-111 45 
With NASA's flair for publicity that rivals that of Hollywood or the 
Catholic Church, the public is informed about the lunar samples in an 
exhibition that demonstrates their significance not only as scientific objects 
and precious stones, but also as holy relics. The lunar vault is open to 
visitors, and presents itself as a hybrid of a laboratory, a bank safe deposit 
and a chapel. The chapel-like character is emphasized by an 'altar' bearing 
a small piece of lunar rock that has been removed from the Pristine Sample 
and graciously located in the public space of the vault. Here, visitors are 
offered a kind of Holy Communion. Emblazoned with the words 'Touch 
the Moon', the plate in front of the 'altar' invites you to reach out your 
hand and touch the 3.8 billion-year-old piece of lava stone. 
To ensure that we, the amazed public, recognize the extraordinary 
significance of this communion, the plate goes on to explain the touchstone's 
symbolic meaning. We are told that we ·have the opportunity to touch 'a 
priceless artefact from one of history's greatest voyages of exploration'. 
The touchstone, the plate instructs us, symbolizes 'both our past and our 
future on the space frontier'. It can allow us to reconnect with primordial 
times, when the surface of the Moon was covered with molten lava flows, 
and it is also intended to act as 'a reminder that one day in the years to 
come, humans will return to the Moon to establish a permanent base, 
where they will live, work, explore and gain new knowledge for the people 
of Earth' (Johnson Space Center, text accompanying exhibit of lunar 
touchstone). 
With its many references to the Apollo astronauts who picked up the 
rocks and the scientific insights gained by their heroic acts of exploration, 
the lunar vault seems to convey the message that spaceman has turned the 
cosmos into a cyborg laboratory. It gives us to understand that he can 
control even primordial extraterrestrial matter as well as construct his own 
cosmic future. The visitor's touch is staged as the palpable proof of this. 
In much the same way as the Catholic Church ensures that believers 
experience in a literal sense the incorporation of the heavenly /human 
body of Christ, through the dogma of the transubstantiation of bread and 
wine, so NASA makes use of the special power of enunciation of the 
touchstone. The touch is designed to appeal to the public's sense of mythic 
realism. The stone is intended to perform not only as a symbol of the 
Moon, but as the Moon itself. Wben we touch the stone, we, the visitors, 
are brought into direct contact with this other world and allowed entry 
into the spaceman's cosmic laboratory. 
Cosmo dolphins 46 
A Coincidental Meeting 
Our first meeting with the Russian astrologer Vera appears to be the 
result of a coincidence. However, according to Vera, it is a highly meaning­
ful coincidence. She invites us into her amazing reality, and takes our 
breath away with her exposition of what this coincidence signifies. To her, 
the meanings of the macrocosmos are inscribed in our meeting, and we are 
the cosmic messengers from whom she expects great things. 
In any case, whether the coincidence is meaningful or not, it certainly 
takes us by surprise to find Russian astrologers in the place where we meet 
Vera, although the setting has a very 'cosmic' air. It is an autumn day in 
1991, and we have set out to visit Moscow's counterpart to Disneyland or 
the Epcott Center in Florida: the grandiose exhibition and amusement 
park, VDNKh (the Exhibition of Economic Achievements) that was built 
in order to celebrate the techno-economic successes of the Soviet Union. 
Our goal is the gigantic 'Cosmos Pavilion', which is acclaimed as the park's 
central and most popular attraction, with close to ten million visitors every 
year. Over the decades since its opening in 1966, this pavilion, the monu­
mental encapsulation of the 'conquest of space', has heralded the bright 
future of cosmic communism. 
In the big exhibition area the 'Cosmos' is located as the triumphant end 
point to which all roads lead: the point where the apotheosizing finale of 
the tour is supposed to take place. Expectantly, we approach the pavilion, 
which looks from the outside like a hybrid of a church and a fortress. But 
inside an anti-climax awaits us; everything is in a mess, and most of the 
exhibits are covered or in other ways swept into limbo. A sign informs us 
that the Soviet Cosmos is presently undergoing repairs. This former 
'mirror of the future and progress' now reflects only the chaos and decay 
of the Soviet Union in its final days. 
From the deserted Cosmos, we stroll back towards the exit of the 
exhibition area, but suddenly our attention is caught by one of the other 
impressive pavilions where, by contrast, the installation of new life seems 
to be in full swing. Alternative medicine, healing and occultism have here 
totally ousted the Soviet techno-triumphs. Now we finally meet the cosmos, 
although in a very different form from the one we came to see. Together 
with other prophets of the New Age, an astrological company has set up 
a stand, from which Vera and her colleagues cast horoscopes and proffer 
other kinds of celestial consultations. 
Vera welcomes us warmly, as though she has been expecting us. Later 
she explains that she was supposed to have already left, but 'something' Amazing Stories 1-111 47 
persuaded her to stay at the stand this afternoon. On this particular day, 
she has Venus in the ascendant, so she knew that something important 
would occur. When we appear on the scene, she immediately understands 
that we are THE EVENT. 'It had to happen,' she says. Nevertheless, she 
debates with herself whether she could perhaps be mistaken. Maybe we 
are just a little too amazed to be suddenly cast into this unfamiliar role of 
cosmic messengers; maybe we insist too much on not being particularly 
important. At any rate, doubts arise in Vera's mind. Are we the event the 
cosmos has sent her this grey autumn day, or was it in fact the young man 
who had approached her earlier about selling a device to measure bio­
energy? She tells us that she did not have time to talk to the young man 
because she was preoccupied with the horoscope of a client, and he had 
left again quickly. Nevertheless, her intuition makes her think that it was 
a significant incident. The young man had probably designed the instru­
ment himself, and it might turn out to be an important invention. Such 
devices are rare. Finally, however, Vera setrles on the solution that the 
young man will probably return some other day, and that we must be the 
unique event to which the cosmos has guided her this autumn day. She 
kindly invites us to visit her in an apartment that serves both as a day-care 
centre and meeting place for Vera's astrology group. A couple of days 
later, we spend a pleasant Sunday afternoon there, interviewing Vera and 
one of the other astrologers about the amazing stories the cosmos conveys 
to them. We are pleased to get our very first interviews with astrologers, 
but it is not easy to be cast in the unaccustomed role of cosmic messengers 
that Vera keeps thrusting upon us, although we emphasize that we do not 
consider ourselves fit for it. 
Even at the end of the afternoon, Vera is still confident that, as celestial 
messengers, we must possess some particular kind of occult or esoteric 
knowledge, and her expectations are especially directed towards the one of 
us who does not speak Russian and who has therefore been silent during 
the interviewing. In a paradoxical way, this language barrier has increased 
the astrologer's intuitive feeling of a mysterious connection, and made her 
deeply expectant of communication on a level higher than ordinary 
language. In pregnant silence, she seats herself close to the muted visitor, 
and indicates by gestures that she wants to have her pahn read. It is hard 
to convince her that neither of us, whether deprived of speech or not, can 
teach her the astrology of the hand (as palm reading is also called), or any 
other occult or esoteric secrets. She cannot bring herself to believe that the 
cosmos would create a meaningful coincidence like our meeting without 
some significant ulterior purpose. 
Cosmodolphins 48 
This is a Trick! 
Within the next decade or two the human species will establish communi­
cation with another species: non-human, alien, possibly extra-territorial, 
more probably marine, but definitely highly intelligent, perhaps even intel­
lectual. (Lilly rg6za: rs) 
These words were written in rg6r by John C. Lilly, a medical doctor and 
brain specialist. It is the opening line of his book Man and Dolphin, which 
describes his research on methods of interspecies communication with 
; bottlenose dolphins as experimental subjects. Lilly is the principal author 
' , of the post-Second World War dolphin script and it is through his work 
1 that enormous interest was first generated in these animals, whose existence 
: i had attracted little scientific or public attention up until then. He set up 
his own Communication Research Institute with laboratories in Florida 
and the Virgin Islands, partly funded by the American National Science 
Foundation, and at that time he was already making headlines. He 
confronted the amazed public with the possibility that dolphins might 
learn to speak a human language, and he frequently told journalists and 
1 others that he was convinced of the animals' high intelligence, which was 
(-perhaps even superior to his own. In rg6o, the amazing story of Lilly and 
his dolphins hit the front page of the New York Times (zr June). The 
1 following year, the full extent of his ideas was unfolded with the publication 
of Man and Dolphin, an event that was heralded by the extremely influential 
Lifo magazine in a widely read feature (28 July rg6r). 
Like the designers of the Apollo project, Lilly was obsessed with the 
challenge of mapping and controlling totally unknown spaces, in this case 
the terra incognita of the huge, 'human-like' dolphin brain. But, like Vera, 
who searched for cosmic messengers, he was equally absorbed in his desire 
to trace a 'genuine' language capacity in this wild and alien environment, 
and was convinced that dolphins had been endowed with a will to com­
, municate intelligent and meaningful messages to humans. In this way, the 
:story of Lilly and his endeavours to speak with the dolphins encompasses 
; central aspects from both of our first two amazing stories. Lilly's project 
:is also an appropriate illustration of the ambivalent oscillation between 
·cannibalizing and sacralizing that characterizes late twentieth-century 
attitudes towards wild others. 
An incident that occurred while Lilly was working with test animals 
Numbers 9 and ro, Baby and Lizzie, exposes the doubled vision that 
manifests itself so insistently in tltis new dolphin script, and specifically in Amazing Stories J-Ill 49 
Lilly's work. Numbers 9 and ro were the first animals with whom Lilly 
experimented in the Virgin Islands laboratory. He had flown the two 
dolphins in from Florida. Lizzie, who was named after Lilly's wife, Elisa­
beth, had been rather badly injured in transit. Furthermore, she seemed to 
have contracted some kind of infectious disease, and she clearly did not feel 
at home in the laboratory's dolphin pool. She would not eat, and had to be 
force-fed by stomach-tube. Of course it added to the worries of Lilly and 
his team that all the previous animals in the test series (Numbers r to 8) 
had already died or been seriously damaged as a consequence of their 
experiments. Now the outcome was once more about to be painful death 
and bodily decay rather than sublime intellectual conversation. 
However, before Lizzie died, Lilly tells with awe, something strange 
happened. Since his work with test animal Number 6, he had been 
convinced that the dolphins mimicked the human sounds they heard. As 
part of the experimental setting, therefore, every sound in the laboratory, 
airborne or underwater, was recorded and later analysed. When Lilly played 
back the tapes in slow motion, to his own astonishment he reached the 
conclusion that the dolphins in an 'eerie' way also 'copied' human laughter 
and even certain English words (Lilly r962a: r57-8). But the finding that 
amazed him the most was the phrase that he and his team seemed to hear 
when they listened to Lizzie's last recording. She may, he relates, have 
mimicked the sentence 'It's six o'clock!' which had been uttered by some­
one to remind him that he was going to be late for dinner due to the extra 
work of force-feeding Lizzie. However, he 'was caught first by another 
"meaning"' of Lizzie's words. To him it seemed as though she said: 'This 
is a trick!' (Lilly r962a: rs8). 
In Lilly's imagination, Lizzie's final act before expiring was to transgress 
the role of mimicking beast-machine, and to begin to convey intelligent 
messages of her own. The ambivalence could hardly be clearer. On the 
one hand, Lilly's ventriloquism constructs Lizzie as a docile test animal 
whose behaviour 'proves' that the doctor's agonizing experiments are 
scientifically meaningful and his thesis about dolphin intelligence and 
linguistic abilities correct. On the other hand, Lizzie appears in Lilly's 
story as a sibylline figure, to whom such a trivial pursuit as the search for 
scientific 'proofs' is but 'a trick'. In the doctor's fantasy, she becomes the 
bearer of a 'higher' truth which, as a kind of last will and testament, she 
wants to bequeath to him and other humans in distress. Indeed, Lizzie's 
last 'words' were not wasted on Lilly, who eventually converted to the 
New Age. 
Between Amazement and Estrangement 
The discourses on the spaceship, the horoscope and the dolphin are linked 
·\by the theme of extraterrestrialism. When we use the critical strategy we 
1 \introduced in Chapter r, and read them 'out of context' (Haraway 1989: 
377; Strathern 1987= 251ff.), we can articulate this similarity in another 
way. Addressing the non-fictional discourses of our material as though they 
were narratives, we can read these alongside the truly fictional ones from 
the perspective of literary theory and borrow analytical tools accordingly. 
In line with this approach, we will look at the theme, extraterrestrialism, 
from a genre viewpoint and revisit the commonalities and differences of 
r-ilie stories in this light. 
From this pers'pective, the extraterrestrialism of the three icons' stories 
places them in the literary genres of romance or fantasy. Along with science 
fiction theorist Robert Scholes, we define these genres in a broad sense: as 
an umbrella for different types of stories that join hands in insisting upon 
'a radical discontinuity between [their] world and the world of ordinary 
human experience' (Scholes 1976: 46--7). The purpose of this disjunction, 
Scholes comments, is to confront the well-known sphere of everyday life 
from new angles. In the most basic form of romance or fantasy this effect 
is achieved by a spatial dislocation to 'another world, a different place: 
Heaven, Hell, Eden, Fairyland, Utopia, The Moon, Atlantis, Lilliput' 
(Scholes 1976: 47). 
Another science fiction theorist, Darko Suvin, proposes the term 
'narrative of estrangement' (1979: zo--r) to describe the same inclusively 
defined genre. He wants to emphasize the non-familiar and non­
everydaylike setting in which the story takes place. He links his definition 
to the concept of estrangement, first coined in Russian formalist theory 
(Shklovsky 1990) and politicized in Brecht's theory of the theatre. In rhis 
context, it refers to literary techniques that de-automatize and de-naturalize 
the reader's perceptions of the world: 'A representation that estranges1 is Between Amazement and Estrangement 51 
one which allows us to recognize its subject, but at the same time makes 
it seem unfanllliar' (Suvin 1979: 6; Brecht 1964: 192). 
Dislocation to extraordinary and otherworldly places is a feature that 
works well as a description of our stories of cosmic and oceanic extra­
terrestrialism. In this chapter we shall, therefore, subject them to a genre 
analysis that is informed by Scholes's and Suvin's definitions. From the 
oblique angles of a literary reading, we shall draw a map of the patterns 
of similarities and differences that characterize the master narratives of 
the spaceship, the horoscope and the dolphin. 
In our analysis, we find it worthwhile to keep both Scholes's and Suvin's 
terms in mind. Suvin's 'narrative of estrangement' is apt to evoke images 
of unfamiliar and alien environments, which are implied in the concept of 
extraterrestrialism, whether applied to outer space or to the world beneath 
the ocean surface. Scholes's terminology may in return call forth associ­
ations with the combination of the romantic and the fantastic which, in 
different ways, characterize the rhetoric of the master narratives of space 
flight, New Age astrologers, dolphin scientists and dolphin-lovers. Further­
more, while 'estrangement' indicates critical denaturalization in the tradition 
of Russian formalism and Brecht, 'romance' and 'fantasy' may signal an 
alliance with wonder and amazement. In this way, the two terms may 
supplement each other. 
Besides the genre category, we shall borrow one more direction-finder 
from the inventory of literary theory in order to map the stories of our 
three icons. This is the concept of the fable. The fable of a story is the 
condensed structure of its course of events in terms of logic, chronology 
and central theme. As part of our mapping of the genre differences and 
similarities, we shall produce a survey of the fables on which the stories 
of the three icons are based in the discursive fields of space flight, New 
Age thought, cetacean research and popular culture. Typically, each of 
these fields is structured by one or two master fables that recur in different 
forms in various materials, fictional and non-fictional, textual and non­
textual. In this chapter we shall illustrate each of these master fables with 
examples, which we call prototypical because they crystallize many central 
features of the stories. In order to catch the prototypical dimension, we 
have chosen to focus on simplistic, fictional examples from popular culture, 
even though this approach has the disadvantage that it engenders a distinct 
imbalance in favour of American examples because of the USA's hegemonic 
position on the scene of popular culture. 
A related purpose of the chapter is to point out the relationship between 
fable and genre, demonstrating how the fables can be described in terms 
Cosmodolphins 52 
TABLE 2. r Main features of the master narratives of the spaceship the horoscope 
and the dolphin icons ' 
Spaceship 
a) Genre 
The masculine adventure story 
Science fiction 
The fairy-tale of the questing 
hero 
b) Fable 
Driving forces: 
To imprint the cosmos with 
human meaning 
Command-control: to will, to 
know, to know-how 
Central theme: 
'To conquer space' 
c) Self-other relationship 
Cannibalizing 
Cyborg dolphin 
a) Genre 
Science fiction: alien encounter 
SF and cyborg SF 
b) Fable 
Driving forces: 
To imprint the animal with 
human meaning 
Schooling; body modification 
Central theme: 
'Uplift', 'Education in humanity' 
c) Self-other relationship 
Cannibalizing Horoscope 
a) Genre 
The spiritual journey guided 
by the 'Eternal Feminine' 
The fairy-tale of the hero who is acted 
upon 
b) Fable 
Driving forces: 
To be imprinted by macrocosmic 
meaning 
Coincidences: to abandon yourself to 
cosmic guidance 
Central theme: 
'As above, so below' 
c) Self-other relationship 
Sacralizing 
Noble savage dolphin 
a) Genre 
Pastoral novel 
Romantic noble savage story 
b) Fable 
Driving forces: 
To be imprinted with animal wisd~m 
Fight benveen good and evil, nature 
and technocivilization 
Central theme: 
'Return to nature' 
c) Self-other relationship 
Sacralizing 
of .s~b--genres of the narratives of romance/fantasy/estrangement. To· 
anncxpate the result of the genre-analysis, we shall premise a remark about 
the involved sub-genres. They are: the science fiction story, the adventure 
story, the ~piritual journey, the pastoral, the Romantic noble savage story 
and the farry-tale. These all take place in extraordinary, otherworldly and Between Amazement and Estrangement 53 
exotic settings, suited to create estrangement as well as amazement. Table 
z.r presents a survey of the sub-genres, and how they relate to the three 
icons. A detailed analysis can be found in the pages to follow. 
Another anticipatory remark concerns the fables. 'When we interpret 
their driving forces and central themes, and take into consideration the 
self-<lther relationships they put on display, two opposing pairs emerge 
(see Table z.r). As we will show, the stories of the spaceship, the horoscope 
and the dolphin fit so nearly into such pairs that they seem bound to each 
other in patterns of reversal and negation. The world of the New Age 
master narrative appears as the inverted world of the space fable, and vice 
versa. The latter is about 'civilized selves' wanting to imprint the cosmos 
with human meaning, while the former, conversely, represents a human 
longing to be the object of macrocosmic meaning imprints. The in­
appropriate contignity established by the mutual negations of these two 
sets of tales is emphasized by the polysemy of the dolphin icon, which 
enacts the same kind of reversals, circulating endlessly between the position. 
of subject and object of the human self. 
The Space Age Adventure: To Leave Human Marks in 
Outer Space 
Since its early beginnings, a central theme of the master fable of both 
American and Soviet space flight has been the 'conquest of space', which 
means that the crucial driving force of the space adventure is to leave 
marks in outer space -to imprint the cosmos with human meaning. In 
spite of its dubious colonialist connotations, the 'conquest' metaphor is 
still used in the rggos. An example is the Astronauts' Memorial at NASA's 
Kennedy Space Center. It was erected in rggr, as a tribute to the heroes 
and heroines 'who have made the ultimate sacrifice believing the conquest 
of space is worth the risk of life' (Astronauts' Memorial inscription). 
The conquest story implies a fundamental shift in human perspectives 
from an Earth-bound existence to a new life in outer space. 'Yesterday the 
Moon, Today the Space Station, Tomorrow Mars', the explanatory inscrip­
tion told us, when in 1998 we visited Kennedy Space Center's Processing 
Facility for the new International Space ·Station that will replace the 
Russian Mir. Embedded in a pompous rhetoric, the space fable situates 
humanity at the threshold of a new era, the cosmic millennium that will 
make us citizens of the Galaxies and transform old-fashioned homo sapiens 
into homo spaciens (White 1987: 172). 
Prototypical versions of. this master fable abound in both American and 
Cosmodolphins 54 
Soviet space discourses, and it is celebrated in hyperbolic form by its 
monumental presence in the two capital cities. These national monuments 
will serve as illustrations here. 
~The Space Mural- a Cosmic View' 
Washington, DC, the seat of the US government, has emblazoned space 
flight in the National Air and Space Museum. This is part of the Smith­
sonian Museums, a large complex of buildings that dominate the National 
Mall between the Capitol and the Washington Monument. Within this 
complex, the Air and Space Museum enjoys a particularly prominent 
location neighbouring the CapitoL On view is the glorious American history 
of aero-and astronautics, illustrated by many historic highlights such as 
the Wright Brothers' Flyer from 1903, the machine in which Charles 
Lindbergh crossed the Atlantic Ocean in 1927, the command module of 
Apollo I I, which in 1969 carried the first men to set foot on the Moon, a 
'touchstone' from the lunar rock samples, and so on. In order to ensure 
that every visitor, even the most ignorant foreigner or nai've primary 
schoolchild, fully understands how to interpret these illustrious proofs of 
American power, masculine heroism and technoscientific genius, the main 
entrance hall displays a large and dramatic mural, which concentrates the 
central features of the American space master narrative. 'The Space Mural 
-a Cosmic View', by Robert McCall, is a visual exegesis of this narrative 
blown up to proportions designed to underpin its significance and splen­
dour. The L-shaped painting has a horizontal section 22.9 metres long, 
and a vertical section 17.7 metres high. 
The 'Present' and 'Future' sections of the mural tell the fable of the 
human imprinting of the cosmos, while the first section, 'The Past', 
dramatically depicts the primordial beginnings of the universe in the Big 
Bang. The latter appears as a chaotic natural background for 'The Present' 
human order that has two Apollo astronauts standing on the Moon with 
the Stars and Stripes in a central position. 'The Future' launches 'spaceship 
Earth' (Fuller 1981; White 1987= 95) drifting over the lunar surface together 
with the command module that carries the third astronaut involved in the 
mission. Above the Earth, a radiating cross represents the Sun casting 'its 
radiance upward, to the galaxies and a new destiny for mankind' (Ex­
planatory plate, National Air and Space Museum). 
The will to leave human marks in space leaps to the eye of the spectator 
as the driving force in the story. It is unmistakably embodied by the 
astronaut soldier-hero (Dawson 1994) and conqueror, who plants the Stars Between Amazement and Estrangement 55 
and Stripes in the lunar soiL As his cyborg-twin or magic helper, the 
gadget-fetishistic representation of the big lunar landing craft is designed 
to confront us with the sublime technoscientific knowledge and know-how 
of the nation that made this event possible, while the cross of solar rays 
in the upper part of the vertical section signals divine participation. The 
knowledge, willpower and heroic virility of the USA, which happened to 
have God on its side, produced this unique event in human history that 
has forever imprinted new meaning on the cosmos -this is the message 
that the mural, with an almost breathtaking naivety, wants to convey. In 
other words: Cybergodfather & Sons re-created the Universe. 
~To the Conquerors of Space ••• ' 
The Muscovite counterpart to McCall's Space Mural consists of a roo­
metre-high obelisk, erected in 1964 and dedicated to the 'Conquerors of 
Space'. It is located on top of the Memorial Museum of Cosmonautics, 
which was opened as a celebration of the twentieth anniversary of Yuri 
Gagarin's historic flight when he became the first human in space. Both the 
obelisk and the museum form part of the monumental district of Moscow, 
where we also find the Avenue of the Cosmonauts, the futuristic Hotel 
Cosmos and the exhibition and amusement park VDNKh containing the 
Cosmos Pavilion (whose political deconstruction we described in our second 
Amazing Story: 'A Coincidental Meeting'; see pp. 46-7). We will use the 
obelisk and the museum as our next illustration of the space narrative. 
The titanic pillar of the obelisk bears at its summit a silvery rocket that 
conveys to the spectator an impression of something surging into space 
with massive power and acceleration. Part of the visual effect consists in 
blurring the -view of the rocket from ground leveL The speed and energy 
involved in its launch appear so immense that we, the spectators, who are 
still languishing in the 'cradle of Earth', can only take leave of the ad­
venturous and heroic 'conquerors of space' by looking in amazement and 
awe at the rocket's trail of 'smoke'. 
Below the obelisk the museum invites the public, in return for its 
adulation, to enter into the lofty environment of the 'conquerors'. The 
main exhibition hall is constructed so as to give the visitor the feeling of 
being inside a spaceship. The display areas perform as imitations of the 
spaceship's bull's-eye observation windows, and mirrored podia of polished 
stainless steel are supposed to create an illusion of weightlessness. Further­
more, the monumental vitrage at the end of the hall is illuntinated with 
blue, orange and yellow -'space colours'. 
Cosmodolphins 56 
The message equals that of McCall's Washington mural. The whole 
setting gives us to understand that, in entering the museum, our perspective 
has shifted: the future in space has begun. Being inside the spaceship, we 
have left the nursery of Earth-bound toddlers for the adult world of homo 
spaciens that has been opened up for us by the conquerors. Carrying not 
the Stars and Stripes, but the Hammer and Sickle, they have already 
imprinted the cosmos with Soviet meaning. 
One exhibit in the Moscow museum even brings to mind the quasi­
religious aspect of McCall's painting, although here it has a more mystical 
than explicitly Christian tinge. In front of the vitrage we encounter a five­
metre-high bronze cosmonaut who towers against the background of a 
gigantic sphere unfolding the twelve Zodiac signs. This 'space era pioneer' 
(Solomko 1994: 8) resembles the cosmic man, who in Renaissance astro­
logical depictions signified the interconnectedness between the human and 
the cosmos. Like his Renaissance predecessor, the cosmonaut spreads out 
his arms to touch the Zodiac with his hands and, whether intended or not, 
the gesture lends him something of the cast of a Jesus-figure, giving the 
visitors his blessing. So even if the Soviets did not have God on their side, 
they had at least the benediction of a Jesus-like Cosmic Man! 
~-~s_c_uJ_i!le_~5fventure Story 
------·----~ In terms of genre, we may read the master narrative of space flight 
with the science fiction story of the extraterrestrial voyage as model. Like 
such stories, the space fable is located in a futuristic, extraterrestrial setting, 
a 'world apart' (Malmgren rggr). In McCall's version, the central action 
takes place on the Moon, while in the Moscow Museum we are 'invited 
inside the spaceship of the 'conquerors'. The logic of the space fable is, 
moreover, based on what Suvin calls a novum, which he defines as a basic 
feature of the science fiction genre. It is an important technological or 
social innovation that is cognitively validated, but not necessarily possible 
by contemporary standards (Suvin 1979: 63). An already existing novum 
involves the possibiliry, created by rockets and spaceships, of travelling 
beyond the familiar gravity-bound sphere of Earth, but speculatively the 
space fable also envisages the emergence of other grandiose nova that, in 
a not too distant future, will expand the human sphere of interest to an 
intergalactic scale. The effect of the science fiction novel can be linked to 
the aesthetic ability of the novum to create an elsewhere that mirrors a 
high-tech future, which fascinates because it is, at one and the same tim~ 
both amazingly different from the everyday world of the reader and Between Amazement and Estrangement 57 
potentially possible. The same is true of the space fable. Even for sceptical 
implicated strangers like ourselves, who find both McCall's space cartoon 
and its Muscovite counterpart unintentionally comical in their super­
nationalistic, self-glorifying and phallocentric gigantomania, it is difficult 
not to be awe-stricken when reminded of the extraordinary and fabulous 
voyages beyond the borders of the known world to which they refer. 
Intertwined with the science fiction story, two other genres suggest 
themselves as paradigms for the space fable and its story about the great 
extraterrestrial voyage. These are the fairy-tale of the questing hero and 
its ramification in the modern adventure story. Both involve travels to 
strange, otherworldly and unknown places far from home, which test the 
ability of the protagonist to overcome great dangers and meet incredtble 
challenges. Together, the two genres give a clue to the analysis of the 
conqueror-protagonist of the space fable. 
As described by Vladimir Propp (1975), whose fairy-tale theory strongly 
influenced structuralism and semiotics (Greimas 1983), the questing hero 
is the protagonist of one type of fairy-tale. He is the kind of hero whose 
project generates the course of events of the story. In the fairy-tale magic 
helpers endow him with three important modalities or action-generators­
will, knowledge and know-how -so that he can accomplish the project 
successfully. When the fairy-tale scheme is transferred to the adventure 
story, the questing hero is made the standard protagonist and at the same 
time inscribed in a modern cult of supermen, who by individual per­
sonality, and not because of magic helpers, are empowered by invincible 
will, knowledge and know-how. It is obvious that the protagonist of the 
adventure story shares these features with the hero of the space fable. 
Whether posing as soldier-hero who plants the Stars and Stripes in the 
lunar soil or as Soviet 'conqueror' who has left the (cradle' of Mother 
Russia far behind, he incarnates the questing adventure hero. 
In his analysis of the modern adventure story, literary scholar Martin 
Green (1990, 1991, 1993) critically describes it as a tale about the white, 
male hero, who embarks on dangerous journeys for nationalistic and 
imperialist purposes. He traces the genre back to Robinson Crusoe and 
discusses various types, for example the frontiersman stories (well known 
in both American and Russian literature). He defines adventure stories as 
modern fairy-tales. They are, he writes, 'folktales of white nationalism and 
empire' (Green 1990: 4), allied to a specific kind of modern masculinity 
that flows from the 'high-spirited' experience of exerting power 'beyond 
the law, or on the very frontier of civilization' (Green 1991: 3). The 
adventure story represents a 'liturgy of masculinism' (Green 1990: 6), 
Cosmodolphins 58 
intersecting with a 'liturgy for the cult of potency and potestas- the social 
management of force, the exertion of power, material and moral' (ibid.: 5). 
Green's description fits well as a characterization of the space fable. It 
sustains the suggestion that the adventure story and the fairy-tale are both 
part of the underlying script that created the image of the astro--and 
cosmonaut supermen. Like Green's adventure heroes, the astro-or cosmo­
nauts perform as mythic national romantic heroes, acting beyond the 
frontiers of civilization in the wilderness of hostile space, allegedly 'in 
peace for all mankind', although always carrying with them their national 
flags to mark their presence in the new territories. 2 Furthermore, the hero 
of the Amencan and Russian space fable is strikingly masculine. The great 
'first steps' of the human journey into the cosmos (the first human in 
space, the first humans on the Moon, and so on) are, over and over again, 
in history books, space museums, etc., celebrated as having been taken by 
'men of the right stuff' (Wolfe 1988). 
The New Age Pilgrimage: To be Pervaded with-­
MacrocosO.ic MeaninJt· · ---------·---~· 
With similar high-flown rhetoric to the spaceship fable, the master 
narrative of the New Age articulates prophetic visions of a radically 
reconfigured relationship between the human and the cosmos. But while 
the former presents the new cosmic connection as an intentional human 
imprinting of outer space, the New Age fable depicts it as the opposite. 
Here cosmos is the subject and the human the object of__imp_I:illting. We 
should, this fable instructS us, st~p trri;;_-g wilfttily to cO";trol and c~illinand 
the world; instead, we should recognize the symbiotic relationship between 
macro-and microcosmos, and accept that meanings emanating from the 
macrocosmic 'above' pervade the microcosmic 'below': body and psyche. 
Another difference between the two is that the spac!"'hip fable stages 
the coming of the new epoch as a result of the voyage into outer space, 
whereas the entry into the Promised Land of the New Age follows from 
the exploration of inner, mental spaces. The master fable of the New Age 
tells of a mental journey into reahns of the spiritual and the occult that 
were exorcized by the Enlightenment and modernity. This fable is about 
a reinvention of allegedly ancient knowledges and practices, such as the 
old astrological tenet: 'as above, so below'. 
Astrological thought plays a central role in this fable, although it should 
be stressed that New Age discourses are highly eclectic. They mL~ hetero-­
geneous elements from many different sources within both Eastern and Between Amazement and Estrangement 59 
Western traditions of occultism and mysticism. But the idea of the 
interconnectedness and synchronicity between macro-and microcosmos, 
which dominates the astrological world view, runs as a leitmotif through all 
the New Age stories. In influential versions of the fable, the astrological 
calendar itself initiates the Great Mental Journey that takes humanity and 
the Earth from the Zodiac sign of Pisces, which began at the time of 
Christ, to a new epoch: the Age of Aquarius, which will make our existence 
flow with love, peace, cosmic harmony and higher human consciousness, 
'the mind's true liberation' as the popular song 'Aquarius' from the rock 
musical Hair was promising decades ago (Ragni and Rado 1970). 
Celestine Messages and Meaningful Coincidences 
Together with our second Amazing Story on our coincidental meeting 
with the Muscovite astrologer, Vera, the worldwide best-seller and super­
didactic American novel The Celestine Prophecy (1993), by James Redfield, 
will serve as illustration of the New Age fable. Both Vera's interpretation 
of our meeting and Redfield's book exemplify with utmost clarity how_the~ 
:t:'!ew Age fable-rurns the sp3:ce narrative, of the human subject ;:h~­
impfintnneanmg__Qn_.ihe_ ~cosmos;:.:upsidci-:-doWILTri.Jiera':S:aD.d.::RC<ffiercrs.._ 
universe, it is the cosmos that fills the human with_new _spititual insight, 
and the E~E.!tj~~-tru~f theif StOiies~-~~~l_u~iyely on ·[~nces 
of events that .. 3.!'e __ de_termined Qy"the occurrence of meaningful-CO: 
inCidenceS, ~ranged by the ni.3.CrOCOsffiiCforCeS. Tiie-cO"~d~ontroC 
paradigm of"th:e space _n.a.,ra~ij~- i_O:@Y.:"!§'effilea;-a-sisih~- belieCm 
scientific ratl~fliliti--iffiow-how and ~!~:»'JL9_f_}p~~b:~§.ti.c_~~~irJ. -· / 
Redfield's novel has noCdisnngmshed itself by any literary qualities and 
neither, strictly speaking, does it deal with astrology. We chose it as proto-­
type example because of its global popularity, which is reflected in an 
amazing publication history, and because, with a simplicity that borders on 
the naive, it illuminates a very basic New Age tenet: the belief in the 
fundamental importance of meaningful coincidences. Since this belief is a 
prerequisite for the use of occult 'tools' such as astrology, the I Ching, 
tarot, etc., which aim at interpreting coincidences, the book can be con­
sidered as an elementary manual for novices in all these branches of 'New 
Age science' (Spangler and Thompson 1991: 83). As such," it was also 
recommended to us by one of our astrologer-interviewees. It is, moreover, 
typical of the mix of activities in which many New Agers are engaged that 
Redfield practises as an astrologer as well as writing. He sells personalized 
audio--tapes, based on interpretations of the astrological data of his readers 
Cosmodolphins GO 
(Redfield 1993: i47). So astrology is evidently an integral part of his 
universe. 
The novel was distributed privately via a PO box before it was eventu­
ally bought by a publisher for $8oo,ooo; for over three years it was included 
in the New York Times best-seller list, with eight million copies sold in 35 
cotmtries. It has given rise to innumerable discussion groups and fan circles, 
and has been followed up by another hit novel, The Tenth Insight (Redfield 
1996), a handbook, The Celestine Prophecy. An Experiential Guide (Redfield 
and Adrienne 1995), and another non-fictional book, The Celestine Vzsion 
(Redfield 1997), which elaborates on the philosophical background of the 
novels. 
Prophecy depicts a New Age pilgrimage. It takes the protagonist, a 
somewhat naive male American sociologist and counsellor, Redfield's alter 
ego, on a spiritual journey to exotic Peru in a quest for the celestial wisdom 
of an ancient manuscript that can reveal how to reach a mystical unity 
with the cosmos and save the world through inruitive, spirirual insight. A 
bad guy (with the ordinary Danish name of Jensen[!]) plus a narrow­
minded and conservative segment of the Catholic Church of Peru, sup­
ported by the govermnent and the army, try to hinder the quest for the 
manuscript. But together with a bunch of good, white middle-class guys 
(plus a few women!), all with Anglo-American names, and some insightful 
Catholic priests (the good Fathers), Redfield's protagonist overcomes all 
the obstacles set up by Jensen and the Peruvian government, army, etc. 
The key to the success of the good guys is that, contrary to the bad ones, 
they follow the hints of meaningful coincidences instead of yielding to 
reductive scientific theories and religious dogmatism. The grandiose and 
spirirually elevating landscape of mountains and rain forests which like ' glamorous brochures for ecotourism, excludes the disturbing presence of 
tourists or locals not authorized to take part in the protagonist's project, 
provides a symbolic representation of the 'higher' macrocosmicJorces of 
life that orchestrate the coincidences. These forces teach the .:protagonist 
how to give up wilful control and instead follow his inruition and the hints 
offered by the coincidences. Together with magical helpers (the good guys 
and the good Fathers) and antagonists (the bad guys) who, in a fairy-tale­
like way pop up unexpectedly ouly to test the protagonist's belief in his 
new insights, the 'natural', cosmic beauty of the landscape guides the 
protagonist towards a new elevated level of existence, which he afterwards 
makes a vow to spread to other people. 
The moral of the story shows that the pattern of meaningful co­
incidences, which constitutes the main driving force in Prophecy's journey, Between Amazement and Estrangement 61 
is the vehicle for guiding us towards a higher spirirual level of life. The 
resulting new kind of consciousness is promoted as the key to social, 
ecological and spirirual salvation for mankind in the rwentieth and rwenty­
first century. 
A World of Reversals 
The New Age master narrative often consciously reflects the fact that 
it represents a world of reversals compared to the scientific world view to 
which the space narrative adheres. Redfield's novel explicitly invites its 
middle-class American readers to opt out of the scientific mainstream 
culrure in which they were brought up. The novel is not ouly about learning 
to live with the mystical teachings of the ancient Peruvian manuscript; it 
is also a manual of ways to unlearn the command-control paradigm as well 
as the outlook of modern science that reduces 'nature' to mindless matter 
in mechanical motion. The protagonist's voyage through the Peruvian 
wilderness is at the same time an inner journey into unknown mental 
landscapes that opens up new ways of seeing, sensing and acting in the 
external world. Thus, the novel depicts an otherworldly journey on an 
inner as well as an outer level, and in this way it inscribes itself in the 
classic genre of the spiritual hero-journey. 
As this genre is interpreted by Campbell's Jung-inspired analysis of its 
figurations in ancient myths (Campbell 1968) and in a spirirual feminist 
mode by Gottner-Abendroth (1980), it has important overlaps with the 
fairy-tale. What is at stake, however, when the ancient genre of the spiritual 
hero-journey is revived as New Age master narrative, is a different fairy­
tale model from the one we saw activated in the space adventure story. In 
the New Age fable, the modalities or action-generators of the tale of the 
questing adventure hero are substituted by those of the opposite type of 
fairy-tale described by Propp (1975), the one in which the protagonist is 
being acted upon and led forward by 'higher forces'. To will, to know and 
to know-how have -as in an act of reversal -left the stage in favour of 
opposite modalities such as abandoning oneself to cosmic guidance, to be 
open to intuitive wisdom occurring naturally in one's mind, to be in a 
meditative mood. The aim is no longer to imprint the cosmos with human 
meaning, but, conversely, to be imprinted by cosmic wisdom. The New 
Age fable mairitains that when the protagonist reverses the modalities, i.e. 
gives up the will to control and engages in a spirirual journey following the 
hints of macrocosmic meaning conveyed to her /him in the language of 
the coincidences of everyday life, exciting things begin to happen; mental 
Cosmodolphins 62 
change will then begin to spread out from her /him in ever-widening circles. 
To unlearn the modalities of a modern hero and identify with the opposite 
ones is, thus, exactly what Redfield's protagonist is taught by his co­
incidentally determined voyage to Peru. 
Another important reversal that opposes the New Age fable to the space 
narrative bears upon ·the construction of the external environment of the 
otherworldly setting. Described in terms of genre, this opposition can be 
highlighted by Suvin's distinction between the estrangement of the science 
fiction story and that of 'metaphysical genres' (Suvin 1979: zo), to which 
the combination of spiritual journey and fairy-tale that we find in Redfield's 
novel appertains. Like science fiction, the 'metaphysical genres' escort their 
protagonist to an otherworldly setting, but they differ in that the alien 
world 'is actively oriented towards the hero' in either a positive or a negative 
way instead of obeying the laws of physics. They confront us with a world 
in which these laws are denied, and where 'physics ... in some magical or 
religous way [is] determined by ethics, instead of being neutral toward the 
hero' (ibid.: 19). With a slight twist of Suvin's arguments, we may describe 
the differences as follows: the space narrative glorifies the human self 
because it successfully instrumentalizes the laws of physics in the service 
of cosmic expansion; the New Age fable, conversely, locates its protagonist 
in the navel of a universe that, without any side-glances to physics or 
causality, concentrates all its parental attention on the guidance of this 
particnlar individual! 
, · --A third reversal concerns the pattern of genderization. Like the space 
narrative, Redfield's novel and its spiritual journey are a rather phallocentric 
affair: it is primarily the brotherhood of good guys and benevolent fathers 
who are called by the higher cosmic forces to bring along spiritual elevation 
and new harmony._But the phallocentrism of the prototype New Age fable 
differs from_ that of th~, sp-ace· narrative.: 1ICc0iitr-as(!Q the maSculine hero 
of the latter~-wlrom"the·technOSCiCiltifiC will drives to imprint his meaning 
i upon the cosmos, Redfield's angelic boy scout netvvork is guided by v.ilues 
J such as intuition, mysticism and interconnectedness, which most New Age 
'--texts bluntly identify with an essential 'feminine' principle. 
It is popular among New Agers to invoke 'The Universal Feminine' as 
representation of alternative value systems. Along these lines, the opposition 
between technoscience and intuition/mysticism/occultism is often articu­
lated as a dominating masculine vis-d-vis a repressed feminine principle. 
Some versions of the New Age fable reconstruct this gendered opposition 
as a complementary figuration. An imbalance has occurred in favour of the 
masculine yang-principle, but this will be rectified when the repressed Between Amazement and Estrangement 63 
feminine yin-principle returns with the dawning of the New Age. Like 
Redfield, the American physicist Fritjof Capra achieved almost instant 
fame for advocating this notion in his international best-sellers (Capra 
1982, 1991). 
In a way, these New Age constructions reverse the gendered mythologies 
and value systems of the space discourses. 'Universal Man' and his brother­
hood of adventurous 'right stuff' heroes ;,;;;·-replac~·d'-by--tile-.soft ana· 
spiritual values of 'Universal Femininity'. But as a prototypical example, 
Redfield's novel confirms once more the-·~teflffiide oOservatiOn ·that the 
Close embrace of _a 'feminine' position and ·of·essential 'feniiniile' values 
does not aut~matically imply-an ~urffient-of:Y.ilallocenti:i~m -and patri-
. archal.I!l~des of thought. Howevel;·it-shocld also be noted that ~;;,y -
f~minist g~ddess-WOrShij:>Pers and astrologers contribute in alternative ways 
to the 'fenrinization' of the qualities that the New Age is said to bring. 
The position of these feminists will be revisited briefly in Chapter 6. 
Dolphin Fables of New Age and Space Age: Between Pastoral 
and Science Fiction 
While the spaceship icon of American and Soviet/Russian space flight 
discourse and the horoscope icon of New Age cosmology can each be 
related to one dominant fable, the dolphin icon resists the singular in so 
far as it engenders at least two distinct fables. Since contemporary dolphin 
stories involve a lively activity of boundary-crossing between modern high­
tee~ science discourses and ancient myths and legends, the dolphin can 
perform smoothly in roles that otherwise exclude one another: as both 
cyborg and noble savage. In the prototypical cyborg dolphin story the 
animal is being imprinted with human meaning, whereas the master fable 
of the noble savage dolphin tells a story of an alien figure conveying 
profound cosmic wisdom to humans in distress. 
The Dolphin as Noble Savage 
According to the latter fable, the distress stems from civilization that has 
severed the connections with the animal world. Typically, the storyline 
opens with images of what has been lost: a series of scenes that in our 
culture automatically signal a natural sublime state of original bliss. De­
picted in highly aestheticized ways, the free and joyful oceanic life of wild 
cetaceans radiates an aura of awe and sacrality that is often enhanced by 
the absence of humans. Thus the human spectator may be kept away, 
Cosmodolphins 64 
hidden in a space-off position (as in McCulloch's 'Earth Dolphins' photo), 
or relegated to the off-stage role of the implied author/reader in the case 
of a textual representation. The apparent absence of humans is clearly 
intended to render the scenery reminiscent of the Garden of Eden at the 
beginning of the Golden Age, before human intrusion foreshadowed the 
Fall. When humans are allowed into this initial, idyllic imagery of the story, 
they will have to express the feeling of being 'honoured' by the presence 
of the animal and to show the appropriate attitude of awe (Ocean 1997: rg). 
At other times, the spectator or narrator enters into the primordial scene 
in order to voice a human desire to transgress the alienation caused by 
civilization -as in the following example: 
I envy them [i.e. the whales], envy their life and the ease of their connections. 
I wish to be of them, yet my thoughts, my ideas, become obstacles to the 
possibility of that experience. (Mcintyre 1974: 22r) 
The human narrator of these stories is motivated_~Y- aJongi:q.g __ to merge 
withilie dOtPhhts or wh~~' ~~o JiY~_."iji. ~-e~ 'in~~cent' ~~J.cLa_n4.~~ 
~Jl~ted·Qy.::thfir@'j]Tal' wisdom. But ~o on the agenda are the b_arriers . 
tffiif (techno-)civilization has erected agamst a return to thrs Para drs e. As 
the first section of the fable discloses the original bliss of an oceanic Garden 
of Eden, so the next one brings the Fall: a violent act disturbs or destroys 
the paradisic state. The violence is perpetrated by agents of civilization 
who in the USA are usually depicted as insensitive, brutal machos or 
white, male capitalists, while in Russia they may appear as representatives 
of the inhuman Soviet system. 
To be Imprinted with Cetacean Wisdom 
In Ken Grimwood's popular science fiction novel, Into the Deep (1996), 
ancient Greece witnessed a blissful unity between humans and marine 
mammals. Apollo's priestesses at Delphi were imprinted with c~tacean 
wisdom and taught the animals' moral concepts, their social organization 
and governing precepts by means of telepathy, or 'Mind-Linking'. However, 
these 'Teachings~ were viciously interrupted by 'barbaric, non-Linking' 
humans who took a specific pleasnre in butchering women and children as 
well as whales and dolphins. Ouly after 2,ooo years of violence and cruelty, 
when an environmental disaster eventually threatens to destroy all life in 
the sea, does the global, sentient network of the large whales, which 
constitutes the semi-divine 'Source-l\1ind' of the world, decide to com­
mission the intelligent and helpful dolphins with the task of re-establishing Between Amazement and Estrangement 65 
contact with some of the 'land-walkers'. Since three young children who 
are selected by the marine mammals all possess the talent for telepathic 
communication, their minds are easily imprinted with the cetacean message: 
'Harmony'. Decades later, these three people play a crucial role in saving 
the globe. Particularly important is the marine biologist, Sheila (her gender 
and profession both emphasize her bonds with the body of the sea); driven 
by the dolphin message, which gradually surfaces from the depths of her 
unconscious, and also by John Lilly's books on communication with 
dolphins, she fioally manages to translate the complex cetacean language 
into human pictures. In more ways than one, Sheila re-enacts the part of 
the priestesses who long ago performed the sacred rituals of the oracle of 
Delphi. Not only does she understand and disseminate the warnings from 
the oceanic womb of the Earth, but she was present at the Kennedy Space 
Center when Apollo I I, namesake of the ancient dolphin God, was launched 
to the Moon in the 196os, certainly a sacred moment in the space pro­
gramme. Furthermore, it was during this lift-off that she received the 
message of Harmony, and originally became imprinted with cetacean 
wisdom. 
In the fioal pages of the novel, the global wound is healed: undergoing 
an education in dolphinity, humanity leaves the death-world of violence 
and weaponry in order to embrace the altrnistic life-world of dolphins and 
whales. With the restoration of Eden the stage is set for the return of 
God. The global consciousness, the 'Source-Mind', created by the whales 
seems to enter into contact with other planetary group minds: 'there may 
even be a galaxy-wide or larger aggregate consciousness, a limitless, truly 
godlike greater sentience pervading the universe -and eternally seeking 
out newly self-aware worlds, like ours, to join it in jubilant immortality' 
(Grimwood 1996: 377). 
Thus the noble cetacean savages who draw virtues directly from nature 
provide Into the Deep with a happy ending (stage three). In other versions 
of the fable the endpoint comes already with the tragic stage two, where 
technocivilization and so-called 'progress' show their evil faces. This is the 
case, for example, in the Siberian author Yuri Rytkheu's When the Whales 
Leave ( r 977 ), to which we shall return in Chapter 8, and in the Canadian 
naturalist Farley Mowat's semi-documentary novel A Whale for the Killing 
(1978), which describes the meaningless killing of a trapped pregoant fio 
whale on an island off the Newfoundland coast. The whale murderers are 
a group of locals, who have become alienated from the traditional lifestyle 
of the islanders by the industrialization process of the 196os. The death of 
the whale seals the locals' final expulsion from the symbolic Paradise, the 
Cosmodolphins 66 
island as the enclosure of original innocence. When the divine dies, Paradise 
is lost. 
Pastoral Precursors 
A clue to understanding the fable of the cetacean as noble savage comes 
from the pastoral novel, which reached a peak in pre-Romantic Europe. 
The 'return to nature' philosophy, combined with the consciously lachry­
matory and spiritually elevated style of, for example, Bernadin de Saint­
Pierre's best-seller Paul and Virginia (r788/rg8g), the most famous pastoral 
novel of early modernity, seems recently to have been revitalized in stories 
of animals threatened with extinction. Dolphins and whales fit the genre 
well, since they appear designed to represent the innocence of the 'un­
civilized other' combined with an inherent capacity for goodness and 
'natural' wisdom. The Eden of the eighteenth-century pastoral novel, with 
its pure and innately good characters living in a blissful state contrasted 
against evil and corrupt civili7.ation, would today appear old-fashioned and 
comical if applied as a paradigm for stories with human characters. 
However, when the humans are substituted by touching and glamorously 
aestheticized intages of wild animals, the ancient model evidently regains 
its strength, confirming the rule that, as reinvented nature becomes more 
widely perceived as the norm, so wild nature is more thoroughly trans­
formed into an emblem of the innocent, the unpolluted and the sacred. 
Intertwined with the pastoral novel, the noble savage tradition of 
European Romanticism also serves as an obvious model for stories about 
cetaceans. As described by Fairchild (rg6r), the Romantic movement in­
itiated a critical renewal of the pastoral and re-authenticated the noble 
savage tradition, which stemmed from several sources: from the travelogues 
of explorers (from Columbus to Captain Cook), from the philosophy of a 
'return to nature', and from medieval and classical conventions such as the 
legend of the Golden Age. In a departure from these sources, )"Omen, 
children, _peasants, Native Americans and other non-whites were con­
structed as bearers of an inherently sublime wisdom, to which a 'natural' 
state of existence supposedly gave rise. There are obvious parallels here 
with present-day re-inventions of dolphins and whales: with a spotlight on 
their 'big brains' and 'no hands', the marine mammals easily merge with 
the classic noble savage figure who seems to 'lack' the prerequisite of 
technoscientific civilization, yet possesses a wisdom that transcends rational 
intelligence. 
Although somewhat different, the pastoral and the Romantic noble Between Amazement and Estrangement 67 
savage story form an interlaced pattern of genre models for one strand of 
late twentieth-century dolphin and whale stories. The common denominator 
is the celebration of the 'pre-civilized' other as moral and sacred ideal for 
civilized selves in search of a 'natural and non-alienated' elsewhere. 
The Dolphin as Cyborg 
In opposition to the dolphin as noble savage fable, the prototypical 
cyborg dolphin story features an 'uplift' (Brin rgg6) from ao animal to a 
humanoid state of being, an 'education in humanity' (Lilly rg62a). An 
important theme in both fables is the quasi-humanness of dolphins and 
whales. But while, in the former fable, this quality makes the animal a 
fitting guide to lead humans back from alienating civilization to their 
supposed 'natural' origins, the-boundary-position in the latter fable rather 
transforms dolphins into challenging aod attractive objects of techno­
scientific experiments in humanization and imprinting of human meaning. 
In this way, the two branches of dolphins fables perform as reversals of 
each other. 
The genre model of the cyborg dolphin fable is the science fiction story 
of the alien encounter, but with a specific modification. Contrary to the 
popular trend within tlus SF sub-genre of depicting aliens as hostile, 
dolphin stories show the human self encountering a friendly and devoted 
.other. Moreover, cyborg dolphin stories describe encounters with alien 
~thers who, although bodily different, are nevertheless 'highly developed' 
according to human parameters, i.e. in terms of intelligence and language 
skills. As in the spaceship fable, the narrative structure builds upon a 
novum: in this case the cognitively validated possibility of communication 
with an 'intelligent' alien species of sentient beings. 
The standards of communication in the fable are basically human. 
Therefore, it is an integral part of the story that the alien is measured in 
human terms and imprinted with human meaning. The course of events 
displays the many small steps that the successful 'uplift' of the animal to 
a humanoid status requires in terms of learning human ways of living, 
speaking and thinking. This will often imply that it is transformed into a 
cyborg, i.e. modified technologically, to be able to participate in the com-. 
munication. The varying degrees of cyborgification represent another 
dimension of the novum; it characterizes the futuristic setting that such 
advanced body modifications are possible. 
•i Cosmodolphins 68 
'Uplift' and 1Education in Humanity' 
As prototypical illustration we have chosen the cult novel Startide Rising 
(1996), by the American SF writer, astrophysicist and NASA consultant 
David Erin. Like other SF stories about dolphins, such as Anne McCaffrey's 
The Dolphins o[Pern (1996) or William Gibson's Johnny Mnemonic (1995), 
Brin's novel takes as its point of departure the evocative dolphin script 
created by Lilly's famous attempts to teach his dolphins English in the 
early 196os, which we introduced in our third Amazing Story and revisit 
in Chapter 8. Within this trend, one reason for choosing Startide RiSing as 
prototype is Erin's link with NASA, but another is the novel's status as the 
dolphin-lovers' cult book; a comprehensive dolphin reference database lists 
it as 'the all-time cetacean sci-fi favorite' (c£ Feuerstein 1998). 
Startide Rising is one of Brin's novels about 'uplift' from one evolutionary 
stage to another. 'Uplift' means that a 'higher' species, a so-called 'patron 
species', using genetic manipulation and other technological modifications, 
makes a 'lower' species of sentient beings, a 'client species', fit for space 
travel and for participation in the ancient galactic civilization. The rules for 
the 'uplift' of one race by another and the relationship between patron and 
client species constitute the founding principles in the universe of the 
noveL In this way it presents itself as a novel about interspecies com­
munication, which at the same time functions as a metaphor for intercultural 
communication between various kinds of 'selves' and 'others'. 
Startide Rising narrates the story of a spaceship staffed by seven humans 
(of whom some are products of conscious genetic change), 130 dolphins 
and one chimpanzee. The animals have been 'uplifted' by humans. They 
function as scientists, engineers, and space pilots on a more or less equal 
footing with the humans. Sometimes they do, however, relapse into atavistic, 
i.e. 'pre-uplift', behaviour, and this causes conflicts in the novel. Another 
part of the drama unfolds through the encounter with the alien, spacefaring 
races who have ruled the galaxy for billions of years. Most of these age\ 
old and technologically superior races, some of which physically resemble 
'lower' terrestrial species (birds, reptiles, etc.), consider humans to be a 
primitive bunch of annoying 'natives' who are very strange for two par­
ticular reasons. First, humans have not been 'uplifted' by a superior race, 
but have done it for themselves. Second, they treat their client species, the 
cyborg dolphins and the chimpanzee, as their equals instead of enslaving 
them as all the other galactic races have done. 
In showing cyborg dolphins in charge of the complicated technoscientific 
tasks necessary for space flight, and in allowing humans to encounter Between Amazement and Estrangement 69 
technologically superior galactic races with the appearance of animals, the 
novel flirts with a post(hu)man position. It advocates a retreat from human 
specialness (c£ Steels and Brooks 1995), a break with the humanism of 
modernity and the hierarchy that it constructed between universal man 
and 'his' others (e.g. animals). Along the lines of the cyborg aothropology 
(Gray et a!. 1995: 341ff; Haraway 1997: 52) and the technophilic techno­
critique that followed in the wake of Haraway's cyborg manifesto (Haraway 
1ggr), Start£de Rising in one sense promotes the cyborg as a rebellious 
figure that deconstructs the anthropocentric and phallogocentric values of 
humanism. But at the same time, Western humanist values pervade the 
novel: humans are presented as different from all other species; like the 
protagonist of the American Dream, they are self-made and democratically 
minded. While the dolphin as noble savage fable places the dolphin above 
the human as a standard to which 'we' should adapt, the cyborg dolphin 
fable conversely tends to place humanity above all other species. 
To Read out of Context 
We have now introduced the prototype fables of the spaceship, the 
horoscope and the dolphin, and the genres involved, as a framework for 
the more detailed presentations of the icons and reading of their stories 
in the following chapters. Before we end this chapter we shall, however, 
briefly sum up the question of reading strategies. 
In a book with the significant sub-title: 'Om forbloffelse' [On amazement] 
(Hastrup 1992), the Danish anthropolog{sfK.Irsten Hastrup points out that 
critical distance and amazement should be balanced against one another in 
the anthropological project. This balance is also important for the reading 
strategies we advocate. Relying both on Scholes's term, narrative of 
romance and on SUvin's narrative of estrangement, we try to evoke a ' double perspective that gives· room both for the wonder and amazement 
that an extraterrestrial perspective is likely to evoke, and for critical distance. 
But as far as the latter is concerned, we shall add a few remarks to Suvin's 
definitions. 
We shall first emphasize that 'estrangement' and 'critical distance' should 
not be collapsed into each other. Extraterrestrialism and otherworldliness 
create distance and estrangement, but this does not in itself make up a 
critical approach. Suvin distinguishes between the estrangement caused by 
'the metaphysical genres' (fairy-tale, myth, fantasy, etc.) (Suvin 1979: 20), 
and that of genres such as science fiction and the pastoral that, according 
to him, relate to a cognitively validated world (Suvin 1979: ll---9). While the 
Cosmodolphins 70 
former genres close around a metaphysical truth and leave space only for 
spiritual meditation, wishful thinking and escape from the everyday world, 
Suvin maintains that the latter possess potentials to act as critical eye­
openers. In particular, he gives priority to the cognitive estrangement of 
the science fiction story, which may lead us to revise taken-for-granted 
viewpoints when we use its estranged world as a mirror for the familiar 
one. This is due to the 'totalizing ("scientific") rigor' (Suvin 1979: 6) that 
he ascribes to the non-trivial trends within the science fiction genre. 
We find Suvin's distinctions between different kinds of estrangement 
illuminating, but we do not share his belief in 'scientific rigor' (even though 
he puts the term in quotation marks). According to the social constructivist 
· and postrnodern science critiques, to which we adhere, a point of departure 
in a scientifically validated estrangement would just lead to the installation 
of a new kind of metaphysics -a new kind of master narrative. We agree 
with Suvin when he notes that spatial dislocation in itself is not enough 
to create a critically estranging platform, but neither is a scientifically 
validated estrangement in his sense. The critical estrangement we suggest 
as reading strategy is, therefore, different. It is linked not to beliefs in a 
metaphysics of science, but to the de-naturalizing and de-automatizing 
effect of readings 'out of context' and of a focus on story-telling practices 
rather than scientific 'truths'. 
Another aspect that we would like to stress, as far as our reading strategy 
is concerned, regards the configuration we have created by juxtaposing the 
stories of the three icons. As the binaries in Table 2.1 indicate, the proto­
rype fables of the spaceship, the horoscope and the dolphin are closed 
stories that each claims to enunciate a truthful account of the relationship 
between human selves and wild others. So even though they may appear 
as both amazing and estranging- when we read them out of context, and 
when we meditate upon their extraterrestrial content and naive enunci­
ations of high-flown truth claims-they can stili maintain a certain closure 
and resist the intrusions of other 'truths', as long as we look at them one 
by one. But if, instead, we read them as a configuration, then patterns of 
reversals and negations, a carnival of circulating meanings, are put on 
display. We see this as yet another way to create critical estrangement and 
de-naturalization. Each of the poles in the binary pairs makes its opposite 
seem non-evident. 
Our configurative reading produces its own de-automatizations. The 
analysis of the binaries and patterns of reversal shows that the fables of 
the three icons, when juxtaposed, may articulate a contemporary oscillation 
between two opposing kinds of self-<>ther representations and suggest how Between Amazement and Estrangement 71 
late twentieth-century minds are caught in an ambivalent pattern of 
cannibalizing and sacralizing vis-a-vis the global commons. On the one 
hand, the stories of the spaceship and the cyborg dolphin demonstrate an 
unrestrained will to imprint the 'wild' commons and their inhabitants with 
human meaning. We define the seif-<>ther relationship that is iroplied here 
as 'cannibalizing' insofar as the difference of the 'wild' other is meant to 
be consumed and transformed into an exploitable resource for or image of 
the human self. On the other hand, the horoscope and dolphin as noble' 
savage fables tell tales about a completely reversed obsession -about \\ 
modern human selves who present themselves as desperately longing to , 
become imprinted with non-human meanings, with cosmic or animal ·\ 
wisdom. We shall distinguish this kind of representation as 'sacralizing' in ( 
the sense that it constructs the other as a norm to which the human self) 
should adapt. 
The distinction we make between 'cannibalizing' and 'sacralizing' self­
other representations shoufCtD.<it;liOWever,··ooscure the-fici t:haf '~facralizing'- ···­
~ften:appears-to:.l::>~.::A.differen"t-mode~·of~cannibalizing';_· we· discussea-tliis­
i:tlOur mt;rpre"Uttion of McCulloch's picture in die P~elude. Nor does a 
'cannibalizing' self-representation exclude the involvement of strong acts 
of sacralization; our analysis of the space narrative will illustrate this. 
Notes 
r. Contrary to the Willett-edition of Brecht's texts (Brecht 1964), Suvin uses the 
translation 'estranges' instead of 'alienates'. We follow Suvin's translation, which is more 
correct, since it takes into account the difference between German verfremden and ent­
frermkn. 
2. The plaque that was left on the Moon together with the Americ:m flag after the 
first lunar landing bears the inscription: 'Where men from the planet Earth first set foot 
upon the moon, July 1969, AD. They c::une in peace for all mankind.' It is signed by the 
crew members and by President Nixon (Wilford rg6g: 303-4). Part of the space race was 
a competition to demarcate the lunar landscape with national emblems. Already in 1959, 
the Soviet emblem was scattered onto the Moon. 
The Big Mission 
'Once I started into it, I got the rocket fluid in my blood.' (female NASA 
employee, Kennedy Space Center, Florida) 
'For me, it is my life.' (male IKI employee, Institute of Cosmic Research, 
Moscow) 
The American and Russian space narratives are told so homogenously that 
one might half expect a smiling, transnational chief script-writer to appear 
at the end of the dramatic course of events. In this chapter we shall re­
tell the master narrative as we heard it articulated by the z6 women and 
men we interviewed at the Institute of Cosmic Research (IKI) in Moscow, 
at NASA's Kennedy Space Center in Florida and at the adjacent Space 
Camp for youngsters, in the early 199os1 Although certain national and 
gender differences do distinguish the narrators, their stories are very alike. 
Two strongly marked features function as homogenizing factors of the 
individual stories: the cross-national idea that space exploration represents 
a magnificent human. 'mission', and the implicit recycling of the masculine 
adventure story to frame this noble goal. 
In the imaginary of oUr interviewees in both East and West, the 
missionary character of the~ enterprise is clearly marked. The £pace hero 
and his large-scale backup. team of scientists, technicians, workers and 
administrators on Earth are presented as united in their dedication to a 
common objective: the successful accomplishment of a big mission of 
utroost importance to the nation and to the future of all mankind. These 
imaginary representations reflect the fact that the organization of space 
exploration in both countries is typical of the trend towards mission­
orientedness that has been part of the development of 'big science' in the 
twentieth century. An important feature of this kind of research is an 
explicit goal 'expressed in terms of a contribution to society reaching 
beyond the laboratory' (Galison and Hevly 1992: 265). The term 'mission' 
reveals a genealogical root in wartime projects such as the American 
Manhattan Project and the Soviet rocket research, carried out by engineers The Big Mission 73 
and top scientists who were imprisoned in special camps during the Second 
World War. But 'big science' projects, organized as societally or commer­
cially defined 'missions', had already before the war entered the research 
of civil society -although it often seems difficult to draw a hard-and-fast 
line between civilian and military purposes (DeVorkin 1992). NASA, as an 
allegedly civil organization that nevertheless cooperates with the military, 
provides a good example of this (cf. Von Beneke 1997: 37). As a con­
sequence of the very direct interaction with mission funders -in many 
cases the state -mission-oriented research will often· couch in a master 
narrative that legitimates and motivates it explicitly in relation to broad 
national, sociocultural or commercial goals. The dedication of space flight 
to a 'big mission' -allegedly undertaken for 'all mankind' -is one of the 
background features accounting for the homogeneity which, as discussed 
in Chapter I, is even more visible in our American than in our Russian 
interviews, due in part to the turbulent political situation in Russia in the 
early 1990s. 
The second homogenizing feature characteristic of the space narrative 
is the inscription of the project in a national-romantic adventure story 
with a remarkably fixed and unchanging structure. 
As discussed in Chapter z, the space fable fits the narrative scheme of 
the adventure story, and it is based on the same driving forces -to will, to 
know and to know-how- that narratology attributes to the fairy-tale of the 
actively questing hero. Accordingly, the entire space project, including its 
most spectacular protagonists, the mythic national heroes, seems permeated 
by an invincible will to large-scale accumulation of sublime technoscientific 
knowledge, matched by the unfolding of a gigantic potency and know-how. 
A new meaning will hereby be imprinted on the cosmos, demarcating it as 
a place to go to. 
Although individual NASA or IKI employees may rebel, now against 
one part of this narrative and now against another, it is as if, in the I 99os, 
the general script is still surrounded by such a halo of sacrality that any 
/substantial adjustment would appear as a serious heresy to the believers in 
',the Big Space Mission of mankind. In order to underline the conspicuous 
similarities we mix the Russian and American, the female and the male 
voices in the following presentation. 
To Devote One's Life to the Big Mission 
To work with space flight is perceived as being something special. The 
master narrative of space exploration plays an important role for those 
Cosmodolphins 74 
involved, both in the West and in the East. Our interviewees might perhaps 
not fully agree with all the space activities or space goals of their country 
but, to all of them, the project of civilian space flight in general, the great 
boundary-crossing journey out into the universe, represents a decisive and 
important step in human evolution. 
The perception of this step as something quite unique and sublime is 
reflected in the fact that, to a majority of our interviewees, their involve­
ment in space flight assumes the character of a personal quest. They see 
it as a mission to transform homo sapiens to homo spaciens, and have more 
or less devoted their lives to this cause. 
This kind of outlook seems to be especially pronounced in the somewhat 
older generation, who have taken part in the development of space flight 
from its infancy and right through the years of pioneering adolescence in 
'the great decade', 196o-7o, when the space race berween the USA and 
the Soviet Union reached its first peak. 'Once I started into it, I got the 
rocket fluid in my blood,' says JoAnn. She is an engineer and began to 
work at NASA back in the 1950s, when she was '7· At the time of the 
interview, she has a leading position at the Kennedy Space Center; more­
over, she is one of extremely few women to have been involve~ in the 
Apollo Project of the 196os. JoAnn sees a deep symbolism in having 
touched some of the artefacts that have remained on the Moon. Every 
time she looks at it, she relates, she thinks about these things, and the 
human footprints that she spent ten years of her life to assist in imprinting 
into the lunar dust. To her, the abandoned objects and the imperishable 
footprints represent her most important mission in life: to help ensure the 
possibility of a cosmic exodus when the sun explodes in billions of years' 
time. To secure life -not necessarily human life, but what we today 
understand as life in the broadest sense -to give it a chance of survival 
somewhere else in the universe, constitutes in her view 'the ultimate good' 
of space flight. The first Moon landing, and her own contribution to this 
accomplishment, set up a milestone on the long road towards this goal. By 
the end of the interview we, as the former infidels, are converted by 
encountering a true missionary, and agree that.there is something special 
in the fact that we can now go back to Demnark and tell of our shaking 
hands with somebody who has touched artefacts that are still standing on 
the lunar surface. After this interview, the Moon seems only a handshake 
away! 
Speaking of space flight in missionary terms, many of the interviewees 
indicate that they have pursued this particular career since childhood. 
Often the choice was made due to the influence of spectacular, historic The Big Mission 75 
events. Sputnik had an enormous impact on the recruitment of technicians 
and scientists to space jobs in both the Soviet Union and the USA. The 
same is true of Gagarin's flight and the first Moon landing. The Russians 
draw much attention to the wave of enthusiastic faith in the future that 
was unleashed all over the country after the triumphs in space. The older 
ones recall the experiences they had at that time; the younger mention 
how their parents' enthusiasm is vividly imprinted into their memories. 
The beeps of Sputnik and the parade in Red Square after Gagarin's flight 
in 1961 functioned as a collective rite of passage in the same way as the 
American TV transmission of the Moon landing did in 1969. 
Nikolai, who has worked as an astrophysicist at IKI for almost zo years, 
belongs to the generation who, as teenagers, witnessed both Sputnik and 
Gagarin's flight. These two events, he says, left 'tremendous marks' in his 
mind. He is the son of rwo victims of the purges in the 1930s (he was 
born in Siberia), and as such he did not appreciate the propaganda that 
proclaimed the space triumphs as victories for the communist system. But, 
he goes on, these great and unique events in space did speak for themselves. 
To his generation, they came to represent something sublime and un­
paralleled. They became an important symbol of a field in which his 
country could excel. He points out that, against the background of a poor 
standard of living and the multiple hardships of life in the post-Stalinist 
society of the 195os, the technoscientific advances represented by Sputnik 
and Gagarin's spacecraft gained a special significance. They added a new 
dimension, which he describes as spiritual, to this tough life. Perhaps they 
came to embody promises of a different existence for the whole of human­
ity, materially and spiritually enriched, and he emphasizes that they became 
decisive in his choice of career. 
Sputnik also made a huge impact on Irene, who works as a doctor at 
Kennedy Space Center, specializing in the biomedical problems of humans 
in space. She tells us how, by the age of nine, she had already decided that 
she would devote her life to this field. Deeply impressed by the launchings 
of the Sputniks in the late 195os, she eagerly devoured all the TV broad­
casts she could find on technology and science. 'That's what I will do,' she 
said to herself while watching a medibl doctor from the Air Force descnbe 
his job during a transmission on the preparations for the American space 
programme. Irene held firmly to her decision, although she had to break 
through many barriers to achieve her goal. In more ways than one she 
belongs to a minority within NASA: she is African-American as well as 
female. In addition, not wanting to do military work, she had difficulties 
in finding a civilian biomedical space programme. That she nevertheless 
Cosmodolphins 76 
succeeded in making a career, she ascribes to her determination and her 
dedicated perseverance. She never relinquished the decision she made at 
the age of nine, and thus her dream came true. 
Although the feeling of being part of a big mission is particularly 
pronounced in the generation that experienced the start of space flight in 
the 1950s and 196os, the younger staff members also frequently emphasize 
their feelings of working for a glOrious mission of exceptional significance 
to liumanity. 
At 20, Sergei is still a student. When we meet him, he is engaged in 
trainee service at IKI. He very much wants to continue working with 
space flight after his graduation from the Moscow Institute of Aviation. 
To a certain degree, his reasons are similar to those of the much older 
Nikolai. Nor is Sergei's enthusiasm due to any sympathy for the communist 
regime. During the coup against Gorbachov, which took place a couple of 
months before this interview, he demonstrated in favour of democracy in 
front of the White House, where the parliament sits. His desire for a job 
in the space programme is rooted in the belief that this is a field where his 
country has accomplishe4 magnificent things and enriched humanity. It is 
also important to him that he is a child of the Space Age. To hav.e grown 
up at a time when society was capable of huge technoscientific achieve­
ments has provided his generation with great self-confidence, he states. In 
his view, our capability of travelling into outer space proves our ability to 
solve the problems on Earth, and he wants to contribute to this. 
Much the same attitude is expressed by Shannon, a 32-year-old com­
puter science engineer at NASA. She too is convinced about the Big Mission 
embedded in space flight. She informs us that her friends sometimes blame 
her for trying to make them proselytes of the space programme in an 
'overzealous' way. But she truly believes in its crucial significance for the 
evolution of the human race. Since her childhood, when she ardently 
followed all the details of the Moon landing on TV, she has been seized by 
an unshakable belief in the USA's historic mission in space. She has been 
brought up in a strongly patriotic spirit, and it means a great deal to her 
that her job is relevant to both her nation and to humanity. Her work for 
NASA, she feels, enables her to combine these two aspects in an ideal way. 
The Adventurous Journey 
One icon that almost all of our interviewees, in both East and West, 
identify as an essential image in the master narrative of space flight is the 
figure of Columbus. They view space flight as a re-staging of the Renais-The Big Mission 77 
sance's adventurous voyages of discovery beyond the ultimate frontier that 
the ocean to the west represented to those European rulers, merchants and 
explorers. 
The symbolic parallel between Colw:nbus and present-day voyages 
through the hostile and unexplored cosmic ocean is particularly clear to the 
Americans, since it resonates with a canonized, historic theme with which 
our American interviewees feel a natural bonding. But the comparison is 
by no means unfamiliar in Russia either. In the official Soviet history of 
space flight, Gagarin was called 'the cosmic Columbus', and although the 
idea of a new world inscribed in a cosmic communism does not receive 
much applause from the IKI staff today, most of them acknowledge the 
parallel with Columbus. In the shifting political landscape, this icon remains 
an appealing symbol for what many Russian intellecruals perceive to be a 
fundamental fearure of the Russian mentality: unlimited dynamism, per­
perual movement and messianic nomadism (Boym 1996: 157ff.). This image 
of the self as a dynamic explorer, a conqueror with an extraordinary mission, 
was also celebrated in the name of the communist organization for children 
that was founded in the early 1920s: Pioneers.2 At the present time nearly 
every adult Russian has in childhood been a member of this pioneer 
organization to which Gagarin, 'the cosmic Columbus', allegedly sent his 
last thoughts before the lift-off that was to re-affirm his status as a 'pioneer', 
an 'explorer' and 'trail-blazer' (Gagarin 1971: 63f.). One Soviet book on 
this space hero is simply entitled The Pioneer of Pioneers (Kopylova and 
Yurkina 1962). 
Olga, a 23-year-old radio engineer and progranuner at IKI, exclaims 
spontaneously: 'Yes, of course' when we ask her about the analogy between 
space flight and Columbus's voyage. The question prompts her to mention 
one of IKI's perestroika-born projects, in which ordinary people are en­
couraged to send in their preferences on things to be explored in space. 
Olga seems very excited about the perspectives ~is project opens up for 
democratic access to the new cosmic world's inexhaustible fund of the 
thrilling secrets that are so important for human evolution. She is happy 
that IKI and space flight are now blazing a trail whereby 'anybody can 
become a Columbus and make his or her own discoveries'. Olga is confident 
that humanity will not only put questions to the universe, but that in time 
we will also go out to settle the distant planets. 
One of our American interviewees has a distinctly negative attitude 
towards the idea of everybody encroaching on Columbus's or the astronauts' 
preserves, and as such he appears on one level to be Olga's diametric 
opposite. Dr B, as our NASA guide calls him, is a medical doctor. His 
Cosmodolphins 78 
career at NASA goes back to the days of the Apollo Project, when he was 
a part of the team behind Apollo Il and the last Moon landing in 1972. 
For almost two decades he has been in charge of the biomedical department 
at the Kennedy Space Center. Dr B's categorical rejection of the notion of 
a democratically open outer space stems from his pessimistic view of human 
nature. According to him, Earth's problems with pollution, overpopulation 
and much more have been allowed to grow to insoluble proportions because 
of human folly and prejudice. The only effective way out, he suggests, is 
a cosmic exodus of a select few who can start all over again somewhere else 
in the universe. It is his hope, and the goal of his work, that a chosen group 
consisting of highly intelligent and scientifically minded individuals will 
one day populate the cosmos -and found a new world on a sustainable 
basis. 
Olga and Dr B are extremely different. Nationality, age, gender and, 
not least, their views on life and human beings radically separate them. 
Nevertheless, they have one substantial thing in common. They both see 
undreamed-of possibilities opening up via the magnificent voyages of 
discovery signalled by the Columbus analogy. Their common belief, that 
we will attain an extraordinary and sublime world if we technoscientifically 
pursue our will to exploration and engage in the adventurous journey 
across the cosmic ocean, is one they share with many other interviewees. 
The High Frontier 
A network of related notions play distingnished roles alongside the 
Columbus image in elaborating the master narrative into which our inter­
viewees inscribe their work. This network includes 'the frontier', 'the wild' 
and 'the enigmatic'. Such concepts, clearly, are present in the Columbus 
myth, but these three notions carry much wider significance as well. 
. -To the Americans, the idea of the universe as 'the high frontier' or 'the 
new frontier' has a strongly national-romantically coloured meaning. The 
frontier concept has deep roots in American history. Referring to the 
expansion towards the west in the nineteenth century, 'the frontier' rep­
resents the myth of the borders to the 'Wild West', which challenged 
pioneers with promises of fertile land, gold and a new life. At the same 
time, 'the frontier' also signifies the way into a tough, dangerous and 
unknown world. This outlook has influenced the sense of national identity 
so strongly that the myth of the frontier as being indispensable was even 
canonized in American historiography in the first half of the twentieth 
century. As the frontier disappeared into the waves of the Pacific Ocean, The Big Mission 79 
the American historian Frederick]. Turner set up a national monument to 
it, with his 'frontier' thesis. 3 His argument, which became immensely 
popular, specified the frontier to the west as the matrix of American 
democracy and national character. The disappearance of the frontier, 
Turner warned, could seriously damage the development and identity of 
the nation. 
Seen from this perspective, the USA has been lacking a frontier that 
could regenerate the national spirit for many decades now. As if in a 
healing response to this, the master narrative of space flight came forward 
with alluring offers of a new mythical frontier. Under the title The High 
Frontier: Human Colonies in Space (O'Neill 1978), a well-known professor 
of physics, Gerard O'Neill, impressed by the national successes in space 
of the r96os, contributed yet another enthusiastic chapter to the history of 
the US frontier myth. Even better, O'Neill's new frontier wholly overcomes 
the problems raised by Turner. In contrast to the old frontier, which was 
evenrually devoured by the ocean, the new one borders onto a 'wilderness' 
of cosmic dimensions that is, in theory at least, open to endless expansion. 
To ourselves, born and raised in a small nation that has to resort to the 
somewhat shabby myths of the Vikings for a national-romantic icon to 
represent the legendary voyage into the wild unknown, the frontier myth 
sounds very alien. By contrast, to our American interviewees, this myth is 
an unquestionable part of their national identity. 'What has permeated the 
US since it was founded is going to the unknown,' JoAnn points out. She 
considers the quest for the unknown, for new knowledge and adventure, 
to be part of her national heritage. In others, this heritage has become so 
much second nature that they even consider it to be an essential char­
acteristic of 'universal man's' biology. Dr B's version of the frontier myth 
goes as follows: 'Man has always moved outwards . . . If there was an 
ocean, we sailed across it. If there was a continent, we walked across it. All 
this space out there ... we will somehow sail across that to get to the other 
physical body ... we shall go there. It's the nature of the beast.' 
In several discourses, a Turner-like argument pops up not only in a 
form aiming to highlight the frontier as a positive challenge, but also in a 
negative version: what will happen to humanity if we ignore this challenge? 
One of several to voice this aspect, Irene strongly underlines the likelihood 
of intellectual degeneration should we fail to constantly confront new 
horizons. As if echoing Turner, Shannon states that, since there is no 
more room for expansion on Earth, we must venture into outer space to 
regain the pioneering spirit of former times. The cosmos is now 'the 
natural course of advance'. 
Cosmodolphins 80 
A major theme in the frontier myth concerns the expansion of the 
territory that we, in a physical, social and scientific sense, can define as 
being domesticated -that is, the territory that we are able to utilize for our 
own purposes. An expansion into the universe will, according to some of 
the interviewees, sOlve our demographic problems; others refer to visions 
of mining the Moon and the asteroids as a means of overcoming the 
shortage of natural resources on Earth. As part of this line of utilitarian 
expansionist arguments, the revolution in communication techllologies, 
which depend on orbital satellites, is also emphasized. 
All of these leitmotifS appear in the legitimization of space flight for 
utilitarian goals. But the desire for domestication represents only one side 
of the frontier myth, and should by no means eliminate the existence of 
the frontier itsel£ In the cosmic-scale version of the frontier myth, the 
universe should simultaneously be domesticated and remain a challenging 
gateway into the unknown. 
Ross, who, with a PhD in ecology, is in charge of an ecobiological 
research programme being carried out for NASA by a private company, 
brings out this ambiguity vety strongly. One of his key arguments concerns 
the human need for contact with a vast, ·non-domesticated nature, a pristine 
wilderness. Originally, he had not believed in the necessity for nianned 
space flight; he felt it would suffice to launch robots. But his work at 
NASA has convinced him otherwise. He is now confident that human 
experiences in space are indispensable, for they add a subjective interpreta­
tion that no robot could come up with. When explaining to us why we as 
humans need to go into outer space, he refers to the ecological offshoot of 
the American frontier debate, to one of the classical preservationists, Aldo 
Leopold, who co-founded the American Wilderness Society in '935· Seen 
from a utilitarian point of view, the wilderness is unproductive. Yet, Ross 
ponders, recycling Leopold's ideas, as humans we need a wilderness into 
which we can venture. It evokes the curiosity and urge for exploration that 
constitute basic traits of our being human. If we are not challenged into 
permanently developing this curiosity, we will degrade to the level of mere 
robots. To Ross, manned space flight thus brings the human into contact 
with a truly vast and magnificent wilderness, the incarnation of a sublimity 
that, by and large, we can no longer find on Earth. The contact with outer 
space has given us 'high hopes', he says, sounding in a way like Nikolai the 
Russian astrophysicist, to whom Sputnik and Gagarin brought a 'spiritual 
dimension' into everyday life. The Big Mission 81 
The Enigma 
In many ways, the stories told by our Russian interviewees seem very 
similar to the American ones. The complete spectrum of utilitarian goals 
also appears in their discourses. But there is a difference, in that ~e 
Russians pay a great deal of attention to the lack of spin-offs from therr 
space enterprises. As they speak admiringly of popular American products, 
from moonboots to Velcro, they envision a future in which democracy and 
the market economy will sustain the entry of space-linked inventions into 
the daily lives of ordinaty Russians. 
Another difference is directly connected to the political situation in 
Russia in the autumn of 1991. Where the Americans are able to merge 
their utilitarian views with popular national-historic themes, the Russians' 
attitudes to their space mission are marked by the collapse of official values 
that accompanied the disintegration of the Soviet state and communism; 
the cosmonaut as heralder of a cosmic communism is consigned to 
monuments and museums. In contrast to their US colleagues, our IKI 
interviewees drift in limbo as far as a national-political mission is 
concerned. This does not, however, mean that they have lost all their 
aspirations. Like the Americans, they firmly believe in the Big Mission of 
the Cosmic Columbus for the benefit of all mankind. In their view too, 
this space explorer will provide us with infinite quantities of new resources 
and knowledge. But when the Russians depart from a strictly utilitarian 
description of the mission's significance, a picture develops that is more 
heterogeneous and searching than the American version. The imaginary 
cosmography of the latter draws heavily on a collective, national icono­
graphy of the cosmification of the human race to which NASA, with a 
knack for constructing imageries almost worthy of Hollywood, has con­
tributed generously. In comparison, the ·images with which the Russians 
flesh out the master fable of the Big Mission appear more individual and 
self-made. 
Amid this Russian heterogeneity, a common iconography, a new over­
individual image of-the universe, nevertheless emerges as a homogenizing 
factor. The imagery that, to them, best specifies the contact brought about 
by the vOyage of discovery across the cosmic sea is that of the enigmatic, 
the mysterious, the unknown. The Americans, too, often refer to explora­
tion of the unknown as the goal of space research. Still, there is a national 
difference. In the imaginary cosmography of our NASA interviewees, the 
unknown seems less imbued with the enigmatic, the essentially mysterious, 
than it is in the minds of the Russians. 
Cosmodolphins 82 
This difference stands out clearly when, for instance, we compare Ross 
and the young Sergei. To Ross, the existence of the wild and unknown is, 
as we have said, a fundamental condition of life. However, he concedes 
without any. reservations that he is bothered by the idea of there being 
something ultimately incomprehensible about the universe. He says that 
he conceives of God as a metaphor for the universe's ultimately incompre­
hensible order but, with an apologetic laugh, adds to this that he has 
difficulties in worshipping an enigma. Therefore he has to 'cheat' by 
scientifically solving the divine mystery: 'I have trouble bringing myself to 
worship it ... I try to cheat to understand it.' By contrast, the young 
Sergei claims to see the universe as a great and, perhaps, basically 
incomprehensible, infinity that cannot be grasped by means of earthly 
standards: 'To reduce one's concepts of it to something connected with 
the Earth, that is stupid,' he underlines. 
Contrary to the majority of the NASA interviewees, who seem to shun 
mysticism, the IKI staff members readily volunteer their fascination with 
the infinite mysteriousness of the unknown. They also oblige us with 
various personal versions of the kind of speculations that, as we shall see 
in Chapters 4 and 7, have had a firm grip on the minds of both American 
and Russian top scientists, who, as part of space research, became 'hooked 
by the prospect of finding extraterrestrial intelligence in the universe. 
Several of the ncr interviewees earnestly ponder the many UFO stories 
that at this time are proliferating without restraint in the Russian news­
papers. Dr Vasiliev, head of the technical department whose guests we are, 
elaborates on the theory that evolution on Earth may be a consequence of 
extraterrestrial activities. To a certain degree, he is inclined to believe that 
it may stem from visitations from space. Others speculate on a super­
intelligence or super-civilization in the universe that is observing us and, 
regulating our behaviour and movements on Earth, is using us as an 
experiment. Often, this unknown is explicitly surrounded by an aura of 
spiritually tinged mysticism. For example, Zhanna, an engineer and con­
strUction team leader at ncr, suggests that what we call 'God' may be such 
a super-civilization. Victoria, a mathematician who has been engaged in 
space projects since the 1950s, tells how, while calculating the orbit of 
the first Sputnik, she had the thought that there Inight be something of the 
presence of God in it. 
Like their colleagues at NASA, the IKI staff evidently strive for scien­
tific explanations of the enigmas with which space flight confronts them. 
But generally, they are more open than their American counterparts to 
speculative and spiritual conceptualizations of what might be hidden in 
\ The Big Mission 83 
the cosmic ocean. It seems as though the atheistic-materialist philosophy, 
the official state 'religion' of the Soviet Union, has been no more than a 
veneer over a repressed, spiritual layer that is about to return with a 
vengeance. The dichotomy between science and non-science, upon which 
the modern world view is based, emerges as fissures and fractures in the 
discourses of our Russian interviewees. Typically, they speak in an ambigu­
ous both/ and mode, where the universe overspills a scientific world view 
that cannot entirely contain it. On the one hand, they willingly discuss 
strange cosmic phenomena inaccessible to scientific thought; on the other, 
in the light of their professed rationalistic, atheistic materialism, they deny 
the very existence of the mysterious. Victoria's discussion of the divine 
manifesting in the orbit of Sputnik is a good example of this fractured 
discourse. Having seriously and thoughtfully put forward her ideas of the 
presence of God in the trajectory, she hastens to retract her words and 
claims that they are only a joke, since she is an ·atheist. 
Meanwhile, in the USA, it appears to be almost offensive to the scientific 
self-consciousness of the NASA staff to imagine that there may be 
something unknown, something out of reach of a physical or, at the very 
least, intellectual domestication. Another explanation of the pronouncedly 
rational outlook of the majority of our NASA interviewees is perhaps, 
paradoxically enough, to be found in the relative strength of the American 
New Age movement, which may have made the narrators of the space 
narrative anxious to distance themselves from views that could be mistaken 
as non-scientific mysticism. 
As ~e will show in later chapters, a mystical and spiritual undercurrent 
also pervades the American context, but, at the same time; it seems to be 
much more taboo than among the Russians. The case of the late Carl 
Sagan, distingnished scientist and NASA consultant, and one of the prom­
inent figures in the search for extraterrestrial intelligence, may illuminate 
this American ambignity. Sagan was, on the one hand, known for his fierce 
rejection of anything that smells of New Age and mysticism (cf. Penley 
1997). On the other hand, he was obsessed, to put it Inildly, by the idea 
of communicating with the ETs, a position that, as a New Age writer 
ironically observes, could lead to rather paradoxical situations: 
I have watched him [Sagan] fuam at the mouth while attacking a flying 
saucer contactee buff at a conference at Lindisfarne [a famous New Age 
Association in New York], but his whole imagination is dominated by images 
of extraterrestrial 'Contact'. (Spangler and Thompson 1991: 83-4) 
Cosmodolphins 84 
To Will, to Know, and to Know-how 
Whatever the differences between our Russian and American inter­
viewees, the basic form of their stories is, nevertheless, fundamentally the 
same. At play are the three modalities: to will, to know, and to know-how, 
which also direct the questing hero of the fairy-tale. 
The extraordinary will to transgress the borders of the unknown is, in 
one sense, already built into the technology, just as the pull towards the 
divine was embedded in the European cathedrals of the Middle Ages. The 
booster rockets, the spaceship, the complex technological apparatus as a 
whole, are constructed with the aim of realizing this will to demolish the 
barriers against human advance. At work is the will to transgress such 
essential elements of our earthly existence as gravity and our bodily 
dependence on the Earth's biosphere. 
Many of our interviewees in both the USA and Russia compare the 
driving force of their space projects to the motivation of a mountaineer: 
the will to show that the apparently impossible can in fact be accomplished. 
Yet the feats performed by the astro-or cosmonaut are, in contrast to the 
mountaineer's, described as being the result of collective, technoscientific 
teamwork of unprecedented magnitude and complexity. The flag on a 
mountain peak testifies to the will of an individual; the Stars and Stripes 
on the Moon, however, renders to many at NASA -and at II<I, too -
positive proof of the human collective will to overcome all physical and 
existential limitations. When, during the interviews, we air our scepticism 
about the Moon flags, alluding to their connotations of conquest, national­
ism and colonization, our point of view is in most cases rejected. Almost 
everybody, whether American or Russian, spontaneously approves not only 
of the flags, but of all the physical imprints of human activity left behind 
on the Moon, seeing them as positive symbols of human will and know­
how. The only one to disapprove is a young Russian man. 
Zhanna, for instance, says that these artefacts are terrific, because they 
have imprinted the Moon with a new human meaning: 'They prove that 
man was there.' In no way does it upset her feelings of national pride that 
the footprints on the Moon were made by American boots: 'The important 
thing is that man has been there.' Ross tells us about the heated debates 
he has had with his friends; he totally disagrees with their view of the 
artefacts left on the Moon by the Apollo astronauts as mere 'garbage'. In 
his eyes, they represent the will to do the best we can to establish contact 
with the wild and the unknown to which he ascribes so much significance. 
To JoAnn, the will to overcome seemingly impossible barriers and to The Big Mission 85 
infuse space with human meaning assumes particularly magnificent pro­
portions. She connects it with the control of ~uman d~sti~y. While 
witnessing the first successful launch of an Amencan satellite m 195~, a 
few months after the Sputnik shock, she was changed, she says. Observmg 
the rocket racing into the night sky and absorbing the knowledge that this 
small US-made satellite was going to orbit the Earth, sbe felt different. She 
describes the feeling as 'a sense of greater control over your destiny' and 
compares it immediately with the fear and powerlessness that the Cold v:'ar 
called forth in so many people at that time. To gain control over desnny 
was, in that context, about her nation achieving a position as the techno­
scientifically and militarily leading superpower. However, when JoAnn 
speaks in the 1990s about control of destiny, after Mikhail Gorbachov's 
perestroika and after the fall of the Berlin Wall, the words have a much 
more far-reaching significance. The will to control desnny that space 
technology now embodies for JoAnn concerns the peaceful coopera~on of 
the entire globe and the will to tackle all the many problems that, m her 
opinion, space exploration can solve for humanity. The final _item on her 
long-term agenda is our total emancipation from the ~arth's ~~o~phere ~d 
a cosmic exodus prior to the death of the sun. Undemably, thts ts a proJeCt 
of will and control of gigantic dimensions! 
In the space fable as in the fairy-tale, the will and the know-how belong 
together. The realization of the tremendous will embedded in space flight 
presupposes a matching know-how. Sure enough, the ideas put forward.by 
our interviewees on the extraordinary will, do march with correspondmg 
notions of an omnipotent know-how. 
Underlining their insight as professionals into the deep complexities of 
this technology several do, indeed, on the one hand, point to the high risks 
that such complicated machinery necessarily involves. The NASA staff, 
for instance consider it an expression of naivety when ordinary people, ' . implying that technology can be infallible, interpret the Challenger disaster 
in rg86 as a serious undermining of their techno-op_timi~~- Bo~ ~e 
Americans and the Russians distance themselves from snnphst:Lc behefs m 
unfailing technologies, but they are, on the other hand, in the grip of ~ 
extremely strong faith in the enormous technoscienti:fic forces that we, m 
their opinion, may eventually develop if we continue along the path that 
space technology has opened up. 
The idea of a technology so advanced that we may one day bring to life 
a dead celestial body and make it habitable sounds in no way unfamiliar to 
JoAnn. She considers the bioengineering of other planets or terraforming 
(the artificial generation of a biosphere on a lifeless planet) to be a natural 
Cosmodolphins 86 
and quite realistic progression. This is a vision she shares with the majority 
of our interviewees. Few doubt that humankind will settle permanently 
'Out There', either by means of terraforming other planets, or by the 
construction of space stations. Many voice an amazingly firm belief in our 
capacity to develop the. techno-and bioscientific know-how required to 
adapt our bodies to alien extraterrestrial environments. 
As an astrophysicist, Nikolai extends his thoughts, fantasies and 
emotions very far out into the universe. Even though he does express a 
certain reservation regarding the scope of our space projects, the limits he 
sets to how far we may go into the cosmos seem so distant that his 
perspectives become as far-reaching as those of JoAnn. His concepts of 
the future are likewise deeply anchored in his faith in human 
technoscientific know-how. His reservation, he explains, stems from our 
being existentially located 'in a jail of space and time'. By tltis, he means 
~e eno:mous distances involved in interstellar travel that make it physically 
unposs1ble for us to travel very far from the Earth, even if such a journey 
were to last for the lifetimes of several generations. Since we cannot travel 
faster than the speed of light, it would take us around roo,ooo years just 
to cross our own galaxy. In his view, therefore, although space flight has 
endowed humanity with a great freedom -to go off to other planets -the 
~pe.ning up· of this free space has also, he insists, emphasized how very 
limited our range of action is. However, as if not quite prepared to accept 
the limitations he has himself sketched, he eventually leaves the door ajar 
to speculations on possible new technoscientific discoveries that may in the 
future enable us to break out of 'the jail': 'Maybe you won't need to carry 
all the physical particles of your body, but using some informational 
transfer you can go out there,' he speculates. 
When JoAnn envisions gigantic terraforming projects on other planets 
and Nikolai contemplates voyages beyond the laws of physics as they are 
~own today; we pass into the reahns of the speculative. But the speculative 
d1scourses voice a belief in a future where a super-potent technoscience of 
inunense reach will materialize. The grandiosity of these speculations bears 
witness to the great impetus that space flight has given to both the Amer­
ican and the Russian dream of a sublime technoscientific know-how. 
Just as the gigantic and sublime dimensions of the will and the know­
how match one another, knowledge, as the third of the modalities or action­
generators at play in the space adventure story, also refers to something 
extraordinary in the minds of our interviewees. 
As with the other two modalities, sublime knowledge is likewise enfolded 
into the technology. If the technological know-how in the stories of our The Big Mission 87 
interviewees assumes a touch of the sublime, then this has an effect on the 
knowledge invested, and vice versa. But powerful knowledge doesn't only 
feature among the built-in prerequisites of space flight, it is also, to many 
of our interlocutors, one of the noblest goals of their enterprise. Alongside 
the desire for expansion, for new frontiers and contact with the 'wilds' or 
the 'enigmatic', the quest for sublime knowledge is a recurring theme. 
Frequently, staff at both space centres underline this aspect of basic 
research as being much more important than the utilitarian arguments that 
aim to legitimize the huge national investments in space flight. To take 
part in tltis quest for knowledge is, for almost everybody with whom we 
speak, a highly motivating factor. 
The Masculine Hero 
Both American and Soviet space flight carry a heavy iconographic 
tradition connecting the prototypical space hero with an extraordinary 
masculinity (see Chapter 2). It is a tradition with roots stretching back 
deep into the infancy of space exploration. 
With only one single exception, the entire collection of early space 
heroes, greeting present-day visitors with their cosmic smiles from the 
innumerable photographs in American and Russian space museums, are 
men-although apparently not ordinary men. From Gagarin's flight to the 
Apollo Project and the Moon landings, the great space events of both 
countries are presented to the public as the stories of supermasculine, 
almost superhuman heroes. According to the narrative logic, the gigantic 
will knowledge and know-how must be embodied by superheroes who can 
rep;esent the quintessence of legendary masculinity, the 'men of the right 
stuff' as Tom Wolfe (r988) called them in his book on the first astronauts 
and the military test-pilot environment from which they were recruited. 
'The right stuff', required to gain an admission ticket to 'the true 
fraternity', was something unmentionable, a taboo that, in that setting, 
created a clear division between those who had it and those who did not. 
Wolfe explains the concept as follows: 
[I]t seemed to be nothing less than manhood itsel£ Naturally, this was never 
mentioned, either. Yet there it was. Manliness, manhood, manly courage · .. 
there was something ancient, primordial, irresistible about the challenge of 
this stuff, no matter what a sophisticated and rational age one might think 
he lived in. 
Perhaps because it could not be talked about, the subject began to take 
Cosmodolphins 88 
on superstitious and even mystical outlines. A man either had it or he didn't! 
(Wolfe I 988: 22; italics in the original) 
Although this description refers to American space history, the myth of 
'the true brothers Of the right stuff' was no less pervasive in the Soviet 
Union (c( Pelevin 19921I996; Graham 1990: 18o-1; Lebedev et al. 1973). 
Without a touch of irony, the cosmonauts could be staged as heirs to the 
'Real Man', the legendary fighter pilot and war cripple Maresiev, who lost 
both legs in combat, and whose heroic deeds later during the Second 
World War had convinced millions of readers of a popular novel about his 
life that a real Soviet man did not need legs either for dancing, or for 
flying. On prostheses such a man could do anything (Polevoi 1970). At 
other times, the space heroes were simply referred to as 'the cosmic 
brothers' although this brotherhood included the world's first space woman, 
Valentina Tereshkova. However, her mission was clearly not meant to lead 
women to the stars, but to emphasize the manliness and cool courage of 
her colleagues. The still generally accepted depiction of this first female 
cosmonaut as a vomiting, 4 weeping disaster serves to highlight her steely 
counterparts as possessing the genuine 'right stuff'. 
This extreme worshipping of masculinity that pervades the history of 
space flight influences our interviewees in different ways. Some express a 
strong wish to replace the old masculine iconography with a new, gender­
mixed one. This applies especially to the female NASA employees. 
JoAnn, for instance, is active in promoting women on many levels within 
space flight. She refers to the joy she felt when a very complicated opera­
tion on a space station was performed by two women. At first, she says, 
she had only seen two competent astronauts at work. But suddenly, she 
was struck by the fact that this was the first space operation ever conducted 
without male assistance. Such examples, she claims, demonstrate the on­
going change in the status of women, although men still vastly outnumber 
women, both in space and in the work teams on the ground. JoAnn ·has 
listed the statistical improvements in a report (Morgan and Ragusa 1987) 
that she, as mentioned in the Introduction, proudly presented at the 
Women's Studies World Conference in Dublin. JoAnn is thoroughly optim­
istic about future prospects, and argues that new technology constantly 
creates new jobs that are not tinged by old prejudices and gender stereo­
types. Moreover, a specifically equality-promoting factor is built into outer 
space as a workplace. For weightlessness, she points out, eliminates any 
physical advantage of strength men may have. Space is thus the natural 
site for complete equality. The Big Mission 89 
However, some of JoAnn's female co-workers voice less optimism. They 
are generally in agreement that women are gaining a foothold within 
NASA, but barriers and prejudices are, they say, still easy to spot. One 
woman, who has otherwise been outspokenly pro-NASA, relates how, in 
her opinion, the female astronauts are not being taken entirely seriously. 
She does not like to admit it, but these women are being laughed at behind 
their backs, and jokes are made in tones that are never used when the 
subject is a male astronaut. A few female astronauts who have accomplished 
something extraordinary do gain respect within this environment, but they 
then find themselves pushed into the role of 'token woman'. Another 
woman mentions that 'the old boys' network' is still going strong. All in 
all the general impression we get fully matches Penley's observations: that 
NASA in the 1990s is still 'repeating itself, unable to think about women 
in space' (Penley '997' ss). 
A complete contrast to the female NASA employees and their wish for 
a change in the iconography lies in the discourses of the male IKl staff. 
With two exceptions, they all believe that space flight is literally a man's job. 
Dr Vasiliev is very frank about his commitment to the old patriarchal 
school. He openly professes his belief in home and motherhood as women's 
true vocation. When asked to characterize himself, he refers to his profound 
dislike of women who smoke and of 'nursing fathers' -that is, fathers 
who stay at home to look after a sick child. We listen carefully for any note 
of irony in his tone, but there is none. Gender hybrids seem to be his 
favourite targets. As to the question of female cosmonauts, he warms to 
his subject as he describes an occasion in the early 1970s when he put a 
female audience in its place while giving a lecture in France. He was asked 
if the Soviet Union intended to launch another woman cosmonaut. With 
visible pride, he recalls how he replied with a categorical 'no'. He argued 
then, and argues again now, that the job of a cosmonaut is hard and 
dangerous and, playing his trump card, he informs us, as he did the 
dumbfounded French women, that 'in principle, a man does any job better 
than a woman'. 
Dr Vasiliev was born in 1934, and was therefore young when space 
flight came onto the public agenda in the 1950s. But such views, which in 
no way fall short of the American myth of 'the fraternity of the right 
stuff', are certainly not a prerogative of his generation alone. Whatever 
their age, the majority of the male IKl employees believe that masculinity 
and space flight are two sides of the same coin. 'There are too many 
women in space flight. After all, the cosmos is a man's job,' one zs-year­
old radio engineer maintains. Others among the young men make up their 
Cosmodolphins 90 
minds a little more hesitantly, but in the end they also conclude that 'men 
are better suited' for the hardships of space flight. This attitude, which is 
countered only by a minority of two, becomes so monotonous that the 
female IKI employee who has been assigned as our gnide, and who is 
present during the interviews, begins to show signs of embarrassment; 
during an interval, she tells us that this is getting to be too much. 
Between these two poles, occupied by the American women and the 
Russian men respectively, we find the American men and the Russian 
women. In contrast to their Russian colleagues, the American men are 
clearly so affected by the precepts of political correctness that they take 
great care not to voice any discriminatory remarks. Nevertheless, their 
stories on gender problems are much less pronounced than the ones told by 
the NASA women. The Russian women evidently favour equality but, with 
one exception (a woman who had wanted to be a cosmonaut herself), they 
are altogether satisfied with the existing gender division of labour in space. 
Our questions on space flight and gender thus generate response 
patterns in which cultural and gender differences interfere. But these very 
different answers confirm, each in its own way, that the iconography 
bonding the extraordinary will, knowledge and know-how with 'men of 
the right stuff' is still brooding over space flight. 
That space flight represents a cultural enclave where the heroic master 
narrative of the masculine superhero has been able to survive unchallenged 
far longer than in many other places is confirmed by the interviews we 
conducted at the Space Camp for youngsters that is located near the 
Kennedy Space Center. 
Ahnost one-third of the children aged ten to thirteen at the camp are 
girls. According to the staff, there is little difference between the two sexes 
in their response to Space Camp activities; both are equally eager to learn 
and discuss what it means to be an astronaut. However, the girls are often 
surprised when they are confronted with the masculine iconography on 
display, so distinctly genderized that it can neither be hidden nor explained 
away. Since the space heroes are men, the girls who are interested in space 
flight have difficulties with role models. One of the teachers, Debbie, says 
that this collision between the traditional iconography and the girls' search 
for role models has the effect of making some of them very gender­
conscious. She illustrates this with an anecdote: 'I used to give a lectUre 
about this space suit from the Apollo mission. We talk about the little 
portable bag, the urine collector. And, well, this is a man's bag, because 
women did not go to the Moon, and sometimes they [the girls] are startled 
by that.' The Big Mission 91 
Notes 
1. Our interviewees belonged to the academic staff of the space centres. The majority 
had technoscientific backgrounds as computer scientists, engineers, biomedical doctors, 
biologists, astrophysicists, etc. Altogether we interviewed twelve Russi~ns (five women 
and seven men) affiliated with the Institute of Cosmic Research ~IK.l) 1~ Moscow, and 
fourteen Americ:ms (nine women and five men); eleven were affiliated wtth NASA {the 
Kennedy Space Center) and three (two women and one man) with Space Camp F_lorida. 
The purpose of the American space camps is to get youngsters hooked on the tdea of 
space exploration. The camps are sponsored by, am~ng others, the Mercury Seven 
Foundation. (The Mercury Seven were the first Amencan astronauts.) 
2• With the fall of the communist regime, this organization was dissolved, but there 
m-e presently- in 1998-plans being made to set up a new one retaining the old name, 
Pioneers. 
3· Turner first put forwm-d his thesis in 1893 at a mee~ng. of the ~eri~n Historical 
Association, and later published it in his book The Frontter tn Amencan HtStory (1920/ 
I996). 
4. Patricia Cowings, director of the Ames-NASA Psychophysiology Labo:atory, 
ridicules the scientific work that stereotypically claims women to be more suscepttble to 
motion-sickness than men (see Gray et al. 1995: 96). 
Terraforming: farmers in the Sky 
During the I94os, a significant novum, terraforming, began to appear in 
the works of Western science fiction writers. It is a major theme, for 
example, in Robert Heinlein's novel Farmer in the Sky (1950), in which 
Ganymede, one of Jupiter's moons, is transformed into a new Earth a new 
Terra, and popnlated by colonists from Eaith. Since that time the idea of 
fertilizing barren planets· and filling the heavens with duplica;es of Earth 
has _occupied the minds not only of many SF writers, but of scientists and 
engtneers as, well. They dream of redesigning existing planets, asteroids 
and ~oons, and of creating new ones. These are the thrilling visions made 
possible by space flight and, the scientists stress, the technology required 
for such tremendous feats of planetary engineering is not so very far 
beyond what is possible today. In the confident words of one space salesman 
and NASA consultant: 'many of the now-sterile worlds of the Solar System 
can be rebuilt into new Earths' (Oberg 1981: z6o). 
. I~ this chapter, we shall highlight the will to cosmic technopower, 
shiftmg our perspective from the personal lens of our interviewees to a 
genera~ rev~ew of some of the grandiose master plans for galactic-scale 
cyborglficanon that have emerged within the framework of Russian and 
American space flight. We take Foucault's notion of bio--power to be our 
theor~ti~ fr~ework, but extended from human to planetary bodies and 
arllfi':'al hfe m .outer spa~e: Focusing on body regimes, Foucault (1978) 
des~be.d the will to admm1ster, regulate, optimize and multiply life as a 
basic pnnciple of modern society. We shall discuss how space flight allows 
fancrfulideas o~ new kinds of bio--power to proliferate: from life manage­
ment on a cosmic scale to radical recodings of bodies as cyborg-machines. 
As part of the story, we shall also unravel the ambivalences that since 
the early years of space flight, have surrounded the introduction ~f the 
master. plans for planetary and galactic scale bio--power. On the surface, the 
scenano looked clear and straightforward: the so-called 'sterile worlds'. of 
the cosmos, the 'barren deserts of space', were to be fertilized and harvested Terraforming: Farmers in the Sky 93 
in a way similar to that in which the terrestrial wildernesses have been 
conquered and civilized. In the USA, this approach tied in nicely with. the 
frontier mythology of the 'Wild West', while in the Soviet Union it found 
resonances with the traditional Russian colonial desire that fitted so well 
into the Marxist myth of the productive forces as carriers of progress. 
However, the concept of farming the sky, of extending the colonial 
enterprise to the heavenly realms, appears to be neither so obvious nor so 
simple as the old-fashioned conquest of terrestrial territories. For the 
colonial analogy, which aims at normalizing and naturalizing the coming 
deeds of the cosmic Columbus, has clashed with religious taboos. Acts of 
heavenly creation are already copyrighted by the Fathergod that most 
religions, including Christianity, worship. As a result, some American, and 
even some Soviet, discourses have implied that if we are to intrude into 
the realm of the divine, if we are to take profane possession of something 
so otherworldly, then the sacred has to be reordered accordingly. This 
dilemma results in interference between two different kinds of scripts. 
The modern, secnlar one describes technological man striding boldly across 
the cosmos, creating his own new cyber-Earths and skies. In contrast, the 
Holy Script(ure) reserves heaven as the traditional dwelling place of a 
fatherly god, the divine master of creation in comparison with whom even 
technological man shrinks into insignificance. 
The intertextual compromise between these two very different stories 
has led to the construction of a new divinity: the cosmic cybergod, whose 
high-tech spirit and terraforming agenda seem fit to serve as a role model 
for the sky-rocketing visions of the spacefaring nations. 
Bio-power: From Human to Planetary Bodies 
In Foucauldian analysis, bio--power defines a specifically modern kind 
of power relations that 'materially penetrate the body in depth, without 
depending even on the mediation of the subject's own representations' 
(Foucault 1980: 186). 
The nltimate rationale of bio--power, according to Foucault (1978), is 
the political regulation, management and control of life and life processes. 
At stake is a 'Power over Life', as opposed to the 'Right of Death' wielded 
by the sovereigu of pre-modern societies (Foucault 1978: 133f£). The pre­
modern sovereign had the right and the absolute power to dispose of the 
lives of his subordinates, a power that was often exercised in condemning 
them to death. Modern power relations, by contrast, are built upon sophis­
ticated technologies that give control over life, regulating individual bodies 
Cosmodolphins 94 
as well as the reproduction of entire populations. Even weapons of mass 
destruction, such as the atomic bomb, Foucault emphasizes, are constructed 
with the explicit purpose of ensuring the survival of populations; the 
enemy has to be extinguished as a people in order that one's own population 
may live. 'If genocidC is indeed the dream of modern powers, this is not 
because of a recent return of the ancient right to kill; it is because power 
is situated and exercised at the level of life, the species, the race, and the 
large-scale phenomena of population' (Foucault 1978: 137). 
Foucault's bio-power has two basic forms. First, it centres 'on the 
(human) body as a machine' (ibid.: 139); it brings a machine-like discipline 
to human bodies so they are able to fit smoothly into the capitalist apparatus 
of production. Second, it focuses on 'the species body, the [human] body 
imbued with the mechanics of life and serving as the basis of the biological 
processes: propagation, births and mortality, the level of health, life expect­
ancy and longevity, with all the conditions that can cause these to vary' 
(ibid.: 139). 
Foucault's use of bio-power is aimed at discourses on the management 
and regulation of human bodies and sexuality. But if we shift the focus 
from Foucault's concern with the history of sexuality during the eighteenth 
and nineteenth centuries, and extend it to the bio-political agendas of the 
post-Second World War period, we see that bio--power develops a much 
broader significance. Population policies, so-called 'population control', 
have not lost any of their bio-political importance. But this is only one 
aspect of late twentieth-century bio-politics. 'Over-population', 'food crisis', 
'environmental destruction', 'pollution', 'energy crisis', etc. are today rep­
resented as a complex network of life-threatening problems that require 
interrelated bio-political interventions on a planetary scale. In other words, 
the new bio--political world order-as anticipated for example by the UN's 
Brundtland Commission (WCED 1987)-is envisioned as an order where 
not only human bodies, but also the global body of the Earth, are dis­
ciplined and regnlated for the benefit of 'all mankind'. 
We suggest that the gist of this new world order can be aptly articulated 
by an expanded version of Foucault's concept of bio--power, and also that 
space flight has given an important impetus to its construction. As Bordo 
has pointed out (Berry and Wernick 1992: 165-81), it is no coincidence 
that the opening paragraphs of the Brundtland Report position its subject 
of enunciation -the global 'we' of the UN -in 'our' new panopticon of 
outer space. Nor is it chance that they celebrate space flight which, having 
given 'us' access to this privileged view, for the first time in history allows 
'us' to set in place the planet-wide regime of life management that' is Terraforming: Farmers in the Sky 95 
designed to prevent imprudent human activity from further threatening 
the health of the fragile Earth body: 
In the middle of the 2oth century, we saw our planet from space for the first 
time ... From space, we see a small and fragile ball dominated not by human 
activity and edifice but by a pattern of clouds, oceans, greenery, and soils. 
Humanity's inability to fit its doings into that pattern is changing planetary 
systems, fundamentally. Many such changes are accompanied by life­
threatening hazards. This new reality, from which there is no escape, must 
be recognized- and managed. (WCED 1987: r) 
Later on in the report, in the section on 'the global commons' (ibid., 
Chapter 10: 274ff.), the message becomes clear: space flight and space 
technology can play a vital role in monitoring and protecting the 'health' 
of the planet and in ensuring its 'continued habitability' (ibid.: 274). The 
Space Age heralds the advent of global-scale bio--power. 
The idea of monitoring life on Earth from the space panopticon is as 
old as space flight itself. The first satellites with television cameras were 
launched in the 196os to assist in weather forecasting. Today, satellite­
mediated technology has developed into a service so familiar that 'we', all 
Earth's television viewers, hardly notice when TV meteorologists sky-rocket 
us to the elevated position of the weather satellites as part of their peda­
gogical presentation of tomorrow's forecast. Many other sophisticated Earth 
Watch projects have been developed since then by various space agencies, 
utilizing orbital technology. In the 1990s these have culminated in the 
'Mission to Planet Earth', launched as an international space project and 
as one of NASA's four strategic enterprises. It is dedicated to 'gaining a 
full understanding of Earth's systems and the effects of natural and 
human-induced changes on the global enviromnent' (NASA: Mission to 
Planet Earth home page 1998). This big 'mission', designed to understand 
the 'total Earth system', is a significant demonstrition of the way in which 
the extension of the scope of modern bio-power to the planetary body is 
being articulated, both as science and as a serious bio-political agenda for 
the spacefaring nations of the late twentieth century. 
The term terraforming, as it is used in the discourses of both science 
fiction and science fact, suggests primarily a duplication by technoscientific 
means of our own biosphere in the faraway wilds of the universe -that 
is, the construction of cyber-earths or even of artificial planets. However, 
the word also implies a blurring of boundaries between bio-power in outer 
space and on Earth. In the discourses of the promoters of terraforming, 
Terra, the prototype for the whole project, is not only discursively con-
Cosmodolphins 96 
structed as a model to be imitated elsewhere; she is also considered as an 
object of transformational intervention hersel£ In the techno-optimistic 
discourses engendered by space flight, there seem to be only minor obstacles 
to overcome before the step can be taken from planetary monitoring and 
management to complete reinvention. Ideas for re-creating Earth as, for 
example, a Garden of Eden have clustered around the terraforming concept. 
The reconstruction of Earth as an enormous wilderness park or recreational 
area has been part of the 'speculations of several scientists engaged in space 
projects in both East and West. Among them is the well-known physicist 
and NASA consultant, Freeman Dyson. In his book, which bears the 
remarkable title Disturbing the Universe, he suggests that 'Earth may be 
treasured and preserved as a residential parkland, or as a wilderness area, 
while large-scale mining and manufacturing operations are banished to the 
moon and the asteroids' (Dyson 1979: 232-3). 
In the East, an influential Soviet Moldovian philosopher and member 
of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, A. D. Ursul, advocated a similar 
division of the cosmos into a celestial industrial sphere and a terrestrial 
recreational zone (Ursul 1990: 154-5). 
The notion of terraforming, of extending the regime of life management 
and bio-power to planetary bodies, may therefore be just as relevant when 
speaking of Earth as when speaking of other worlds. While Earth is 
proposed as the blueprint for terraforming in outer space, the discursive 
construction is at the same time blurring the distinction between Earth 
and other planetary bodies. On an imaginary level, bio-power is extended 
to life management of galactic dimensions. This is exactly what Dyson is 
proposing in the quotation above, which stems from a chapter equally 
astonishingly entitled: 'The Greening of the Galaxy' (Dyson 1979: 225ff.). 
Civilizing the Deserts of Earth and Space 
In order to demonstrate in detail how this discursive blurring of bound­
aries between bio-power on Earth and in outer space works, we shall look 
at two Russian examples: a film, White Desert Sun (1970), which has been 
a favourite of cosmonauts for decades, and a book promoting space flight, 
Where All Roads into Space Begin (Borisenko and Romanov 1982). Both 
clearly re-use the country's imperial Orientalist discourse _in their efforts 
to communicate the vision of how to 'bring landscapes to life' ( c£ Greenleaf 
1994: 1o8ff.). In a rephrasing of one of Edward Said's observations on 
Orienralism (Said 1979: 96), it could be said that the Russian fund of 
cliches about the conquest of 'eastern' territories in the early nineteenth t l l I Terraforming: Farmers in the Sky 97 
century multiplied itself into the Soviet promotion of a future expansion 
into outer space. 
White Desert Sun is an 'eastern', the Russian equivalent of a Hollywood 
western, focusing on the 'wild east', those vast tracts of land comprising 
the former Soviet Central Asia. The film was lovingly adopted by the 
cosmonauts, and a viewing of it included into the rituals that the space 
hero in waiting had to perform prior to his flight. 
Chronicling the installation of a procreative social order into the lifeless 
void of a desert, the film loyally -although with a touch of irony -
reproduces the traditional Soviet propaganda that depicts the 1917 Revolu­
tion as a kind of societal lift-off. The bonds of feudal-Muslim enslavement 
of the desert region are broken by a passing Red soldier-hero, and thus the 
rules of life replace the realm of death. Hence the desert is seen to be 
heading metaphorically in the same direction as the blond protagonist, 
Sukhov -towards the flourishing meadows of voluptuous Mother Russ1a. 
The imaginary re-shaping of the old order and of the hot, barren landscape 
openly rests on sexist as well as racist representation~;. in a parallel wi~h 
classical Hollywood westerns, there is no trace of pohtJ.cal correctness m 
dealing with gender and race. The film's transformations are foreshadowed 
at the beginning by two contrasting images of femininity. On the one hand 
we are introduced to the soldier's dreams of his blossoming sweetheart: a 
young, typically Russian peasant woman in watery pastures ~ar awa~; and 
on the other to the parched desert through which the hero IS passmg on 
his journey home. The sandy landscape over which he walks is sculpted 
to resemble a woman's body. The connections between terraformmg and 
the redistribution of sexuality become even more clear when a harem, 
condemned to death by its evil husband, Abdulla, is freed, and the battle 
over the women's future begins. Almost single-handedly, the Red soldier 
wipes out the savage natives, icons of the old infertile desert society. 
Dissolving the childless, barren harem and encouraging the women to 
enter into monogamous marriages, the blond hero prepares them for the 
life-affirming world of his own civilization. If death and stagnation were 
the emblems of the old desert-woman, her newly liberated bodyscape is 
oriented towards fertility and progress. 
The struggle between good and evil is embodied in the highly racialized 
fignres of the blond and noble Russian, Sukhov, vis-a-vis the dark ":'d 
cruel Abdulla.l Furthermore, if we use a Foucauld1an framework of In­
terpretation, Sukhov as rescuer and controller of life an~ Abdulla as cruel 
sower of death are prototypical representations of the dichotomy between 
modern bio-power and the pre-modern power of death, as seen from the 
Cosmodolphins 98 
self-glorifying position of the modern hero. As the symbol of a huge 
wrist-watch on the white man's arm indicates, the outcome is determined 
in advance. Modernity and History, understood as technology-compatible 
and transcendental Time, are allies with which the hero shares his im­
personal, machine-like drive. For although the soldier-hero relates to the 
desert in his sharing of its thirst, he never succumbs to narure. His nam~ 
Sukhov, suggests dryness (sukhoi means 'dry'), as does his desire for his 
dream-gir~ buxom Mother Russia. Not once in the film does a drop of 
perspiration moisten his forehead, nor does a grain of sand ever stain his 
impeccably clean uniform. Unlike the desert or the vengeful Abdulla, the 
hero made of the 'right stuff' knows how to master nature and transcend 
the body. All his desires are cool and controlled. 
In I 998, seven years after the collapse of the Soviet empire, White Desert 
Sun was still an essential ingredient of the pre-flight rituals (Fedorov rgg8: 
5). Not ouly did the cosmonauts take a fancy to this film, but its dialogue 
even entered into the professional language of the space community. During 
flights the cosmonauts often quoted phrases from it in their communications 
with mission control, using particular sentences as a code to avoid possible 
misunderstandings. One cosmonaut asserts that, after using such quotes, 
'everything would be clear to everybody' (Savinych rg83: 46). 
One answer to the question of why this film became an imaginary 
the cosmonautS could internalize lies in the desert's geo-cultural rep­
resentations. As a mythical icon of sterility and death, non-terraformed 
desert wilderness long ago came to symbolize the barren world of pre­
Revolutionary Russia in Soviet ideology. But even if this desert had ceased 
to exist, other deserts continued to signify stagnation and to challenge the 
pioneering sons of the new society. The deserts of the Soviet Far East or 
the icy wastes of the Arctic North were perceived as frontiers to be con­
quered and civilized as proof of permanent revolutionary progress and 
expansion. Among the role models cosmonauts were expected to name in 
their public appearances, the flyer-heroes of the rg3os, who had 'conquered 
the polar deserts' of the Arctic, ranked very highly. Especially popular was 
Chkalov, the first pilot ever to make a transpolar flight (Gagarin 1971: 6g; 
Savinych rg83: 67). With the dawning of the Space Age, the cosmos itself 
began to be perceived as 'the deserts of space', a name that, with its 
connotations of emptiness, underlined the secularized view of space en­
dorsed by the Soviet regime.2 Hence the desert is the real field of operations 
for a cosmonaut. Like the soldier-hero of the movie, space man is ultimately 
commissioned to transform the 'hostile' and 'barren' deserts into a living 
world, akin to the sacred homelands of Russia. Terraforming: Farmers in the Sky 99 
The mythical terraforming of earthly deserts as a symbolic anticipation 
of a cultivation of the sky recurs in other space flight discourses: for 
example, in the story of Baikonur, the military cosmodrome in Kazakhstan 
from which all the cosmonauts were launched. Our second example of 
boundary-blurring between the terraforming of Earth and outer space is 
the book promoting this cosmodrome as the symbol of the Soviet space 
enterprise: Where All Roads into Space Begin (Borisenko and Romanov 
rg8z). The long-range perspective oudined in this text is that, by means 
of space flight, man can start 'harnessing the wealth of nearby planets for 
the benefit of the entire human race' (ibid.: 86). However, the main point 
of the narrative is to show that the terraforming of a huge tract of desert 
into a cosmodrome of itself anticipates these future riches. When, in 1955, 
'an army of builders' led by a 'field commander' and construction engineer 
began the construction of Baikonur, one of the largest projects ever to be 
undertaken in the Soviet Union, the newcomers were met by a desert 
region that symbolized all the lifeless backwardness of the non-terraformed 
world of yesteryear. The starting point for the conquest of the wilderness 
was a tiny station where trains, symbols of the arrow of time, rarely 
stopped. The majority of the setdement's few houses were but small and 
'mud-plastered', marked both by gravity and the dusty infertility of the 
desert soil (ibid.: 33). 
As the terraforming evolves through all the hardships brought about by 
the extremely 'hostile' environment, the vast desert gives way to what the 
authors perceive as an oasis, a garden city, a town of roses and rockets, 
already halfway out of this world. No longer are the housing and the 
production sectors of the cosmodrome grounded in an ordinary earthly 
existence; rather they are re-named within the narrative as a 'living module' 
and a 'production module'. They have become the inhabited parts of a 
spaceship, associated with the creation of a new world, a new Earth, floating 
in the nothingness of the universe. 'Suddenly out of nowhere a green isle 
-Baikonur,' the authors enthusiastically exclaim as their aeroplane, having 
passed over the ocean-like 'greyish expanses of the desert', finally reaches 
its destination (ibid.: rr). By transforming the void of wilderness into 
spaceship garden earth, the (male) Soviet mind, he implies, has once more 
proved its ability to replay the god-trick of creating life from dust. 
Human and Divine Will to Cosmic Bio-power 
Space flight discourses blur the boundaries between projects of life 
management and bio-power on Earth, and in outer space. But these are 
Cosmodolphins 100 
not the only boundaries that are being renegotiated. So too are the ones 
between human and divine bio-power. 
Let us reconsider the heavenly panopticon, the 'God's eye' position, to 
which space flight and space technology gave access. During the formative 
years of the Space Age, it was constructed on a deeply ambivalent basis 
that echoes the keynote of cannibalizing and sacralizing. Situated within 
this panopticon, man seemed both small and great, simultaneously the 
humble pupil and the dominant master. The new mental map of the 
universe, to which we return in Chapter 7, could be used to sustain both 
views. According to the modern, secular story-line, the protagonist of 
which boldly takes off to terraform the galaxy, the ventures into space 
were essentially a prolongation of the colonial activities of humans on 
Earth. Via the frontier myth in the USA, and the myth of the historical 
progress of productive forces in the Soviet Union, the new technological 
adventure was made to appear unavoidable and exciting, not to mention 
conspicuously simple. The dead and barren 'deserts of space' might, after 
all, be subjugated almost as easily as the deserts of Earth. In this discourse, 
technological man is envisioned as the future master of the universe, already 
capable of restructuring and re-creating the solar system: 
In the second half of the twentieth century, the inhabitants of the planet 
Earth are beginning to change the over-all organization of the solar system. 
For billions of years, our planet had only one moon. Now, many artificial 
Satellites orbit the Earth. In the·not-too-distant future, artificial satellites 
may be orbiting our natural moon and other planets of our solar system. 
(Shklovsky and Sagan 1968: 467) 
The view presented by these two scientists, a Russian astrophysicist and an 
American astronomer, reflects the widespread perception of the first Sput­
niks in 1957 as nothing less than 'man-made moons'. As opposed to the 
natural one, such artificial moons could symbolize the farthest reaches of 
terrestrial technocivilization, now extending into the cosmic wilds. 
Yet another aspect of cosmic bio-power as a technological feat of im­
pressive proportions was eograved on the sky when the USA launched a 
so-called 'talking satellite' in the closing days of 1958. This launch may be 
considered a spectacular attempt to outshine the triumph of Laika, the 
communist mongrel bitch who became the first Earthling to orbit the 
globe. For the first human voice to travel around the earth had a quite 
differently elevated and empowered tone from that of Laika's imaginary 
barking: it belonged to President Eisenhower who, from outer space, broad­
cast his Christmas message of 'peace on earth and good-will toward meo Terraforming: Farmers in the Sky 101 
everywhere'. However, the voice of the Great White Chief resonated with 
the words of the Almighty, the Great White Father, in more ways than 
one. The satellite that relayed the benevolent message incarnated of itself 
the will to expose an entire enemy population to death in order to ensure 
national survival: it was ao Atlas missile (an ICBM), designed to carry 
nuclear warheads over intercontinental distances. Unfolding the dual per­
spective of power over life and death on a global scale, this Celestial 
President not surprisingly supported the belief in techno-mao's ability to 
manufacture quasi-divine wonders: 'Through the marvels of scientific 
advance, my voice is coming to you from a satellite traveling in outer 
space' (New York Times, zo December 1958). . . . 
Nevertheless, the visions of such intrusions into the traditiOnal domam 
of God were at the same time so daring, so obviously transgressive that 
they called for a second story-line to adequately renegotiate man's place in 
the universe in relation to the sacred. In this discourse, techno-man acknow­
ledged his being, after all, orily a techno-infant, a mere novice in the new 
world of science and technology, and so the sacred became invested with 
the characteristics of a benign high-techno-father (see, for instance, Cam­
eron 1963; Tovmasyao 1965). The themes of man as but a small and 
humble pupil who is being ruled by higher, technologically sublime, forces, 
thus intertwine with a readjustment of the divine. Seen through the 
rationally scrutinizing eyes of the writer who first popularized the original 
cyborg concept of Clynes and Cline, Arthur C. Clarke, this second narrative 
could be explained in a relatively simple way. According to him, it was only 
a half-truth that man had invented the tool. Rather, 'tools invented man' 
(Clarke 1964: zoz). We could add that in this case the spaceship invented 
not only space man, but also the gigantic projects of planetary eogineering 
or terraforming that have been envisioned by scientists and semi-scientists 
since the late rgsos. Written more as a profession of faith than a provoca­
tion Oarke's statement points bluntly towards a universe that is no longer 
gov;rned by the old-fashioned, 'crossed-out' god of the classic scientific 
world view (Latour 1993). In the new order of the Space Age, the retired 
watch-maker, who was needed only for an occasional repair to the celestial 
clock, is ousted by a very different divinity, energetic and enterp~ising -
the Cybergod. In contrast to the distant clock-maker who supervrsed the 
universe of Kepler, Descartes and Newton from the outside, this high-tech 
divinity is an active and communicative terraformer, as omnipresent in 
time as in space. 
The Cybergod entered space science discourses in both the USA and 
Soviet Russia around 1960. Representing a new entrepreneurial spirit in 
Cosmodolphins 102 
the skies, this superior being brought along a cosmos that contested the one 
known so far on a fundamental level. Perceptions of the differences between 
the cosmic natural and the cosmic artificial became unstable, the one 
beginning to merge confusingly with the other. Our own small satellites, 
the 'man-made moons', might, for instance, have numerous, gigantic fore­
runners in orbit that we have naively and mistakenly believed to be natural. 
Shortly after the first Sputniks, the prominent Russian astrophysicist 
I. S. Shklovsky thus ventured the idea that the two moons of Mars, Phobos 
and Deimos, with their unnaturally low density, might be artificial- huge, 
ten-million-ton, Martian-made satellites, rigid and rocky on the outside, 
and yet hollow within (Shklovsky and Sagan 1968: 373). Although the 
launching of such enormous structures might well surpass 'the fondest 
dreams of contemporary rocket engineers', such feats would offer no serious 
problems to 'a technical civilization substantially in advance of our own', 
as the American astronomer Carl Sagan noted some years later when he 
endorsed the hypothesis of his Russian colleague and co--writer.3 Conceding 
that the non-natural moons were more likely to be mute testaments to an 
ancient civilization than signs of a 'thriving contemporary society', the two 
scientists opened up the possibility that the Martians, turning into a nation 
of spacefarers, might have left their home planet for good. 
· These trail-blazing Martians may be seen as emblems of the Cybergod. 
Like them, He is believed to have come into existence long before mankind, 
as evinced by His superior level of development in science and technology. 
By further association with traditional images of a fatherly God, the cyber­
divinity was sometimes posited as the original Terraformer and, con­
sequently, as the very masculine Creator of life on Earth. Clearly these 
modes of thought reflected both the deeply patriarchal settings of the 
space sciences and also the urge to legitimize spa~e man's own ventures 
into the heavens. During the early years of the Space Age, the astronautic 
mind still felt the need for some kind of moral justification for his bold 
dreams of seeding and terraforming the 'barren bodies' of space. The 
notion that life might indeed have been seeded on our own planet by 
higher beings from the stars not ouly made Earth into a model for other, 
as yet lifeless celestial bodies; it also gave an impetus to visions of future 
space settlements by loosening the bonds to Mother Earth and psycho-­
logical!~ fac~litating our departure (see Romanyshyn 1989: zJ)._ff,.as_th<e_. 
theory unplied, Earth were ouly a dead and passive receptacle for the 
entefi>ruuig-!Ife-genes from above, ifshewere ·m-ei-ety a bow loT 'Pre biotic 
~~~up_:, _!h_en _id~_~u:eturn_t_£_the intdligerifana sp!eiiaid realm: of 
the Father would seem natural as wellas.tempt1ng. ·-· ---· --· 
·.. .. --.... --~ ---------.-- ....... . Terraforming: Farmers in the Sky 103 
Panspermia or the New Genesis 
These ideas relating the origins of life to a Cyber-Godfather led to an 
updated, and in a way truly seminal, theory of how life began on Earth: 
the concept of 'panspermia' re-entered the stage of science. The 'sperm' 
in question had a certain impact on the subject of terraforming and also 
bluntly demonstrates how phallogocentrism, gigantomania and destabilized 
boundaries between Man and Cybergod merge in the space flight discourses 
on life management and bio--power. It therefore seems appropriate to sketch 
the genealogical table of these 'little guys' as one scientist approvingly 
called panspermia in the 1998 doctunentary It Came from Outer Space 
(Discovery Channel). 
The concept of panspermia as generator of life was most fully elaborated 
at the beginning of this century, when a distinguished Swedish chemist 
and Nobel Prize winner, Svante Arrhenius, took up the idea in a book 
(Arrhenius 1907) that was later issued in English as Worlds in the Making 
(1908). Here he suggested that the Earth (or other planets) had been 
impregnated by life-bearing spores that migrated through space, speeding 
from one celestial body to another. These spores, thrown out. from a planet 
by 'volcanic force' or the like, were imagined to be driven by radiation 
pressure from the sun and other stars. The necessary precondition for 
conception was simply that the planet receiving the semen should be ready 
to 'shelter organic life'. As a result of this interstellar migration, Arrhenius 
reassuringly asserted, life in the universe had no end. Although living 
beings on any given planet would die out when conditions became inimical, 
their essence would live on in the creatures propagated by the panspermia 
from their parental planet elsewhere in the universe. From this outlook, 
cosmic life came to seem very much like the stable, ceaselessly colonizing, 
patrimonial family so cherished during Victorian times. 'Sperm' from one 
parental celestial body gave rise to 'children' on another; these children 
reproduced similarly, and so on ad infinitum. Carried by the panspermia 
floating through the cosmic womb, heading for a planetary 'shelter', life 
would go on eternally. 
Arrhenius's perception was, naturally, influenced by his own time and 
by the world in which he lived. The Old World of those days was sending 
living beings by the thousands over the oceans to the New Worlds of 
America and Australia. The colonial powers were also busy in their en­
deavours to spread life and civilization to the colonies as well as keeping 
their empires together. The 'humanization' of space and the 'export of 
life' into space, advocated by pro-space activists several decades later 
Cosmodolphins 104 
(O'Neill 1978; Elias 1990), was by no means a novel idea. However, 
Arrhenius's thinking differs from theirs in that he takes nature the human 
body, as the root metaphor for the bonding of the universe.rus mode of 
terraforming is still situated within the framework of 'natural procreation'. 
In his discourse, tools had not yet invented either man, or his sperm. 
Let us now proceed to some updated versions of his theory. Here the 
natural has been ousted by the artificial. Just as the borders between the 
moon and the satellite had begun to blur, so the traditional division between 
naturally and artificially generated life was collapsing. Now, artificial in­
semination on a galactic scale became conceivable. 
By 1960 the spaceship, icon of the Cybergod, had revived interest in 
the panspermia hypothesis, the credibility of which had eroded over the 
years.4 At the First International Space Science Symposium, the geneticist 
J. Lederberg added the dimension of Space Age technology to Arrhenius's 
organic concept when he pointed out that 'rocket-impelled spacecraft' had 
'furnished a mechanism for producing artificial panspermia' (Goldsmith 
1980: 43). In other words, space man was now able to engage in an export 
and import of life throughout the cosmos. Intentionally or otherwise, he 
could implant the spores of terrestrial life on distant celestial bodies and 
his spaceships could equally well carry alien micro-organisms back to Earth. 
Visions of creating life on other planets by means of 'infection' or 'seeding' 
were put on the scientific agenda (with Venus, of all places, serving as the 
very first imaginary target; see for instance Fogg 1995: 25). And, of course, 
what space man was able to do now, the enterprising Cybergod might 
already have done a long time ago. 
Various lustful fantasies of a barren Earth herself being infected or 
seeded by alien astro-or cosmonauts popped up in the Space Age sciences. 
For example, in the American 'garbage' hypothesis, terrestrial life was the 
result of a picnic held by visitors from an advanced civilization on the 
'virgin' Earth. A primordial crumb, left in the party's refuse, might thus 
be the ancestor of us all (Shklovsky and Sagan 1968: 211-12). On the 
Soviet side, not surprisingly, it was suggested that we may stem from the 
activities of 'highly organized cosmonauts' who were conducting well­
planned experiments -not dissimilar, it seems, from the Soviet five-year 
plans-on foreigo celestial bodies (Konstantinov 1972: 17; Shklovsky 1976: 
321). Jointly, scientists from the two superpowers wondered whether these 
divine aliens intended to prepare the Earth for colonization or merely 
wanted to distribute their genetic code, so that the 'evolutionary patrimony 
would not be irretrievably lost' in the event of a disaster on their home 
planet (Shklovsky and Sagan 1968: 212). In each of these visions the ' Terraforming: Farmers in the Sky 105 
living Earth, including ourselves, descended from a Being whose superiority 
was founded on the technologies on which artificial panspermia depended 
-rockets, spaceships and computers (at that time tellingly nicknamed 
'Giant Brains'), as well as knowledge and control of the genetic code. 
Dismissing the prevailing view that earthly matter had generated life 
on its own, the theory of artificial panspermia revitalized and rephrased 
the dichotomy between mind and matter. If the 'semen' of life were 
transmitted in microbiological codes programmed by a superior techno­
logical intelligence, then Earth provided only the pre-biotic, the pre-life 
environment, for these genes to evolve in. And insofar as the genetic code 
is usually seen as a dictionary or language, 5 the mind in question was also 
authoring our planet by writing a text that, like the Word in Christianity, 
imprinted meaning and logos onto an otherwise mute and senseless world. 
The artificial panspermia theory held a certain attraction for several 
scientists because it offered one possible explanation for the enigmatic 
universality of the Genetic Code. Indeed, it attracted no less an authority 
on genetics than Francis Crick who, with James Watson, had 'decoded' the 
structure of DNA. It was Crick who carne up with the quintessential 
version of the New Genesis. In 1973, assisted by the prominent chemist L. 
Orgel, he invented the term Directed Panspermia (translating 'panspermia' 
as 'seeds everywhere') to describe the ancient Cybergod's encoding of life 
on our planet. Ahnost a decade later, he even published a book, Life Itself 
(Crick 1981), outlining his astonishing vision. He speculates that, long ago, 
Earth was covered by a 'pre-biotic ocean', a 'primitive soup' or 'chicken 
bouillon' containing no life, but filled with small organic molecules that 
could serve as 'food' and 'raw materials' to sustain the pioneering life genes 
when they came raining down from above. Hence, this ocean of thin organic 
soup was passively 'waiting for life to get going' (Crick 1981: 105). Mean­
while, we are invited to envisage a higher civilization inhabiting an alien 
galaxy very ·far away. Having reached technological maturity billions of 
years before Earth was terraformed, this civilization would be interested in 
colonizing the universe through the means of interplanetary fertilization. 
Filling his rocket with generative cells, this Cybergod targeted the Earth's 
passively waiting, as yet sterile, womb and launched his frozen semen. Mter 
the arrival of the tiny colonists, emissaries of Technological Mind, life 
began to multiply and grow in the nourishing 'soup' of the virgin planet 
which was thus made (or, we suggest, raped) to become Mother Earth. 
What Crick and Co. are advocating is the idea that our genetic heritage 
comes not only from the stars, but from the heavenly, high-tech Father we 
have named the Cybergod. Although Crick speaks out against our own 
Cosmodolphins 106 
~infecting' or ~polluting' of other celestial bodies, the warning sounds 
somewhat hollow in the light of his own infectious obsession with Directed 
Panspermia as the procreator of life on Earth. Moreover, his writings 
confirm that a certain kind of self-replicating panspermia does exist, at 
least in the imaginary and textual interchanges between fathering minds; 
Crick's views are not very different from either Aristotle's theory of 
conception where the sperm alone created life in the womb, or from the 
Christian narrative of creation. 
Out of the Cradle 
The next entry into our inventory of new kinds of bio-power evoked 
by space flight concerns discourses about the escape from gravity and a 
new artificial cyborg-life in weightlessness. These stories present us with 
one more cluster of ancient phallogocentric images of the sacred and the 
profane articulated in the language of modern high-tech culture. 
The imagery sustaining arguments for a departure from Earth feeds on 
the ancient cultural dichotomy between a Heavenly Home, associated with 
a wise and omnipotent Father God, and a barren, fallen World governed by 
~e concerns of low and mindless (female) nature. In some Space Age 
discourses this opposition was transposed into a confrontation between 
'gravity' as a property of enslaving matter and 'non-gravity' as an icon of 
energy (the techno-scientific term for spirituality) and disembodiment. 
Thus the degrading and impure World was extended to encompass all the 
gravity-ridden worlds of our solar system in opposition to the uplifting and 
blissful zero-gravity of open space. When planning our future in space, ad­
vocates of this trend argued, we should construct artificial 'earths' in space 
instead of trying to re-engineer the forbidding and heavy celestial bodies. 
The idea of building colonies in the sky as a way to escape the 'chains 
of g~vity' goes back to the Russian schoolteacher Konstantin Tsiolkovsky, 
who mvented the space rocket at the beginning of this century. However, 
Tsiolkovsky invented much more than the mere technological prerequisites 
of_ sp~ce flight. He also laid out the imagery that carne to fascinate so many 
soenosts and that pervaded the bulk of space discourses after the Second 
World War. This is true not only of the Soviet Union where the teachings 
of the Russian 'father of cosmonautics' became mandatory· but also, and 
at first glance more surprisingly, of the USA as well. In a single, telling 
sentence, Tsiolkovsky articulated the metaphorical script for the Departure 
and in so doing he succeeded as no other space pioneer has done in stirrino­
the imaginations of his techno-scientific heirs: 0 Terraforming: Farmers in the Sky 10.7 
To live on them [i.e. on the heavy planets] means to shackle oneself in the 
chains of gravity which [on other worlds] are sometimes stronger than the 
terrestrial ones; it means to put up a multitude of obstacles around oneself, 
to be packed together on a tiny space, to live a miserable life in mother~s 
womb. The planet £s the cradle of £ntell£gence but you cannot b've £n the cradle 
forever. (our italics; Tsiolkovsky 1954: 127) 
It was the final sentence that really developed a life of its own; written in 
19II, this cradle-image still figures in current space discourses as a high­
flown rhetorical, yet evocative, challenge to break away from matter, mother 
and Earth and to 'become a man'. It is, for example, inscribed on the wall 
of the public area of the Kennedy Space Center's new, International Space 
Station Processing Facility. In English, this slogan usually reads: 'The 
Earth is the cradle of man but you cannot live in the cradle forever', or 
abbreviated simply to 'Out of the Cradle' (Hartmann et al. 1984). 
Gravity as the emblem of imprisoning mother I matter also frames other 
images that continue the devalued 'womb' and 'cradle' imagery. Viewed as 
a very 'deep hole' (alternatively a 'deep pit' or 'well'), the gravitational 
field around a planet makes us ~disadvantaged' as we have to waste too 
much energy in order to clamber out of the devouring abyss it forms. 
'Does it make sense to climb with great effort out of one such hole, drift 
across a region rich in energy and materials, and then laboriously climb 
back down again into another hole?' O'Neill, author of The High Frontier, 
rhetorically asks (O'Neill 1978: 37). As though echoing these reflections, 
another advocate of living in a zero-gravity zone, Timothy Leary, wishfully 
claimed that: 'There is no reason for us to ever climb back down into such 
a planetary hole again ... The original sin of "Genesis" is gravity: the fall' 
(Romanyshyn 1989: 27). 
Contrary to traditional Romantic imagery, Home and World have ex­
changed genders: the sacred Home belongs to the Cyber-Godfather, while 
the World of gravity is left to fallen and feminine Nature. A complete 
liberation from the natural environment was therefore among the primary 
objectives (cf. Ulubekov 1984: so). In the artificial, non-polluted 'earths', 
built from the raw materials of celestial bodies, the inhabitants would fully 
control their worlds. Here, gravity could be properly reinvented so as to 
suit differing needs, and the environment of the man-made heavenly bodies 
would consist only of carefully selected, non-offensive vegetation and 
animals. For instance, mosquitoes, symbolizing the itchings of the flesh, 
were banned from O'Neill's artificial 'garden-earths' where idyllic and 
pastoral landscapes with lush gardens and luxurious houses were set up in 
Cosmodolphins 108 
opposition to the depleted and 'polluted' World of the Earth. In contrast, 
the Soviet sanctuary privileged the productive forces that were taken, here 
as on Earth, as the governing principle for the layout of the settlement. 
Thus the machine dominated the futuristic visions of a cosmic communism 
headed by a new, superior breed of workers: tidy 'city-earths' with clean 
production compartments, separated by a green belt from the small, petty­
bourgeois apartments that seemed amazingly reminiscent of Western 
European habitat ideals of the 1950s (U!ubekov 1984: 212-13). 
Although these artefact 'earths' were designed for future emigration, 
they had, at least on a modest scale, been overtaken by events by the time 
these visions of a sacred refuge were written. Along with other ventures 
into the sky, orbiting space stations had shown that neither Gravity nor the 
rest of fallen Nature any longer constituted a serious hindrance to leaving 
behind the turbulences aod troubles of an earthly life. As an example of 
the astonishing new world we were entering, the Soviet champion of the 
Departure, Ulubekov, tells of how the cosmonaut in Soyuz-3 observed wild 
thunderstorms and torrential rains beneath him while he himself was sitring 
warm and comfortable in his quiet cabin, high above the raging of nature 
(Uiubekov 1984: 155). Describing space as 'the high throne of orbit' and 
the spaceship as 'an enclosed cylinder of magic', ex-astronaut AI Shepard 
similarly opposed the imagery of elevated clear-sightedness, wonder-ful 
peace and tranquillity to the turbulent and distorting 'atmosphere' of Earth 
(Shepard and Slayton 1995: 429). The choice of the Sea of Tranquillity 
as the first Lunar laoding site could only underline this dichotomy. While 
wars aod racial upheavals were tearing the Earth apart, a Tranquillity Base 
was set up on the Moon, for the occasion standing in for Home. 
These images of raging and confusing nature showing herself to the 
distant and curious gaze of the space traveller may be used to identify one 
of the two very ambivalent, yet interrelated, thematic clusters with which 
the Space Age has re-created the Earth. The first, suggested by the turbu­
lent atmosphere, is Earth as an hysterical body: an unruly, unpredictable 
an~, from a distance, deeply fascinating body that, on the constant brink 
of a breakdown into chaos, seems close to the tomb, to the Fall, to death. 
She represents the World, the bodily troubled background, matter gripping 
hold of mind, against whom the blissful disembodiment of space (or space 
man) may be profiled. She is the empty 'womb' without a future of her 
own, the barren body whose displaced and empty 'holes.', such as the 
ozone hole, must be carefully watched and scrutinized from the panopticon 
of the sky. She is the patient in need of supervision and medical re­
engineering so that she may become a 'reservation in space', a controlled Terraforming: Farmers in the Sky 109 
and manageable Earth with reconstructed, primordial wilderness and 
restored historical sites. A body of the past. 
The second Earth also has its origins in outer space. It is Earth as 'the 
beautiful blue planet', perceived in contrast to the 'lifeless deserts of space' 
-'the bright colorful home' as opposed to 'stark black infiuity' (Kelley 
1988: Preface). Ever since the blue plaoet's creation in the vicinity of the 
Moon in 1968, it has been lifted out of this World, sanctified as 'our only 
home' and worshipped as the holy Mother whose existence, however, also 
depends on the Son aod the Father. 
In this vision, one key factor in the crucial outsider position of the sons 
is that it implies that the 'fragile' Earth has become 'an aged mother, 
totally dependent on us, her children' (Koval and Desinov 1987: 8). The 
pictures taken from the space panopticon did give an impetus to the 
environmental movement and to the technology-mediated resacralizing of 
Earth and Nature, as we discussed in our analysis of McCulloch's picture 
in the Prelude. However, another factor in the significance of these pictures 
may stem from the fact that they are also well-suited to legitinaize the 
escape fantasies of the Space Age. The concept of a helpless Mother 
Earth, an elderly beauty in distress, entrusted to the 'filial love' of space 
man6 encourages the idea that only by going out can we, mankind, develop 
the proper attitude required to 'save her'. Moreover, when building space 
stations based on recycling technology, we shall, space fans claim, learn 
how to 'manage' or 'steward' our own natural habitat, on a planetary scale. 
If one term may be singled out as suggestive of Earth as the projected 
controlled body of tomorrow as well as the home/body we have left, it is 
the name of that NASA project we mentioned earlier: the Mission to 
Planet Earth. The C ybergod could hardly have done it better. 
The Bodyscapes of Men of Steel and of their Mock Mirrors 
Mter this exploration of the ways in which space flight discourses 
invent ever new ways of extending the power over life and combining it 
with resacralization processes, let us now return to what Foucault describes 
as the most basic element of modern bio-power: the reconstruction of the 
human body as machine. Elaborate new versions of this aspect of life 
maoagement are also part of the bio-political agenda of space flight. 
In multiple and unprecedented ways, the test pilots who were selected 
as astronauts during the infancy of the Space Age were made to demon­
strate their capabilities of breaking the bonds holding them to matter, 
body aod Earth. The autobiographical aothology We Seven (Carpenter et 
Cosmodolphins 110 
al. 1963), written when these American astronauts were still naively over­
whelmed by their own historical significance, is crowded with examples of 
how coolly and self-obsessedly they endured all bodily torture in order to 
match their otherworldly mission and augment the technologically sublime 
machine they trained for years to fly. To remain cool and casually skim 
through a popular magazine while being baked for hours at 135°F in a 
heat chamber, to fall asleep in a chair in the sealed-off isolation chamber, 
to consent to having one's feet submerged in a bucket of ice cubes for 
seven minutes, or to black out in the G--centrifuge and still nonchalantly 
maintain the easiness of the test -all that, and much more, rendered 
symbolic proofs of an outright martyr-like readiness to sacrifice emotional 
flesh and depart from the bodyscaping powers of Earth. So non-humanly 
self-controlled, so emotionally self-suppressed were these steel men that 
they were often likened to predictable robots or 'mechanical men' (Collins 
1974: 54). In the eyes of one NASA official who lived and worked alongside 
astronauts for many years: 'they become so disciplined they can almost 
dial up the emotional commodity that's needed. If they are going to a 
cocktail party they'll dial up to where it says, "We are going to be light and 
gay"' (Young et a!. 1969: 183). 
The image of the mechanical men gained strength from a mock-hero 
by the name of Jose Jimenez. Jose was an imaginary comic character created 
by the US writer and comedian Bill Dana around 1960, more or less 
simultaneously with the figuration of the first real-life space men. Jose 
appeared as a Hispanic astronaut who spoke EngliSh with 'a hilarious accent 
and a wispy "please-don't-send-me" attitude'. When asked in interviews 
during TV shows what he was going to do on his epic flight, he inevitably 
answered that he was going to cry a lot (Carpenter et a!. 1963: 14, 182). 
Obviously, alien and effenrinate Jose could not really be counted among 
the seven first astronauts, the men who were presented to the public as the 
new 'heroic breed of men' whose responsibility it was to embody America's 
numinous future as a superpower. Nevertheless, he came to -play a major 
role in developing the image and the self-image of the Astronaut (at that 
time significantly written with an initial capital letter). The first team of 
astronauts, the Mercury Seven, adopted him to function as 'a handy device 
for relaxing the troops' (ibid.: 14). The first words spoken from the ground 
to the first American human in space, AI Shepard, were: 'OK, Jose, you're 
on your way'. Accordingly, Shepard's post-flight debriefing statement res­
ponded: 'My name Jose Jimenez, Chief Astronaut, ]united States' (Benford 
and Wilkes 1985: 139). In other words, Jose seems to have created a moment 
of joy and laughter in tense situations. By providing a debased and blurred Terraforming: Farmers in the Sky 111 
counter-image to the semi-divine prototypically white, Protestant, military 
test-pilot-turned-space-men, this timid Hispanic mock--hero affirmed the 
real soldier-heroes' staru.s as 'ordinary supermen', as one Air Force general 
put it (Carpenter et al. 1963: r2). 
The shadow fignre of Jose accompanied the staged masculinity of 'the 
right stuff' in various ways. Scott Carpenter of the Original Seven Mercury 
Team, who went up hoping to be let in on a 'great secret'/ became so 
swept away by the sublimity of the experience of orbiting Earth that his 
over-composed, astronautic self gave way to an emotional, erratic identity 
with an eventual loss of control of his corporeal as well as his surrogate 
bodies -the space suit and the capsule. Listening to the alleged steel 
man's anguished cries during re--entry, one disgusted NASA official bluntly 
asked whether the astronaut thought he was changing his sex (Young et a!. 
1969: 178)8 
Jose may also be viewed as a symbolic boundary figure between space 
man and his earthly wife. In the popular cult of the Astronaut, beginning 
in the early days with Life magazine and continuing up to the present with 
the book A Man on the Moon (Chaikin 1994) and the film Apollo IJ (1995), 
a dichotomy is invariably at play between the calm and aloof astronaut­
hero who strives for the sky, and the anxious housewife who represents 
family, womb and earthly matters. With mythic persistence, this opposition 
also dominates the Soviet presentations where Gagarin's rural mother (less 
often his wife, a medical doctor) typically re-enacts the role of the body 
and of Mother Earth. 
However, the Soviet Union had a much more immediate mock­
cosmonaut than the USA. Putting the questions of both ethnicity and 
gender on the ideological agenda long before the Americans, the Communist 
Party launched an ethnic other, a Chuvash, as well as a woman, Valentina 
Tereshkova, as cosmonauts number three and six respectively. While the 
Chuvash, Nikolaev, codenamed Falcon, was generally accepted into the 
heaveuly elite, the poetic Seagull, Tereshkova, was not.' Although the space 
agency realized that the preparation of a woman for this flight 'required 
special scientific research, called forth by the peculiarities of her organism' 
(Lebedev eta!. 1973: 103), things went terribly wrong in outer space. Even 
Soviet science could evidently not cope with such organic 'peculiarities'. 
From soon after her lift--off, she was perceived by the infuriated Control 
Centre as possessing too little steel and too much earth, as being far too 
worldly. A recent book rather sarcastically relates all her physical complaints: 
her discomfort with the helmet, for instance, which she found too heavy 
even though, the patronizing author notes, this was simply impossible in 
Terraforming: Farmers in the Sky 113 
her state of weightlessness (Golovanov 1994: 700). Allegedly, a crying, 
vomiting, disoriented and exhausted Seagull (an obvious alter ego for the 
timid Jose) wanted only to return home. 
Her flight was depicted by the media as yet another victory for the 
system, but the stories of her catastrophic failure nevertheless became more 
or less common knowledge remarkably quickly. Having it both ways, with 
an impressive demonstration of liberated Soviet Woman up front and a 
notorious flop behind the scenes, a satisfied Korolev, the mastermind behind 
the space programme, could now assure the rest of the brotherhood that 
women did not belong in space and that he would never again venture into 
such an experiment. In an American magazine from 1975, nearly a decade 
after Korolev's death, staunch cosmonaut A. Leonov still maintained that 
'by analyzing her flight, we understood that their [i.e. women's]lot is to stay 
on Earth' (Golovanov 1994: 701 ). The creation of the 'wrong stuff' was 
thus accomplished in a manner characteristic of the Soviet PR stunts around 
women's emancipation. The ideological fa\'Ode of equality was upheld while 
discrimination flourished freely. Tereshkova's double life never ended. 
Even today she is depicted by many Russians as the cosmonauts' quint­
essential counter-image, helping to give credibility to the notion that men 
alone can escape the bonding of gravity and the materiality of body and 
earth.10 By contrast, Tereshkova figures prominently in a Western New 
Age and astrology dictionary, Astrology for the Age of Aquarius (Kurrels 
1992: 180). A large photograph depicts her lying in her space capsule with 
dreamily closed eyes. Presenting her under 'T', together with such entries 
as 'Tarot Cards' and the astrological 'Tables of House', the author of this 
book seems finally to have defined the 'right cosmic place' for 'wrong 
stuff'-heroines! 
Back in the 196os, however, homebound Seagull was re-caged by Soviet 
propaganda in a context seemingly more suitable than that offered by the 
space capsule. Soon after Tereshkova's flight, the Communist Party, eager 
to improve the somewhat tarnished image of the nation as 'one happy 
family', staged a celebrity wedding berween her and none other than the 
Chuvash cosmonaut, the 'man of iron tenacity' (Lebedev 1973: 59). This 
cosmic marriage, set up as an official event of grandiose proportions, could 
also serve as a splendid icon for the Party's vision of Heaven on Earth. 
From Superman to Post(hu)man Cyborg 
A major purpose of the steely body of the 'right stuff' was, as we have 
discussed, to demonstrate its capability of transcending debased bodily 
Cosmodolphins 114 
matter. Nevertheless, in its own way the lift-off implied a dramatic return 
of the body in its fusion with the machine; a return that was paradoxically 
sustained by the many persistent mock-heroes. 
As the space body exposed its flesh and intestines to the devices of 
innumerable medical tests, examinations, adjustments, probes and the like, 
as it was inserted into the electronic and mechanical systems of the space 
capsule, it began to seem like a machine in its own right. The way in 
which the astronautic body was fragmented and transformed into numbers 
and statistics exemplifies this configuration of body and machine. It also 
came to tickle the popular imagination as this totally decomposed body 
accompanied the presentation of its owner-occupier, the space hero himself, 
to the public." Thus the rate of the space man's heart before, during and 
after the flight, his pulse, weight, lung capacity, blood pressure, respiration, 
oral temperature, blood count, the colour and gravity of his urine, and so 
on and on ... all of this was carefully registered and, especially in the 
USA, made a question of national interest. Strikingly, this act of de­
composing the body became a counterpart to the reduction of a machine 
into small, separate parts or, as Romanyshyn has cleverly pointed out, to 
the dissection of a dead body, a corpse (Romanyshyn 1989: 17). 
However, this analogy overlooks an important point. What the medical 
electronics involved in rendering the astronaut body fit for cosmic ad­
ventures is mechanically translating, by means of so many numbers and 
figures, is not the language of other machines or of decomposed corpses: 
what it electronically signifies is rather the disjointed grammar of organic 
speech. What it translates and interprets into the depersonalized lingo of 
science is nothing if not the vague murmuring of organisms in change: the 
whispering of blood particles, the susurration of cells, of muscles and 
organs at work. It is the speech of a body that, transformed into a post­
(hu)man cyborg, can only be rendered intelligibly and functionally alive 
through technology. Inspected and explored for diseases and organic mal­
functions, the astronaut becomes so dissolved in bodily fragments and in 
multiple voices that the boundaries of that strategic and heroic assemblage 
called self appear to be thoroughly transgressed (Haraway 1991: 212). 
Consequently, the image of the autonomous and transcendent astronaut, 
a cybergod in waiting, easily merges with counter-images of earthly shadow 
figures that conjure up the spectres of degradation, fragility and depend­
ence; images such as the mock doubles of Hispanic Jose, Seagull Teresh­
kova, and also the chimps, monkeys and mongrel bitches of earlier flights 
-that is, the non-straight, the effeminate male, the hysterical woman and 
the domesticated animal. Terraforming: Farmers in the Sky 115 
These symbolic carriers of 'weak' nature(s) performed actively in the 
phantasmagorical show that, in the first decade of space flight, brought 
into focus the representations, not only of a divinely strong and self­
reliant steel man, but also of a vulnerable and mortal cyborg body, 
completely unable to function on its own. In this performance, the space 
man was not the manly conqueror and explorer, taking other territories 
and bodies into his possession; rather, his own body had become possessed 
by everybody. Thus, in his book on the Apollo I I mission to the Moon, 
Norman Mailer locates a binary opposition between the masculinity of the 
space heroes with their elevated images as stainless steel men and the 
pictures of their manipulated bodies which were not only possessed and 
(sexually) abused by technology, science and the penetrating scientific gaze, 
but were even laid open for public entry. The objectifying, dissecting and 
knowing vision of Mailer himself provides evidence of this transgression: 
They were virile men, but they were prodded, probed, tapped into, poked, 
flexed, tested, subjected to a pharmacology of stimulants, depressants, di­
uretics, laxatives, retentives, tranquilizers, motion sickness pills, antibiotics, 
vitamins and food which was designed to control the character of their 
faeces. They were virile, but they were done to, they were done to like no 
healthy man alive. (Mailer 1971: 48) 
Conclusion: Bio-power and the Sacred 
The Foucauldian notion of bio-power gives both a rationale and a 
driving force to the master narratives of the adventurous space heroes, 
which we analysed from a genre point of view in Chapter 2 and in Chapter 
3 through interviews with academic staff of the American and Russian 
space agencies. We have seen how space flight constitutes an important 
chapter in what literary scholar Martin Green calls 'the history of the 
white male mind' (Green 1993), and how this history intersects with 
Foucault's 'bio-history' (Foucault 1978: 143), an approach that may also 
cover the many brand new kinds of life management and body regimes to 
which the prospect of a cosmic exodus gives rise. 
Our analysis shows, first of all, that, when ideas of calculated, cosmic­
scale power over life are introduced, they produce a break with the 
secularization process that is considered to be a part of the modern scientific 
enterprise. 
The Foucauldian description of bio-power and the cultural impetus to 
gain total control over life point towards the conclusion, stressed in par­
ticular by Evelyn Fox Keller (1992), that twentieth-century biology has 
Cosmodolphins 116 
aimed for a final excommunication of the 'secrets of life': for a wiping out 
of mystery and a definitive detachment from story-telling, speculation and 
religion. Keller quotes, among others, Crick and Watson, who describe the 
scientific quest that led them to the discovery of DNA as a 'calculated 
assault on the secret of life' (Keller rggz: 42). In our context, Keller's 
account is especially interesting because it spotlights the secularization 
process, which is a logical consequence of the desire for total human control 
over life. If humans are in charge of the processes of life, there is little 
space left for traditional divine mysteries. 
But what Keller does not comment on is that the scientific 'assault' on 
Nature's traditional secrets and the ensuing erasure of the activities of an 
old-fashioned God, who possesses only words and other magic tools for 
the creation of life, leave a vacancy to be filled by a Cybergod who, in 
contrast, is equipped with the most advanced and super-powerful high­
tech devices. Crick's invention of the directed panspermia hypothesis, after 
having successfully carried out his own 'assault' on the secrets of life, is 
a significant example of the phallogocentric re-sacralization process that is 
also a part of modern high-tech science. 
Apart from highlighting, on the one hand, this high-tech-based 'return 
of the divine Father', another conclusion suggests that the cosmic high­
tech laboratory, on the other hand, is a tricky place, where supermen may 
be heading not only for the elevated realm of the Cyber-Godfather, but 
also for a fall into the post(hu)man. 
Notes 
r. The scenario was co-authored by the Russia.nized Azerbaijani writer Rustam 
Ibragimbekov. 
2. Nevertheless, among ordimry Russians the view of the cosmos, and consequently 
of the cosmonauts, as divine or semi-divine persisted (see Savinych I983: 136). 
3· The Soviet-American book Intelligent Life ln the Universe (1968), by Shklovsky 
and Sagan, has remained the 'bible' of SETI (Marx Ig88: 305). The book is a translated 
and expanded version of Shklovsky's Russian book on the subject (1962). In his memoirs, 
Shklovsky notes that while he, the Jrul.in author, never received one penny in royalties, 
Sagan made both a fortune and a name for himself from the book (Shklovsky I99I: 
zsrff.). 
4· The theory lost credibility after the discovery of the damage done to organisms 
exposed to radiation. 
5· 'The Genetic Code is the small dictionary which relates the four-letter language 
of the nucleic acids to the twenty-letter language of the proteins' (Crick I98I: I71). 
6. A declaration of this 'filial love' is also perceptible in the title of the Soviet book 
on the cosmonauts that NASA had translated into English: Sons of the Blue Planet (Syny 
golubol planety) (Lebedev et al. I973). Terraforming: Farmers in the Sky 117 
Carpenter implies a parallel between his upcoming flight and the after_life as, lying 
ato;·the Atlas, he recalls how in his childhood a dying uncle talked of gettmg ready to 
'know the great secret' (Carpenter et al. I963: 328).. . . . , 
8. Carpenter was never re-assigned to a space ~lSSlon. Instead, he JOmed ~e Navy s 
Seal® experiment, where he worked ~th a dolphm whose name, Tuffy (denved from 
'tough') suggests yet another mock-mrrror. 
N, theless, both the Chuvash and the woman were launched as part of ~ group 9· ever h'. hniR d flight where the cosmonaut in the twin capsule was more 'rig t, 1:e., et . c . ussmn an 
ale The idea of a woman cosmonaut came shortly after Gagann s fl1ght m I96r. Of 
: r'wenty female candidates who were selected from regional parachutist clubs, t_hree 
w~t into training. One of them, Ponomareva, had a degree from the Moscow I_nsotu~e 
f A · ti In contrast, Tereshk.ova was a graduate in textiles, with no expenence m 0 . ~a opn: MI·nrs· ter Tn--~hchev made the final choice; however, he may well have aVIatJon. nme .ruu u.:> Ga · 
been influenced by the agency -and heavyweights such as Karole~ and , ~ann su~ 
ported Tereshk.ova -into picking the candidate least likely to qu~IJo~ the, nght stuff 
icon. Only in I9g2 did the 'cosmic brothers' get a 'second celesaal SISter , the fighter 
pilot Svetlana Savitskaya. Upon her arrival on board Salyut-;, the crew presented her 
with a bunch of flowers and an apron (Popovich et al. 1989: I2o--I). 
IO. The job of space man still carries with it many earthly rewards, such as money 
and prestige. . Car a1 ,< · 3 z II. See, for instance, the decomposition of John Glenn m. pen:er et · I':JV3· 2 -
I th 90 the Orbital heartbeats of Gagarin were still on dtsplay at the space 3· n e I9 s, 
museum in Moscow. 
~ --------------------------------------Amazing Story IV: The Dark Side of the Moon 
This amazing true-life story bridges the gap between the astronautical and 
astrological mind. The cast of characters is the crew of Apollo II: Neil 
Armstrong, Michael Collins and Edwin E. Aldrin J r, generally known as 
'Buzz'. Aldrin takes the leading role in the story that stems mainly from 
his own recollections, Return to Earth (1973). In its effort to debunk the 
images and values of Mechanical Man, this exceptional book is strongly 
influenced by the youth revolt of that time. 
Much to his resentment, Buzz Aldrin was not designated to be the first 
man on the Moon in July 1969· Yet Aldrin did score his own historic first. 
As he backs out of the hatch and, covered with goose bumps inside his 
·• spacesuit, steps onto the Sea of Tranquillity, which exhibits a landscape of 
'magnificent desolation', he immediately notices the peculiar properties of 
the lunar dust which, when kicked, reacts differently from sand on a 
terrestrial beach. But Aldrin was not only observing the effects of his 
moonboots on the lunar dust. 'The second thing I did', he writes, 'was 
record my own first on the Moon, a first that became known to only a 
select few.' His kidneys, he says, sent him a message of distress: 'Neil 
might have been the first man to step on the moon, but I was the first to 
pee in his pants on the moon. I was, of course, linked up with the urine­
collection device, but it was a unique feeling. The whole world was watch­
ing, but I was the only one who knew what they were really witnessing' 
(Aldrin 1973: 235). 
What Aldrin seems to be relating is that his lunar identity was not what 
it appeared to be. Beneath the shielding glamour of the spacesuit, radiating 
impressions of a knighdy heroism, behind the fa<;ade of the astronautic 
steel man himself, his out of control bodily processes secredy mock­
mirrored Neil Armstrong's historic first step, and fooled the worldwide 
TV audience. The only thing of which Aldrin was in conscious control 
was the knowledge of the debasing secret itself; he alone could decide 
whether or not to let it out. Or perhaps even this degree of control was Amazing Story IV 119 
PLATE IV. I 'Do you see what I see?' (Text and photo from astronaut Michael 
Collins' autobiographical account of the first Moon landing (Collins 1974). Courtesy 
NASA.) 
illusional, for the Moon appears to be so strangely interwoven into his life 
that it unleashed forces that eventually led him to recognize and disclose 
aspects of his personality that had been secret and repressed. Thus other 
cues in his story intensify the sense of inappropriateness that pervades this 
incident, creating a context that transforms it from a carnivalesque act into 
an Oedipal drama of truly cosmic proportions. 
A clue to this palimpsestic pattern stems from his earlier perception of 
the lunar mountains and craters as sexual parts of the female body. When 
Cosmodolphins 120 
passing over the back side of the moon, while radio contact with the Earth 
was cut off, the three astronauts gazed down at the moonscape rushing by 
beneath their craft, exchanging remarks that Collins in his book on the 
voyage records as ~ollows: 
Buzz pipes up. 'Yes, there's a big mother over here, too!' 'Come on now, Buzz, 
don't refer to them as big mothers; give them some scientific name.' Buzz 
ignores me and goes on. 'It sure looks like a lot of them have slumped down.' 
'A slumping big mother? Well, you see those avery once in a while.' Buzz 
decides to descend to my level. 'Most of them are slumping. The bigger they 
are, the more they slump -that's a truism, isn't it? That is, the older they 
get.' (Collins 1974: 392) 
As though determined to make the meaning of these euphemisms crystal 
clear, Collins continues the passage by relating a fantasy in which he is 
inspecting a spaceship crew of a thousand women with 'two thousand 
breasts bobbing beautifully and quivering delightfully in response to .their 
every weightless movement' (Collins 1974: 392ff.; see also his photograph). 
So the astronauts' moon was unquestionably feminine; indeed we can go 
further and suggest that the mother, the queen, whom the ancient Oedipus 
married, also has a role to play. 
On the way back to Earth, Aldrin becomes plagued by the mysterious 
cosmic flashes that he first noticed on the outward journey, but which at 
that time he quickly forgot. Now they become a veritable obsession, evoking 
a state of fear and anxiety that is to be his constant companion for years 
to come. According to some scientists, he says, the flashes, generated 
perhaps by tiny particles of cosmic dust penetrating the astronauts' helmets 
and skulls, may eventually cause brain damage and blindness. Seen through 
the prism of our story, this strongly suggests that the space man is terrified 
of the fatal embodiroent of a vengeful moon. 
Even at the astronauts' press conference before lift-off, Norman Mailer 
spotted Aldrin's particular anxiety of being emasculated by 'evil moon 
rays'. Mailer relates that the space man had come up with a rambling story 
in which he began talking about his former rank of tenderfoot within the 
Boy Scouts before jumping bizarrely to his hopes that he would not have 
'a tender foot after walking around the moon' (Mailer 1971: 41). (The 
name Oedipus means clubfoot.) In their discouragement of emotions and 
their disregard for the sexual taboos engraved on our ~ulture and minds, 
officials at NASA never saw what it took Mailer only minutes to suspect: 
the Oedipal anxiety that co-<:onstructed Aldrin's moon. 
Back on Earth, and deeply depressed, Aldrin eventually breaks down. Amazing Story IV 121 
At a banquet for the cream of the 'right stuff', his country's most 
distinguished test pilots, he is publicly asked what he calls his 'anathema' 
question: 'how it really felt to be on the moon' (Aldrin 1973: z8o). Develop­
ing hysterical symptoms, he is hospitalized. During the treatroent, he comes 
to realize that his trauma includes a demanding, pushy father, Edwin E. 
Aldrin Sr, and a depressive mother who took her own life prior to her 
son's journey to Tranquillity Base. Incredible as it may sound, his mother's 
maiden name was Marion Moon. 
Besides the fantastic Oedipal re-enactment, this story hints at two 
further layers from the realm of the imagination. First, the interconnected­
ness in the astronaut's mind between his parents and himself on the one 
hand, and God, the Virgin Mary (Marion) and the Son on the other (he 
was the only and adored son in a household full of females: two older 
sisters, the mother, a grandmother who was also a Moon). Secondly, if 
entry and possession are suggestive of sexual mastery -and the assault on 
the Moon may well be seen as rape-who in his situation would not worry 
that the Goddess of Fate might be eager to resettle the score? 
As Above, So Below 
A human being follows the way by which he is guided. (male Russian 
astrologer) 
I was, in fact, a part of the Universe and doing what I was supposed to 
be doing no matter how difficult. (female American astrologer) 
Space flight discourses construct the cosmic commons as a technoscientific 
playground and an appropriate scene for the heroic adventures of steel 
men and cybergods who are obsessed by the will to leave their mark on the 
universe through the expansion of human or superhuman bio-power. But 
when we now leave the scientific cosmos of space flight and turn to that 
of 'New Age science' (Spangler and Thompson 1991) such as astrology, 
we are met by actors who speak and act very differently from the steel men 
and cybergods. Seen through the lens of the New Agers, the picture of the 
wilderness 'above' changes radically, and other kinds of proper human 
attitudes are prescribed. 
The actors who invite us into the New Age Cosmos are a rather 
heterogeneous group, belonging to dispersed circles that represent many 
different kinds of spiritual and occult beliefs. They do not form the kind 
of consensual community that, to a large extent, unites the narrators of 
the Russian and American space fable. Nevertheless, they share a nucleus 
of beliefs as far as cosmos, nature and body are concerned that makes up 
a master narrative as compelling and coherent as the space adventure 
story. 
In this chapter we shall present the New Age narrative of the relation­
ship between human self and cosmos, as it was told to us by fifteen female 
and male astrologers, whom we interviewed in Moscow and San Francisco 
in the early I 990s.1 While retelling their stories, we shall lo~k at the 
differences and similarities between the women and the men, the Americans 
and the Russians. The primary focus, however, will be the general frame-As Above, So Below 123 
work of shared beliefs, which highlights a master narrative of an inner 
spiritual journey beyond the world view of modern science. 
The driving forces behind this journey are modalities or action­
generators quite opposite to those that characterize the space adventure 
story. The modalities of the fairy-tale of the questing hero -to will, to 
know and to know-how -are replaced in the narratives of the astrologers 
by those found in the other prototype fairy-tale, the tale of the protagonist 
who is led or acted upon by external forces (Propp 1975). Independent of 
gender and nationality, the stories of our astrologer interviewees were borne 
along by an enthusiastic dedication to act as such guided protagonists. 
They had consciously opted out of the scientific world view in which they 
had been brought up, and had rejected the mainstream cultural values of 
their countries which, in different ways, celebrate the will of universal 
man to shape his own destiny. All were eager to tell us about their will to 
abandon themselves to cosmic guidance, to be open to intuitive wisdom 
and to cultivate a meditative mood. Their stories were clearly driven by a 
desire to be imprinted with cosmic meaning, an emotion just as strong as 
the space men's will to leave their mark in outer space. 
To Devote your Life to Cosmic Guidance 
Mikhail, a 42-year-old Russian, illustrates his belief that he was pre­
destined to become an astrologer by pointing out the connection between 
his life story and the position of the planets at the moment of his birth. 
In the late .rg8os, he left his job as a computer specialist in order to 
become director of an astrological academy, where he lectures and gives 
consultations to the public. Aside from being a prolific author of articles 
and books, he is also active in the interregional federation of astrologers 
that was set up during the perestroika period. 
Originally, however, he graduated with a degree in computing and 
mathematical topology. Nothing in his rationalistic and atheistic childhood 
environment seemed to point towards his later spiritual life. Only two 
things set him apart from most children: his interest in astronomy, and his 
Jewish heritage, which he only discovered by accident when he was ten 
years old. But today he perceives neither his fascination with the firmament, 
nor his feeling of being marginalized because of his ethniclty, as anything 
more than links in the long chain of coincidences that eventually led him 
to astrology. Seen from the normal explanations of cause and effect, he 
says, his astra-spiritual awakening appears to be a result of all the preceding 
events of his life. However, seen in a different light, it is 'as if I have 
Cosmodolphins 124 
walked a path that was already laid out at the moment of my birth'. In 
retrospect, all the coincidences in his life form a pattern of cohesive 
significances, a narrative whose structure only became meaningful -when 
the language of astrology offered him a key. Inevitably, he claims, 'astrology 
became my natural occupation'. Mikhail feels that a higher power, the 
cosmic language, structured the course of his life at birth, and marked him 
out for this particular profession. 
A similar sense of having been calied by higher forces is voiced by 
American Stephanie, who is about the same age as Mikhail. She has broken 
out of a marriage and given up her job as a social worker to embark on a 
search for a deeper connection, a higher meaning in life. She, too, was 
fascinated by astronomy before turning to astrology. 'That was about ten 
years ago, and since then it has been my passion. I fed in a sense called 
to do this work.' Nevertheless, she tried for a long time to avoid her 
vocation because of the social stigmatization that she knew would follow, 
even in the San Francisco area, unofficial capital of the New Agers. Finally, 
Stephanie 'surrendered', she says, and at the time of the interview she has 
been practising astrology professionally for eighteen months. 
Others articulate their vocation in a similar way; they use phrases like: 
'it was probably destiny', 'I had no choice', or 'so this is my gift, this is 
what I am supposed to do in this lifetime and I love to do it'. To judge 
from their intonation and appearance, this commitment seems to be accom­
panied by the kind of inner peace and joy that is usually ascribed to born­
again Christians. 
Often their encounter with the alien world of astrology took our inter­
locutors themselves by surprise. It is as though they had suddenly stumbled 
upon a strange, exotic landscape whose dislocation from the mundane 
world of Western civilization made it an appropriate environment for their 
initiation into a higher, spiritual existence. During a journey to India, a 
youthfully disoriented Gregory had his horoscope cast by a native astro­
loger; although the casting provided him with a certain inner clarity, the 
prediction that one day he too would be an astrologer came as a shock to 
him. Suddenly he realized that, perhaps, he was meant to 'get lost in order 
to find his way home'. After his return to the USA, he caiied on a 
distinguished astrologer and became the Sorcerer's Apprentice. 
For the Muscovites, however, who were not permitted to copy the New 
Age Bildungsroman by travelling abroad, the exotic was, in contrast, to be 
found much closer to home -in the underground movement. Mikhail's ' 
short journey to a metaphysicaiiy minded, subcultural study group in 
Moscow meant, as he recalls with a smile, that he was led down to the As Above, So Below 125 
basement in more ways than one -to the nethermost floor as well as into 
the subconscious. 'It was a revelation to me,' he says. 'My atheistic education 
turned out to be a shell and one strong blow was enough to smash it.' In 
a very short time, and much to his surprise, he discovered the metropolitan 
underground movement, populated not by Soviet-loyal atheistic material­
ists, but by Soviet society's peculiar oriental mirror-shadows, the Russian 
Buddhists, yogists and religious philosophers. 
In contrast to Mikhail's easy transition to a new life, the economist 
Vera's way into the world of astrological spirituality was long and tortuous 
(we introduced Vera in our second Amazing Story; see pp. 46-7). In the 
late 196os, when she was in her twenties, she became a member of a sub­
cultural group for whom astrology was the major interest. But the 
information she gained on the subject seemed at the time foggy and vague; 
only very gradually, having supplemented her knowledge with courses in 
psychology, extrasensory perception and biorhythms, did she begin, many 
years later, to practise as an astrologer herself. 
Vera speaks only her mother tongue, and has had difficulties in obtaining 
any information at all on occult or esoteric subjects. Astrological books 
were no more available in Soviet bookshops than other religious or spiritual 
literature. People with interest in such things had to xerox old, pre­
Revolutionary texts or to copy them laboriously by hand. Those who knew 
foreign languages were in a better position and often managed to get hold 
of books by authors such as Dane Rudhyar, one of modern astrology's 
founding fathers, and-the younger, but no less influential, Liz Greene. 
However, even though most professionals, such as Mikhail, draw a strict 
line between 'popular' and 'scientific' astrology, it is not an institutionalized 
belief system with authoritative interpretations. On the contrary, each 
practitioner is free to endow it with new principles and hermeneutical 
readings in accordance with her or his own perceptions. Thus Vera has 
herself elaborated some new astrological concepts, and the feeling of being 
a spiritual systems developer has enhanced her self-confidence enormously: 
she now sees herself in the role of a 'fairy-tale prince who is predestined 
to bring her ailing people back to life'. 
Vera is not alone in viewing astrology as a dynamic booster in the 
restructuring of her country. In his dialogue with a Russian astrologer, the 
very prominent author and president of the Russian PEN-centre, Andrey 
Bitov, claims that astrology's return with a vengeance from the long list of 
prohibited ideas has perhaps contributed more than anything else to the 
de-ideologizing of Soviet society. To Bitov, there is no doubt that the re­
emergence of astrology has assisted in liberating the mind from the paranoid 
Cosmodolphins 126 
effects of totalitarianism: 'to believe that you are ruled by the celestial 
bodies is after all better than to assume that the KGB or the freemasons 
stand behind everything' (Bitov 1994: 7). 
To be Imprinted with Cosmic Meaning 
In one way or another, our interviewees all refer to a feeling of being 
embedded in a specific pattern of significances that is given from above; 
hence they perceive themselves as being constantly guided by higher forces. 
To feel the rhythms of the cosmos in their lives is to them a literal truth. 
They understand themselves to be microcosmic bodies closely inter­
connected with and totally dependent on the celestial bodies of the 
macrocosmos. This symbiotic dependency structures their everyday lives 
down to the smallest detail. 
In our second Amazing Story, we saw Vera pondering how to interpret 
our visit to her astrological stand. For a long time she wavered: were we 
or were we not the cosmic messengers that the heavenly constellations had 
promised her that day? However, Vera's indecisiveness in decoding the 
celestial sign turned out to be an exception rather than the rule. Several 
other interviewees provided us, in contrast, with examples of the natural 
ease with which they pick up and read the flow of cosmic communications. 
Mikhail, for example, claims that anyone who has been preoccupied with 
the cosmos for a long time, and has developed a certain sensitivity for its 
'language', will spontaneously feel the changes in the macrocosmic 
constellations. It is then no longer necessary, he insists, to check the 
ephemerides (tables listing the positions of planets and nodal points) in 
order to know what is going on. Instead you will feel it in your body and 
your soul. If, for instance, he wakes up tired and depressed, he knows that 
this is due to the influence of Neptune or the Moon, and if the breadknife 
should slip and cut his finger, then that is the work of Mars. When the 
celestial signs are changing, so is he, and his life with him. For these 
reasons, he considers the practising of astrology to be the only realistic 
way of 'controlling' your life: it gives you insight into the laws that rule 
your destiny. 
American Stephanie strikes a sioailar chord when she describes her 
own, extremely intimate, contact with cosmos. She already had a conception 
that 'as above, so below' before she was introduced to astrology, but at that 
time she had no language to encode her experience. Today she is fully 
capable of describing the synchronicity between the 'above' and her micro­
cosmic self: an ascendant Cancer means, for example, that she herself will As Above, So Below 127 
think of subjects that astrologers believe emanate from this constellation: 
family, needs, emotions. She feels the cosmic energies most strongly when 
she consciously 'tunes in': 
Every two and a half days when the Moon changes signs I definitely notice 
those shifts. Often within minutes I can feel that shift if I tune in, if I am 
quiet. If I'm running around, busy driving, then I don't know of this so 
much. But if I am home quiet, I feel these shifts. For example, I was sitting 
on the couch and the Moon was just finishing going through the sign of 
Pisces which is a very quiet and introspective kind of energy and as soon as 
it went into Aries, I got up, got into my computer, you know, got real busy 
and more external. Then I looked later, oh, isn't that interesting. The Moon 
just changed sign and I just changed energy too. 
This feeling of being guided by cosmic forces is shared by our interviewees 
in both countries. Nevertheless, there is a national difference. While the 
Russians speak of the c.elestial bodies as being real-life, concrete, sensuous 
and extremely powerful agents, the Americans tend to use abstract terms 
that to some extent transpose the macrocosmic agency to mainly psycho­
logical and aestheticized forces. This difference between the two nation­
alities can best be illustrated with examples from their views on space 
flight and the Apollo journeys to the Moon. 
One of the female American astrologers sees the moon landings as a 
strengthening of our bonds with the feminine archerype that the Moon 
represents in New Age astrology. With these journeys, she says, we 
signalled our readiness to enter into a broader cosmic connection that will 
perhaps be based on the feminine principle. Clearly inspired by the NASA 
iconography, she also endorses space flight as 'a giant leap for mankind', 
which has enabled us to see the Earth from the outside and to perceive it 
as a living organism without national borders, etc. One of her male col­
leagues, Rick, author of several books on astrological philosophy, offers 
another, more speculative version. To him, space flight may be an indication 
of human escapism, but it could also mean something quite different and 
positive. It may be part of a greater, galactic birthing process initiated by 
the cosmos itself. 'It is also like the baby starting to come out of the 
mother and see itself, see Mother Earth, from the outside.' 
Although the higher cosmic forces are present here, the narrative per­
spective of these stories is primarily linked to the human mind and its 
cognitive functions. Even in the image of Mother Earth in ·labour, the 
viewpoint is assigned not to the planet but to the interpreting eyes of the 
human baby. 
Cosmodolphins 128 
In contrast, these astrologers' Russian counterparts expose a cosmo­
graphy in which the celestial bodies act as the only forces of sigoificance; 
they are the ones that carry the narrative perspective and, acting as the 
protagonists, they also set the plot in motion. They do so not by rep­
resenting psychological principles or forces, but by literally embodying 
powerful parental figores, which are cast as divine beings. In this way, the 
Moon of the young medical doctor, Petr, may be said not to represent but 
to embody the cunning intelligence of a female with absolute power: Petr 
understands the Apollo journeys as a scheme devised by the Moon with 
the sole purpose of making humans realize the insanity of the space 
projects. The Moon (Luna) had her own reason for 'letting the astronauts 
come to her', he says. 2 Petr maintains that she took them under her 
'influence' because she wanted to transform their consciousness, referring 
to the widespread belief in Russia that the astronauts came back as com­
pletely changed people. In Petr's discourse, the human is replaced as agent 
by the powerful Moon, who is endowed with both will and knowledge. By 
contrast, human will, knowledge and know-how are completely illusory as 
action-generators. It was the Moon who guided the space men to visit her 
body and then, as they were forced to acknowledge their mistake, to leave 
it for good. 
A similar story of macrocosrnic forces as embodied performers comes 
from 3o-year-old Sveta. She has a technical education from the Moscow 
Institute of Aviation, and has since taken courses in extrasensory perception 
and astrology; she is also very interested in UFOs, which she sees as 
messengers from a plurality of highly advanced civilizations. She believes 
that one of these extraterrestrial civilizations is so advanced that it can 
incarnate the will of the cosmos and, consequently, rule the universe. While 
this is a view she shares both with the Russian 'father of cosmonautics', 
Tsiolkovsky, and with many of his scientific heirs at the Institute of Cosmic 
Research, Sveta's conclusion differs radically from theirs. According to her, 
this divine civilization will siroply put an end to earthlings' efforts to 
colonize space. 'It will not allow us to pollute the planets in the way we have 
polluted the Earth,' she says, full of serene confidence. 'It will be stopped 
in time.' Hence the space projects are without any significance whatsoever: 
'Everything is going to turn out the way it must, and not the way we want.' 
The perspective on space flight taken by our two Americans includes a 
certain human agency and rationality in the general picture of higher 
forces at play. Moreover, the guidance that they anticipate from the cosmos 
has quite a benevolent and helpfnl character: in the USA, the cosmic 
guide seems ready to show some goodwill and render humans at least a As Above, So Below 129 
certain amount of assistance in their projects. In the Russians' case, how­
ever, humans are not only reduced to mere marionettes in the hands of the 
supreme power; they are also directly rebuffed and put back in their place. 
The will and knowledge of the Russian higher forces effectively exclude 
the upward mobility for which the Americans expect a helping hand from 
above. Roughly speaking, the American cosmos offers a carrot, that of the 
Russians wields a stick. 
On a personal level, the Russians are also led by cosmic forces in a 
much more concrete and imperative way than the Americans. When Sveta, 
for instance, began to understand the langoage of the cosmos, she would 
receive thoughts such as: 'go!', 'do this!' or 'look there!'. She says: 'You 
feel that someone is guiding you, that someone is educating you.' Sveta 
gets all the instruction she needs from above, as do many other Russian 
astrologers. An elderly former space flight technician, Askold, assures us 
that 'no knowledge' originates within himself, not even the capability of 
driving his car safely. Macrocosmic forces take over the wheel when danger 
lies ahead. 
However, one of the Russian astrologers strongly disagrees with the 
rest of her colleagues on the despotic and interfering character of the 
cosmos. Farida, who has a degree in psychology, angrily rejects in­
terpretations such as those of Sveta and Askold. She points out that these 
views are remnants of the authoritarian political system that strongly 
encouraged a fatalistic attitude. 'Oh, how I hate it!' she exclaims. The 
horoscope is to her nothing if not a fantastic offer to each individual to 
take responsibility for her/hiroself and to make use of the possibilities for 
self-development that are contained in cosmic energies. 
The differences between the Russian and American astrological mind 
are easy to find, but so are the similarities. At certain times, the Americans 
too become mere instruments of a divine agency. This happens when they 
perform the sacred ritual connected with the reading of a horoscope. For 
example, Gregory refers to this as a ritual role where he changes from an 
everyday, mundane individual to the elevated position of speaking on behalf 
of higher cosmic forces. During this transformation, his appearance also 
seems to change as though he becomes part of an ancient mystery play. He 
feels that, metaphorically speaking, he develops a mask over his face and 
a mantle of transpersonal energy over his shoulders: 
As you wear the mask, you take on the mantle of a transpersonal energy or 
power, but you are just a vehicle for that. It transcends you and you just try 
to make yourself an adequate instrument for that to happen. So when I do 
Cosmodolphins 130 
read the chart, I do really feel like something shifts inside me and, hopefully, 
it is not just me speaking. 
The notion that something or someone speaks through the astrologer 
during a seance is phrased more directly by Victoria, another San Francisco 
resident. It is not she but something else that does the readings, she insists. 
In her incense-scented apartment she prepares herself very carefully for 
her meeting with the client whose chart she is going to read. While 
meditating, she attempts to 'pull in' her client to ask the cosmos for 
permission to do what she can for the person she is waiting for. 
Then the client comes and something just happens. I get very psychic and 
things come through me and I am able to put everything together and to 
integrate the whole chart. It's a magical thing and I don't think I am·doing 
it, you know. It's someone else or something else and I am a very willing 
spokeswoman. 
These two stories push to extremes the set of modalities that rule the 
astrological stage. To be imprinted with macrocosmic meaning is central to 
both Gregory and Victoria. They abandon themselves totally to cosmic 
guidance; they are wide open to the intuitive wisdom that comes spon­
taneously into their minds during the ritual. They are so completely 
receptive to celestial wisdom that even their own personalities are intended 
to serve only as its tools. 
Astrology and Gender 
Regardless· of nationality, our astrologers all agree that their profession 
holds a very special attraction for women. As president of an astrological 
organization in Moscow, Farida conducted a survey that showed clearly 
that women, and especially middle-aged women, form the majority of 
astrologers' clientele and of those attending their lectures. Since their 
children do not need them any more, Farida says, these women finally have 
time for their own spiritual growth. 
While Farida is vague about the exact figures in her statistics on the 
distribution of gender, some of her American colleagues immediately 
declare astrology to be an almost purely feminine concern. Among those 
attending his consultations, about go per cent are women, Gregory informs 
us, and his percentage is roughly matched by the estimates given by others. 
There is also 3. broad consensus as to why this is so: it is due to feminine 
intuition. 'I would hate to sound too feminist,' says Farida, 'but women As Above, So Below 131 
have a better connection with their intuition, and astrology implies in­
tuition, not only calculations.' Much the same explanation is used in the 
USA, although with the significant difference that, here, no one airs any 
concerns about sounding too feminist. Q]llte the opposite. As we shall see, 
femininity, the icon of the marginalized, deviant and intuitive, functions in 
the discourses of all the American astrologers as an unambiguously positive 
self-image. 
Cathy, who teaches at a New Age college, is fully confident of the 
natural interconnectedness between women and astrology. To her, intuition 
and receptiveness, which she considers to be essentially feminine, are crucial 
when it comes to reading the chart, and today, where the mathematical 
calculation of planetary orbits and so on is completely computerized, they 
may even be viewed as the only really important skills. Since the necessity 
of carrying out complicated computations for the horoscope casting has 
vanished, because the mapping of the cosmos is left to computers, women 
can now, more easily than ever, apply their natural talents to reading the 
signs. According to Cathy, the readings are mainly about uniting and 
creating connections, for instance by drawing lines from one planet to 
another, and feeling the mutual influences exerted by the celestial bodies. 
'It's very connecting and complex and receptive, intuitive ... It's natural 
for women and not so natural for men,' she says. 
To discover connections, and hence to co-weave the net of cosmic 
textures, are talents that spring from the female body. (Only one person, 
an American man, felt that feminine intuition originated from upbringing 
rather than from nature.) The natural origin of female intuition is evident 
from the roles women played in ancient European myths, the American 
psychologist and New Age philosopher, Ralph, maintains. The Volva in 
Nordic mythology, Pythia and the Sibyl in the Greek tales, all acted as 
prophetesses and priestesses able to read signs that were concealed from 
others. These mythic figures clearly indicate that, since the dawn of time, 
women's natural talents have been linked to the intuitive, symbolic gifts of 
prophecy that also included astrology. Women, he says, are born with a 
talent for the clairvoyant and telepathic. 'Men have it too, but women 
simply have it naturally. Women seem to be drawn to that.' 
However, in the eyes of our American interviewees, it is not just that 
women are naturally connected with astrology as clients or professionals; 
astrology itself should be identified with femininity. Thus, Ralph is very 
sceptical of the ancient version of astrology he sees so many present-day 
astrologers reproduce uncritically. It is, he insists, an Indo-Aryan construc­
tion strongly tinged by the deeply patriarchal thought of that culture. 
Cosmodolphins 132 
Accordingly, what the astrological world view needs is a feminist de-and 
reconstruction parallel with that which has been brought to bear on some 
of the natural sciences. Ralph also mentions Marija Gimbutas's feminist 
reinterpretation of European archaeological prehistory as an example of a 
science critique that could be successfully applied to astrology (Gimbutas 
1982). 
This revolt against the patriarchal iconography of traditional astrology 
recurs in the astrological system with which New Age philosopher Rick 
presents us. (Strikingly enough, several of our interviewees took part in the 
youth revolt of the late 196os, among them Ralph and Rick; today they are 
both well-known authors of spiritual and ecological books.) Oearly inspired 
by the American goddess movement, Rick has created a feminine universe 
that, in the shape of the Great Goddess, appears to be in constant labour, 
giving birth to everything. He even envisages patriarchal culture as a 
manifestation of a larger feminine, cosmic 'principle', but when humanity 
one day gathers the courage to walk through what he sees as the birth canal 
of the Great Goddess, it will emerge to a 'reconnection with the feminine 
grounded being', he prophesies. Rick is thus extremely preoccupied with 
motherhood, birth and rebirth on a universal scale and, not surprisingly, 
he feels that psychologically he is rooted in a strongly feminine principle 
-which, he emphasizes, does not in the least affect his heterosexual 
orientation. He relates that he has had many fantastic experiences of 
identifying with the Great Mother Goddess when She is engaged in the 
process of giving birth (and this, we might add, seems to be her main 
occupation in Rick's universe). Generally, he believes that it is especially 
his feminine side that connects with the astrOlogical cosmos: 'I have a very 
strong connection with the feminine inside me which I think very much 
informs my understanding of the cosmos and my openness to astrology.' 
The identification of astrology as overtly feminine is not only based on 
its contiguity with traditional female characteristics such as intuition ' receptiveness, mediating abilities and interconnectedness with nature. 
Astrology is also endowed with 'soft' female contours because it is perceived 
as a repressed counter-universe to the 'hard' natural sciences that are 
embedded in masculiniry. As a resurgence of mythic thought, astrology 
calls to mind an alternative, womb-like cosmos that, according to Rick, 
threatens the masculine principle of the natural sciences: 
Of all disciplines, it [astrology] is the most scorned by conventional scientists 
because it is in certain ways the most feminine of sciences. There is a gender 
thing going on. The one-sidedly male psyche or masculine principle that As Above, So Below 133 
has been running the show for modern science is most scornful of the 
emergence of astrology because it threatens its male bastion. 
The majority of our American astrologers whole-heartedly endorse the 
battle with the 'male bastion' and look towards the future with high hopes 
that it will hold the return of femininity I astrology. In spite of their 
continual marginalization, they feel that the cultural shifts caused by a 
growing feminist consciousness and by the ecological movement have led 
to an increasing interest in their profession. The position of Woman/ 
Nature is hence privileged as the place from where they try to subvert and 
counter the dominant scientific discourse. 
In Russia, however, the picture of gender and astrology looks different. 
The astrologers may all admit to a specific feminine interest in the occult 
and esoteric that can be explained by women's superior intuition, but that 
is about all. Farida's cautious, yet pronounced, rejection of feminism 
indicates a demarcation line that is not to be transgressed- with or without 
the still relatively scarce computers. Femininity has no privileged position 
here. 
Although Rybakov's impressive book (1981) on the paganism of the 
ancient Slavs exposed a female deity of a magnitude that could easily 
accommodate several goddess movements, none has emerged. Moreover, 
the esoteric, idealized women that hover in Russian occult belief systems 
seem to the spiritual mind to have little in common with the profanely 
enfleshed ones of everyday life. As Holly DeNio Stephens notes in her 
article on the proliferating occultism in Russia today, the deification of the 
Eternal Feminine (or Sophia) in many of these occult teachings has 
definitely 'not translated into reverence for women and their purportedly 
occult powers' (Rosenthal 1997: 374). 
This is true of our astrologers as well. Mikhail is thus the only one 
among our interviewees to support Farida's view on the importance of 
feminine intuition in the readings, but he too keeps his endorsement of 
this idea within safe limits. Intuition is important, he concedes, since the 
mystical side of the soul cannot be explained by rational means alone. 
Cooperation between a male and a female astrologer is therefore optimal, 
because the 'divine wisdom', the logical-rational faculty of Universal Man, 
and the 'divine love', the intuition of the Eternal Feminine, can then join 
forces. Another Russian, the young paediatrician Petr, whose wife works as 
a healer and witch, totally rejects the idea that women should practise 
astrology professionally. Just as a man cannot be a witch, Petr reasons, a 
woman cannot be an astrologer. The latter deals with 'liberating the human 
Cosmodolphins 134 
from its cage', and such a liberating expansion can only be done by a man. 
Women should do the opposite -that is, preserve and keep together the 
human within its frame. (Nevertheless, his pronounced dislike of female 
astrologers does not prevent him from being vice-president of the organ­
ization that is headed by Farida.) Finally, a third male answers our question~ 
on possible gender-based differences in the approach to astrology with a 
rodomontade whose essential message is that women are intellectually 
mediocre while men span the entire spectrum from the stupid to the 
brilliant. Hey presto -men ate the best! 
While the Russian men eagerly embrace patriarchy and openly advocate 
misogynist notions of a kind reminiscent of the great Eutopean gender 
debate of a century ago, their female colleagues energetically resist the traps 
of labels and definitions set up by the gender discoutse. They demonstrate 
their resistance by maintaining, for instance, that gender is insignificant, or 
by claiming that everybody contains femininity and masculinity -or yin 
and yang, as one of them puts it -in the same way that both sexual 
categories are present everywhere in the universe. Hence their strategy is 
to define themselves not as constrained women but as free humans. 
All in all, the Russian gender discourse seems old-fashioned. The 
subversive possibilities of the concept of Woman as a loose discursive 
position that may assist in the deconstruction of repressive systems have 
not yet moved eastward. 
Beneath the snrface, however, the female sex does occupy the language 
of the male Russian astrologers with its own subversive agents. Via the 
grammar of gender that is so vital in Russian (nouns are feminine, 
masculine or neuter), another very powerful femininity is installed alongside 
the one that is conversely characterized by a definite lack of power. The 
latter emerged in the male astrologers' explicit phrases about women, while 
the former rises inexorably with the Moon, the feminine Luna. T'o most 
astrologers, American and Russian, the receptive and light-reflecting Moon 
symbolizes the maternal and emotional sphere that is connected with the 
past, with childhood, and hence with the distinctive traits of femininity. 
But whereas in the eyes of the Americans the Moon is unambiguously 
positive, beautiful and good, an indispensable 'complementary principle' 
to the Sun, this very same Moon brings up quite different feelings in the 
Russian men. In their language it, or rather 'she', is dangerous, difficult, 
and at times impossible to control. 
Following on from his description of the Eternal Feminine, the in­
carnation of the bright 'divine love', a datk, chaotic and threateningly 
destructive Moon-Woman enters Mikhail's speech: As "Above, So Below 135 
I feel the Moon's influence rather strongly but, frankly speaking, I try to 
withdraw from it. The Moon's influence defines the biological and psychic 
everyday life. The Moon after all is like a mother to us ... she creates the 
family in which we live, she defines the influences on biological processes, 
but at the same time she is also connected with all the confusion and destruc­
tion of our psychic life ... somnambulism, unexpected emergences of the 
unconscious ... ungovernable processes in our psychic life, that is all the 
Moon ... I would like the Moon to be more organized -the Moon in my 
soul, of course ... I certainly do not want to bring order to the celestial 
Moon, that is not up to me ... But generally I feel the Moon very strongly, 
the movements, phases . . . Even my activities, my capacity for action, are 
very much connected with the lunar cycle ... Some days, especially towards 
the end of a cycle, I have great difficulty getting hold of myself, statting 
work . . . At full moon one feels increased agitation, less stability and too 
much emotionality ... but during recent years I've got more control ... 
In contrast to the Americans, who carefully fertilize and cultivate their 
inner femininity so that it seems to glow and thrive even in the dim light 
of their soft and beautiful Moon, Mikhail apparently needs great strength 
to manage the unruly Moon in his soul. 
A similarly active and powerful female Moon was at work in Petr's field 
of vision when he described the 'influence' that this celestial body exerted 
on the Apollo astronauts. His Moon effectively put the astronauts in their 
place; performing in the manipulative way she did, she perhaps remained 
within the radius of action that Petr allots more generally to women: as 
keepers and upholders of traditions and boundaries. Nevertheless, this 
active Moon, the absolute agent of the plot, throws new light on Petr's 
efforts to contain Woman/Narure. Illuminated in this way, the category 
regains some of its lost freedom. The Moon, Petr asserts, had her own 
reason for 'letting the astronauts come to her'; she alone decided whom to 
allow in. This version of Luna could not be controlled. 
Mikhail's uneasiness and Petr's subtle respect are supplemented by 
Askold's cautious hostility towards the Moon (Luna). Askold is very reluct­
ant to elaborate on his pronounced dislike of her: 'I don't like her,' he 
repeats deprecatingly, before eventually straying into fantastic and lustful 
speculations on the revenge that cosmic Mother Nature, possibly the Earth, 
will take on humanity. Mother Eatth is in bad shape, he insists, because 
too many people live 'on her' as useless parasites. But one day narure will 
decide to put an end to this infestation by exterminating one half of 
humanity: 'A wave will pass over half of the Eatth and everything will be 
Cosmodolphins 136 
dead ... or gases ... there are a lot of variations,' he explains in answer to 
our ~azed question about how this catastrophe will come about. Askold 
has yet another option, which this time seems to refer to the hole in the 
ozone layer. But in his vision, this hole is generated by higher forces: 
'There may be a hole made in the cosmos, and radioactive radiation shall 
enter, afterwards the hole will be closed again ... it's elementary.' The 
agent of this punitive expedition may be Mother Earth or 'sometbiog 
else'; that is really of minor importance, he says, since the Earth is a living 
organ in the cosmic body. 
We saw the Americans ascribe significance and power to the feminine, 
partly by insisting on its identity with astrology, and partly by locatiog 
Woman/Nature in the privileged place from where the astrological universe 
is meant to counter and subvert the dominant discourses. This picture 
changed radically in Russia, where gender was either subsumed into human­
ness (by the women) or hierarchically polarized in favour of patriarchy (by 
the men). Nevertheless, this latter, vety rigid, gender hierarchy becomes 
subverted by the mythic realism that conceives of nature in the shape of 
an extremely powerful, female figure who is alive and who has will, know­
ledge and know-how. This intrusion of mythic realistic thought thus causes 
displacements and turbulence, not externally in the dominant cultural 
context as intended by the re-mytbologized world picture of the Americans, 
but internally in the mindscape of the Russian men. 
The Dyadic Relationship 
Femininity also emerges on another and higher level in the astrological 
universes of both nations. A dyadic mother I child relationship exists be­
tween the astrologers and their cosmos. This connection is suggested by 
Rick's experiences of identifying with the cosmic Mother Goddess, but it 
recurs in other stories as well. For instance, when Vera relates that to her 
the cosmos is one system, 'whole, living, pulsating, harmonic', she envisions 
it as a large organism or body of which she herself is only a very small 
part. Hence she feels that she is 'a living, tiny part of a living cosmos'. 
During the interview, she mentions the priority that for many years she 
has given to being a loving but also a strict mother to her two daughters. 
This maternal role suddenly takes on an unexpected enunciative force: 
when we ask her which picture spontaneously connects with the word 
cosmos, Vera gives an apologetic laugh and presents us with an image of 
herself when pregnant. Her association with the word cosmos she says is ' , 'an extension of mysel£ I grow large and become enormously big.' In the As Above, So Below 137 
next breath, as though in continuation of her metaphoric maternal swelling, 
she defines a human being as 'a creature, a child of nature, who must only 
submit to the cosmos'. In this context, Vera's reply strongly suggests that 
she is simultaneously the gigantic, swelling cosmic body who is about to 
give birth and the child who is being born -at the same time the great 
mother and the small daughter. Probably unwittingly, she has reproduced 
the ancient mythic representation of the Great Goddess in her self­
generatiog cyclicity (mother/ daughter) tbat is still visible, in stylized form, 
in Russian embroideries. 
The symbiotic connection, where mother and child seem to merge, is 
phrased by Farida in a way that recalls Vera's mother/daughter/cosmos, 
except that Farida speaks not of the cosmos, but of the Eartb (which is a 
feminine word in Russian). She experiences herself as both a child of the 
Earth and as its mother. By developing her personality positively she, as 
a living part of a living Earth, gives sometbiog back: 'I am a part of the 
Earth, so if sometbiog good happens to me, it means that I'll return 
sometbiog good to the Earth. I am at the same time both the Earth's child 
and her mother.' 
Similar pictures are put forward by Petr, who practised as a specialist 
in treating new-born babies before he switched to astrological medicine. 
He too sees himself as a tiny part of the cosmos and 'although this may 
sound impudent', he laughs, he also connotes the word cosmos with an 
image of himsel£ In another connection, he speculates on the age-old 
question of origin: 'Who came first, I or the cosmos, that's impossible to 
grasp.' So, who was first -the chicken or the egg, the child or the mother, 
the embryo or the womb, Petr or the cosmos? 
An even more common picture of coalescence lies in the description of 
oneself as a cell in the body of the Earth, while the Earth is a cell in the 
larger, cosmic body. Stephanie, and others with her, express their feeling 
of a deeply organic interconnectedness with the cosmos in this way. And 
to Petr, who also identifies the self with the cell, the important tbiog is not 
to fall out of the organic rhythm and become a 'cancer cell' tbat, at worst, 
may destroy the whole organism. 
The human being and the cosmos are thus intimately bodily connected 
in the eyes of our astrologers. In their world picture, the conception of the 
cosmos as a double image that mirrors womb and human being, mother 
and child, reappears, suggestiog that the one does not stir without the 
other. 
Cosmodolphins 138 
Notes 
1. The majority of our interviewees were professional astrologers in the sense that 
they practised it publicly. Some of the Americans were, however, also teachers and 
researchers at a New Age college in San Francisco; a couple of them were students 
there. We interviewed six Russians {three women and three men) and nine Americans 
(five women and fourmen). 
2. In Russian the moon is called Luna, which is a feminine word. In the context, the 
pronoun should be translated as though referring to a female Moon that is alive. One Does not Stir without the Other 
The stories told by our Russian and American interviewees demonstrate 
that their use of astrology is different from that of pre-modern societies, 
where it was part of mainstream culture. Their approach also differs from 
the one practised in contemporary cultural settings in which people frequent 
astrologers in order to comply with traditional customs and lifestyles. To 
become an adherent of New Age astrology in Russia or the USA means 
to opt out of the mainstream culture that is embedded in a scientific world 
view and is passed on by the educational system, universities, the media, 
etc. New Agers deliberately embrace the alienness and difference of ancient 
thought systems, such as astrology, as vehicles for a rebirth and re­
empowering of the spiritual dimensions of life and matter, which were 
exorcized by the powerful alliances of modern science, Enlightenment, 
secularization and, as far as the former Soviet Union is concerned, 
Marxism-Leninism. 
When listening to the astrologers, it is as though we are being asked to 
enter a universe of negations. All the modes of functioning and the 
principles of agency that govern the scientifically defined world view, in 
which both we and they were brought up, are inverted. We are encouraged 
to give up the idea of human free will and to forget the cosmic billiard 
table of soulless matter in mechanical motion, all regulated by the laws of 
physics., that we learned about in school. Instead, we are invited into a 
cosmos that is bodily and spiritually alive; we are urged to see ourselves 
as tiny parts, as microcosmic offspring, of a gigantic macrocosmic being 
who administers our life and activities like an overzealous mother. When 
the rhetoric of the astrologers conjures up this alternative universe, the 
pictures of the distant clock-maker God of early modernity and his Space 
Age successor, the Cyber-Godfather of galactic civilizations, fade away. 
Instead, the image of an omnipotent cosmic mother, all-pervading in her 
bodily and spiritual presence, appears on our mental screen. We are stimu-
Cosmodolphins 140 
lated to feel her perpetual embrace and the tremors of good and bad 
vibrations that she continually sends through us. 
With astrology as illustration, this chapter takes a closer look at the 
performances of the motherly cosmos-body, which make the cosmological 
master narrative of the New Age so different from the one produced by 
space flight. We analyse how the astrologers renegotiate cosmology- how, 
in a gesture of negation towards the modern will to bio-power, they 
reinvent pre-modernity's symbiotic mother-child relationship between 
human self and cosmos. 
Astrology- a Cosmic Ecriture FBminine? 
Some astrologers (Farrant 1989; Douglas 1981) point out that astrology 
is a kind of linguistics, a cosmosemiotics. While, as Ferdinand de Saussure 
once said, social semiotics interprets 'the life of signs in society' (Saussure 
1974), astrology wants to help us understand the life of cosmic signs. 
Astrology constructs its object as a cosmic language of rhytlunically moving 
heavenly bodies. It turns the firmament into a big screen that continuously 
conveys important messages from the Goddess of Fate in a grotesque and 
sibylline body language of dancing planets and gesticulating Zodiac signs. 
Seen from their own perspective, the astrologers are offering us dictionaries 
and grammars for the decoding of this language. 
Beginning our investigations with the arguments of linguistically 
oriented astrologers, we shall suggest that New Agers and some spiritual 
feminists have reinvented astrology as a kind of cosmic icriture fhninine, i.e. 
a writing that negates the rationality of the dominant cosmology and the 
symbolic order in which it is inscribed; a writing that instead articulates the 
bodily-spiritual forces of a cosmos that is identified as being a mixture of 
the grotesque, the feminine, and the motherly; a writing that erupts in­
appropriately in the margins of a culture dominated by the scientific world 
view. In this interpretation of astrology, we draw inspiration from the 
philosophy of icriture fiminine and desire in language- and from key works 
by Luce Irigaray (1981, 1985a, 1985b, 1993), Hl:lene Cixous (1985, 1991; 
CiJmus and Clement 1986) and Julia Kristeva (1980, 1984, 1986, 1987). 
Since the term icriture fiminine, 'feminine writing', has been used 
differently by different interpreters of the original French texts, it is 
necessary to insert a note on terminology. We use the term as an umbrella 
for the heterogeneous ways in which lrigaray, Cixous and Kristeva articulate 
close relationships between female/human/ sexed bodies, desires and texts/ 
writing. But, strictly spealdng, the term lcr£ture fiminine applies only to the One Does not Stir without the other 141 
works of Cixous. lrigaray prefers other terms such as parler-femme, 'speak­
ing (as) woman' (Whitford 1991: 38), whereas Kristeva's term 'desire in 
language', contrary to those of Cixous and lrigaray, is not inscribed in a 
philosophy of sexual difference. 
Although the texts of Irigaray, CiJmus and Kristeva are often read for 
their approach to writing, to textual articulations of desiring bodies, 
spiritual or cosmic themes also play a significant role in them. In fact, they 
juggle creatively with textual--sexual relationships between bodily desires, 
cosmologies and spiritualities. In so doing, they fit our analysis, because at 
the same time they avoid simplistic essentialism in their focus on imaginary 
or symbolic representations. Their approach matches our wish to steer 
clear of two complementary traps while exploring the re-emergence of 
astrology in the midst of a culture that cultivates a scientific world view. 
One trap is to side totally with the rational, anti-spiritual and disembodied 
outlook of modern mainstream culture and to reject the New Agers' opting 
out as an irrational act of unscientific nostalgia. The other trap is to give 
up critical analysis and distance and to accept the universalist, essentialist 
and at times extremely phallogocentric truth claims of the astrologers. 
Referring to the works of Irigaray, CiJwus and Kristeva, we try to carve 
out a third approach. But it also follows from this that the purpose of our 
reading of astrology as heavenly icr£ture fim£n£ne is not simply to collapse 
the sophisticated, poststructuralist texts into the essentialist thinking of 
astrology. Our aim is both to explore certain analogies between the two 
kinds of discourses and to expose their differences. 
An Outline of the Approach 
We shall highlight the significance ascribed by the astrologers to the 
sibylline 'language' of grotesque, macrocosmic (mother)bodies by drawing 
parallels with the otherwise different narratives of a writing that claims to 
be a textual--sexual inscription of female/ motherly bodies and desires. 
More precisely, we shall sustain our analysis of the astrologers' narrative 
about an archaic cosmic body language that subverts the discourses of 
modern science, by comparing it to the ways in which the discourses on 
ecriture ]eminine (Cixous), parter-femme (Irigaray) and desire in language 
(Kristeva) construct their stories about close-knit relationships between 
texts and sexed bodies -about textually erupting bodily desires that can 
be traced, for example, in certain kinds of poetic language. 
The pivot of ecriture ]eminine and parter-femme is writing/ speaking/ 
singing the female body. Writing the female body into a text means insisting 
Cosmodolphins 142 
on it as a difference that makes a difference and that can disrupt the 
phallogocentrism of existiog imaginary and symbolic orders. Disruption 
can for example be engendered by an imaginary and symbolic emergence 
of the female labia, which in the discourses of Western philosophy from 
Plato to Freud were completely repressed by the phallus (Irigaray 1985a 
and 1985b). 
Desire in language, according to Kristeva, is to be traced in disruptions 
of the symbolic order of thetically' meaningful enunciation caused by the 
semiotic chora: i.e. pre-representative, pre-symbolic and utterly provisional 
articulations founded in the primary processes' and the early bodily inter­
play between child and mother. Metaphor and metonymy play an important 
role in Kristeva's theory as tropes that correspond to the psychoanalytical 
notions of displacement and condensation. As such, they are considered to 
be pyschosemiotic articulations of desire in close relationship to the bodily 
drive economy (Kristeva 1984: 28). 
We shall suggest that the stories of these kinds of body-speak, imagined 
to· spout from the human/female body and stream into certain kinds of 
texts as the 'white ink' of the 'good mother's milk' (Cixous 1985: 251), can 
in a sense illuminate the astrologers' narrative about the organic-spiritual 
langnage of the Great Cosmic Mother's rhythmical movements and bodily 
gestures. 
In a concluding assessment of the astrologers' negation of the scientific 
world view and its will to bio-power, we shall, however, also outline some 
important differences between the narratives of their discourses and those 
of icn·ture fhninine. We shall use Irigaray's discussion of present-day 
women's need for a female divine (Irigaray 1993) to encircle potentials of, 
as well as limits to, the deification of cosmic space as embodied female 
subject, which in different ways and to varying degrees is a part of New 
Age and feminist astrology. 
A broadly outlined concept of icriture fiminine will thus structure the 
general framework of interpretation. But in order to explore the difference 
that makes the astrological outlook manifest as alien other when reinvented 
in the midst of a late twentieth-century postindustrial society, it is also 
necessary to draw on cultural-historically informed theories about the pre­
modern episteme that astrologers have revived. In the following, we will 
take a closer look at some theories about ancient astrological cosmology 
and apply them to selected texts from New Age and feminist astrology. One Does not Stir without the other 143 
Cosmos as Living Body -the Rebirth of an Ancient Episteme 
The astrological cosmology has roots in the ancient belief in an organic­
spiritual correspondence between the human body and the cosmos, between 
micro-and macrocosmos. An important genealogy can be traced back to 
medieval and Renaissance Neoplatonist mysticism and Gnosticism (Jung 
1972; Rosenberg 1984). But, according to Ernst Cassirer's comprehensive 
analysis of mythical thought from totemism to astrology (1922, 1987), the 
theory of correspondences forms part of a broad spectrum of pre-scientific 
modes of knowing and signifying, which all share a basic episteme. The 
construction of cosmos in the. image of the living body, and vice versa, 
enfleshes the core of this episteme. The living, feeling, thinking body in 
its macro-and microcosmic aspects, Cassirer points out, governs the 
production of meaning, or semiosis, of ancient mythical thought. 
In order to understand the ancient episteme reinvented by New Age 
astrology, we shall, alongside Cassirer, take into account two other cultural­
historical approaches to pre-scientific thought systems. One is Milthail 
Bakhtin's analysis of the grotesque body of pre-modern world views 
(Bakhtin 1984). The other stems from Carolyn Merchant's discussion of 
the motherbody as root metaphor of the organic-mythical world view of 
pre-modernity (Merchant 1980 ). The approaches of Cassirer, Bakhtin and 
Merchant are complementary. Cassirer highlights the 'how' of the ancient, 
bodily episteme, developing a linguistic-philosophical analysis of the 
mythical mode of knowing and signifying. Bakhtio and Merchant on their 
side focus on the 'what', the type of body image on which the ancient 
episteme is modelled. In the context of our study, Cassirer will sustain the 
claim that astrology can be viewed as a linguistics or semiotics of the 
cosmic body-speak, while Bakhtio and Merchant back up the statement 
that the sibylline gift of tongues flows from a grotesque and motherly body. 
We shall apply Cassirer, Bakhtio and Merchant's theories to a cluster of 
contemporary New Age texts. The purpose is to show how New Age 
thinking causes ancient discourses of a world conceptualized in the image 
of the living (mother)body, to erupt as a kind of ecriture feminine on the 
margins of contemporary high-tech culture. We have chosen four different 
examples from the vast corpus of contemporary New Age literature. 
First, we shall zoom in on two astrologers with international reputations, 
whom several of our American and Russian astrologer interviewees 
mentioned with reverence. They are the English astrologer and Jungian 
psychotherapist Liz Greene and the late French-American astrologer philo­
sopher Dane Rudhyar. Greene's books are famous for their application of 
Cosmodolphins 144 
astrology to psychotherapy and individual psychology, whereas Rudhyar 
was the first to develop philosophically the links pointed out by Jung 
between analytical psychology and astrology (Rudhyar 1991). Rudhyar has 
~lso written extensively on the coming of the New Age. We use Greene and 
Rudhyar as exaroples because they provide a kind of theoretical conunon 
denominator for much New Age astrology, including the majority of our 
interviewees. They are both influential representatives of the 'psychological 
turn' characteristic of New Age astrology. It is a turn away from predictive 
astrology, which is rejected as vulgar magazine fortune-telling, to a Jung­
inspired 'cosmopsychology' (Rudhyar 1975: 9), i.e. a mystically tinged 
psychology oriented towards personal and planetary consciousness-raising 
and spiritual transformation. 
Two further examples involve the American feminist astrologer Demetra 
George (1992) and the Russian writer Zufar Gareev (1991), who represents 
a New Age-inspired wave of occultism in post-glasnost Russian literature 
(Brougher 1997; Laird 1999). Together, Greene, Rudhyar, George and 
Gareev unfold a broad spectrum of omnipotent mother-images, ranging 
from profoundly patriarchal to feminist figures, inhabiting the imaginaries 
of Eastern and Western New Agers. 
To be Guided by Fate 
We shall look first at the 'how' of the astrological episteme, with Cassirer 
as our theoretical guide. Applying his approach to the texts of Liz Greene, 
we focus on the natal horoscope as a favourite instrument of modern 
astrology. 
In her book The Astrology of Fate (r984), Greene reports a case history 
from her psychotherapeutic practice. The protagonist of the story is a 
woman, Alison, who lost her eyesight during her late teens and whose 
whole future life appeared to be ruined by this stroke of seemingly bad 
luck that also entailed a series of other misfortunes. The eye disease that 
caused her blindness was not properly treated because of an incompetent 
ophthalmologist's erroneous diagnoses; she had to give up the development 
of her distinct talent for painting and drawing; she was prevented from 
pursuing the career as a schoolteacher that she had planned, etc. Never­
theless, the Alison that Greene puts on display is not unhappy, embittered 
or depressed but, on the contrary, full of creativity and vitality; she feels 
that the loss of her eyesight 'gives [her] ... as much as it takes away' 
(Greene 1984: 327). We also hear that she has found her 'inner authority': 
instead of engaging in a destructive 'vendetta' (Greene 1984: 326----7) against One Does not Stir without the Other 145 
her bad luck, she has accepted the guidance of Moira, the Goddess of 
·Fate, whose motherly advice is inscribed in her natal horoscope and the 
pattern of coincidences of her life. In this way, Alison's blindness has led 
her to become a gifted singer, a social worker, a counsellor and a therapist 
-all activities that she enjoys very much. 
Seen from Greene's point of view, Alison lost her sight because of the 
unusually strong influence of the planet Pluto in her natal horoscope. Of 
all the celestial bodies, Pluto connects most forcefully with the basic, 
existential transitions of life and death. To understand Pluto, Greene 
writes, we must remember his mythic genealogies. In ancient Rome, Pluto 
was feared as the sovereign of the Underworld, the kingdom of the dead. 
Since Greene believes Fate to be closely related to a powerful femininity, 
she also stresses that the Roman god of death has roots in much older, 
matriarchal myths of omnipotent mother goddesses who rule over life and 
death. In their dark aspect, these goddesses embodied night, death and 
Fate. 
To be born under a sky heavily over-written with the ominous hand­
writing of the dark forces of Pluto and his powerful foreroothers is no 
laughing matter, Greene warns us. Nevertheless, for Alison, who dared to 
accept their guidance instead of fighting them, it has led to 'individuation'3 
and a rich life. Greene is clearly impressed by Alison's story and reports 
it as an exemplary illustration of her main point: that the motherly guiding 
voice of Fate should not be ignored. If we oppose or disregard Fate, the 
moral of her story goes, if we stick to our arrogant and illusory twentieth­
century beliefs in free will and the power to be in complete control of the 
basic existential prerequisites of our lives, then Fate will show us her 
destructive face. But if, on the contrary, we steer away from the hubris of 
the modern scientific world view, we will be able to see Her regenerative 
face. Then, She will guidC us like a wise mother- as she did with Alison. 
How to Think in the Image of the Body 
When we explore Greene's discourse with the assistance of Cassirer's 
interpretation of mythical semiosis and its construction of cosmos as a 
living body, it becomes clear that the epistemic principles he identified as 
the basic eleroents of pre-modern astrology reappear as cornerstones of 
New Age astrology. 
Cassirer's theory (Cassirer 1922, 1987) maintains that mythical thought 
depends on a semiosis very different from the one to which people educated 
in the modern scientific ·world view are accustomed. An important 
Cosmodolphins 146 
difference is that the mechanistic principle of causality and the Cartesian 
and positivist distinction between subjectivity and objectivity do not fit 
into this way of knowing. This difference was also emphasized by Jung. 
He coined the concept of synchronicity (Jung 1972) in order to name his 
belief in the existeri.ce of meaningful coincidences between occurrences 
that were connected by non-causal relations- for example, between inner­
psychic and outer-world events. But while Jung takes these links as 
essentially and universally given, Cassirer explains them in the historical 
context of the bodily episteme of pre-modern thought. This is our reason 
for choosing Cassirer as our theoretical guide. 
When confronted with Alison's blindness, the scientifically minded 
person will look for objective causes: biomedical reasons, incompetent 
intervention on the part of the ophthalmologist, etc. Whether or not Alison 
can learn to cope with her handicap will be considered as a subjective, 
psychological question to be kept apart from the biomedical ones. In 
contrast, Greene rejects this 'modern' form of reasoning as superficial and 
lopsided. For her, the blindness is an effect of the influence of Pluto in 
Alison's natal horoscope. It is a work of the Goddess of Fate, an existential 
fuct that cannot be bypassed by any biomedical intervention, but that, in 
return, may guide Alison ·to her 'true self'. 
Seen through the lens of modern science, Greene's way of arguing is 
irrational. She does not look for causality, nor does she distinguish between 
the objective world of matter and the subjective sphere of thoughts and 
feelings. But, assessed within the framework of Cassirer's analysis her 
viewpoint makes sense. She refuses to obey a logic of mechanistic cau~ality 
and. inst~d ~eeks signs of contiguity and similarity in a gigantic living, 
feeling, thinking world body, of which all earthly beinga and celestial bodies 
are spiritual-organic parts or cells. 
The bodily way of knowing of mythical semiosis is, according to Cassirer 
rooted in signifying processes based on the principles of contiguity (bodil; 
touching) and simz1arity (bodily resemblance), or in other words, on the 
tropes metonymy and metaphor' (Jakobson rg87). Phenomena and events 
(outer and/or inner) that touch one another bodily in space and/or time 
are forever connected; this is the principle of contiguity, or metonymy. The 
same is true, Cassirer says, of phenomena and events that can be claimed 
to bear a qualitative, bodily resemblance to one another; this is the function 
of similarity, or metaphor. 
. Applying the principle of contiguity/metonymy, we may observe two 
kinds of bodily 'touching' when looking at the natal horoscope. First of 
all, the celestial bodies 'touch' one another spatially. Seen from the geo-One Does not Stir without the other 147 
centric perspective of astrology, the ruler of existential transitions, Pluto 
'copulated' (i.e. formed geometrical oppositions, squares, trigons, etc.) with 
almost all the other planets and important Zodiac signs when Alison was 
born. Second, we may speak about a temporal 'touching'. This particular 
configuration of heavenly bodies occurred at the unique moment of 
Alison's birth. 
That the whole world is conceived in the image of the living human 
body is a consequence of the other basic principle of mythical semiosis, 
that of similarity /metaphor. This construction is based on the bodily 
resemblance that the production of mythical meaning inscribes in the two 
entities: cosmos is a body, and the body. is a cosmos. Also implied is the 
belief that everything in the universe is connected through organic~piritual 
links, parallel to those of the individual human body. Hence the thought 
that ominous Pluto influenced Alison's bio-psychic life pattern is not 
dissimilar to thinking that a severe headache affects the mood and general 
well-being of a person. 
The system of correspondences is another effect of the principle of 
similarity or metaphor. According to Cassirer, phenomena that, by tradition 
or by actual physical similarity, may be said to resemble one another, 
become linked by all-inclusive processes of metaphor creation. Thus, 
phases of human life are connected to seasons of the year (spring-youth, 
sununer-mature adulthood, etc.). The same goes for the planets' mythical 
namesakes and aspects of the human psyche; the metaphorical principle 
functions as the driving force behind astrology's setting up series after 
series of links suCh as: 
Sun/Sun-gods/ ego 
Moon/Moon-goddesses/unconscious self 
Pluto/ruler of the kingdom of the dead/basic urge towards death and 
rebirth, etc. 
Apart from contiguity/metonymy and similarity/metaphor, Cassirer 
identifies one more important basic principle distinguishing mythical 
semiosis from conventional scientific thought. It is the principle of realism 
(as opposed to the philosophical category of nominalism, whereby a di­
chotomy splits word/image from world). According to Cassirer, mythical 
thought presents us with an extreme variant of realism that recognizes no 
distance at all between representation and the represented referent. This 
mythical realism implies that the cosmic 'Signature' (Rudhyar 1991: 141) 
imprinted on the individual and articulated in the natal horoscope appears 
to the astrologer to be as real as the transubstantiation of holy bread and 
Cosmodolphins 148 
wine is to the devout Catholic. Alison's blindness IS, Greene wants to 
persuade us, a TRUE effect of Pluto's influence. 
The Universe as Mother Body 
We shall now turn to the 'what', i.e. the particular body image of the 
ancient episteme revived by New Age astrology. Our new theoretical guides, 
Bakhtin and Merchant, will here inform our approach to the example: 
Rudhyar. 
Bakhtin ( 1984) characterizes the world body in which the episteme of 
astrology and other kinds of pre-modern thought are grounded as grot­
esque. This grotesque body is an ancient image that celebrates the basic, 
existential transitions of the life cycle of the body. In this image birth, 
death, copulation, metabolism, etc., act in hyperbolic forms. Especially 
highlighted are situations where the boundaries of the individual body 
appear as ambiguOus and temporary, and where body and cosmos, micro­
and macrocosmos, merge: 
the grotesque body is cosmic and universal. It stresses elements common 
to the entire cosmos: earth, water, fire, air; it is directly related to the sun, to 
the stars. It contains the signs of the zodiac. It reflects the cosmic hierarchy. 
This body can merge with various natural phenomena, with mountains, 
rivers, seas, islands, and continents. It can fill the entire universe. (Bakhtin 
1984: 318) 
Similarly, Merchant (198o) also emphasizes that pre-modern Europeans 
perceived the world as a living organism, a person writ large, but a primary 
concern for her lies in the importance that the ancient imagery ascribed to 
sexual difference and to nature as a powerful mother. She shows how the 
ancient notions of the world as a living and thinking organism .often 
included different kinds of images of nature, world and Earth as a 
nurturing or sometimes cruel mother, eventually married to some kind of 
cosmic father figure. Merchant provides abundant illustrations, for example, 
Plato's Timaeus and its framing of three cosmic family actants or positions: 
Demiurge-father, chora-receptacle-mother, and the creation-child; or 
Renaissance Neoplatonism, where the chora was transformed into a female 
world soul (Merchant 1980: 1o-u). 
Bakhtin and Merchant both concentrate on medieval and Renaissance 
images of the grotesque and gendered world bodies. Both argue that the 
ancient system of correspondences between macro-and microcosmos the ' One Does not Stir without the other 149 
basic tenet of astrology, is gestated in the womb of this grandiose body 
(Bakhtin 1984: 361; Merchant 198o: uS-19). 
The Universal Mother Body in New Age Guise 
We shall now revisit New Age astrology and look at the world body that 
is celebrated by a guru such as Rudhyar -a world body that appears as 
a reinvention of the pre-modern images drawn by Bakhtin and Merchant. 
Images of a living body, which may take on gigantic and grotesque 
shapes and fill the entire universe, abound in Rudhyar's texts. He sees 
Earth as 'a cosmic organism' (Rudhyar 1975: 59) and humans as 'cells' in 
this vast body (Rudhyar 1991: 141), which is imbued with life and spiritu­
ality. It is a 'vast, living, thinking organism' (Rudhyar 1975: 61) that 'has 
not only a physical globe as its material body, but also an electromagnetic 
"ethero-astral body" and still higher <'fields of existence" in which mental 
and spiritual forces and dynamic centres operate' (Rudhyar 1975: s~o). 
It is a planetary being that, like the human body of occult theory, has a 
surrounding aura, chakras housed within specific body parts, and a spine 
channelling waves of energy or 'kundalini'.5 The Zodiac is described as 
'the auric egg of the planetary Being' (Rudhyar 199r: 198), or as its 
'placenta' (ibid.: zoo). Certain mountains, for example the Himalayas, are 
conceived as planetary chakra centres (Rudhyar 1975: 63), and so are the 
equator and the poles. The polar axis of the Earth forms the spine of the 
planetary being and the equator is defined as its solar plexus (ibid.: 130). 
As his reference to the Zodiac as 'egg' or 'placenta' indicates, Rudhyar 
is not only conceptualizing the world/ cosmos as a living organism, a 
grotesque body d Ia Bakhtin, but also as a nurturing mother (cf. Merchant). 
The planetary being, the Earth-body, is viewed as an embryo in complete 
metabolic symbiosis with the cosmic womb that nourishes it' with energy 
-'macrocosmic food', 'celestial Bread and Waters' (Rudhyar 1991: zoo)­
and protects it by filtering all outside radiation and disposing of its waste 
products: 
the zodiac is the placenta of the embryonic Earth-body. All the bnilding 
energies which produce the growth of the embryo must pass through the 
placenta. The placenta is the formative zone, the zone in and from which 
the building energies and substances of the macrocosm vitalize the micro­
cosm just as the mother's energies vitalize the embryo. (Rudhyar 1991: zoo) 
It is hard to imagine a clearer presentation of the human-Earth--<:osmos 
relationship as an image of the mother/child symbiosis. But further 
Cosmodolphins 150 
affinities between Rudhyar's world view and the pre-modern ones depicted 
by Bakhtin and Merchant surface in his fascination with life cycles and 
physical transitions. 
Basically, astrology deals with cyclical patterns of transformation and 
the important transitions of life. In particular, the existential threshold, · 
represented by the moment of birth, is a benchmark of the natal horoscope. 
But cyclicity and the transitions and transformations involved in cyclical 
processes are also generally founding concepts in astrology. The day arid 
night cycle, reflecting the Earth's rotation about its own axis, reappears 
here as the wheel of twelve houses, while the cycle of the solar year and 
the Earth's rotation around the sun recur in the orbit of the twelve SignS 
of the Zodiac. The .large cycle drawn by the precession of the equinoxes 
is mirrored as the so-called 'Great Year', 6 composed of twelve ages each 
about 2,150 years long and represented by a Zodiac sign: the Age of 
Pisces, the Age of Aquarius, etc. In New Age astrology, the cycles acquire 
psychologica1-spiritual significance, revealing various kiods of wholeness 
or mandalas. The wheel of houses is a mirror of the individual self in its 
relationships to the wholeness of life's aspects (play, work, relationships, 
ideals, etc.); the twelve Zodiac signs are considered as corresponding .to a 
fourfold division related to the elements, fire-earth-air-water, which New 
Age astrology, based on a Jungian influence, correlates with basic rilodes ·of 
perception: intuition-sensation-thinking-feeling. 
Rudhyar's philosophical fraroework underlines the general·astrological 
importance of cyclicity. He describes a myriad small and large cycles that 
interfere with one another in the cosmic world body. According t~ him 
cyclicity is an expression of the rhythms of the universal body. He fud~ . 
an adequate metaphor for its continuous rhythmic transformations·. ·in. 
vegetation, since it plays a basic role in human life, as food, as pfoducer 
of an oxygen-rich atmosphere, etc. (Rudhyar 1975: 121). Grafting on to 
the vegetative root metaphor, he explains cyclicity as a manifestation of a 
seed-leaf polarity (ibid.: 122ff.), distinguishing a 'seed-state' of biopsychic 
or biospiritual potentiality and a 'leaf-state', the recurrent unfolding of the 
'seeds' in new forms. 
When exploring the cyclic dimensions of the world body, it seems as 
though Rudhyar shifts his outlook from a gendered to a vegetative mode. 
Thanks to its close relationship to light, the discursive sphere of vegetation 
and photosynthesis may appear to be particularly well-suited for spiritual 
elevation in the would-be post -gender world of the soul, which Rudhyar 
so enthusiastically promotes. Nevertheless, vegetative and gendered meta­
phors mingle quite sharoelessly in Rudhyar's world. His seed-metaphor is, One Does not Stir without the Other 151 
indeed, not intended to be read only in the vegetative mode. It is marked 
by the phallogocentrism of European philosophy. Although two occult 
mothers- the Russian founder of the Theosophical Society, Helena Blavat­
skaya and the British Alice Bailey -play an important role in Rudhyar's 
' ' d hagiology, gurus and avatars are first and foremost holy brothers or see -
men' (Rudhyar 1975: 135). The acts performed by these gurus and avatars, 
i.e. the dissemination of 'seeds', occult messages, preparing the world for 
the coming of the New Age, are described in terms of unarobiguously 
sexual metaphors. They re-enact the specifically hierarchical versions of 
the classic narratives of impregnation of the Earth-mother, which Merchant 
opposes to the versions where female and male elements copul~t.e on ~ore 
equal terms. Rudhyar constructs sexual difference along trad1ttonal hnes 
featuring, for example, the dichotomy between female matter, 'the planetary 
ovum within the placental biosphere', and male spirit, the 'Logos Sperm­
atikos' of Stoic philosophy (ibid.: 129). 
The Great Cosmic Mother- as Phallogocentric or Feminist 
Construction 
Although God is more or less crossed out of the scientific world view 
(Latour 1993), we saw in our analysis of the master narratives of space flig~t 
that when he re-emerges as Cybergod and reveals his sex and his body m 
outer space, he tends to be male. In Chapter 4 we saw him in his inca::nation 
as Cyber-Godfather, who sent out his sperm-astronauts to colomze the 
universe. In New Age astrology things look different at this point. Here, 
sacred cosmic space is filled with the grotesque body, the Zodiac Womb, of 
the Great Cosmic Mother, female Fate, Moira. Even the profoundly phal­
logocentric thinking of Rudhyar leaves more divine cosmic space for the 
female body than do the space flight master narratives featuring the Cyber­
Godfather. On the one hand, an inappropriate contiguity pops up between 
Crick's theory of 'directed panspermia' (Crick 1981) and Rudhyar's 'Logos 
Spermatikos' and his occult 'seed-men' who herald the glad cosmic tidings 
of the Advent of the New Age. On the other hand, the Zodiac Womb in 
Rudhyar's universe is the bearer of a divine agency, ruling over human life 
and death, while the female planetary bodies in Crick's uuiverse can only 
exercise the female patience prescribed by Aristotle, passively awaiting their 
fate as receptacles of the tiny colonists from far away. 
The inscription of New Age 'longings for a divine cosmic agency onto 
bodily sites that demonstrate a prominent rOle for intersections of the 
female, the motherly and the grotesque sustains the suggestion (see Chapter 
Cosmodolphins 152 
z) that 'feminization' serves as an important vehicle for the alternative 
world and values that the New Age is expected to bring. However, this is 
not to suggest that the master narrative of the New Age unanimously 
celebrates a common construction of a divine femininity. On the contrary, 
a broad spectrum of 'omnipotent mother images, ranging from profoundly 
phallogocentric to clearly feminist figures, inhabits the New Age cosmos. 
As discussed by the spiritual feminist Monica Sj66 in her critical book 
on the New Age (Sj66 1992), traditional patriarchal ways of thinking 
permeate the discourses of many New Age gurus. Rudhyar is a good 
example. Another is Zufar Gareev, one of many post-glasnost Russian writers 
who draw inspiration from both the New Age and occultism and whose . , 
mysncally tinged cultivation of a cosmic mother is born out of a phallogo-
centrism that does not fall short of the one we met in Rudhyar's universe. 
Garee:'s ~-fantastic novella The Allergy of Aleksandr Petrovich (1991) 
evocattvely illustrates a strong desire for a 'feminized' elsewhere, which in 
this case is found at the heavenly bosom of a cosmic mother with whom 
the protagonist, Aleksandr Petrovich, re-enacts the first part of an Oedipal 
mother-son drama. Aleksandr, who feels 'allergic' to his present mundane 
situation, i.e. completely out of touch with life in late Soviet society; is 
redeemed by an unknown force. It literally lifts him to what turns out to 
be the cosmic site of the warm, milk-scented, secure bosom of his mother. 
Sh~ floats among other heavenly mothers whose voices form a chorus urging 
therr sons to return from Earth to a happy reunion in a universe where the 
last desperate, authoritarian moves of a decaying Soviet Father State cannot 
victimize them any more (and, we may add, where they are not bothered 
by the annoying presence of their human sisters either!). 
At the opposite end of the spectrum of value systems, we find images 
produced by spiritual feminists, like Sj66 herself, who co-authored a book 
with the telling title The Great Cosmic Mother (Sj66 and Mor 1987); or like 
the ~y US-based feminist astrologers such as Demetra George, whom 
we wtll use as an example here. Contrary to the traditional mother figures 
of Rudhyar and Gareev, the spiritual feminists trace their feminine 'else­
where' to qnite different iurages. George (1992) recommends that we seek 
out the symbolic sites of the dark moon goddess, whose healing feminine 
powers have been repressed and distorted by a long-standing cultural 
tradition. According to the ancient cosmological theory of macro-and 
microcosmic correspondences, the dark moon-that is, the three moonless 
nights each month -is mirrored in the menstrual period of the female 
cycle and in the menopausal body, which in patriarchal cultures were 
tabooed as ill-omened and dangerous. Likewise, the dark moon was seen One Does not Stir without the Other 153 
as the site of evil feminine forces, such as the Greek Erinyes, female spirits 
of anger and revenge, or the serpent-headed, monstrous Medusa, or as the 
three Moira, goddesses of Fate, who meted out the thread of life without 
mercy. Instead of upholding the repression of the dark moon life aspects, 
George wants us to reclaim their regenerative powers by recognizing them, 
both in ourselves and on a collective cultural level. The dark moon periods, 
she writes, are. germinating phases, phases of turning inwards, of symbolic 
or material returns to the womb of the Earth, where new creative moments 
are born. They form part of the life cycles of all bodies, cosmic or human, 
and as such are necessary and productive. 
Gareev's nurturing mothers, calling their oedipal sons to heaven, and 
George's dark moon goddess, who urges modern women to reassess the 
myths of the 'evil feminine', do not share many values. The same can be 
said about Rudhyar's phallogocentric construction of a heavenly hierarchy, 
and the omnipotent female Fate, Moira, who rules Greene's universe. But 
the heterogeneity displayed by our exaroples should not obscure the fact 
that the significance ascribed to the powerful agency of a female-motherly 
and grotesque body makes up a common dimension of alienness that marks 
New Age cosmologies as different from the ones we met in the space 
narrative. 
To Speak the Cosmic or the Female Body 
Having explored the bodily episteme of pre-modern thought systems 
and its reinvention by New Age and feminist astrology, we shall now return 
to the affinities with the discourses on icriture fbninine, parler-femme and 
desire in language. 
First of all, let us notice how the image of the early mother-<:hild 
relationship plays a prominent role both in the new astrologies and in the 
texts of lrigaray, Cixous and K.risteva. If, for example, we compare Greene's 
description of Moira's motherly performances vis-d-vis the individual, and 
Irigaray's poetical-theoretical articulations of the daughter's experience of 
the impossibility of escape from the dyad with the mother (Irigaray r98r, 
1993), the similarities are so strikingly analogous that the latter still sound 
meaningful when recycled as metaphorical representations of the former. 
Tbat 'the one doesn't stir without the other' (Irigaray r98r) and that a 
'corps-a-corps' is takiug place with the mother (Irigaray 1993) may articulate 
the gist of Greene's as well as many other astrological discourses. 
Another affinity beween the two kinds of discourses of the astrologers 
and those of icriture fiminine is that both seem to attach great expectations 
Cosmodolphins 154 
to the female body and to the grotesque in a Bakhtinian sense, when they 
search for 'elsewheres' and free space for the unfolding of otherness. 
Whether traced in a pre-symbolic, motherly chora (Kristeva), in the speak­
ing labia (Irigaray), in a generously lactating breast (CiJtous), in Moira 
(Greene), in the Zodiacal placenta (Rudhyar), in the celestial mother's 
bosom (Gareev), in the Dark Moon Goddess (George), or in the Great 
Cosmic Mother (SjOO), a conspicuous common denominator of these 
imagined spaces of otherness is their discursive location within inter­
sections between the grotesque and the female body. It may be a sexual 
body, a nurtUring and giving or a devouring, violent and 'dark' motherbody, 
but in each case the screen of projections used in these discursive quests 
for an 'elsewhere' seems to be a female and grotesque body, characterized 
by its sibylline agency and its will and power to voice disruptive messages. 
It seems as if the heterogeneous cluster of texts shares a desire to use 
sexual difference and the langoage of the grotesque body as vehicles for 
subversion of existing symbolic orders. 
Moreover, it is important that the stories told by the astrologers, as well 
as those narrated by the texts on Ccriture fhninine, claim to speak from 
within the body -the former from the body of the cosmos, the latter 
from the female body. When they articulate bodies, they do not speak 
about them, nor do they take up speaking positions located outside them. 
This sets them apart once more from the dominant symbolic order and the 
discourses of the scientific world view. In the langoage of astrology, there 
is no panopticon from where the celestial bodies can be scrutinized at a 
distance, no godlike subject position from which the body of the cosmos 
can be surveyed as a bounded object. This becomes clear when we look at 
New Age and feminist astrology with Cassirer's theories as our analytical 
lens. They show that the bodily episteme, and a speaking position located 
within the cosmic body, are a sine qua non for any kind of astrological 
cosmology. The same is the case for Ccriture fhninine. The heterogeneous 
cluster of discourses, for which we use this term as an umbrella, all 
underline the unbreakable links between langoage, spealting subjects and 
desiring bodies; according to these texts, language can suppress, but never 
detach itself from, desire and body. As part of this line of argoment, we 
may also notice how both kinds of discourses place emphasis on tongoes 
that are governed by tropes such as metonymy and metaphor that in various 
ways claim to be rooted in the body. 
In general, it seems as if the two kinds of discourses also share a 
longing to subvert the logocentrism of dominant discourses. Ecriture 
fhninine is supposed to make space for the creation and articulation of One Does not Stir without the Other 155 
jouissance, the pleasures of the female body, thereby decentring and sub­
verting phallogocentrism. Analogous shifts may be traced as far as the 
revival of astrology in New Age and feminist spiritual circles is concerned. 
Conceived as a challenge to the scientific world view's exclusions of the 
sacred and spiritual dimensions of life and matter, the reinvention of 
the ancient bodily episteme involves disruptive moves. 
Drawing on the analogy with Ccr£ture fCminine, we suggest that an 
important challenge of the new astrologies is their opening of discursive 
spaces for eruptions of excesses of cosmic meaning, for which it is 
impossible to properly account from a subject position defined by the 
logos of the scientific world view. Cosmos is, of course, a basic existential 
prerequisite of our ·lives. But can we reach an in-depth perception of this 
fact when cosmos and world are constructed as picture, image, representa­
tion (cf. Heidegger 1979), which the human subject can observe from an 
apparently safe distance with the disembodied gaze of modern science? Is 
it not rather more likely that precisely this imagined disembodiment and 
distance of the scientific gaze make it impossible to consciously recognize 
either the horror or the bliss of our existential dependence on the cosmic 
body? We suggest that New Age and feminist astrology, among other things, 
have become popular today because their exegesis of cosmic body-speak 
renders possible some kind of articulation of such basic existential ex­
periences as cosmic horror and bliss, excluded by the modern scientific 
world view. 
A Divine of one's Own 
So far we have focused on the aspect of Ccriture fCminine that concerns 
its poetic articulations of the individual body. But in our context, it is also 
interesting to note that the boundaries between the individual body and 
the cosmic body, as well as those between the poetic and the spiritual, are 
often consciously blurred in the texts of Ccr£ture fCminine. This is another 
affinity with the astrological discourses and their search for alternative 
articulations of the sacrality of cosmic space. 
Irigaray in particular is explicit in emphasizing that a writing and 
'philosophy of the feminine' (Whitford 1991) must include spiritual and 
cosmic dimensions. So she points out the need for a female divine that can 
undo the fatal consequences of women's imaginary and symbolic banish­
ment from the realm of the sacred, and end the cosmic occupation of the 
divine by the phallogocentric trinity of the Father, the Son and the Holy 
Masculine Spirit (Irigaray 1993). 
Cosmodolphins 
Compared to lrigaray, Cixous's and Kristeva's texts are further 
our theme, but the blurring of boundaries between individual and cosmic> , 
bodies is also woven into their textual universes, along with· spiiritua['; 
references. In her poetic celebrations of feminine writing, Cixous 
praises it in metaphors and metonymies that make it appear as thc>ucrhth•e'+ 
writing is emerging out of a female body grown ·to cosmic dilnensiiODls:! 
'Her libido is cosmic, just as her unconscious is worldwide: her writilill!, 
also can only go on and on ... ' (Cixous and Clement 1986: 88). In a 
rhetoric, Cixous celebrates writing that, welling out of the b,illli!y coo;mc>~;'+ 
articulates a sort of 'cosmogyny' (Braidotti 199r: 242) analheralds 
advent of a feminine libidinal economy, i.e. a generous, all-em,bracing love. 
Kristeva, too, flirts with themes that touch on the sacred, tlie divine and 
the ecstatic (Berry and Wernick 1992; Wyschogrod 1990), although with 
less emphasis on femininity. Nevertheless, it is worth bearing in mind that 
the concept of the chora (Greek for 'space'), so important for Kristeva's 
theory of bodily desire in language, is closely linked in its genealogy to 
classical Greek cosmology, borrowed as it is from Plato's Timaeus (Kristeva 
1984: 25) and its description of the three cosmic family-actants or positions 
necessary for the creation of the universe (Plato 1973: 177/5oB-D). 
However, the affinities between the discourses on icriture fEminine and 
the new astrologies should not eclipse the differences. The most important 
difference is that Irigaray, Cixous and Kristeva speak on the level of 
ilnaginary or symbolic representations, while the astrologers clailn to ralk 
about truths and essences within an epistemic framework of mythical real­
ism. As ilnplied by Cassirer's analysis of the 'realism' of mythical thought, 
this pushes to extremes the tendency to collapse representations and their 
referents into one another. Hence astrologers cannot release the critical 
potentials that in our opinion are implied in their approaches to cosmic 
space and the divine. Instead of playing subversively at the boundaries of 
the dominant symbolic order, they end up delivering simplistic counter­
truths. 
Irigaray's method of reclaiming the female divine, partly in accordance 
and partly in disagreement with spiritual feminists and astrologers, will 
serve as a concluding illustration. 
As part of her quest for the female divine, Irigaray makes positive 
references to the cosmology of astrology because, in contrast to the main­
stream culture of modern society, it is attuned to cosmic temporality and 
rhythms. Moreover, she shares with the adherents of astrology a pronounced 
intuitive and meditative interest in the four elements. The meanings of 
water, earth, air and fire, she maintains, are too often denied and mis-Does not Stir without the Other 157 
+UnideJrstc>od by a modern culture that tends 'to refuse to think about the 
.m:ite1rial conditions. of existence' (Irigaray 1993: 57). Irigaray also focuses 
astrology's specific spiritual relationship to women and, in consonance 
Wirh~<•nv spiritual feminists and feminist astrologers, she points out the 
'imooJ:tar>ce of reclainring mythical images of an era where divine mother­
.aa,ught<:r genealogies were not yet exiled from the space of the divine, and 
'astrological power in its godly aspect' was not 'taken away from 
!w·ore•en' (Irigaray 1993: 8o).7 'To posit a gender, a God is necessary,' she 
(ibid.: 61), so the exile of women from divine space is profoundly 
;'p!:oblenlati,c. Women have, of course, been allowed into the realm of the 
sacred -as the mothers of male gods, but this move gives them 'no God or 
gods of their own to fulfil their gender, whether as individuals or as a 
community' (ibid.: 81). To change this situation, mythical ilnages of divine 
space, not occupied by the Father, the Son and the Holy Masculine Spirit, 
are needed. 
So far, Irigaray is in tune with many spiritually and astrologica!Iy 
minded feminists, but her approach is at the same time different. Her 
reclaiming of the female divine forms part of her complex rewriting of the 
nineteenth-century German philosopher Ludwig Feuerbach's book (1957) 
on the essence of Christianity from the point of view of sexual difference. 
Feuerbach wants his. fellow humans to recognize that God is not an alien, 
transcendent power, but their own creature, an image of their own ideals. 
Specifying Feuerbach's text in terms of sexual difference, lrigaray's argu­
ment implies that women should not abandon themselves to an alienated 
kind of deification in a regressive symbiosis with the goddess. Instead, we 
should try to become 'divine women' (Irigaray 1993: 6o) by a dual strategy. 
We should reclailn the space of the divine for women and, in a Feuerbach­
inspired gesture, deconstruct the transcendency of the divine and re­
inscribe it into the network of immanent interactions between women, 
men and cosmic nature. With this exhortation, Irigaray distances herself 
from feminist astrologers, who remain at the level of a regressive mother­
child symbiosis with the divine. 
Although they are focused not on return and regression, but on renewal 
and rebirth, astrologers still end up reinventing the Great Cosmic Mother 
as an alien power, recycling her as a figure of mythical realism. This means 
that she can act only in a dubious and ambiguous way as an empowering 
mirror. As a super-alien, she leaves too few possibilities for human agency, 
responsibility and accountability. Can her potentials not be released in 
more productive ways? We shall return to this question in our concluding 
Chapter 9· 
Cosmodolphins 158 
Notes 
1. In Kristeva's linguistic theory, 'the thetic' (1984: 43ff.) is the space in language 
defined by the. performances of a bounded and positioned subject that is capable of 
enunciating theses and making propositions and judgements. 
z. Contrary to the 'secondary processes' that are submitted to the principle of reality, 
Freudian psychoanalysis describes the 'primary processes' as the part of the psyche that 
is governed by the pleasure principle. The 'primary processes' are linked to the un­
conscious and characterized by its alogical mode of functioning and by the non-existence 
of distinctions such as subject and object. 
3· 'Individuation' in Jungian theory means reaching maturity by coming to terms 
with your 'true self'. 
4-Cassirer does not refer to metaphor and metonymy himself, but the linkage is 
clear, if his description of the work of similarity and contiguity in mythical semiosis is 
r~d ~rough the lens of the linguistic theory of Roman Jakobson (1987), who dis­
tmgulshes between metaphor and metonymy on the basis of exactly the same principles. 
5 In esoteric yoga 'kundalini' is often referred to as the 'serpent power'. It is the 
name for an energy that rises along the spine, and which is believed to originate from a 
serpent that is normally coiled at the base of the spine, but which strikes when aroused, 
for example, by certain yoga exercises. 
6. Seen from an astronomical perspective, the 'great year' of 25,8oo years is a result 
of the so-called 'precession of the equinoxes'. During a 365-day year the sun rises in all 
Zodiac signs; it stays approximately one month in each sign. The annual revolution of 
the sun through the signs is, however, not constant. Measured from the point at which the 
sun rises at spring equinox, a change can be noticed, so that over a period of about two 
thousand years the rising position of the sun moves through an entire Zodiac sign. In 
the year 0 the sun rose in Pisces at spring equinox, now this rising position is about to 
move into Aquarius. 
7. The affinities between 'French feminism's icriture jemt'nine' and the American 
'Goddess-oriented women's spirituality' are also recognized on the other side of the 
Atlantic Ocean and commented upon by spiritual feminists (sec Spretnak 1991: 135). Voices from Inner and Outer Space: Refiguring 
Mother Sea and Father Sky 
In the previous chapter, we saw how the image of the distant Cyber­
Godfather is reversed by New Age astrology. The futuristic high-tech 
cosmos of space flight is replaced by premodernity's Great Cosmic Mother, 
who communicates with us through the natural rhythms of celestial bodies. 
In this chapter we shall revisit the Cybergod, but this time as part of 
another extraterrestrial projection of a traditional male/ female pair, Mother 
Sea and Father Sky. We will explore how this second pair was reconfigured 
by post-Second World War science, which ascribed to both figures a strong 
desire to send messages to humans, while still maintaining the opposition 
between high-tech and pre-tech. 
But since the discussion of the cosmos and the ocean in the following 
pages also paves the way for the dolphin finale in Chapter 8 -where our 
last icon will carnivalize the dichotomies and hierarchies set up by the 
narratives of the spaceship and the horoscope -we shall, as a prelude to 
the present chapter, focus on a story about cosmodolphins. 
The Message of the Cosmodolphins 
A recent New Age book claims that dolphins arrived on planet Earth 
only during this century. They were beamed down just a few decades ago 
via a high-frequency transmission from the cosmic Spiritual Alliance. 
According to the American author, these emissary-dolphins, having arrived 
in the ocean through a 'window in time', proceeded to inscribe their 
imaginary, yet ancient, 'history' into human minds and books, a feat they 
were able to achieve in a single instant. The Greek and Roman dolphin 
myths, the dolphin legends, cave art and hieroglyphs, are all recent creations 
generated by these extraterrestrial dolphin-beings who seem bent on con­
tributing to wbat we would call the bulk of Holy Graphics on Earth. They 
.. --·---
Cosmodolphins 160 
achieved all of this with nothing more than their in-built mastery of 
communication via sound waves. Consistent with her own story-line, the 
textual author, Joan Ocean, insists that she received this insight from an 
acoustic image presented to her by the 'wild animals' themselves. Via this 
image they explained 'to her how and why they made the sacrifice of giving 
up their celestial lives as 'light-beings' in favour of a limited three-dimen­
sional, mammalian incarnation. The purpose of this Jesus-like gesture was 
to guide humans towards the realms of spiritual reality by opening their 
minds to the primordial wisdom of the ocean and preparing them for 
their future life as ethereal space beings (Ocean 1997: 162-5). 
Much as contemporary adherents of astrology believe that they have 
been called by the cosmos, Ocean sees herself as a true disciple of the 
cosmodolphins. She shares her belief in dolphins as spiritual messengers 
or 'angels of the sea' with many New Agers, who indulge in similar ritual 
acts of resacralizing 'wild and wise' nature. Like the astrologers, she also 
believes that an intuitive wisdom is embedded in extraterrestrial space, 
although in her universe not only the cosmos, but also the ocean is a bearer 
of this mystical insight. While the Spiritual Alliance possesses an all­
embracing cosmic knowledge, the so-called 'Akashic Records' represent 
the age--old and sublime information about the planet Earth stored in the 
water molecules of the ocean to which dolphins and their whale cousins, 
acting as 'molecular librarians' (Ocean 1997: 146), can give us access. 
Besides bringing her close to the astrologers' claim about the ancient 
wisdom embodied by the global commons, Ocean's story also overlaps 
with the scripts of yet another branch of New Agers, who conjure up 
other kinds of mock-mirrors of the space narrative by celebrating UFOs 
and high-tech angels from outer space, who apparently are eager to com­
municate their wisdom to humans. 
,;:/7 Ocean's aroazing contribution to the New Age fable anticipates the 
,Y analysis of the polysemantic dolphin icon in Chapter 8 as well as the 
present chapter's survey of some remarkable post-Second World War 
refigurations of the cosmos and the ocean -refigurations that, as Ocean's 
story shows, laid the foundations for many, still valid, imageries. In the 
wake of the war, the Cold War consciousness began to match an outward 
movement into the sky with an inward movement into the ocean which, in 
the American discourse, was propagated as the world of 'inner space'. 
Conceptions of extraterrestrial setrings shaped in this period include some 
of the key themes that reappear in Ocean's text. We shall focus in particular 
on ideas about receiving information from other worlds by means of sound 
waves or radio and TV signals.' The new sky and the new sea herald the Voices from Inner and Outer Space 161 
acoustic images that our contemporary New Age author believes she re­
ceived from the dolphins. 
.Voices from the Global Commons 
As both of the global commons., outer space and the sea, were being 
discursively set up for invasion during the rgsos and rg6os., intricate 
strands of narrative began to evolve. The (re-)investment of life signs in 
both places became a conspicuous tendency, pointing towards the need to 
redesign our mental maps in preparation for the exploration of these two 
new frontiers. Although alien and 'other-worldly', the extraterrestrial 
regions eventually became infused with recognizable, human-like features 
and populated with 'others' who functioned as displaced mirrors for our­
selves, or as echoes resonating with the voices of the imagination. A major 
theme of this chapter is the exploration of these different 'echoes' and of 
the deep impressions left on them by technology. 
As a consequence of the rapid, primarily military, development of 
electronic listening devices, inner as well as outer space became imbued 
with sounds, with noises that broke the silence normally ascribed to these 
areas. We call these sounds 'orality' in order to describe how the formerly 
silent sea and the secularly muted heavens were suddenly perceived as 
beginning to 'speak'. As technoscience developed the capability of elec­
tronically translating the sound waves emitted by marine life forms and 
the radio waves emanating from the universe into the range of human 
hearing, the extraterrestrial commons now seemed to gain scientifically 
authorized 'voices'. 
In conceptualizing this voice-giving process., we shall draw upon ter­
minology coined by the literary scholar W. ]. Ong. In his book on the 
cultures of orality and literacy, Ong distinguishes between two kinds of 
orality: a 'primary' and a 'secondary' version (Ong 1997). Primary orality 
implies a simple acoustic act of speech and reception and presupposes an 
ignorance of writing, of literacy, and hence it constitutes, says Ong, the 
distinctive feature of all illiterate cultures, both ancient and contemporary. 
In contrast, he classifies the orality practised in our own literate and 
technological societies as being 'secondary', due to the way in which it is 
inextricably intertwined with writing, printing and electronic transmission 
(ibid.: II). Consequently, although the sciences engaged in both marine 
and cosmic research began to. involve acoustics, this is a secondary orality; 
the act of listening to these non-terrestrial regions is dependent upon 
electronic devices and, hence, on writing and print. 
Cosmodolphins 162 
In extending Ong's concepts of orality from human acts of verbal 
communication to extraterrestrial soundings, we are investigating not the 
material reality of the 'other' worlds, but the minds and imaginations of 
the humans studying them. While they evidently did not speak in oral 
ways, both cosmos and ocean were to a certain extent perceived as if they 
did so. Through the influence of new information theories and 
technologies, nature became conceived of as communicating or exchanging 
information in a way analogous to our own. Furthermore, the discourses 
of popular science and culture, especially Western ones, frequently referred 
to or depicted the (non-vocally) emitted noises from the sky or from the 
ocean depths as 'voices'. Inevitably, a variety of connotations, embedded in 
the common conceptions of communication, information exchange and 
orality, thus became activated, including a certain anthropomorphism. A 
recycling of Ong's terminology underlines this aspect, as it sets off the 
contiguities at play between human orality I vocality and these new extra­
terrestrial soundings. 
In general, the concept of 'orality' also underlines the important role 
played by acoustics when the 'signals' were received from outer and inner 
space, while the term 'secondary orality' emphasizes the agency of the big 
technological apparatus that characterize the listener's techno-position. 
Very sensitive hydrophones (underwater microphones) could now pick up 
the biological sounds of the ocean, and increasingly sophisticated radio 
telescopes could 'hear' the electromagnetic waves -the 'hissing noises' -
from outer space, these latter bearing evidence of a radio universe as real 
as the more familiar, visual one. (The fact that the naked human ear is 
deaf to these sounds makes them, however, at the same time all the more 
'supernatural', suggesting divine intervention.) 
The various vibrations from inner and outer space indicated both 
similarity and difference (see Table 7.1). On the one hand, the ocean and 
the cosmos became connected in a new way. Both were generating 'waves' 
of some kind that could be made audible and, at the same time, transcnbed 
into writing, graphics and images. On the other hand, the different nature 
of the energy emitted from the sea and from the sky seemed to sustain 
age-old discourses of differentiation, involving gender and ethnicity. For, 
while the terms of research bonded the two areas in a secondary orality 
characteristic of the high-tech devices utilized, the areas were nevertheless 
interpreted differently. 
The very character of the marine and the cosmic sounds, respectively, 
fed into the already present gender and ethnic identifications that are 
interwoven into the themes of 'orality' and that in popular mythologies Voices from Inner and Oute~ Space 163 
have been connected with the two extraterrestrial regions. Due to her wet 
and primordial nature, the ocean has often been cast as motherly womb, 
while the Euro-American cosmos, due to a strong influence from Chris­
tianity, has for centuries been identified as the realm of the white Fathergod, 
notwithstanding that many pagan and occultist thought systems constructed 
the sky as a mother. In high-tech science, the roles of Father Sky and 
Mother Sea became readjusted and confirmed -and, moreover, connected 
with a racialized, ethno-technological opposition between white and high­
tech vis-d-vis non-white and pre-tech. 
TABLE 7.1 
'Vot'ces' [rom t?tner and outer space. 
Scientists picking up noises from the ocean and the cosmos via high-tech 
equipment :::: secondary orality. 
OCEAN COSMOS 
Sound waves with biological Radio waves: outer space 
origins: constructed as body- constructed as broadcasting 
speak = primary orality station = secondary orality 
(suggesting Woman and Native) (suggesting high-tech Scientist) 
The universe was found to emit radio waves that were usually explained 
'vith reference to terrestrial broadcasting stations. Using this analogy, the 
new signals could be fitted smoothly into the traditional view of the heavens; 
what emerged was the image of a heavenly broadcaster who, in the guise 
of a 'distant scientist' (of implicit masculinity and whiteness), might be in 
the process of transmitting his superior knowledge to the Earth (Holmes 
rg67: 31ff.). But whereas the heavenly radio signals indicated, to a number 
of prominent scientists, the existence of radio voices emanating from 
incredibly advanced technological 'supercivilizations' (Tovmasyan rg6s: 40), 
the sounds of marine life from beneath the sea, 'the voices from the deep' 
(Clarke Ig6o: 45), were more likely to be interpreted in the context of a 
noisy body-speak. In contrast to the image of a high-tech scientist broad­
casting intelligent radio messages from the Beyond of space, the imagery 
that evolved around the noisy sea drew on the configurations of non­
technology, Woman and Native. From this watery 'inner space' came not 
the radio waves that suggest 'advanced' electronics but sound waves that 
connect \vith biology (cf. Tarasov rg6o: 4) and sounds that were generated 
by the bodies of the sea creatures and hence perceived as 'primitive'. The 
sounds might, for example, be produced by the contractions of the swim 
Cosmodolphins 164 
bladder or by fish grinding their teeth (Griffin 1974: 269). Neither fish nor 
cetaceans have vocal cords. 
We will apply Ong's definition to the rwo different scientific discourses 
on outer and inner space. The purpose is to emphasize how the network 
of associations that the langnage of science set up around the rwo global 
commons implicitly co-constructed an affinity between the imagined 
heavenly voices and Ong's secondary orality, and between the sounds of 
marine lift and his primary orality. 
Although the marine noises are also perceived via listening devices, the 
high-tech ntind nevertheless sees a parallel berween these and non­
technological -or technologically 'innocent' -societies (ancient Greece, 
for instance, as well as contemporary groupings of some ethnic others). In 
order to illustrate this discursive construing of marine sounds as body­
speak and hence as primary orality, let us briefly listen to the onomatopoeic 
words with which two researchers describe the sounds emitted by marine 
populations such as fish, crustacea and marine mammals: 'clicks or clacks, 
croaks, grunts, rattles, or thumps', said the fish and the crustacea (Kellogg 
196r: 34), and with 'whistles, squeals, chirps, clicks, rasps' the marine 
marmnals replied (Sebeok 1972: 54). Finally, one scientist notes that 
dolphin trainers in the American oceanaria tended to suppress certain 
'primitive', 'non-civilized' noises made by the performing animals 'because 
to humans they sound raucous, derisive, impolite, even scatological, but at 
least very alien (it may be that clicking Hottentots and Bushmen would 
not think so [sic!])' (Lilly 1962a: 152). 
The differentiation constructed by the langnage of science berween the 
two kinds of extraterrestrial voicings reaffirms the gendered and ethnicized 
mind-body split that is so deeply rooted in our culture. On the pages to 
follow, we give an account of this construction, looking at the discourses 
on the two global commons one by one. 
Refigured Mother Sea 
Mter the Second World War, the sea became an important arena for 
military expansion for both superpowers. Billions of dollars and roubles 
were spent on the construction of nuclear-powered submarines capable of 
launching long-range missiles from beneath the ocean surface. (These 
submarines were modelled on whales and dolphins.)' In addition, the 
exploration of the sea for resources such as oil, minerals and food was 
given high priority. Both scientists and popular science writers advocated 
these activities with slogans about 'mining the ocean' and 'farming the sea', Voices from Inner and Outer Space 165 
seeing them as a way of avoiding an impending global famine brought on 
by the world's so-called 'population explosion'-'In a typical linking of race 
and procreation without (sexual) restraint, Western demographic anxiety 
often located a particular need for underwater farming or 'aquaculture' in 
continents with 'exploding birth rates' -that is, Africa, Asia and Latin 
America -thereby establishing a contiguity berween the fecundity of the 
as yet largely unexplored sea and of the senti-'dark' continents (Engel et 
al. 1961: 174). This contignity underlined the status of both bio-political 
regions as resources for the white, industrialized nations to exploit. 
Alongside these traditional recipes for the cannibalization of the objecti­
fied wild other discourses tended towards restoring dynamic movement and , 
exotic, alien and extremely noisy life to the re-subjectified 'Mother Sea' 
(Carson 1961; Piccard and Dietz rg6t: 21). The revival of maternal connota­
tions to nature, the busy womb transformed into a life-affirming cornucopia, 
may be illustrated by two examples in which the ocean's mute and hostile 
image is replaced by one of chatty or even uproarious interconnectedness. 
First the abyss, which until recently was conceived of as a 'place of 
eternal calm' (Carson 1961: ix), a dark graveyard, sterile and lifeless, isolated 
from the rest of the sea, began to be officially integrated into the larger 
picture and endowed with movement, rapid change, and life. The Swiss 
scientist and diving pioneer]. Piccard, who went seven miles down into the 
abyssal Marianas Trench, for instance, declared the deep ocean to be 
basically a 'friendly' place, where 'life does exist' (Piccard and Dietz 
1961: 183). 
Second, technological advances changed the sea from an eerily silent 
place to one filled with marine life emitting familiar sounds; the 'roars, 
knocks, honks, squeals, "popping of corks'" were seized upon by some 
scientists as being 'old sounds from new places' -that is, as something 
well known from everyday life (Tavolga and Steinberg 1961: 288). Marine 
bio-acoustics, the art of listening to the voices from the near surface or the 
deep by means of electronic devices (hydrophones, amplifiers, tape­
recorders, etc.), which w~ with a slight twist of Ong's definition, have 
called secondary orality, became a major scientific game during the rgsos.4 
This research highlighted the aquatic environment as being another world, 
filled with utterances that, in spite of their alienness and their obtrusive 
exposure of a bodily origin, might be paralleled to those of human 
languages. When speaking of fish sounds, scientists often resorted to 
linguistic terms such as 'syllables' and 'vocabularies' that, although usually 
enclosed in quotation marks, indicated speech. A new feeling of kinship 
with the exotic marine others began to emerge as it became known, for 
Cosmodolphins 166 
example, that even the apparently stupid toadfish communicates io the 
same way as humans insofar as its language, its body-speak of long 'honks' 
and short 'bups', respects the widely accepted Law of Least Effort. This 
law states that humans, whether English, Chinese or Native American 
(and now also toadfish), prefer to communicate short messages ('bups') 
rather than long ones (Kellogg 1961: 36---7). So, the toadfish and the human 
both seem bent on efficient communication-' The general belief that all 
fish were deaf aod dumb was definitely crumbling (c£ Griffin 1974: 270). 
Although many of the fish sounds were believed to carry no significance 
whatsoever, one scientist records that 'a number of fishes when squeezed, 
poked with a stick, or shocked with electricity will give off their "fishy" 
utterances' and that these sounds 'might almost be considered emotional' 
(Kellogg 1961: 38). So even io the cool, sceptical minds of scientists, techno­
logy restored a throng of life and a veritable chorus of wild, 'natural' voices, 
suggestive of at least embryonic intelligence and emotions, to an otherwise 
'silent world' (c£ the title of Cousteau's first book, published io 1953).6 
The Sea as Pastoral Source 
At times, the life-affirmiog fecundity of the sea generated Origin iroages 
that depicted the sea as ideal pastoral source in more traditional -ways: as 
a representation of the womb and the maternal breast ( c£ Costlow et a!. 
1993: 223ff.). A telling example of this trend is Arthur C. Clarke's science 
fiction novel The Deep Range (1988), io which a nurturing Mother Sea 
eventually offers her swelling bosom to a humanity virtuously reborn. 
This generous gesture takes the form of nursing whale teats which, with 
their spurting flood of rich milk, perfectly match up to a wishful repres­
entation of the maternal breast in their abundant mammalian fluidity. Thns 
along with the sea, marine mammals are also embedded in pastoral images 
of physical and spiritual rejuvenation that tinge with hope the troubling 
concepts of regression, of going backwards that otherwise might cast a 
gloom over the human intrusion into the newly opened ocean realms. 
Optimistic visions of entering into a 'retrogressive evolution', transforming 
man from mere 'frogman' to whale-man or fish-man, were put forward as 
aquanauts tried to set up habitats on the seabed during the 196os (Belkovich 
et a!. 1967: 144; Bardach 1968: 77-8 and 84). And so the notion of 
progressive regression, the idea that descending the evolutionary ladder 
was in fact a great step forward, became intentionally linked to the 'man­
in-sea' projects that were being set up as a parallel to the evolutionary 
progress embedded in the imagery of 'man-in-space'. I 
1. Voices from Inner and Outer Space 167 
This idea of life in the ocean as a return to Edenic bliss was given a 
considerable boost by the transformation of the seas into a recreational 
wilderness area to be admired by the swimmers who, in rapidly increasing 
numbers, were becomiog hooked on the thrills of snorkelling or scuba­
diving-' With comparatively little equipment, anybody could now not only 
peer from the surface ioto the wet 'jungle' (Cousteau and Dumas 1953: 5) 
teeming with 'untouched wildlife' but, diving a little deeper, could even 
escape the heavy burdens of life on Earth: 
From birth, man carries the weight of gravity on his shoulders. He is bolted 
to earth. But man has only to sink beneath the surface and he is free. Buoyed 
by water, he ~ fly in any direction -up, down, sideways -by merely 
flipping his hand. Under wa~er, man becomes an archangel. (Cousteau as 
quoted in Time, z8 March r96o) 
So, while worshippiog (or cannibalizing) the watery wilds, swimmers 
around the world were, in the words of Time magazine, now 'sinking 
beneath the surface to fly like angels through ao alien realm'. Accordingly, 
Cousteau's glamorous television documentaries promoted the sea world as 
a beautiful and blissful home for humanity. 
A similar attitude towards the sea as the better place emerges in, 
especially Western, fiction sioce 1960 (c£ Springer 1995: 307f£). Like 
Oarke in The Deep Range, numerous American writers begin to cherish 
the life-sustaioiog force of the ocean; maoy also turn to the apparently 
specific capability of women, 'primitive' people and marine mammals to 
be at one with the luringly exotic qualities of watery space; see, for instance, 
Slonczewski's (rg86) peaceful water planet of women 'sharers'; the techno­
logically 'ionocent' people who call themselves the Children of the Open 
Sea in Le Guio (1972); the old sperm whale Mulata [sic!] that carries the 
Dreamtime io Barnes (1994) aod, finally, the special bonds between Peter 
Dolphin, the woman researcher Melissa and the indigenous K.nolly in 
Mooney (1983). 
In the decades after the Second World War, the fecund ocean and her 
noisy marine life thus became endowed with anthropomorphic and angelic 
qualities, floating between the duality of 'wild' humao others: Woman and 
Native. However, this flood of immigration was anything but a one-way 
'traffic' (Haraway rg8g: 146) from 'nature' to 'culture'. At the same time 
as the sea was being reconstructed irito a frontier bearing a marked resemb­
lance to the globe's semi-'dark' continents, where 'primitive cultures' could 
still be 'studied', Universal Man began to envision himself in the roles of 
various 'menfish' who could plunge into the assumed angelic innocence 
---- ---· ---
Cosmodolphins 
and the heavenly riches of an oceanic wilderness, the 'watery Inner 
that held the keys to 'the mystery of his murky beginning' (Piccard 
Dietz 1961: 223 and 21).8 
The Noble Dolphin-speak 
In this context of man's attempts to reconnect with Mother Sea, 
smiling dolphin leaped out as the perfect boundary figure between 
extraterrestrial marine world and that of humankind. While the dolphin is 
traditionally seen as representing the very sea herself, at least in her playful 
and gentle, pastoral configurations (Keller r887: 217), at the same time it 
also embodies difference and differentiation in relation to the sea· unlike , 
fish, the dolphin is a warm-blooded, air-breathing mammal who gives birth 
to live offspring. Moreover, since around 196o, it has been perceived as 
radiating non-aggression, compassion, spirituality and intelligence of a 
magnitude far beyond that which was ascribed even to the reinvented sea. 
As the creature also acquired a rapidly growing reputation not only for 
having a brain as large and complex as that of humans but even for the 
capability of speaking English (less often Russian) in a human-like voice, 
its role as mirror of man seemed assured. With big brains and no hands, 
·the dolphin became an ethnic other or, more precisely, the ethnic other 
who, as the noble savage, radiates the wisdom that transcends intelligence, 
the culru.re that negates civilization, the otherwordly dreamtime that feeds 
on the fabric of moonlight and myths. In other words, the savage with 
whom the other savages, those from the hard and dry landscapes, establish 
a communicative, perhaps telepathic, link much more easily than does the 
high-tech (usually white male) mind (c£ e.g. Ken Grimwood's novel Into 
the Deep (1996) (analysed in Chapter 2), which estimates only 8 per cent 
of the so-called 'First World' to be 'capable of full mind-to-mind contact' 
with cetaceans as against 79 per cent of Australian aborigines and certain 
other native populations (Grimwood 1996: 365-6)). 
We shall now sketch two discursive imprints left by the dolphin's orality 
cluster, and show how this cluster contributed to casting the animal in the 
role of noble savage, and to constructing its marine environment as an 
elsewhere with pastoral qualities. The first concerns the magic of its sonar 
system, the second the dolphin as a teller of Golden Age tales. For, in 
stark contrast to the earlier scientific view of dolphins as mute, the animals 
suddenly became known not only for their eagerness to communicate but 
also for their almost magical 'vocality'. 
In the language of science, dolphins could actually 'see with their ears' from Inner and Outer Space 169 
rg6r: viii). Possessing an in-built echo-location or sonar system, 
studied by the world's navies, they could, as if with an 'auditory 
locate and identify anything in the water by emitting sound pulses 
:Flistenir.g to the reflected echoes. Often such sounds were inaudible to 
lili>:nal;:ed human ear. In addition, despite having no vocal cords and, 
Jriseq1tently, no voice in our sense, they seemed able to speak in mysterious 
Perhaps, one scientist suggested, they communicated in a 'televisual' 
by transmitting sound-pictures or acoustic images (Lilly 196za: 
This might also mean that, just by looking with their ears, they could 
perceive and communicate things that were hidden from ordinary human 
senses. Taking these arguments further, subsequent New Age mythology 
transformed dolphins into healers and shamans, insisting that they perform 
as noble savage. Eventually, whales might turn into prophetic seers a la 
Greek Cassandra as, echoing the world soul's grief over the accumulating 
evils on planet Earth, they try in vain to warn humanity of the cosmic 
catastrophe this evil-doing will cause; see, a novel by the ex-Soviet, Kirghiz 
writer, Chingiz Aitmatov, Tavro Kassandry (1995) [The Stigma of Cas­
sandra]. 
The primary orality associated with these marine mammals also en­
couraged a resurgence within the sciences of the story-telling practices of 
a distant past. Myths and legends, ancient stories and anecdotes connected 
with the age of primary orality and, hence, with etlmic others, formed an 
amazing part of scientific and semi-scientific dolphin presentations. All 
the ancient myths and stories, which the Age of Enlightenment had scorn­
fully discarded as 'absurd tales' ,9 became recycled here in the manner of 
stories-to-think-and-dream-with. 
The scientific discourse on the evolutionary path of cetaceans sustained 
this recycling of stories from a happy and distant elsewhere, for it strength­
ened the bonds between the animals themselves and the sort of imageries 
that equate (primary) oral culture with idyllic Golden Age stories. The 
highlights of this evolutionary narrative expose cetaceans as animals who, 
in contrast to 'us', returned millions upon millions of years ago from the 
land to the sea. Long before 'we' became human, this seafaring species 
evolved into the whales and dolphins that we know today. In short, they 
seem in a paradoxical way to mirror a parallel yet different evolutionary 
path to that of civilized man: these playful, talkative and highly 'intelligent' 
mammalian elders without hands could smoothly embody the technological 
innocence ascribed to the configurations of primary orality. For were not 
dolphins, one Soviet scientist asked, a thought-provoking example of a 
'society of intelligent beings' that neither used, nor invented, technology? 
Cosmodolphins 170 
And did not this non-technological society seriously question the Marxist­
Leninist belief in the inevitability of the industrial revolution as a global 
phenomenon (Konstantinov 1972: 289)? From the very beginning of its 
life in the (more or less popular) scientific discourses of late modernity, 
the dolphin became entangled in the iconic nets of tellers of tales; at times 
it was staged as memorizing and 'vocally' passing on dolphin culture to the 
next generation of marine mammals in the style of the 'folk tales and 
legends' told by human noble savages as well as the Homers of ancient 
times (cf. for example, Lilly '1962a: 37; Belkovich et a!. 1967: 323; Sagan 
1975: 178); at others, it was cast as star in repopularized Greek or Roman 
myths and given a leading role in ancient stories depicting the pastoral 
tiines of bays-on-a-dolphin (Kellogg 1961); now it was set to fulfil Golden 
Age-inspired visions of how wise dolphin grandmothers (babushkz) headed 
large, extended families of dolphin daughters in exemplary old-fashioned 
ways (Belkovich et a!. 1967: 316ft:); and finally, in A. Alpers's narratives 
on Opo, the 'gay dolphin' who played with the children in the shallow 
waters of New Zealand in the mid-195os, this remythologized 'New World 
dolphin' was romantically refigored as a Jesus-like prophetess bringing 
from another world the new teaching of unselfish, maternal love and 
redemption as well as a wholly New Age (Alpers 1960 and 1961). 
Over the years the Golden Age function of this sea manunal has become 
so generally accepted, so emblematic, that the animal's very appearan.ce on 
the stage, even with only a short 'blip', is sufficient to signal idyllic nature, 
untouched by the Fall, by original sin. An example of this pops up in a 
recent American cyberpunk novel on cyborgs and cyberspace, Pat Cadigan's 
Synners (1991). In the epilogoe of this book, after more than 400 pages of 
a very sophisticated high-tech future, a dolphin quite unexpectedly appears 
on the horizon. Its sole purpose is to applaud the protagonist's realizing 
that 'every technology has its original sin' (Cadigan 1991: 435) and establish 
a counter-image to this. The dolphin has clearly come to supplant former 
ways of representing sacred wholeness and innocence. Its belonging to the 
green Origin image that contrasts Mth techno-man's ecological devastation 
is also recognized in Russian literature. For instance, the image appears in 
A. Bitov's reflections on an Earth dead and barren as the result of techno­
logical progress vis-a-vis a green one, filled with animals, birds and fish, 
with man collecting roots, and 'perhaps, an intelligent dolphin who has not 
taken our non-intelligent road' (Bitov 1976: 338). 
Playing the part of the noble savage, the dolphin opens the door to a 
world that promises to redeem our nostalgic longings for a future based on 
the blissfully innocent lifestyle iroagined to have existed prior to techno-l I Voices front Inner and Outer Space 171 
civilization. The restored images of the sea as an alluring pastoral source, 
which in its linkage to womb and breast also incorporates vivid notions of 
primary orality, undoubtedly provide an appropriate setting for embodied 
desires of symbiotic reconnectedness such as the ones displayed by the 
noble dolphin. 
Refiguring Father Sky 
Although the science of oceanography, which had languished in ob­
scurity during the first half of this century, underwent a huge expansion 
during the 1950s and 196os, it was nevertheless eclipsed by the Space Age 
which, for very good reasons, is also known as the age of rockets and 
missiles. The Cold War gaze of both superpowers was unambigoously 
fixed on the heavens for the ultimate display of military and technological 
supremacy. 
However, there were obvious parallels in the discourses concerning the 
conquest and exploitation of the two extraterrestrial regions. As suggested 
in Chapters 3 and 4, the ideas of 'harvesting', drilling for minerals, etc., 
were applied to our neighbours in the solar system as well. Expanded to 
cosmic proportions, visions of 'farming' and 'mining the sky' blazed the 
American and Soviet colonial trails to the stars, engendering grandiose 
blueprints for engineering celestial bodies into duplicates of Earth or for 
transforming them into suppliers of raw materials for 'the home planet' 
(cf. the title of Kelley 1988). These greedy discourses, bent on canuibalizing 
the objectified cosmic wilds, nevertheless also shared resacralized con­
structions with the image of the ocean, constructions that restored life, 
dynamic change, superior intelligence and the divine to the hitherto muted 
abyss of space. 
During the first half of the twentieth century, the cosmic abyss was 
perceived as monotonously dead and barren space. The prevailing cosmo­
gonic theory considered the formation of planetary systems to be the 
result of rare, extremely unlikely, cosmic catastrophes. Our own solar 
system was thus thought to have 'resulted from a close passage of two 
stars: an exceedingly rare event' (Cameron 1963: r). Consequently, Planet 
Earth (and perhaps a few other planets in our solar system) floated as 
isolated islands of life and intelligence in the vast, desolate and lifeless 
cosmic sea. In this universe, man could feel both superior and uniquely 
alone. 
Then, after 1945, this bleak universe gradually succumbed to new 
visions of a cosmos filled with billions of other planetary systems and 
Cosmodolphins 172 
hence, in all likelihood, with a myriad life-forms, some younger and some 
older than ourselves. Neither Earth nor man was unique or superior any 
longer. On the contrary, there was suddenly every reason to believe that 
both were merely 'average' (and hence, easily replaceable, c£ Chapter 4). 
Out there, in the resuscitated Beyond of space, there would be not only 
pre-cellular and, perhaps, human-like forms of life, but also ancient, highly 
advanced beings who, as our technological superiors, represented the 'post­
human' condition that has become associated with the cyborg (Sullivan 
Ig66: Io3; c£ also our Chapter I). But even if these advanced creatures, 
exposed by astronomy's newly opened 'radio window', might be considered 
posthuman, we saw in Chapter 4 that they certainly did not emerge as 
postgendered (Haraway I99" ISO). 
In short, the parallels between the post -Second World War constructions 
of the ocean and the cosmos are striking: the ambivalence between can­
nibalizing and resacralizing, that came to surround our watery inner space, 
is reflected in the discourses on the ethereal outer one. No less striking, 
however, are the differences. If the refined marine listening devices and the 
new communication theories cooperated in transposing the connotations of 
Origin and womb, traditionally linked to the sea, into a primary orality of 
noisy body-speak, then the newly discovered radio universe assisted in 
engendering discursive constructions of the cosmos as a huge broadcasting 
network. Metaphorically, the cosmos became very 'noisy' too (although 
:mere is no 'natural' sound whatsoever, since sound waves cannot propagate 
through the vacuum of space). When its radio waves were translated into 
sound and writing, however, the signals seemed to be of a far more 
intelligent and elevated kind than those picked up from the sea. The 
embryonic intelligence of the Sea Mother was clearly outdistanced by the 
high-tech intelligence of the Sky Father. Often explicitly referred to as 
signals, and explained to the public using our own radio and TV broad­
casting stations as the main point of reference, the heavenly transmissions 
became linked to the technologizing of the word and the secondary orality 
that stems from the upsurge in communication electronics and mass media 
technology." 
The Broadcasting Universe 
Let us briefly recapitulate Ong's definition of secondary orality as 
opposed to the primary and original one that was the only existing mode 
of thought and speech before the technology of writing and printing 
changed our way of thinking. Secondary orality, created initially by the Voices from Inner and Outer Space 173 
invention of alphabets and of printing technology, is, Ong notes, accelerated 
by 'present-day high-technology culture, in which a new orality is sustained 
by telephone, radio, television and other electronic devices that depend for 
their existence and functioning on writing and print' (Ong I997' n). So, 
in secondary orality, technology intrudes into and fuses with the word; 
accordingly, the subtitle of Ong's book is 'The Technologizing of the 
Word'. This technologizing may also be interpreted as the Word becoming 
spiritualized as symbolic or electronic signals suggesting the activities of 
a distant, cosmic Cybergod. This process came to take a major part in the 
resacralizing of the heavens: the divine Word that, in Holy Scripture, 
initiated the cosmos of yesteryear, underwent an electronic Word-processing 
and emerged as a multimedia broadcasting station, capable of regenerating 
and upholding the resounding 'call of the cosmos' (c£ the title of Tsiol­
kovsky I 962 ). 
This kind of secondary orality permeated the imagery into which the 
universe was now transposed.11 At times, natural cosmic phenomena such 
as .atoms of hydrogen, the most abundant element in the universe, went on 
the air, as in the following exarople: 'Like a giant broadcasting station with 
an antenna rising above the street, hydrogen has established its frequency 
of I,420 megacycles as the loudest radio program in town' (Holmes I967: 
53). Radio observatories, described as 'man's only cosmic listening posts' 
(Kraus 1995: 238), were pricking up their so-called 'electronic ears' to 
catch the sounds of the natural universe, since 'radio waves are emitted 
not only by broadcasting stations but by every object in the universe as 
well' (Shklovsky I99" 13). Of itself, the terminology of radio astronomy, 
involving frequencies, channels, wavelengths, tuning in on other worlds -
and so on and so forth -carries connotations of a radio broadcasting 
universe functioning in a quasi-human way. Although astronomers usually 
emphasize that the waves picked up from distant radio sources (in the 
1950s still called 'radio stars') by a large antenna and a radio receiver, 
produce only a 'hissing noise' that in itself carries no information, the 
contiguity with ordinary radio broadcasting often recurs in their own 
discourses. One example of this is the depiction of the 'hissing noise' as 
'the sound of a radio receiver tuned between stations' (Kraus 1995: 149). 
All you have to do, this analogy implies, is to turn the dial and search for 
an extraterrestrial 'electronic voice' of enlightenment and entertainment 
that will come through loud and clear when you find the right frequency 
(cf. Holmes 1967: 8). 
You do not always even have to turn the dial. In the best-selling SF 
novel Contact (I997), astronomer Carl Sagan's alter ego, Ellie Arroway, 
Cosmodolphins 174 
listens obsessively through her earphones to the random noise from the 
sky, searching for a pattern, a signal. Even when the noise is clearly 
patternless, she does not put her earphones away. Mter all, she is familiar 
with Shannon's famous dicru.m in information theory: 'that the most 
efficiently coded message was indistingnishable from noise, unless you had 
the key to the encoding beforehand' (Sagan 1997: so). What was believed 
to be meaningless, hissing radio noise, emitted by distant magnetic fields 
and by the listening devices themselves, might ru.rn out to be an alien 
radio message. 
The blurring of the boundaries between the naturally and the techno-­
logically broadcasting cosmos was an analogy that thrived not only in the 
rapidly expanding border zone of popularized space science and science 
fiction. By the late 1950s, the fusion of the electronically generated radio 
universe and the naturally radiating one had become an issue for many 
astronomers and astrophysicists as well. In 1959, Otto Struve, director of 
the radio astronomy observatory in Green Bank, West Virginia, writes that 
there may well be 'observable phenomena' in the universe that can only be 
understood if the 'laws of physics' have been extended by 'actions of "free 
will"' -that is, by the actions of an intelligence that has reached a techno­
logical level at least equivalent to our own. Struve argues his case with 
reference to the relatively new staru.s of Planet Earth as a rising 'radio 
star': 
Man-made radio waves did not exist a generation ago. Those now in exist­
ence could be easily detected from distances of ten to twenty light years 
(after a light-time interval of ten to twenty years). We can no longer take for 
granted that all observable phenomena are ruled exclusively by what we call 
the 'laws of nature'. (letter in New York Times, 6 December 1959) 
The transformation of the formerly silent universe into a cosmos of 
radio and TV communication, where speech transmissions may be trans­
lated by computers into the langnage of extraterrestrial others, had by that 
time already become an established science fiction 'fact'. In the I 9 57 Soviet 
SF novel, The Andromeda Nebula (Yefremov 1987), a gigantic intergalactic 
broadcasting network, The Great Ring, connects humanity with a plurality 
of other worlds. In this Utopian setting of a distant future, the author, Ivan 
Yefremov (a prominent scientist hiniself), lets a 'beautiful' earth woman 
read the terrestrial news to the aliens at regular intervals, or lecture them 
on human history. The ETs can allegedly see this earthly TV version of 
Miss Universe, but can they hear her? wonders the human protagonist of 
the novel. He concludes that if these ETs do employ some form of verbal I 
I Voices from Inner and Outer Space 175 
communication, 'electronic translation machines will transform the symbols 
into the sounds of the living alien speech' (Yefremov 1987= 123). In other 
words, the speech of the woman is rendered into an electronic voice with 
a langnage, a (secondary) orality of its own. But who is really speaking on 
the ETs' screen- .Miss Universe, the word-processing machine, or both? 
This novel was issued more or less simultaneously with the launch of 
the first Sputnik. So immensely popular did the story become that the 
Soviet Union's best-known astrophysicist, I. Shklovsky, head of the depart­
ment of radio astronomy at the Shternberg Astronomical Institute, soon 
urged a search for intelligent signals from the Andromeda galaxy ( c£ New 
York Times, 3 December 1962). It was here, in this huge starry nebula, 
that the novel had placed the technological supercivilization whose friendly 
call signals, representing the bright future of communism, originally led to 
Planet Earth's entry into the intergalactic club. Stimulated too by their 
country's success in space, Soviet astronomers did indeed locate the alleged 
beacons of such civilizations. In 1965 the Soviet News Agency, TASS, 
informed an astonished world of a newly discovered supercivilization that 
seemed to be signalling us. (Unfortunately, the regnlar pattern of radio 
waves, repeated every hundred days, was found to originate from a natural 
source, a quasar; cf. Sullivan 1966: 225; Shklovsky 1991: 253.) 
An Era of Space Messages 
The broadcasting universe did not emerge solely from the postwar drive 
to rebind the broken cosmic globe, nor did it grow exclusively out of the 
new radio universe and the obsession with communication, information 
and electronic mass media in the industrialized countries. It was also linked 
to the US-Soviet contest in celestial ventriloquism that began when the 
radio beeps of the orbiting Sputnik in October 1957 revealed the presence 
of a superior technological intelligence in the sky. This contest was clearly 
aimed at deciding which one of the two superpowers could most superbly 
master the god-trick of speaking on behalf of the universe. The means 
were radio signals, which displayed how this technology was now miracu­
lously capable of establishing communication, including eavesdropping,12 
on a cosmic scale. Whether transmitting beeps, speech, photographs or 
TV broadcasts, these satellites and spaceprobes were often referred to as 
'voices' from space; see, for example Clarke's Voices from the Sky (1966). 
Moreover, this contest encouraged ideas of communicating with the 'real' 
ETs. Such an alluring prospect lay, for instance, just beneath the surface 
of the newspaper headline that, when reporting on the first satellite trans-
Cosmodolphins 176 
mission of human speech from outer space, bombastically announced: 
'Talking Satellite Heralds Era of Space Messages' (New York Times, 23 
December 1958). 
In the years following 1959, when two elite physicists, Giuseppe Cocconi 
and Philip Morrison, ·both of _them professors at Cornell University, made 
this undertaking scientifically respectable by publishing their article 'Search­
ing for Interstellar Communications' (1959), various strategies for detecting 
artificially generated radio signals from a distant high-tech elsewhere were 
put forward ( cf. Cameron 1963). The enterprise that subsequently became 
knowu as CETI (an acronym for Communication with ExtraTerrestrial 
Intelligence), was for years conceived of as a genuine act of communica­
tion.13 Nevertheless, both the American and Soviet scientists involved were 
in fact concentrating their speculations mainly on technical questions of 
how to locate and pick up the semi-divine transmissions that were believed 
to be already on the· air. The problems of actually establishing meaning 
across the cosmic sea were generally ignored or played down, reduced to 
the universality of prime numbers, mathematics and technicalities. With 
dots and dashes pulsing through the universe from the broadcasting site of 
the 'remote communicator', a sort of interstellar Morse code might, for 
instance, be arranged into a scanning pattern that would display TV pictures 
(TV was becoming the dominant medium at that time; it also blurs the 
boundaries between speech, writing and picture). That humans had dis­
covered television soon after radio, 'he [the distant scientist] will know ... 
from his own experience. He can be quite confident that a society which 
is capable of listening to his signals at all will be capable of constructing 
a television scanning pattern,' claimed an American naval officer and guided 
missile specialist, accustomed to interpreting the alien mind (Holmes 
1967: 37)-
0ne contributor to the CETI. discussion, however, did embed the con­
cept of 'interstellar communication' within the still substantial theatrical 
genre of the radio. This was the Dutch mathematician, H. Freudenthal, 
who designed a bizarre language, Lincos, for an alleged 'cosmic intercourse', 
in which earthlings enacted the everyday dramas of being human. In the 
introduction to his book (196o), Freudenthal confesses to having once 
'thought cosmic radiation to be a linguistic phenomenon', but to have later 
changed his mind, acknowledging that 'at the present stage of our know­
ledge this seems to be very improbable'. Still, the contignity between cosmic 
radiation and broadcast speech apparently continued to haunt him. For the 
'lingua cosmica' (abbreviated to Lincos), which he invented, is oral speech 
designed to be performed by actors playing various parts in a didactic radio Voices from Inner and Outer Space 177 
play. The ETs were thus meant to learn the new langnage by listening to 
(pardy) dramatized radio narratives on what it means to be human on 
Planet Earth. 'Throughout our exposition', he writes, 'we will talk of 
Lincos as if it were speech (not writing). We shall say that Lincos phonemes 
(not letters) are radio-signals of varying wavelength and duration, and that 
Lincos words are constituted of phonemes (not letters)' (Freudenthal 1960: 
15). Hence he explicitly conceives of the Lincos words as being pronounced 
when they are translated into radio signals and transmitted. Although 
Freudenthal admits that the differentiation between writing and speech in 
his desired transmission to the ETs iS conventi0ila1, his preference for 
developing proficiency in oral cosmic communication is so deliberately 
argned that it turns out to be the very foundation on which his broadcasting 
programme is based. By choosing to stage his explanations of human 
behaviour as radio theatre, as polyphonic voices in dialogue, the Lincos 
designer intends to impart terrestrial morals, ethics and culture to the 
distant, though human-like mind. Thus Freudenthal's ET is educated in 
the not-yet-posthuman condition through enactments of European upper­
class etiquette, which display, for example, the advantages of polite speech 
and other signs of good breeding. Listening carefully to this amazing story 
of the terrestrial lifestyle, our remote friend could learn that it does pay 
off-on Earth at least-to treat your servant well (in a note to one of his 
hieroglyphic dialogues, written pardy in Latin, pardy in mathematics, 
Freudenthal explains that: 'It appears that the obedient servant is regularly 
paid by his master. Another person is disobedient, because his master did 
not pay him his due' -ibid.: 215). 
Freudenthal's idea of staging a celestial radio play for the 'distant races' 
did not meet with much sympathy in mainstream CETI circles. The Lincos 
concept was commonly considered too complicated and old-fashioned for 
the Cybergods -who might be more hooked on TV -and the energy 
needed to actually broadcast at random to far-away celestial bodies un­
realistically expensive. Transmitting random signals from a technological 
civilization as young and relatively primitive as that of the Earth was not 
on the agenda; instead, earthlings were to gain entry into the galactic club 
by tuning their electronic devices to the right frequency. We were, then as 
now, supposed to be not the wise and instructive teachers, but the humble, 
ignorant listeners, as is aptly implied by ]. E. Gunn's SF novel, The 
Listeners (1974).14 
In the next chapter, we shall see how the flexible dolphin leaps freely 
between this version of the Big Blue, where it performs as a highly 
technologized stand-in for the cosmic cybergods, and the one in whic~, as 
Cosmodolphins 178 
an emissary of inner space, a noble savage in smooth, rubbery disguise, it 
conveys sybilline messages from the motherly sea. 
Notes 
r. Readers as ignorant as we ourselves used to be on the mystery of 'waves' may 
find the following helpful. Visible light, X-rays, microwaves (used in radar) and radio are 
all electromagnetic waves, differing only in wavelength. They travel through empty space 
at the speed of light. By contrast, sound waves must have a medium (e.g. air or water) 
through which to travel; water constitutes a much more efficient medium than air. 
Technologically, earthlings have been generating electromagnetic radio waves since about 
1900. Radio broadcasts started around 1920; TV, which also depends on radio waves, 
began to enter homes in the 1940s. Radar is a system for detecting objects using pulsed 
radio waves; the word stands for RAdio Detection And Ranging. Sonar is a similar system 
using sound waves; it is an acronym for SOund Navigation And Ranging. Radar and 
sonar are commonly confused in public discourses. 
2. According to an American navy officer, the first undersea craft constructed in the 
teardro~ configuration of a whale became the forerunner of 'the nuclear-powered attack 
submanne and finally of the Polaris weapons delivery system ... The results of dolphin 
research and the most awesome of natural power, nuclear power, have produced America's 
major deterrent to war [that is, the nuclear submarine]' (Devine and Oark 1967: 332 and 
341) . 
. j. C£ Oarke 196o; Cowen 196o; Cousteau and Dumas 1953; Bardach 1968; Vasil­
ch1kov 1964; Tarasov 1956; Chapskii and Sokolov 1973. Howev~ the Soviets faithful to 
th ch. , , 
e tea mgs of Marx, rejected Malthusian-inspired beliefs in the catastrophic con­
sequences of the rise in world population. 
4· The staggering growth of marine bio-acoustics is reflected in the number of 
scientific reports. One bibliography from 1960 contains over 1,200 references almost all 
of which deal with the sounds made by marine life forms (Kellogg 1961: 3~), cf. also 
Sebeok 1972: 54, who lists over 1,500 references by early 1962. 
5· An :malysis of 273 toadfish sound patterns, recorded at the Marine Laboratories 
of Florida State University, revealed toadfish communication to be as 'taciturn' as that 
of humans. A~cording to the Law of Least Effort, there is a negative relationship in 
spoken and wntten language between the length of a woid and the frequency of its use. 
The longer ~e word, the more seldom it is employed (Kellogg 1961: 36ff.). 
~· The Stlent World was published in the USA in 1953; a few years later it also came 
out m the Soviet Union. Cousteau's colour film of the same name, which starred the 
tame grouper, Ulysses, won an award at the 19.56 Cannes Fihn Festival. It was shown in 
the Soviet Union in 1958. 
7· . ~ng the_ 1950s ~norkelling grew into a mass sport in the USA. By 1960, about 
o?~ mtlli~n Amencan swunmers were snorkclling, while zoo,ooo had taken up scuba­
divmg (Ttme, 28 March 1960: 52). In the Soviet Union free diving grew much more 
slowly, partly for geographical reasons, partly due to a shortage of equipment (cf. Dugan 
and Vahan 1965: s(}-2). 
8. !he world's first oceanarium, Marine Studios (1938), was renamed Marineland 
of Flonda after the Second World War. The name indicates the new bonding between 
sea and ~d .. Soviet marine scientists had to lobby for years before they eventually got 
the dolphinanum at Batumi in 1974, which functioned both as a research centre and a Voices from Inner and Outer Space 179 
dolphin circus (Tomilin 1980: 30). By 1969, the USA had thirteen oceanaria in operation, 
the majority of which had been built in the 196os (cf. Chapskii and Sokolov 1973: 213). 
9· In a standard work on animals published in the early nineteenth century, the 
Reverend W. Bingley notes the following: 'The Dolphin was in great repute among the 
ancients, and both philosophers and historians seem to have contended who should relate 
the greatest absurdities concerning it ... How these absurd tales originated it is impossible 
even to conjecture; for the Dolphins certainly exhibit no marks of particular attachment 
to mankind. If they attend on vessels navigating the ocean it is in expectation of plunder, 
and not of rendering assistance in cases of distress' (Alpers 1961: 134; Bingley's An£mal 
Biography was issued in London in r8o2). 
10. A thousandfold increase in the power of Earth's radio and TV broadcasts occurred 
during the period 1940 to 1970; the increase was especially pronounced during the 1950s 
when TV became a popular commodity (c£ Goldsmith and Owen 1992: 467-8). But 
radio was experiencing growth as well. Thus in the Soviet Union there were only eighteen 
million radios in 1952, a number which had increased by 1968 to nearly ninety million 
(cf. Graham 1990: 33). 
11. In the early 1930s, the American engineer K J:msky accidentally picked up radio 
waves from outer space, but his discovery created only a short-lived sensation, and had 
no immediate effects on astronomical research. However, one astronomer foresaw the 
consequences as follows: 'The complicated equations of celestial mechanics may soon 
give way to the more complicated mathematics of celestial electronics. The mysterious 
electron, the fundamental building block of all matter, which dances in your radio tubes 
to the tune of your favorite jazz, is dancing in the remoter stars of the galaxy, and other 
galaxies, to pique the curiosity of the astronomer in his search for knowledge' (Stetson 
1934' 6). 
12. In the late 1950s, the US Navy, for instance, spent 200 million dollars on the 
construction of an enormous radio telescope designed to monitor the Soviets by ob­
serving their radio communications as they reflected back from the surface of the Moon. 
However, when satellites promised better ways of gathering information, the project vvas 
scrapped (cf. Drake and Sobel 1992: 40). 
13. CETI, the concept and the word itsel£, was introduced into the International 
Academy of Astronautics (IAA) in 1965 by the Czech Professor R. Peshek. The IAA 
then formed a CETI committee which, however, two decades later discreetly changed its 
name to the similar-sounding SETI (the Search for ExtraTerrestrial Intelligence) (c£ 
Marx 1988: xv-xvii). To C. Sagan, for instance, the acronym CETI was appropriate 
because it is also the genitive of the lAtin word for whale, Cetus. Sagan strongly favoured 
the argument that if we cannot communicate with the cetaceans, 'we should not be able 
to communicate with extraterrestrial civilizations' (Sagan 1973: s). 
14. Since 1974, a US signal, describing our solar system, our DNA and our species, 
has been speeding towards the Hercules constellation, 25,000 light-years avvay. An answer 
may come in so,ooo years! 
~ -------------------------------
Amazing Story, V: Dolphin Versatility -from 
Living Missiles to Healers 
Ukraine trains kamikaze dolphins to heal . . . (Nanette van der Laan, 
The Electronic Telegraph, 23 July I997) 
Under this amazing headline, the UK-based Internet journal The Electronic 
Telegraph reports on its visit to the dolphin research centre in Ukraine. 
The centre is located at a naval base near Sevastopol, in the Crimea, which 
used to be the home port of the large Soviet Black Sea Fleet and one of 
the main facilities of the Soviet navy. Since the collapse of the Soviet 
Union, there has been considerable tension between Russia and Ukraine, 
and major disputes about how to divide up this fleet. 
The general cut-backs in military spending have left their mark on this 
once powerful navy. Whether Ukrainian or Russian, many of the personnel 
have had to find new ways of earning a living. This includes the elite 
squadron of 70 dolphins who, according to the Ukrainian navy's chief 
spokesman, Captain Nikolai Savchenko, were trained for 'kamikaze mis­
sions' and other military purposes (Laan '997)· Instead of preparing 
themselves to blow up submarines with explosives strapped to their bodies 
(Laan '997), or to disarm any enemy frogmen who might approach Sevasto­
pol harbour ( Ogonek, no. 37, 1996: 9; GlobaLearn 1998), the dolphins are 
now engaged in the therapy and healing business. Several were sold to a 
Red Sea swim-with-the-dolphins centre in Israel; others managed to convert 
their military skills in more domestic Black Sea waters so that they were 
able to keep their jobs at Sevastopol, supervised by their new leader, 
Svetlana Matyshovna, who has worked at the naval base for almost three 
decades. They now participate in a successful dolphin-therapy programme 
conducted by the Science and Research Centre of the National Oceano­
graphic Institute of Ukraine. Much like similar programmes in Florida, 
,'the central part of the treatment consists of sessions where the patient 
' swims with a dolphin. According to the assistant doctor, Ludmilla Lukina, Amazing Story V 181 
since its inception in 1986 the programme has helped over 1,500 people 
with various kinds of medical and psychological problems (Lukina 1996). 
The former 'kamikaze dolphins' have, Lukina notes, been particularly 
helpful in treating children for various kinds of neuroses and even more 
serious afflictions, such as autism. 
Allegedly, what is happening in the Sevastopol dolphin-therapy is a 
readjustment Of the patienes 'natural aura'. This is how the head of the 
healing programme, Svetlana Matyshovna, explains the process, thus dis­
playing that, in her conversion from Soviet military person to dolphin 
therapist, she also came out of the closet as a New Ager. She 'studies 
UFOs, levitation and telekinesis (moving objects with one's mind)', Laan 
reports. In typical New Age fashion, Matyshovna stresses that the aura 
readjustment is a process requiring openness on the part of the patient, 
and a willingness to accept the gnidance of the dolphins: 
The dolphin uses his sonar. He sends vibrating signals underwater which 
reach the patient. The animal scans the human body and realigns the 
energetic field. The time needed to correct the aura of the patient depends 
on the affliction and the willingness of the patient to accept the signals. 
(Matyshovna, quoted by Laan I997) 
Although the dolphins seem to perform extremely well in their new 
role, even being able to attract hard currency (Laan paid £ IO for a short 
swim session), their conversion to peaceful activity is, nevertheless, not 
complete. Since the premises of the research centre are owned by the navy, 
the military training of these extremely flexible animals has not yet been 
abandoned. Some of them still have to work part -time for the fleet -just 
in case the peace should not last. 
With a few minor changes of detail, this amazing story of the dolphins 
of Sevastopol could have been told equally well with American actors in 
the leading parts. Like the Soviet Union, the US navy has been conducting 
a dolphin-training programme since 1959;1 it used the animals for mine­
sweeping and other military purposes during the Vietnam War.' Moreover, 
as a consequence of the changing world order and the growing eco-political 
concerns of the American public, numerous US military dolphins have 
recently, like their Russo-Ukrainian colleagues, had to prove that they 
could act as quick-change artists and adapt to new lifestyles. 
While the Ukrainians convert the dolphins from soldier heroes to sha­
man healers, the trend in the USA is to make the animals prove that a 
return to 'wild nature' is possible. In this way, they too are expected to act 
as healers, restoring the broken bonds between humans and nature. In 
Cosmodolphins 182 
response to a request from the US Congress, a 'Reintroduction to the 
Wild' programme for naval marine mammals was developed in the early 
1990s, and a number of bottlenose dolphins were chosen to be released 
from their duties (Brill and Friedl 1993). Some of them have actually been 
transported to Florida and reintroduced to 'the wild', assisted by Rick 
O'Barry, the former trainer of the famous Flipper from the TV series of 
the r96os. O'Barry converted to ceo-activism and became a liberator of 
captive dolphins after Kathy, his favourite Flipper 'actress', died in his 
arms 'of a broken heart' (O'Barry 1988: 2); hence he emphasizes that the 
reintroduction to the wiid is not about science, but about ethics, art, and 
healing: 'What we are doing is an art, a healing art; not science', O'Barry's 
web-site informs us (1999: 1). 
Yet another parallel between the Russo-Ukrainian and the American 
story of dolphin reconversions from military to peaceful activities is that 
the US navy also does not want to give up its dolphin recruits altogether. 
In 1997, a renewed flow of money revitalized the project. As Jeffrey Haun, 
the trainer who heads the navy's marine mammals programme, declared in 
the Seattle Times (15 October 1997): 'There are some things that marine 
mammals can just do better than man'-such as sweeping mines in shallow 
coastal waters. 
However, one major difference separates the Russo-Ukrainian post-Cold 
War dolphin script from that of the Clinton administration. That is the 
shameless exposure of an inappropriate contiguity taking place on the 
premises of the naval base in Sevastopol, where: 'uniformed navy officers 
march in step, while a few yards away a busload of children runs to the 
water to see the dolphins and pet sealions' (Laan 1997). 
In the USA, the dolphin's iconographic links to the Cold War and 
violent death are kept away from the public eye,.when its performance in 
the entertainment or healing business is staged by oceanaria or therapy 
centres. 
Notes 
1. C£ U.S. Navy Marine Mammal History .Page, January 1999 (www.spawar.navy. 
mil/sandiego/technology/mammals/history.html). Cf. also Wood (1973) and Ridgway 
(1987). 
2. Cf. the video 'The New Explorers: Declassified U.S. Navy Dolphins', AMR 
(1996), which claims to show the US Navy's Marine Mammals Facilities. For 30 years 
these were 'classified as top secret', while 'now the truth about this amazing program can 
be told'. One of the highlights of this video is allegedly 'rare footage' displaying dolphins 
'engaged in mine-sweeping activities in Vietnam' (Internet-ad for the video, 1999). Rocket State and Dolphin State 
Mysteriously smiling, the dolphin entered the American inragination 
around rg6o. Not only did it attract the attention of science and the 
military; it also enraptured the public mind. So powerfully evocative was 
this dolphin image that it spread rapidly throughout the rest of the Western 
world and, adeptly bypassing the Iron Curtain, it even captured the Soviet 
mind. 
The messages that were inscribed in the icon were many and ambiguous. 
On the one hand, the American and Soviet navies secretly investigated 
ways in which the dolphin's amazing hydrodynamic qualities could assist 
in the refinement of torpedoes, and how their sonar and communicative 
skills could be utilized in maritime warfare. On the other hand, the versatile 
animal was simultaneously gaining enormous public popularity as harbinger 
of a New Age and world peace. Being able to perform not only as 'smiling', 
helpful, intelligent, spiritually wise and endowed with healing powers, but 
also as playfully erotic, androgynous and group-minded, the dolphin was 
a perfect match for counter-cultural value systems. Moreover, its eagerness 
to overcome the barriers of interspecies communication, and its apparent 
willingness to speak in human-like voices, inspired hopes in anti-war­
minded humans; the kind dolphin might, some people thought, guide us 
to a new paradigm of peaceful cooperation with alien others, whether 
originating in the strange world beneath the ocean surface, at the other 
side of the Iron Curtain, or in outer space. In the Soviet Union, the fun­
loving animal caught the inragination of anti-Stalinist trends, and the study 
of cetaceans became a legitimizing platform for the promotion of socialism 
with a human or rather, a kindly smiling dolphin, face (Bryld 1998). 
This chapter retells the amazing story of the dolphin's entrance into 
the limelight of post-Second World War culture, and outlines some long­
term effects of the scripts staged at that time. An analysis of the complex 
dolphin iconography exposes an array of conflicting roles and inappropriate 
contiguities. It shows how the animals, in their guise of jesters, masters of 
Cosmodolphins 184 
mimicry and mirrors of alien others, make visible the patterns of displace­
ment, inappropriate connections and fluid boundaries between the master 
narratives of Space Age and New Age, which we have explored separately 
in earlier chapters via the opposing stories of the spaceship and the horo­
scope icons. 
Dolphin Ambiguities 
As a prelude to our, scrutiny of the post-Second World War dolphin, let 
us consider the metamorphoses that this mythical animal was able to 
perform long before its postmodern rebirth as a 'nomadic' (Braidotti 1994) 
and boundary-crossing subject. When, after cenmries of obscurity, the 
dolphin became remythologized in a dual role as Space/Rocket Age cyborg 
and New Age healer, it renewed an ancient tradition of iconographic 
hybridization and fluidity. 
As maunuals that live in the sea, dolphins are anibiguous creatnres, 
prototypical boundary-figures that, from time inimemorial, have appealed 
to mythical thought and stirred the imaginations of different cultnres. 
Dolphin physiology leads the animal continuously to cross boundaries 
. between :water and air; if forced to stay under water for too long it drowns, 
1 and yet it dies from dehydration if it remains out of water for any length 
: of time. These manimals probably once lived on land but, many millions 
:' of years ago, they retnrned to the ocean whence they originated. Belonging 
' to the family of cetaceans, a nanie that was originally applied to any sea-
monster or huge fish, dolphins are classified as small whales, i.e. mammals 
that live in the sea but breathe air, and are warm-blooded and viviparous. 
· Furthermore, the dolphin beCanie known for its legendary helpfulness 
towards humans. In other words, it is in many ways 'like us' but its 
extraterrestrial habitat, the sea, the world of fish, makes it alien. No wonder 
then that the dolphin, acting, like mermaids, at the unstable boundaries 
between air and water, between human and non-human, has been con­
structed as an icon of interface and contiguity between different worlds. 
Another anibiguity making the dolphin even more mythopoeic and 
appropriate to signify border transgressions between seemingly separate 
categories and spheres stems from the polysemy of its sexual appearance. 
The smooth, streamlined bodies of dolphins have almost no external visual 
clues as to sexual difference. The nipples of the f=le dolphin are con­
cealed in the manitnary slits, and the penis of the male appears outside his 
body only when erect. Otherwise, his genital is withdrawn inside a slit. 
Males and females thus look alike, differing only in the number of slits. i 
f I Rocket State and Dolphin State 185 
Furthermore, when seen in total, the dolphin body resembles both a womb 
and a phallus, and these evocative sexual ambiguities are also stressed by 
another aspect. The male has voluntary control over his penis, which, in 
the words of one dolphin scientist, he masters 'in an almost "switch­
blade" fashion' (Lilly 1962a: 188). Moreover, the genital seems powerfully 
potent. This potency is strongly suggested by a photo (Lilly 1978) showing 
how the erect penis, captnred by a rope, apparently pulls the rope as the 
dolphin swims backwards away from the edge of the pool. At the sanie 
time, however, the masculinity on display is rendered ambiguous by the 
strange appearance of the genital. The penis looks like a miniatnre dolphin, 
a mirror baby, a cute dolphin replicant being born out of the body slit. In 
these ways, the dolphin appears to be ilie very incarnation of a fluid and 
unfixable sex, defYing ilie visual regime of phallocentrism and performing 
well as an icon of what Irigaray, speaking of women, has called the 'sex 
which is not one' (Irigaray 1985b). 
Embodying these different layers of equivocality, it is no wonder that, 
in mythological terms, the dolphin appears as a sexual nomad, avoiding 
fixed gender categories. Let us illustrate iliis by taking a look at ilie ways 
in which ancient myths link ilie dolphin to gender. 
Etymologically, ilie dolphin's Greek nanie, delphis, is related to ilie word 
delphys, .meaning womb or vagina. We find the same root in the name of 
the famous. temple and oracle of Delphi, where wise counsel originating in 
ilie womb of ilie Earili could be heard. There are also close links to ilie 
Greek word for sister or brother: adelphos. Delphi was founded by ilie god 
Apollo, who is connected wiili dolphins in ilie ancient myths. In one of 
iliese myilis, Apollo rides a dolphin to ilie place later known as Delphi; in 
another he transforms himself into a dolphin. The fanious statnes and 
pictnres of a boy on a dolphin show ilie young sun-god being born out of 
ilie sea. Originally, ilierefore, ilie boy on a dolphin carried a deep religious 
sigoificance. So did ilie even better-known dolphin rider, Aphrodite, who 
was also a dolphin goddess. Throughout the ancient Near East, ilie dolphin 
was worshipped as ilie Great Cosmic Mother, ilie Dolphin Goddess who 
presided over fecundity and ilie mystery of birili in all living beings. For 
centnries, tales were also told of how her attributes, ilie kind dolphins, 
guided ilie souls of the dead on ilieir journey across ilie cosmic sea. The 
goddess 1Was the ruler of birth and death, travel, communication between 
different worlds, rebirtli and immortality (Glueck 1966: 38o-1). 
But as ilie mythical transformation of Apollo and ilie girl/boy on a 
dolphin may suggest, the animal was imagined in a sexually. ambiguous· 
role. It could not only partake in such mythic, feminine forms as sibylline 
Cosmodolphins 186 
earth womb, lover of boys or Dolphin Goddess, but could also become a 
hermaphrodite through its bonds to Eros/Phanes or, io the shape of the 
god Triton, it could dramatically change into an aggressive phallus and 
rape anyone he pleased, girl or boy. Triton's name means 'three' or 'third', 
indicating that this divine sex maniac gravitates towards the 'third sex' 
embodied io the triadic hermaphrodite of ancient creation myths (Doria 
1974' 44). 
With all of these ambiguities as its cultural heritage, it is not surprising 
that the post-Second World War dolphio is as adept as its ancestors io 
taking on the role of quick-change artist, appearing now as living missile 
or cyborg, and now as wise healer or noble savage. Moreover, the fact that 
the dolphin as a species is much older than homo sapiens undoubtedly 
eased its transformation ioto both a representative of age-old high-tech 
civilizations of galactic aliens and an icon of sibylline intermediaries of the 
ancient, bodily wisdom of 'nature'. 
A Modern Rebirth of Dolphin Lore 
In one sense, the post-Second World War dolphin jumped out of the 
blue. Prior to 1960, very little research had been done on cetaceans. Not 
until that year did the echo-locating or sonar abilities of dolphios become 
an established scientific fact (Wood 1973: 71--2). Because of their extra­
terrestrial environment, these sea mammals were extremely difficult to 
study, and of the Marioelands or oceanaria that became so widespread 
later on there were at that time only a couple in th_~ USA, and none in 
Soviet Russia. But in the wake of improved technologies for exploration 
of the ocean depths,· and the resultant reconstruction of the sea as a place 
filled with life and 'speech', dolphins suddenly caught the interest of both 
science and the military. As it already incarnated the stuff that myths are 
made of, the way was paved for an enormous popularity and a cult-like 
celebration of the animal as mediator between alien extraterrestrial worlds 
and the everyday sphere of humans. 
A perusal of book titles iodicates the sudden popularity and newly 
shaped boundary function of the dolphio. A few revealing examples ioclude: 
Man and the Dolphin, 1961 (Lilly 196za); The Voice of the Dolphins, 1961 
(Szilard 1992); Nash drug-deljin [Our Friend- the Dolphin] (Belkovich et 
a!. 1967); The Mind of the Dolphin: A Nonhuman Intelligence (Lilly 1967); 
The Dolphin: Cousin to Man (Stenuit 1969); Mind in the Waters: A Book 
to Celebrate the Consciousness of Whales and Dolphins (Mcintyre 1974); Lilly 
on Dolphins: Humans of the Sea (Lilly 1975). These now classic dolphin ' 
1 .. -.... · 
I ' I 
I Rocket State and Dolphin State 187 
books were widely circulated and republished, often io paperback editions. 
In 1963 the first dolphin movie, Flipper, was shown in the USA. The fihn 
spawned a popular television series the following year, which subsequently 
became an international hit. A new series of Flipper stories was produced 
in the mid-1990s. Accordiog to the refrain of the jolly signature tune from 
the original series: 'No one you see is smarter than he' -he being, of 
course, Flipper. 
The dolphin made its debut ioto American and Soviet society at a time 
characterized politically by the tensions of the Cold War and the agoniziog 
processes of global decolonization on the one hand and, on the other, by 
a fragile detente, upheld in the shadow of threats of total nuclear destruc­
tion by summit talks, mutual visits and so on between the two superpowers. 
The only alternative to the holocaust of war appeared to be communication 
and mutual understanding, which the 'iotelligent' and friendly dolphin, so 
eager to build bridges between different worlds, conld personify even better 
than any human. 
A telling American example is the science fiction short story 'The Voice 
of the Dolphins' (Szilard r992), written by Leo Szilard, a Hungarian Jew, 
emigre from Nazi Germany and professor of physics at the University of 
Chicago. During the Second World War, Szilard was one of the elite 
physicists participating io the Manhattan Project, which developed the 
atomic bomb. But, like several other leading scientists, he became a 
vehement spokesman for disarmament and world peace after the war in an 
attempt to come to terms with the moral consequences of the role played 
by so-called 'neutral' or 'pure' science in the production of the A-bomb 
and its inherent threat to put an end to human civilization. He wrote 'The 
Voice ... ' io r96o with the explicit purpose of iotluenciog the American 
government and the Soviet prime minister, Khrushchev, with whom he 
tried in vain to discuss it. The story is a passionate plea for disarmament 
and for a new world order, defined by the rational and peaceful outlook of 
scientists. But the main poiot is that the scientists are guided by a group 
of highly iotelligent and morally mioded dolphios, who constitute the core 
staff of a scientific research institute in Vienna. It is a futuristic story 
beginning around 1960, when the dolphins, with the assistance of top 
scientists from the two superpowers, begin to intervene in world history. 
During the next decades they cleverly influence world politics, so that 
disarmament is finally 'reached in 1988. The satirical moral of the story is 
that world peace would never have come about without the knowledge and 
wisdom of the dolphins, who are so much more clever and morally minded 
than their assistants, the Russian and American scientists. Szilard's story 
Cosmodolphins 188 
became an anti-nuclear classic; it sold over 35,ooo copies in the USA and 
was translated into six languages. 
As Szilard's story illustrates, the beginning of the modern dolphin era, 
which coincided with the opeoing of the Space Age, was deeply engraved 
in another new icon -that of rockets and missiles. This gave the clever, 
gentle and morally elevated dolphin a background for promoting itself in 
the role of counter-image. 
An example is the story of Flipper. In the original Flipper film a young 
boy, Sandy, the son of a simple fisherman, makes friends with a dolphin. 
After a disastrous parasite, called the 'red plague'(!), kills off the fish in the 
sea, causing a disruption in his family's livelihood, the kind and caring 
dolphin eventually leads the boy to waters abounding with nourishment. 
The dolphin is obviously intended to perform as the friendly, nurturing 
and life-connoting counter-image to the 'red plague', which, in the context 
of the Cold War, implicitly connoted the deadly rockets of the Red com­
munist regime. The Flipper film was produced only a few years after the 
'technological Pearl Harbor' (Daniloff 1972: 6) where, with the launch of 
the first Sputniks in 1957, the Soviet Union had clearly demonstrated its 
ability to reach the 'hnd of the free' with fast, int~rcontinental missiles. 
True to its nomadic character, however, especially in this setting of a 
new era of weaponry, the dolphin acted not only as a counter-image, but 
also as a mirror of the rocket. The appearance, speed and lift-off power 
of these marine mammals are so strikingly reminiscent of rockets and 
missiles that the metaphors 'rocket-booster' and 'living torpedoes' occur in 
the minds of observers when trying to pass on their llp.pressions of leaping 
or swimming dolphins (c£ Cousteau and Dugan 1963: 123; Stenuit 1969: 
13). Moreover, another conspicuous link marked itself out between the sea 
creature and the rocket which, among other things, conld launch beeping 
satellites like Sputnik. Both heralded a revolution in communications that 
gave rise to great expectations of being able to transgress seemingly 
insurmountable barriers in reaching out to alien interlocutors. As the 
construction of the broadcasting universe and the search for extraterrestrial 
intelligence so neatly coincided with the discovery of dolphin intelligence 
and mastery of language, the stage was set for the animal's entry into a 
strange, paradoxical role of boundary figure for both the kind, wise and 
immensely superior alien, who obviously resided in the extraterr~strial 
cosmic ocean, and the still relatively small and primitive earthling, the man 
of science himself. Rocket state and Dolphin State 189 
The 'Father' of the Post-Second World War Dolphin Script 
The person who, more than anyone else, authored the post-Second 
World War dolphin script was the American neurophysiologist John C. 
Lilly (b. 1915), whom we introduced in our third Amazing Story. All of 
its basic elements stem from the famous experiments he conducted after 
setting up his Communication Research Institute in 1959, with laboratories 
in Florida and the Virgin Islands. As a medical doctor and a brain specialist, 
Lilly focused his research on methods of communication between 'man 
and other species', i.e. interspecies communication. A related purpose was 
to study the structure and functions of the brain and the psychology of 
man and of marine mammals, the latter being primarily the bottlenose 
dolphin, the 'smiling' species. Moreover, it became a goal for Lilly to 
prepare mankind, through dialogues with dolphins, for alien encounters. 
The latter aspect of Lilly's research led to his involvement with the leading 
scientists engaged in the scientific search for extraterrestrial intelligence in 
the universe. For a time, a year or two at least, he succeeded in persuading 
them that he could establish a 'human-like' communication with dolphins 
that wonld be useful as a model for future conversations with the 'real' 
ETs (c£, for instance, Morrison's recollections in Swift 1990: 29ff.). 
Lilly's ideas of English-speaking dolphins reached the front page of the 
New York Times on 21 June 1960, and the following year the extremely 
influential Lifo magazine published a widely read feature (28 Jnly 1961) 
heralding the publication of his first book Man and Dolphin (Lilly 1962a). 
Thereafter, the doctor and his intellectually conversant porpoises with 
skyrocketing IQ; became universal favourites of the public. Although Lilly's 
claims that he would be able to teach dolphins to speak English turned out 
-after he had enjoyed some years in the limelight of the scientific com­
munity -to be a flop, his· importance as a mythopoeic figure cannot be 
overestimated. So evocative was his claim that he could speak with dolphins 
that the amazing story of the events that took place at his Research Institute 
in the 196os have inspired innumerable popular science books, newspaper 
articles, novels, short stories, films, etc. Two novels, Robert Merle's The 
Day. of the Dolphin (1969), which was also fihned (1973) and Ted Mooney's 
Easy Travel to Other Planets (1983), can even be read as romans a clef, 
taking their starting point in the actual events at Lilly's Research Institute. 
No matter how hard many scientists tried to uproot the annoyingly 
unscientific beliefs brought into citcnlation by Lilly, the myth lived on. 
Decades later, two despairing dolphin researchers, Louis M. Herman and 
William Tavolga, summed up the situation as follows: 
Cosmodolphins 190 
Over the years, the hypothesis of a natural language in dolphins, vigorously 
promoted by Lilly, has failed to receive analytic, experimental, or conceptual 
support. Lilly's pronouncemenrs are largely behind the popular myth of 
'talking' dolphins. Partly through uncritical publicity, partly through public 
gullibility, and partly through poor science, the myth persisrs today despite 
many attemprs to lay the ghost to rest. (Herman 198o: 17&-7) 
Having so often been fooled by 'real' science, the 'gullible' public 
stubbornly preferred to side with Doctor Lilly, the ventriloquist who could 
restore the broken bond with nanrre as well as with a friendly non-human 
species. As an example of the indefatigable appeal of Lilly's doctrines, let 
us for a moment apply an ear to the mouthpiece of one of the huge tourist 
attractions of the USA, the marine amusement park chain Sea World. In 
1989, thirty years after Lilly founded his Research Institute in the Virgin 
Islands, a trainer's speech 'sold' the famous killer whale, or Shamu, show 
to the audience in a very Lilly-like fashion.1 It compared the animals to 
extraterrestrial beings from outer space and alluded to the possibility of 
orca-human conversations as a precursor to communication with cosmic 
aliens: 
It's been said that space is the final frontier. If this is true, then the current 
frontier must certainly be the oceans of our own planet. Now with the birth 
of Baby Shamu ... we have been given an incredible opportunity at inter­
species communication. Some people feel that before we ever speak to animals 
and creatures from outer space, we might be able to speak or communicate 
with animals of the sea. Dolphins, whales, maybe even Baby Shamu! (Quoted 
in Davis 1997: 227) 
Even among scientists, the echoes of Lilly's research have continued to 
make themselves heard; this, perhaps more than anytrung else, demoastrates 
how powerful an object-to-think-with (Turkle 1984) he had conjured up. 
The scientific discussion of the issue of intelligently communicating 
dolphins did not end with the discrediting of Lilly's approach as poor 
science. Mter Lilly, several scientisrs have explored the question of human­
dolphin communication in other ways. Even Lilly critic Louis Herman is 
among these. He has studied the issue for many years, and it gives food for 
thought that, at a scientific conference on dolphin cognition and behaviour 
in 1983, his research gave impetus to a discussion that, in its speculative 
extravagance, did not fall very far short of Lilly's own wild way of phrasing 
questions. As sununed up by the widely respected expert in human-animal 
communication Donald Griffin, the thought-provoking issue that followed Rocket State and Dolphin State 191 
from Herman's contribution suggested that it might be easier to establish 
interspecies communication if a language with a more 'basic' syntax than 
English were chosen as linguistic paradigm (Schusterman eta!. 1986: xiii; 
cf. also Griffin 1992: 217). So maybe Lilly simply chose the wrong language? 
Yet another echo of Lilly's research resounds within the sciences in the 
context of the search for extraterrestrial intelligence. Even now, in the 1990s, 
the scientific debate on the issue still sometimes takes into consideration 
the question of human-dolphin communication. In First Contact, which 
presents itself as a book where 'the world's leading astronomers confront 
the ultimate question: are we alone in the universe?' (Bova and Preiss 
1991), a chapter zooms in on 'The Dolphin: An Alien Intelligence'. It is 
authored by Diana Reiss, who was at that time director of the research into 
dolphin communication and cognition at Marine World Africa in California 
and also a teacher in human-animal communication at San Francisco State 
University. 
Lilly's Talking Cyborg Dolphins 
Lilly had developed the idea of actually speaking with alien species 
while working at the Laboratory of Neurophysiology of the US National 
Institute of Mental Health, where he eventually became chief of the 
Section on Cortical Integration. Having had no success in communicating 
with monkeys, chimpanzees, dogs or cats, whose brains were found to be 
ridiculously small, his attention was directed by a whale expert to some 
other brains truly worthy of research. In contrast to the animals mentioned, 
the whale family seemed to possess 'a brain equal to and larger than ours, 
and presumably equally complicated' (Lilly r962a: 45). (At that time, we 
might add, the capacity of computers, all of them very large, grew with 
their size. They were often called electronic brains.) 
Between 1955 and 1957, Lilly conducted his research on the dolphin 
brain in the laboratory of the Florida Marine Studios. Both his anatomical 
and electrical investigations into this terra incognita confirmed that the 
animal was, indeed, not only an excellent example of a highly developed 
non-human intelligence, but also probably the only one existing on Earth. 
The dolphin brain, Lilly claimed, was as complex as ours and its size and 
weight even larger (1,700 grams to Universal Dolphin versus only 1,450 
grams to Universal Man). 
While mapping, as he called it, the brain of test animal Number 6 of 
the series, Lilly suddenly made an astonishing discovery, one so mom_entous 
that it prompted him to give up his governmental job at the Institute of 
Cosm.odolphins 192 
PLATE 8.1 'Can Man and Dolphin communicate? Dr. Lilly "talks" with a flippered 
student in a sound-proof room at his Communication Research Institute in Florida.' 
(Text and photo from Natz'onal Geograph£c, vol. 130: 3, Sept. 1966. Courtesy 
Thomas Nebbia/NGS Image Collection.) 
Mental Health and open his Communication Research Institute in the 
Virgin Islands, a place aptly named for this task of exploration. From 
Number 6 he had learned that dolphins could be taught to speak English! 
Evidently, the doctor's expectations of such interspecies communication 
were numerous. Apart from preparing mankind for an encounter 'With 
extraterrestrials in space, the establishment of a dialogue with these animals 
might also lead to a much-needed improvement in the communication 
between man and woman (Lilly 1967: 98). This advance, which was added 
half-jokingly to the list, revealed Lilly's idea that dolphins connoted femin­
inity. Moreover, the intelligible voice of the dolphin would severely dent, 
if not destroy for ever, anthropocentrism. No longer would man exclusively 
occupy the top rung of the evolutionary ladder. As alluded to in our third 
amazing story, Lilly, as a budding New Ager, probably liked to think that 
the position of Universal Man of Rational Science might be challenged by 
the subversive role of a jester or trickster, appearing as· a speaking dolphin, 
and conveying messages (in English!) from an. unknown world. Rocket State and Dolphin State 193 
In spite of Lilly's extravagantly imaginative ways of phrasing research 
questions, his first attempts to communicate with dolphins were conducted 
on traditional scientific grounds. The goal was an expedition into the 
dolphin's skull, and the means was a laboratory experiment reminiscent of 
those conducted by Pavlov on his famous dogs. But even as he reduced the 
animals to harnessed beast-machines, Lilly hoped to find more or less the 
opposite, namely, intelligent and quasi-human subjects. In all its contra­
dictory ghastliness the story of Lilly's initial reinvention of the dolphin as 
'English-speaking' cyborg deserves to be retold. 
Having lost five animals using full anaesthesia (making the scientific 
discovery that dolphins die when they are anaesthetized because their 
breathing is under voluntary control), the doctor chose a different approach 
to Number 6. Mter restraining the dolphin by inserting its beak into a hole 
in a board, so that it could move only five to eight centimetres, and after 
injecting a local anaesthetic into its· head, he used a carpenter's hammer to 
knock a sleeve guide (a kind of hollow needle), about 30 milliroetres into 
the animal's head. Through this sleeve guide, and through the skin, blubber 
and muscles, electrodes were placed into the brain and 'the long, slow and 
patient examination of this huge brain by electrical stimuli' was begun. 
The idea of the electrodes was, in Lilly's clinical discourse, to have 'push­
button control of the experience of specific emotions by animals in whose 
brains we have placed wires in the proper places' (Lilly 1962a: 34). 
By locating the areas of the brain that responded to the electric current 
with either positive or negative emotions- i.e. with pleasure or pain-the 
'human operator' could provoke intensely rewarding or intensely punishing 
experiences in the animal or, for that matter, in humans on whom the 
method was also used. In Number 6, Lilly was trying to pinpoint the 
pleasure centre. If activated, the animal might become so thrilled that it 
rook 'control' and pushed the switch itself. Thus Lilly could not only test 
his intelligence (Number 6 was a male), but speed up the learning process 
as well. In this case, the electric current was the carrot. In the next test, 
using dolphin Number 7, a female labelled by the doctor as a 'real cry­
baby', the method of punishing stimuli was used. The 'cry-baby' had to 
operate the switch to shut off the punishment. (Both dolphins quickly 
learned the trick; both died.) 
Lilly's 'discovery' of dolphins' linguistic abilities rook place as part of 
his work with animal Number 6. Mrer the electrodes had been slowly, very 
slowly, forced down from 30 to about 6o mil!imetres into the brain, the 
dolphin started responding violendy. Aside from moving around restlessly 
in his restraints, he vocalized in 'dolphinese', emitting whistles, buzzings, 
Cosmodolphins 194 
barks and other noises, the meaning of which struck the doctor later, when 
he replayed his tape recordings. Listening to the tapes, he felt certain that 
the dolphin, in a Donald Duck kind of way, had been mimicking human 
laughter as well as some of the technical data he, the doctor, had recited 
during the experiment. This became especially clear, the scientist claimed, 
when the tapes were slowed dowu to half or one-quarter speed. 
Mter this, Lilly felt that he had good reason to advocate interspecies 
communication through what he called an 'education in humanity' (Lilly 
196za: 166) of the other. Sponsored by agencies like NASA, the US Navy 
and Air Force and the National Science Foundation, Lilly optimistically 
continued the project (with and without electrodes) until 1968, when the 
funding finally dried up, and he himself allegedly came to realize that he 
had been imprisoning his friends, the dolphins, in a 'concentration camp'. 
Revolting against the intrusions into their brairis, five animals had com­
mitred suicide by refusing to eat or breathe. Lilly then set the remaining 
three free and gave up his research (Lilly 1973: 70).2 
Lilly's discourses are unsettled by displacements. On the one hand, 
they are deeply embedded in a mechanistic scientific paradigm; 'nature' 
must unveil her secrets on the doctor's agonizing terms. But, on the other, 
Lilly tells a story of a nature of extraterresTrial origin, which appears to 
him as in a cyber-sacral revelation. Dressed up as cyborg with wires in the 
proper places, this embodiment of 'wild', non-terrestrial nature discloses 
a huge brain and a strong desire for communication with scientific man 
himself. In reinvented nature's new porpoise consciousness, purpose and 
higher meanings also expose themselves. Properly (re-)constructed by the 
scientist, the recorded and slowly replayed voice of the cyborg dolphin 
apparently articulates a highly intelligent, advanced and communicative 
alien mind. Nevertheless, enigmatic questions remained. Had the serious 
master of science, suppOsedly in control of his beast-machine, been con­
trolled by a trickster, a hmghing monster, who had carnivalized the very 
concept of communication? Or was he confronted with an incarnation of 
a divine extraterrestrial intelligence in relation to whom he was but a small 
child -mu~h as the dolphin, seemingly babbling his first English words, 
was but an mfant vis-&-vis the scientist? Such questions obviously stirred 
the mind of Lilly as well as those of his fans. 
Elite Scientists on a Cyborg Dolphin:· Cosmic Encounters 
As we saw in Chapter 7, cosmology underwent radical changes during 
the 1950s. From a silent, desert void, the cosmos was transformed into a Rocket State and Dolphin State 195 
broadcasting universe, filled with life and intelligent ETs who, like the 
dolphins, were eager to open up communications with humankind. 
Analogies between the construction of dolphin and alien mind, as well as 
the fact that Lilly's 'discoveries' coincided with the initial phase of the 
scientific search for extraterrestrial intelligence, gave rise to the construction 
of the animals as boundary-figures between scientific man and the cosmic 
aliens. 
The physicist Philip Morrison who, like Szilard, had participated in the 
Manhattan Project, and who co--authored the article (Cocconi and Morrison 
1959) that started the scientific quest for otherworldly beings, maintained 
that an ancient, highly advanced society of superior aliens had for years 
been patiently waiting for planet Earth to enter into the cosmic communi­
cation system by picking up the intelligent signals they were transmitting 
from space. Such signals would not only indicate that technology did not 
inevitably lead to global self-destruction, but would also give mankind 
access to the inexhaustible source of wisdom and knowledge that the 
'remote philosophers' (Morrison 1962) of the cosmic ocean possessed. 
A universe filled with highly intelligent, civilized aliens became part of 
the scientific imagination from then on, and in anticipation of the coming 
encounter, the media reported diligently on the new horizons opening to 
mankind. As if leading up to the climax of 21 June 1960, when the 
sensational news of Lilly's 'English-speaking' dolphins caught the imagina­
tion of the press, several stories on communication with aliens were re­
ported during the spring of that year. 
'Tuning in on Other Worlds. If civilized beings exist in space, a project 
now beginning may permit us to communicate with them,' reads a headline 
in the New York Times (13 March 196o); the said project, 'Ozma', was to 
take place at the US National Radio Astronomy Observatory and to be 
headed by the radio astronomer Frank Drake. Not surprisingly, the article, 
written by a chief missiles adviser to the Intelligence Department of the 
Army, strongly favoured the idea of 'listening for the voices of the "others"'. 
In undertaking this enterprise, he suggested, we might become the equals 
of possibly existing 'astropolitan' communities, 'linked together by a 
wonderful commerce of communication'. The new commodity, well suited 
to interstellar commerce, was information. 
Professor R. N. Bracewell of Stanford University, California, put forward 
the idea that an 'ancient association', consisting of civilizations 'incredibly 
more advanced' than our own, might already have launched a satellite into 
orbit around the sun, trying to make contact with us (New York Times, zo 
June 1960). The report describing Bracewell's alien messenger in the sky 
Cosmodolphins 196 
was published on the front page of the newspaper just one day before it 
introduced Lilly's intelligent, and perhaps superior, dolphins. 
So the images of divine and helpful super-civilizations and of the 
friendly, talking dolphins began to merge in both the scientific and public 
mind. Both involved notions of interspecies communication and of re­
ceiving information that could solve ahnost all of humanity's problems. 
The crowning event, which once and for all placed on record the 
connection between the narratives of dolphins and cosmic ETs, was the 
first conference ever held on extraterrestrial intelligence. It opened on r 
November 1961, at the Green Bank Observatory in West Virginia. Fewer 
than a dozen scientists were invited to participate, some of them very 
prominent; one, Melvin Calvin, was awarded the Nobel Prize for Chemistry 
during his stay. The organizers intended that the exclusive selection of 
participants would ensure the expertise needed for a thorough scientific 
discussion of the cosmic connection. 
As the one expert who had, more or less, spoken with an ET, Lilly was 
invited to this conference. In his presentation, he played the tapes of the 
'English'-speaking dolphins .and talked about the social attirude of these 
aninials, which helped and took care both of each other and of humans in 
distress. Since the USA was deeply concerned about the threats of Red 
Communism, Lilly did not forget to mention the possible military uses of 
these speedy sea aninials. The dolphins could rescue pilots from planes 
crashed into the open ocean, scout out enemy submarines, serve as 
detection-proof delivery systems for nuclear warheads to be detonated in 
foreign harbours, and so on. Having learned English, Lilly suggested, the 
animals might also {sneak up on an enemy submarine sitting on the bottom 
of the sea and shout something into the listening gear, as if this were a 
human communicating with them' (Lilly 1962a: 168-g). (Oh, boy, would 
that frighten the Red bastards!) 'We were all totally enthralled by these 
reports,' the host of the conference, Frank Drake, recalls. 'We felt some of 
the excitement in store for us when we encounter nonhuman intelligence 
of extraterrestrial origin' (Drake and Sobel 1992: 58). 
So thrilled and captivated were the participants by this representation of 
the dolphin that, at the termination of the conference, they formed a kind 
of brotherhood or lodge and christened it 'The Order of the Dolphin'. Over 
the following years, a few other prominent scientists involved in the search 
for extraterrestrial intelligence were admitted (among others, the Soviet 
astrophysicist I. S. Shklovsky). From the new Nobel laureate Calvin, each of 
the human {dolphins~ received a silver tie pin as an emblem of membership; 
it was a reproduction of an old Greek coin showing a boy on a dolphin. Rocket State and Dolphin State 197 
What does the emblem signify? First, the picrure of the boy on the 
dolphin identified the man of science, searching for intelligence, with the 
ancient dolphin boy, Apollo, whose transformation into a dolphin or whose 
ride on the back of the aninJal is, as already mentioned, culrurally associated 
with both the founding of Delphi and with the rise of the sun, i.e. a new, 
bright civilization being born from the womb of the sea. Second, it also 
connected scientific man on a dolphin with the gigantic space programme, 
the Apollo Project, which Kennedy had launched less than six months 
earlier (25 May), in order to beat the Soviets to the Moon and re-establish 
the technoscientific image of the USA, which had been so badly hurt by 
the Sputniks and Gagarin's recent flight. And, third, behind the Apollo(s) 
on the profit-promising coin, the dolphin beckons as a carrier of displace­
ments and shifting significances, blending the parallel formation of a grim 
and beastly rocket state and a mythic, smiling and humane dolphin state 
with images of divinely intelligent extraterrestrial aliens engaged in beam­
ing down data-streams of wisdom to a globe in distress. Like the oracular 
utterances of the Delphian dolphin, Pythia, this information would be 
obscure and enerypted until decoded. But was such decoding not exactly 
what Lilly had been doing when he slowed down the tapes and suddeuly 
caught the message of test aninial Number 6? The decoding would hardly 
offer any problem. 
If so, the cosmic aliens might perhaps teach us the equivalent of 
dolphinese: 'There might be an attention-getting signal,' Morrison said, 
according to the New York Times, 'followed by a "language lesson" and 
then the equivalent of one volume of an encyclopaedia. This would be 
followed by further calling, a further lesson, and another volume, and so 
forth' (4 February 1962). 
Cohabitation in a Flooded House 
We have now seen how Lilly's initial construction of a modern dolphin 
myth caused the animal to go through several displacements, acting as a 
substitute for both man of science and his extraterrestrial and quasi-divine 
mirror image, the distant high-tech alien. But at this stage in Lilly's 
narrative, ·an excess of meanings marked its presence due to the boundary 
function of the signifier. Something did not fit; something continuously 
kept the discourse from stabilizing itself into. a master narrative of elite 
scientists on a cyborg dolphin in close encounter with galactic super­
civilizations. The dolphin did not properly mirror the man of science, 
however small and primitive he might be compared to a godlike, alien 
Cosmodolphins 198 
scientist, nor did it merge completely into the image of the galactic Cyber­
Godfather. On the contrary, an unpleasant question kept popping up in the 
minds of our scientists, fixated as they were on the network of meanings 
circulating betweeo Technology-Science-Modernity-Whiteness-Masculin­
ity: how could the doiphin, lacking manipulative hands and, consequently, 
tools, represent a technological civilization, not to mention a quasi-divine, 
cosmic super-civilization? With nothing but flippers, the animal was clearly 
unable to build the radio telescopes necessaty for either listening to or 
transmitting signals through space. Moreover, it seemed unlikely to the 
scientists that the 'superior intelligence' of the dolphin had developed in 
the primordial and motherly womb of the ocean so, as a highly intelligent 
sea creature, the animal became something of an oxymoron. In its feature 
on the Green Bank Conference, the New York Times sununarized the 
problem in the following way: 'It is possible that their superior intelligence is 
a heritage of their life ashore. Hence it may be that such intelligence would 
not arise on a completely oceanic planet' (4 February rg6z). Some scientists 
tried to bypass the problems by suggesting that dolphins might develop 'a 
technological society if given sufficient time' (Cameron 1963: 312). Evid­
ently, such a long-term perspective could not save the day for the dolphin 
fans: 'her' lack, 'her' missing link, and 'her' contiguities with a wet motherly 
origin were too obvious, too present, too disturbing. 
The dolphins did not quite fit into the patterns surrounding the ahnighty 
Cyber-Godfather. Consequently, another narrative strand came to the fore, 
one that had already been suggested by the words about civilizing dolphins, 
the 'education in humanity', which Lilly had used in his first book. In this 
narrative, the discourses of non-white edmicity, feoiininity and childishness 
dominate, reversing the dolphin's representation as the man of science and 
his great omnipotent alter ego, the Cyber-Godfather. Instead of acting as 
messenger from a high-tech future, 'she' becomes a figure of a premodern 
past, bound in a state of primary orality, from which modern man, the man 
of science, has separated himself: 
(M]an is said to be the most intelligent species because of what he does with 
his huge brain. May there not be other paths for large brains to take, especi­
ally if they live immersed in some other element than air? ... 
In the case of the Cetacea which are without the benefit of hands or 
outside constructions of any sort [sicJ], they may have taken the path of 
legends and verbal traditions rather than that of written records. (Lilly 
1962a: 95) 
Forgetting the flippers, Lilly focused instead on the sexual ambiguity of Rocket State and Dolphin State 199 
the dolphin body, the missing visible representation of phallic potency, as 
well as on the cluster of primary orality to which its oceanic environment 
seems to limit it. Having been transformed into a representation of non­
phallic Woman, the dolphin, however, vocalizes not only its own lack of 
technological tools, but also the non-technological innocence of primary 
oral cultures from which scientific man is forever sundered. Here, legends 
and dreamtime, rather than technology, were thought to define existence. 
This implied shift of perspective inspired Lilly to try out a new model 
of communication, which also seemed necessary because the electronic 
devices (i.e. the electrodes) with which he had tried to erase the divide 
between his world and the enigmatic world of the dolphins did not result 
in establishing the much-desired connection between the species. Instead 
of attempting to make contact exclusively within a context of secondary 
orality, fit for the communication between man of science and the super­
intelligent cosmic Cyber-Godfather, Lilly shifted to an approach based on 
primary orality (which, however, did not exclude extensive use of technical 
listening devices). 
Talting as his paradigm a human mother--<:hild model for teaching and 
learning on terms as equal as possible, Lilly redesigned his experimental 
setting. The dolphin was positioned as the infant, while the scientist was 
vicariously represented by a nurturing virgin-mother. Day and night, for 
a long period, the human 'mother' and the dolphin 'child' were to live 
together in a home which, neither terrestrial nor extraterrestrial, trans­
gressed the normal boundaries between land and sea. Part of the building 
of the Communication Research Institute in the Virgin Islands was flooded 
with seawater 56 centimetres deep in order to carry out an experiment in 
'wet live-in'. 
After various introductory experiments in interspecies cohabitation, the 
definitive 'flooded-house programme' commenced in the summer of 1965 
and lasted for two and a half months. The plan was to develop it into a 
more permanent 'man-dolphin' habitat, where the dolphin would be able 
to come and 'go' as a genuine member of a human family. 
Evidently the respective agents of nature and culture were chosen 
because of their displaced representations, the dolphin for its brains, which 
in the minds of the scientists differentiated it from its wet, motherly 
environment, and the woman for her soft and oceanic nature, different 
from the image of scientific man. But what ·set them apart from their 
parental context was, of course, precisely what united them in the en­
counter zone of their flooded home. 
Embodying the location of innocence, the Virgin Islands, a young and 
Cosmodolphins 200 
virginal mermaid, Margaret Howe, played the part of the (single) mother, 
educating the dolphin-child and vacuum-cleaning the house while wading 
in seawater up to her knees. By contrast, Lilly's role was that of a very 
distant father, absorbed in his own processes of transformation from man 
of science to New Ager. Spending most of his time hallucinating on LSD 
in a self-constructed water tank (as if playing a dolphin himself), and 
investigating mind-links to cosmic civilizations, he rarely visited the project. 
Thus there was nobody to intervene in the dyad between Peter Dolphin 
and Margaret Mermaid. 
For a time, Margaret had wavered about whom to choose for the role 
of baby, the young and vigorous Peter Dolphin or the reserved Paroela with 
the good pronunciation. Pronunciation was important, for Margaret had 
solemnly pledged that 'no matter how long it takes, no matter how much 
work, this dolphin is going to learn to speak English!' (Lilly 1967: 218). But 
as Pam was shy with humans, having been speared several times by a diver 
in the second Flipper movie, Margaret finally settled on the outgoing Peter, 
a choice that she came to regret when she discovered the implications. 
Apart from the fact that his pronunciation never reached Pam's level, 
Margaret suddenly found that, as she wrote in her diary, she became the 
'other dolphin' in Peter's life (Lilly 1967= 267), i.e. the object of his sexnal 
desires. As he began to open his slits, his mouth containing 88 very sharp 
teeth, 'still capable of drawing blood' (Lilly 1967: 278), and the genital slit 
to reveal his· erect penis, the spell of innocent interconnectedness was 
somewhat broken. Though she was terrified at first, she reali2ed that Peter's 
education in humanity must be paralleled by her education in dolphinity, 
and she therefore succumbed to 'lusty, little Peter' and his clever tricks of 
wooing. In Margaret's account, the dolphin gradually and intelligently 
began to change from a wild animal, who tried to rape her, into a seductive 
gentleman, who gently ran his full set of teeth up and down her iegs in 
order to arouse her. 'Peter led the way,' she claims, and she satisfied his 
sexual desires by masturbating hiro (Lilly 1967: 278). As she became his 
dolphin, so he became her man/husband. 
After the experiment, Lilly informs us, Margaret, 'like the girl [sic!] with 
the chiropan2ees in Africa, married her photographer' (Lilly 1967: 300) (an 
epidemic?), and started a (new) faroily. The role model referred to was Jane 
Goodall, who conducted research in 'the wilds of Tanzania' (Haraway 1989: 
136). But, unlike Goodall, who began graduate work at Cambridge early in 
her field studies and eventually took a doctorate, Margaret Howe retained 
her intellectual innocence during the entire experiment of wet live-in. She 
originally got the job by chance. While working as a hostess at a remote Rocket State and Dolphin State 201 
mountain-top restaurant in the Virgin Islands, she entered into a conversa­
tion with one of the guests, Carl Sagan, the astronomer and ardent hunter 
for extraterrestrial intelligence, who was visiting Lilly's laboratory. As she 
complained of her uneventful and uninteresting days (she was hostess only 
at night), Sagan introduced her to the interdisciplinary researcher, George 
Bateson, who at that time was in charge of Lilly's laboratory, and 'soon 
Margaret was working with dolphins' (Sagan 1975: 174). That was in early 
rg64. Sixteen months later, she became director of the laboratory herself 
and entered into the mothering/marrying arrangement with Peter D. Up 
until that time, 'she had seen dolphins once briefly in a Florida dolphin 
circus' (Lilly 1967: 227). As Bateson soon left, and Lilly was busy hallucina­
ting in his isolation tank, the reali2ation of the ambitious flooded-house 
programme came to depend almost exclusively on her. 
Without the intellectual 'burdens' of a scientific education, Margaret 
Howe seemed, in the discursive universe of the involved scientists, perfectly 
suited for the precast role of mediating link in the narrative of com­
munication between man of science and his 'nalve' non-human other. 
'Undisturbed' by the training of rationality, Woman could more eas~y 
bond with intellectually 'innocent' Nature. 
The ama2ing story has cast long shadows. Apart from being retold by 
Lilly (1967), and science fictionalized by Mooney (1983) and Grimwood 
(1996), it was also recorded on tapes that are still marketed for sale, while 
appetizing samples of the sound-tracks may be downloaded from the virtual 
reality environment of the internet. So it is still possible to enjoy, live, 
Margaret's English lessons with Peter D., and to hear the endless repeti­
tions of 'conversations' such as: 'Say hello to Margaret, Peter' -'squeak, 
squeak, click, click'. In 1994, thirty years after the flooded-house romance, 
there was even a CD released to commemorate the event. In its own 
uncanny way, this CD mirrors how the traditionally gendered fantily roles 
and the instrumentalization of the aniroal in the cnlt celebrations of the 
cogito of scientific man were re-enacted in the otherwise non-traditional 
setting of the wet live--in. On this CD, Lilly, now fully transformed into 
a New Ager, teaches a muted audience to meditate by repeating the word 
'cogitate'. Monotonously, for half an hour, an untiring Lilly enunciates his 
'cogitate' as if obsessed by a desire to invoke the ghost of the Cartesian 
cogito; rather abruptly, the CD then shifts to the mother--child scene in the 
flooded house. Accompanied by the splashing sounds of moving bodies in 
shallow water, Margaret tries, over and over, with motherly persuasion in 
her voice, to teach Peter to pronounce the word 'humanoid' (Lilly 1994). 
Strangely enough, his only response is a persistent squeak. 
Cosmodolphins 202 
From Cyborg to Noble Savage 
Even though the story of Margaret and Peter unfolded within the 
discursive framework of an 'educational' programme that aimed at adapting 
the dolphio to human standards, it is at the same time also a boundary-tale 
that sets the stage for a shift of focus to another strand of narratives. The 
formation of an encounter zone between the two worlds of culture/ science 
and watery nature and the turn towards primary orality as a model for 
interspecies communication evoke a different dolphin icon than the cyborg 
paradigm that directed Lilly's first script. 
The noble savage dolphin that also grew out of Lilly's comprehensive 
script -a script that appears to be as polysemantic as its dolphin pro­
tagonist -links the icon to the values of counterculture, of environmental 
movements like Greenpeace, and to New Age thought in general. In these 
discourses, the 'lack' of the dolphin, its inability to manipulate nature 
through technology, is no longer a disadvantage, but a virtue. 
An astrology-oriented psychoanalyst and New Age scholar, Ralph 
Metzner, whom we interviewed in San Francisco in 1994, summarized the 
arguments of these trends by clearly contrasting the human-with-a-thumb 
and the dolphin-without-a-thumb. Having been very prominent in the 
consciousness-raising counterculture of the r96os, Metzner is today deeply 
occupied with the development of a new ecological consciousness. Whales 
and dolphios have bigger brains than humans, he argues, yet these manunals 
are beautifully adapted to their natural environment. The trouble with 
humankind, therefore, originates in the combination of brain and opposable 
thumb: 'Because with the opposable thumb you can make stuff. You can 
make tools, weapons, and manipulate your environment, and the whales 
and dolphins don't do that.' 
Combined with its intelligence, healing powers and joyfulness, the sea 
creature's environmental non-interference and Gandhi-like 'policy' of non­
violence has, since the r96os, made it into a perfect symbol of a world of 
peace and green politics, a dolphio state or 'Whale Nation' (W"illiams 1988) 
which in the East was associated with the spirit of 'socialism with a h~ 
face' and in the West with slogans such as 'Make Love, Not War'. We shall 
now take a closer look at the iconographies of this dolphin in Russia and 
the USA. 
Socialism with a Dolphin Face 
A Soviet version of the post-Second World War dolphin was, in its own 
wa,y,_~~d to the search for new sociocultural values and for counterimages Rocket State and Dolphin State 203 
to Cold War ideologies in general and Stalinism in particular. The ethically 
minded, speaking dolphin swam into the public Soviet pool in 1962. In 
this year, the largest popular scientific magazine in the Soviet Union, 
Nauka i zhizn, boldly published an article, written by Lilly, bearing the 
startling and provocative title: 'How I Learned to Speak with my Dolphins' 
(Lilly r96zb). The article described Lilly's work to the amazed Soviet 
public. In 1965, an abridged version of Lilly's first book (r96za) was 
translated into Russian. Before long, the mouthpiece of the Soviet govern­
ment, Izvestia, featured the new dolphins as 'our true sea brothers' with 
brains so 'strikingly close to our own'. £:::tinted in nuances that were easily 
recognizable as communist virtues, the newspaper's dolphin tur:~4._c;niS __ ~o -­
be an ideal, peace-loving_and__!le_lpfui __ comxade_ witlr .. ve;:-£},fgh_morals: ·­
'Ch.;acteristi-;; of the_dolphins_is _a fe~ljgg_o£..comradeshi.i'.t....tll",__ie un­
selfish in their relations to each o!her .. and_alway:s__r1l§h..tQ.flj:~t_the. first 
cill;, even at the risk of their own lives' (Izvestia, 13 March 1966). The 
"-irti:Cle-also--reported scientific- expectatiOns of imminent communication 
with the sea manunals, first in dolphioese and later probably in Russian. 
Not surprisingly, at the same time, a moratorium was announced in the 
Soviet Union on the catchiog and killing of dolphios for anything other 
than 'scientific' (i.e. military) purposes. 
Following the introduction of the talking dolphin, the marine manunal 
became the battleground on which, for some two decades, Soviet scientists 
fought over the intriguing question: who is really the most human, man or 
the gentle dolphio? This apparently strictly scientific controversy was in 
fact a displaced outlet for a deeply political debate on questions of con­
tiniuty or change: should socialism be built on hard, authoritarian values 
or on soft, democratic ones? On one side, the old conservative establishment 
claimed the indisputable superiority of Man, citing his ability to speak and 
think in abstract and symbolic terms, and relying on the scientific authority 
of the famous Russian physiologist Ivan Pavlov, whose theories had been 
enthusiastically embraced by Stalin. According to these neo-Pavlovians, 
there was nothing special about dolphios; they were mere instinctual beast­
machioes and could not in any way compete with the superior mind of 
man. As one elderly neo-Pavlovian asserted, the animal's huge brain was 
just the result of its adaptation to the special environment of the sea. 
Lacking speech, human brains and, hence, technology, this mammal- like 
all other animals -was solely in the grip of blind, mechanical instincts: 
'The activities of man subjugate nature, whilst dolphins, as any other 
animal, are subjected to nature to which they adapt' (Tomilin 1969: roz). 
Insisting on the inferiority of the dolphio brain in all respects, another 
Cosmodolphins 
204 
PLATE S.z The Soviet Russian vision of socr"alism WI"th d I hin f: a'"liza· f · aop ace· 
ClVI tJ.on o canng grandmothers (source: Belkovich et al. rg67)-. 
ll~O:...Pavl?vian dismissed the whol~ issue as a storm in the teacup of po ular 
scrence. What should the dolphm really think with?' th" . . p rheto ·call akin th · rs screntlst asked 
n y, m g e huge marine mammal brain vanish as an illusion 
(Kesarev 1968~ 1971). F~itllful t_<>_the basic doctrines of their old mentor 
P~vlov, ~d h1s constructions of do ---;;;--t...--------.-------- .' · · . ---- -· ------~~-.'!,5 __ ueast-machines, to these life-. 
~creJ1tlsts the dolphm was nothing more than ;;-m·· -hin .. d. --. -d--.·--­S · tifi · . . - ac e estgne to serve 
S cren c M3E,_~e, for mstance, the title of Tomilili'~ book Dolph" 
erve Man (1969); see also Tomilin 1965 and 198o· Voronin , . p ms 1 g8o. ' I 970, anov 
Qn .. t\1~ Ot\l.~r.si~.e '1.f..t\l~.debate,.these.conser.vative echoes of Stalin· were countered by a few. tl . . ·--· --.. ,._. ____ --. ISfil: 
~----:··· ·-· .. -.~---. ---~---_.~OS Y.YQtJn_g~, ___ 9_1~!~1P-sts to whom_the Pavlovian 
paradigm seemed both dang d ·· -· -·-·· ···· ·· '·· · . . ·.·-: -·-.. -· .... erous an OUtlnoded. They insisted th superronty not of Man "bii". rTh---···:. .. ... . . . . .... . on e 
-·-···11-""~'~·-·:···~·······- .. -' ..... _t o .. e Tiolphin. In therr vrew man and 
per aps especrally Soviet mari~ was impliCitly the one wh; lack:d all Rocket State and Dolphin State 205 
dolphin virtues: collectivity, non-aggressiveness, culture, wisdom, memory 
of the past, and harmony with the environment. The most persistent 
dolphin fan among these scientists was the young Aleksei Yablokov (b. 1933) 
who, many years later, became president of the national Green peace organ­
ization and deputy chairman of the committee of the Supreme Soviet on 
ecology. Subsequently, he was appointed chief adviser to President Yeltsin 
on environmental issues. 
An important mission of the supporters of the 'intellectuals of the sea', 
as the anti-Pavlovians once called dolphins (Belkovich et al. 1965, 1967), 
was clearly to lay out an alternative, political strategy for Soviet civilization, 
encrypted in an Aesopian metaphor -i.e. in a seemingly strictly scientific 
discussion of animal biology. 3 Instead of a doggy state of authoritarian 
Pavlovian beast-machines, the anti-Pavlovians advocated a society built on 
'soft' dolphin values such as kindness, helpfulness, peace, wisdom and true 
collectivity. 
Among the striking features of the kind, peaceful .. dolphin..s.tatedes- •. · 
cribea·byYaolokov'andhis·colleagues;'-V:-BelkovTch·;,_;,d S. K.leinenberg, u; 
t:heii popUlarSCience·boo"kS. (1965 aird.i967) Were the.Stonisliing cultural, 
emotional and. ethi6LJ.boiids holdiiig-the arii.rrial community together: Even 
more striking;·perhaps;walithe·scientists' claim that thisoondiD.g was due 
to;;";;iliirlii Jess_i:\1aii'a_'grandll1ammyfication' of aofphin society. The 
follndati~n of this community, the a~th~rS Cfaimea~ -was t1le 'Iariiily, tied 
together by strong emotions and always headed by the mother alone. 
Reaching sexual maturity very early, a female dolphin could give birth to 
as many as ten young during her lifetime. This reproductive pattern would 
inevitably result in the rapid creation of grandmothers in the dolphin 
herd, since the female offspring would reproduce just as quickly as their 
mothers. The outcome would be a large, extended family of at least eleven 
generations of simultaneous daughters-mothers-grandmothers, with the 
oldest and, as it were, primordial (great, great, etc. grand) mother at the 
top (see Plate 8.2). 
According to the anti-Pavlovians, this grandmanunyfication created a 
marvellous dolphin culture, since the 'living memory of the ancestors' was 
always present. "I)le collective me111ory of the dolphins was_ compared to 
an enormous libr~ . reinfo~cn:;g the image of the ankals as naturally. _\.- . --
talented intellectuals who stored up the traditional wisdom of oral literature 
and legel)ds in their huge brains. For even if they allegedly possessed the 
equivalent of libraries, in physical terms of course they had no books, no 
technology, nothing of the technological culture that man, the scientists 
stated, had been forced. to invent in order to compensate for his imperfect, 
cosmodolphins 206 
underdeveloped organism. So, in the displaced view of these scientists, the 
dolphin might well feel superior to man. 'Humans', their dolphio matriarch 
.. regretfully sighed, 'do not understand the meaniog of life. They try with 
raw force to subjugate nature' (Belkovich eta!. 1967: 325). In contrast, the 
dolphios themselves had it all io their bodily nature and io their miods. As 
s~perior beings, they were endowed not only with a fantastic memory, but 
w1th supranatural gifts, resulting in telepathic control over their environ­
ment. By a mere act of will power, they could order hostile sharks away, 
or paralyse their prey so that their working day was reduced to ouly a few 
hours. 
In this scientific na[tati~e,__the dolphio fully matches the definition of 
the ]lpble __ §~Xa~~· The dolphio c.;;;:;,unity is posited as a Golden-Age­
phenomenon upon which to project the dreams, desires and Utopian hopes 
of members of the. Soviet sixties generation. _As is so often the case in 
stories concerniog the paradoxical figure of the noble savage, the meanings 
ioscribed onto this Soviet dolphin circulate around concepts of Woman­
Native-Nature, engendering a textual web of mellow metaphors to counter 
the hars~ imagery of authoritarian Pavlovism-Stalioism. The books 
certaiuly gave the iropression that a highly developed, matriarchal and 
otherworldly dolphio civilization already existed, characterized by little 
work and much pleasure. A happy, playful, educated and spiritual dolphin 
community well suited, perhaps, to replace both the beast-machioe and 
the austere, terrifying grandfather society of yesterday. 
The Noble Savage of the New Age 
~ngliog witll__the countercultural.dolphin are explicit tendencies to 
~~cralize ~!, ~-d merge it .. with imag~~._of._~4-~ge~oUSjJ~Oj)1eS~~that·-~-~iflforc~. 
I!S_ t:~vi~~()J?, ___ of__~e-~o~~tic.:noble.sav.age...tta4_i£?n. In this ~~tion:--;e 
shall unfold three examples. Encircling the planet ih,m the Far West to 
the Far East, the stories reveal the global character of the search for the 
wisd~m in th_e water _that the dolphin and whale nation came· to represent. 
But, m tran~It, the VIewpoint of the whole story-line undergoes a change; 
the gaze shifts from the outside to that from withio: from watching the 
cetaceans from a North American perspective, we end up looking at the 
world through the eyes of a Siberian ex-whale. 
The early history of Greenpeace demonstrates the construction of 
cetaceans .a.s symbols of a narrative that weaves together the struggle for 
green pohncs and peace -a narrative that is reflected in the name of the 
organization, ~green peace'. The adoption of this name coincided with the Rocket State and Dolphin State 207 
first Save the Whales campaigns, which also marked a certain embracing 
of New Age values and trends to reconstruct nature as sacred. Begun in 
the mid-197os as a movement against nuclear testing, Greenpeace turned 
its focus to the campaign for a moratorium on whaling. At that time, the 
organization directed the attention of the world's press to the whaliog 
issue through an ioternational Save the Whales campaign, which iocluded 
dramatic confrontations on the open sea with Russian industrial whalers. 
During the previous years the movement had become split between groups 
io favour of the anti-nuclear strategy and others who iostead poioted to 
the anti-whaliog issue. With the 1975 campaign, the whale lobby won and, 
as if coloured by its target, the very style of the organization changed; its 
focus shifted from confronting the gloomy death world of the rocket state 
to defendiog the joyful, counterciiltural, mysterious, green-blue life world 
of the 'nation of armless Buddhas', as whales were dubbed by the journalist 
Robert Hunter one of the Greenpeace activists who played a leading role 
in the first Sa~e the Whales campaign (Hunter 198o: 135). This is how 
Hunter describes the meeting that launched the 1975 campaign and the 
shift io mood of the organization that the whale issue mediated: 
The heavy atmosphere of moralistic purity that had pervaded almost every 
single anti-nuclear meeting we had had over the years was gone. There had 
been nothing much to celebrate so long as we were opposing bombs. It was 
a very negative game. But now, instead of simply fighting death, we were 
embracing life. It was not just that we wanted to save Whales, we wanted to 
meet them we wanted to encourage them, encounter them, touch them, , . 
discover them. For the first time there was a transcendent element lymg at 
the centre of the undertaking. There was a Holy Grail. (ibid.: 153) 
As the final part of this quote suggests, New Age mysticism became 
part of the new cetacean story, and so did indigenous peopl~ whose 
knowledges were celebrated for their alternativ,e relationship to whales and 
to Nature. As logo for its Save the Whales camp_aigi1, __ (ir~enpeace adopted 
.-an ancient totem symbol from a NaiiveAmerican seafariog tribe, ·me 
:Kwakiui:ls, showing. a gt"~en .. crest-fo<me<lby_~<J. wliiUeSman-.,presentrthe-· 
inftnite cy* ~f nature:_Ihisiwg_e,,si'!_d_to s)'Illb~liietlie KWiliutiS'aesire 
to Jiv; io harmony with nature, _has since .lJ.e~ll;P_:u§ted on many-Greenpeace ships. - . . . . --·-·-·-··. -----: · 
) CelebratioiJ._of indigenous wisdom ~,UJ_3!1=_9f..£l.l~--ce,~~ean narratives 
as participated [;;;,;~fully _ig_th~_<:Q!!§.ttUc.tion of the aniroalS a.Sw1~~d 
noble sa.;.ges sioce the early Greenpeace campaign_s, In an example from 
the ;9908, -Kim K.ilidersley's.;id~~ .trailer Eyes of the Soul (Kindersley 
Cosmodolphins 208 
undated), we wim.ess a complete merging of the two icons of unblemished, 
edenic and wise 'nature': the dolphin and the aboriginal. The introductory 
poem, urging the alienated audience from the fallen civilized world to 
return to sacred nature, may serve as an illustration of the trivializing 
rhetoric that sometimes takes over in these kinds of narratives: 
Sweet is the law which nature brings 
our meddling intellect 
misshapes the beauty as formed things 
we murder to dissect 
enough of science and of art 
close up those barren leaves 
come forward and bring with you a heart 
that watches and receives 
(Kindersley undated) 
Finally, this strong trend towards merging the icons of cetaceans and 
indigen?us peoples as symbols of a 'pure' and 'natural' alternative wisdom 
has also been voiced in the distant regions of Siberia. In Yuri Rytkheu's 
story, When the Whales Leave (1977), a myth of human descent from 
whales is reclaimed as part of the cultural heritage of the 'small people', 
the Chukchi, who live on the peninsula facing Alaska. 
Like the poem that provides the keynote of the Eyes of the Soul video, 
Rytkheu's book constructs a pronounced opposition between civilized 
technoculture on the one hand and the original state of oneness between 
human and nature on the other. The novel tells an ancient origin myth of 
the Chukchi, the indigenous tribal people inhabiting the remote north­
eastern part of Siberia. The myth features a woman, the first human in 
the world. She falls in love with a whale whom her emotions transform 
into a man. From this original human-whale love descends the whole of 
the human race. As time goes by, however, the humans forget their kinship 
with the whales and begin to hunt them, disregarding the ancient tale that 
still warns against the slaughter of their totem animal, the whale. 
Rytkheu not only recycles the myth, but reworks it into a story against 
the repressive Soviet technocivilization. Implicitly, yet unmistakably, the 
novel draws a parallel between the slaughter of whales by the alienated 
humans who have forgotten their sacred consanguineous relationship to" 
the whales, and the Soviet repression of the indigenous peoples of Siberia. 
Opposing alienated modern technoculture with an original Eden, where 
whales and humans embrace each other in loving oneneSs, this novel bears Rocket State and Dolphin State 209 
many resemblances to such Western New Age versions of the noble savage 
dolphin and whale story as the Eyes of the Soul video represents. However, 
being an ethnic other himself; Rytkheu rewrites the whale legend from a 
personal perspective. This allows him to avoid the trap of ventriloquism 
(Haraway 1992: 3rr-12) of the white, middle-class people who act as 
narrators on the video, instructing their middle-class audience about the 
proper relationship to the innocent paradise of ethnic and animal others, 
which the visuals put on display. 
As a Chukchi, Rytkheu (b. 1930) knows the traditional lifestyle and oral 
traditions of his people from his childhood. But, as a Russianized writer, 
he also knows by experience what it meant to conform to the condescending 
Soviet Russian attitude to the oral traditions of the indigenous peoples of 
Siberia. Together with other writers of non-white origins, he willingly 
performed as one of 'the first "native sons" who was used by the Party to 
promote the official view of a successful "leap from the stone age into 
socialism"' (Barker 1993: 217). When the Whales Leave can therefore also 
be interpreted as Rytkheu's re-evaluation of his own story, as a reflective 
resistance to his own 'education in Soviet humanity'. In this version, the 
slaughter of whales is a symbol of his Fall, i.e. his severing of the bonds 
to the culture of his kin in order to adapt to Soviet society, and the novel 
his penance for this original sin. 
The Dolphin in a Perpetuum Mobile of Circulating Meanings 
Having followed the cetacean icon from kantikaze soldier to harbinger 
of peace and socialism with a dolphin face, from English-speaking cyborg, 
messenger from the cosmic Cyber-Godfather, through child-lover-pupil 
in a flooded house, to whales and dolphins mediating the forgotten wisdom 
of 'pure' nature, the fluidity of the signifier should have become clear. We 
may well appoint dolphins, together with their whale cousins, to be excel­
lent representatives of what Derrida called diffirance, and described as an 
endless chain of displacements that, he said, could be evoked by such 
floating signifiers as, for example, 'Woman' (Derrida 1979, 1987). It is easy 
to draw parallels between the cetaceans' amazing iconographic perform­
ances as quick-change artists. and the never-ending metamorphoses and 
surprising moves of 'undecidables' like 'Woman'. Both seem to produce an 
excess of meanings that surface forcefully whenever the signifier has 
apparently been fixed within one narrative strand. 
We shall close our story of the dolphin icon's never-ending process of 
displacements by looking at the excess meauings that pop up in the New 
Cosmodolphins 210 
Age master narrative of humans merging with the 'pure' natural world of 
the noble savage dolphin- which switch us from au apparently primordial 
aud pre-technological Eden into the high-tech age of the twenty-first 
century. As an illustration, we will refer to the American New Age 
delphinologisr, Joau Oceau, whose vision of dolphins as bearoed down 
from outer space we presented in Chapter 7. 
Oceau situates the dolphin between a pre-tech aud a high-tech world 
and mirrors the New Age ambiguities that we traced in our initial analysi~ 
of McCulloch's picture in the Prelude. In her book, with the significaut 
title Dolphins into the Future (1997), Oceau merges stories of the wise 
dolphin as noble savage, with whom humans desire to enter into a mystical 
unity, aud the dolphin as harbinger of a cosmic high-tech world that she 
believes, is so advanced in comparison to our own that it might fri~hten 
aod upset us to encounter the full reality of it (ibid.: 156). 
On one level, Ocean articulates a radical 'return to nature' attitude. Her 
highest arobition is to become one with the wild spinner dolphins, with 
whom she has been living aod swimming for hours ahnost every day over 
a period of eight years (198~7); this timespao is covered by the diary 
entnes that make up the main body of the book. Through these journals, 
Oceau tells the story of how, guided by the advice of an alien spirit, 
Arcturus, she moved to Hawaii (ibid.: 153) in order to undertake an 
experiment in 'wet live-in' far more radical than that of Margaret Howe 
and Peter Dolphin. In a complete reversal of the 'education in humanity' 
~pproa~h of Mar~e~ ~d Peter, Oceao commits herself to a thoroughgoing 
educauon m dolphm1ty . In her story, she is the child aod the wild dolphins 
the parents. 'I am like a child in their faroily, a new student in their school 
of wisdom,' she relates (ibid.: 128). 
Accordingly, the method she applies to reach the desired oneness with 
the ":'ld dol~hi~s ~s to act as a humao child does towards its parents, i.e. 
learmng by nmtatJ.on. She swims with the dolphins, dives with them, 
sends out sounds like them, tries to figure our what they think, etc. She 
relates that what made her feel most honoured was the first time the 
dolphins accepted her as a regular member of their pod: 
I remember feeling something different about our swim that morning. One 
moment I was on the outside, the next I was one of them, a member of their 
pod ... On this morning I became aware of a ring of light around the 
dolphins. Suddenly I felt myself included in it as a member of the pod ... 
t felt as if I were a Spinner dolphin ... We were One. We swaro alike, we 
shared a love for the ocean, our bodies were similar, we were no longer Rocket State and Dolphin State 211 
different species, our thoughts merged together, and I became aware of my 
surroundings through their eyes. (ibid.: 39) 
However, mingling with this radical 'return to nature' narrative is a 
quite different story. in.Ocean's text. SheJ;e~ceiv~s .. th.C~dOlpb.iDS as "'swim­
ins' (ibid.: 164) fromaliei!_high-rech civi!izatio,;s-,;,_d c?ns!!_uc;ts_a nariiitive 
that. bears a resemblaoce to the onesthat appeared in the writings ()!the 
s~:~g.~ts IilSCi!Ch..-oLC:iti.ater~~tri;l-intellige~.c.e .. _ in-6ce.ID's ·N~~- xg~·­
version of these advaoced aliens aod their dolphin avatars, they are indeed 
beings whose techoolqgy serves_t;pitiJual_aod ®'~!!I.QQ~es such as 
mediating-access. to_high~r.P!anes o!_,exist~ce, to the worlds oflliliversar 
love and oneness. In this way, Ocean's cosmology, like that of other New 
Age UFO-believers, differs from that of the scientists. But the mystical 
tinge does not chaoge the fact that Oceau's ETs share with the aliens of 
the SETI scientists the possession of an 'advaoced techoology aod wisdom 
beyond our imagination' (ibid.: 136) -aod that the dolphin as incarnation 
of the ETs is drawn into their sphere of extremely advaoced techoology, 
aod displaced accordingly. The aoimal slides from _n~.l!le,..preotech.xepre_:­
,e"'_ra~ of '~Y .. : .. -''l'ild._aodJ}nniOfd~ Space Age cyborg aod 
messengeLfr.O!ll."'_h~gh-tech future. -........ ·--· --·--..... -
Ocean's narratives a"r~-·~c;}Jif:ii:y~ because they continuously cause the 
dolphin to circulate between these two positions without ever allowing it 
to come discursively to rest in one of them. Moreover, they show that one 
of the triggers rendering it impossible to fix the dolphin with other wild 
animal icons in a state of 'pure' nature-is the high-tech connotations that 
pulse from its communicative skills combined with its speed aod nomadism. 
Its sonar, es..ho-location, pattC]J1s .. of--vocalization,....its....app3f.e_lltly highly 
'mreu;ge;:;t' interactions, with _o1:he~ftolJ?hins aod with humaos, it;;peedy 
tra>:eilillg aro~d -all r11;,;~-qualities sig1,~C~YJ5org~ iri~~~t'~riiie rai:her 
than 'n:~b1eSaVaie' all(f-'past':·-------·-·· -· ·-·--· ··· --·-··· 
/ Thesesklllsact as 1aiiDcllpaas for several very different kinds of narra­
tives. In the dolphin stories of Oceau aod other New Agers, they facilitate 
a spiritual elevation to higher realms of existence. In the tales of the 
scientists searching for extraterrestrial intelligence, the same skills make 
the dolphins into mediators between scientific mao aod the cosmic Cyber­
Godfather. A third kind of discourse to recycle them appears in ads for 
sophisticated computer software, advanced telecommunications systems and 
global means of transportation. Here, dolphins figure regularly. As different 
as these three kinds of narrative are, they nevertheless share ao unmistak­
ably futuristic mode that can be summed up in the words of Oceau: 
Cosmodolphins 
PLATE 8.3 Cyborg-dolphins! Advertisement for computer software. 
(Courtesy Intel Corporation). 212 
What they [the dolphins] are doing, and what they are teaching us, is exactly 
what we humans will be doing in the twenty-first century. (italics in the 
original; ibid.: 16) 
·-Seen from the viewpoint of space man, who likes to believe that he has 
the prerogative of leading us into the cosmic cyber-future, we may well 
ask, who do they think they are, these enigmatically smiling animals? 
i Equals? Jesters? Mock-heroes? Anti-heroes? 
' PLATE 8.4 One more cyborg-dolphin. Advertisement for teleeommunication. 
(Courtesy Sonofon) 
Cosmodolphins 214 
Notes 
I. Shamu is the name given to all Sea. World's killer whales, which are also used as 
the theme park's t:r:ldemark. Nearly four million customers per year come to see Shamu 
the killer whale (Davi~ 1997: r). 
2. Lilly briefly resumed his research on communication with dolphins in the late 
rg~os when he set up Project JANUS (Joint Analog Numerical Understanding System). 
Thts new project built on the split between techno-Man's secondary orality and non­
techno-Dolphin's primary one. At the human end of the communication line, visual 
symbols on a computer screen could be translated into high-pitched signals which the 
dolphins might pick up from underwater loudspeakers at the other end of the line. 
Conversely, the dolphin-speak was translated from underwater hydrophones into visual 
computer symbols for the scientist. 
3-The term Aesopian metaphor is derived from the name of the ancient Greek 
author? Aesop, who in_ his fabl_es used :t?imals to expose humans. Due to censorship, 
~esoptan language (wtth or wtthout animals) became common in all kinds of Soviet 
discourses. · ·-Conclusion: Inappropriate Contiguities 
Revisited 
Our study of different narratives on the spaceship, the horoscope and the 
dolphin has come to an end. We have looked at the changing patterns of 
self/ other representations that they display, and have considered the human 
expectations and yearnings attached to communication with an array of 
extraterrestrial others, from the cosmic Cyber-Godfather to Female Fate, 
Moira, and from the cyborg dolphin to the noble. savage dolphin. 
The analysis has snoivh tfut th~·l;,agin.;:y db.logues with these Others 
are conceived of as taking place on anything but equal terms • .Sometimes 
the territories of the extraterrestrial worlds and their irnagirlary..:or-real" -
-i~abft-.;~~-i: CbilSYr:UcTe1i-iiLi' "c{~_~i~~loni.Ji~t-- mote, as obj~~ts-to• '"be 
irnpri~ted ;.;th ~.;.,.;,~; by th~ tri~phant hum-;;;-self; ~omeiiffies -ihey ·· 
~e depicte~cas -~~P..et:i?r si.il>jects~#~I~COii~_~YO~s ~i-d~ille- ~~SI.:.alviiie, 
'WiSd.Oiii.-BUt·-it does no~tSCeffi Pos;ible-tO;·the self-aggrandizing or self­
a'b;.;d~ning logics of the stories to foresee acts of communication with 
extraterrestrial subjects who are simply understood as equal, but different. 
As they oscillate between cannibalizing and sacralizing modes, either a 
superhero-self or a God/ Goddess-other, or both, seems to perform un­
questioned in the majority of stories. 
We have also seen how gender, ethnicity, the myth of linear progress and 
the opposition between 'pre-tech' and 'high-tech' are invested in these 
self/ other representations along rather traditional lines. Colonial and 
patriarchal stereotypes, which would be more or less outmoded if used in 
a terrestrial context, thrive in the language in which the master narratives 
of extraterrestrial spheres are embedded. The nexus Woman-Native­
Nature is re-emerging out of the post-Second World War ocean, while re­
enactments of ancient religious gender stereotypes are gaining new ground 
in the stories of the refigured cosmos. The 'crossed-out' god of modernity 
returns in space flight discourses as the Cyber-Godfather of distant galaxies, 
who sends out his sperm-astronauts on long-term space missions, and New 
Cosmodolphlns 216 
Age astrology provides him with competition by reviving his traditional 
female counterpart, Moira, or Fate. 
By focusing on different iconographies and master narratives we have 
aim~d at miling---risible -this trend to;-ard;-the-r~-vi-~;ti~n ~-:f:--r-ath~e-r­
·stereOtYPICar~_ge-~· Of~Icr-=--coSffifc-O?OCeanic:·=·na;;;~:~]3\it we have­
:ilso sought ~to~-d.,;~biiize_them-by-dispJaying_so-;;,~of the circulating 
~~gs and inaiJpr~p~ate CQQtiguitj_~.§..that ~P-pear whe;;__dfff~~to~--­
.Or the globai-commons and their twentieth-~entury ico,;oiraphl~;;;;:e 
jfu<tar._?sg rendering tlleir truth-claims non-evident by-hlghiigh~ 
r-emerging patterns of opposition, polarization and never-ending reversals. 
To smn up this denaturalizing and critical perspective, we shall briefly 
revisit the master narratives of cosmic and oceanic otherness as seen 
1
1 through the lens of three novels that rewrite them from deconstructive 
1
·, and alternative positions that open them up in line with our analysis. The 
I\ novels are: Victor Pelevin's Omon Ra (rggz/Igg6), Jeanette Winterson's 
!(Boating for Beginners (rggo) and Vonda Mclnryre's Superluminal (rg83). 
'--· lea 1/"";:J f Y\ r-o1Y) ~n..e Fr"\ .J 1 
Conquerors· of Space in the Underground 
We just didn't have the time to defeat the West technologically. But in the 
battle of ideas, you can't stop for a second. The paradox ... is that we support 
the truth with falsehood ... and the goal for which you will give your life is, 
in a formal sense, a deception. But the more consciously ... you perform 
your feat of heroism, the greater will be the degree of its truth. (Pelevin 
rgg2/rgg6: 44) 
With these words the protagonist, Omon, of Russian writer Victor Pelevin's 
satirical novel Omon Ra is instructed in Soviet history and told, following 
its inexorable logic, why he must give his life as part of a faked space 
mission to the Moon. Omon, the son of a low-ranking member of the 
Soviet police, daydreams about fighter-plane heroes, flying and cosmo­
nautics. He aspires to be a cosmonaut and is selected for a special mission: 
to go to the Moon and cycle/travel seventy kilometers along the Lenin 
Fissure in a so-called 'moonwalker'. The vehicle is mocked up to look 
automated, but underneath is basically nothing more than a simple bicycle. 
At the end of the trip, Omon is supposed to use the last of his oxygen 
supplies to rush out of the 'moonwalker' and set up a radio transmitter in 
the lunar soil, which will broadcast the words: 'Lenin', 'peace', 'USSR' 
thus 'proving' to all the world the power of automated Soviet spac; 
technology. Mter this heroic act as human ghost in the fake automaton, Conclusion 217 
Omon is permitted to shoot himself in order to avoid the more painful 
death of suffocation. Return to Earth is not part of the progranune. To 
do so would destroy the illusion of the automaton, and besides, the Soviet 
Union has not had time to develop the proper technology. Seen through 
the prism of Omon's innocent and naive perceptions of the inhuman 
system-surrounding him, the novel deconstructs the master fable of Soviet 
space flight with scathing irony and black humour. It tells of the large­
scale and grandiose technological fakery, designed to 'prove' Marxist­
Leninist dogma about the superiority of Soviet forces of production. Not 
one single part of the space programme is what it pretends to be. Not only 
are the apparently automated functions on the rockets and spacecraft in 
reality simple manual tasks, but Omon even discovers that there is no real 
trip .into space either. When, in accordance with his standing orders, he 
tries to shoot himself outside the moonwalker, he misfires and discovers 
that he is not on the Moon, but in an abandoned tunnel of the Moscow 
metro where the entire Soviet space programme has actually taken place. 
Everything is pretence, Potemkin fal"ldes that will legitimize the claim to 
truth of the master narrative of superior forces of production and power 
to beat the technology of the capitalist West. 
Apart from being a satire on the inhuman Soviet system and its indif­
ference towards the life of the individual, the novel can also, on a more 
general symbolic level, be read as an extremely funny and, in a Bakhtinian 
sense, carnivalesque exposure of the pompous rhetoric of both the Russian 
and American space narratives, which, as shown, have many similarities. 
As the jester created a down-to-earth mock-image of the king in carnivals 
of the Middle Ages, so the story of the very ordinary Russian boy, Omon 
(whose name alludes to homo)1, who has the (bad) luck to be selected to 
become a cosmonaut-hero, ridicules the high-flown Russo-American myth 
of the 'conquerors of space' who imprint their superior power and know­
ledge on the whole universe. The master narrative of space flight is, in a 
very literal sense, transformed from a 'high' to a 'low' matter. Events 
apparently unfolding in the heavens are, in the novel, actually taking place 
inside the Earth, as the cosmonaut-hero is degraded from universal master 
of a complicated and all-powerful technology into an interchangeable cog 
in a simple mechanical device. In this way, the novel emphasizes the point 
we made when we exposed the inappropriate contiguity between the Russo­
American brothers of the right stuff and such shadow figures as the 
mongrel bitch Laika, the crying and vomiting Tereshkova, the comic 
coward figure Jose Jimenez, and so on; i.e. figures who perform as counter­
parts to the space heroes because the grandiose self of the master narrative 
Cosmodolphins 218 
needs an inferior other as background. The story of Omon Ra underlines 
the tricky problem posed by the imaginary monumentalism and closure of 
national master narratives such as the space adventure story, which is that 
their lack of openness to revisions or to voices other than those authorized 
may create their owri kind of instabilities, inappropriate contiguities and 
unwanted proximities between heroes and mock-heroes, heavenly and 
earthly matters. 
To Posit a Fathergod through an Illusory Genesis 
Soames ... broke open the bottle. He deciphered the writing. 'Hey girls, I 
made it,' he read slowly, 'loveD ... ' (Winterson 1990: 159). 
Like Omon Ra, Jeanette Winterson's Boating for Beginners is a story about 
the big fakery of master narratives and about their destabilization via 
inappropriate contiguities and the eye-opening perspectives of mock­
heroines. But while Omon's life displays a tragicomic caricature of the 
official space romance and its powerful masculine adventure hero, Boating 
for Beginners makes a down-to-earth carnival out of the God and Goddess 
stories that are included in the cosmic master narratives we have analysed. 
In our context, Winterson's novel can be read as a frivolous commentary 
on both the Cyber-Godfuther of the space narrative and the Great Cosmic 
Mother of the astrologers' universe. Winterson opens up both of these 
self-important and elevated. figures in promising ways that are in line with 
the destabilization we have tried to create by inappropriately juxtaposing 
the two opposing figures. 
The fictive frame of Boating for Beginners is the archaeological excava­
tion of the supposed relics of Noab's Ark in 1984. During the work at 
Mount Ararat, the assistant archaeologist,. Gardener, digs out somt.: strange 
things which are too inappropriate and 'unbiblical' for his boss, Soames, 
to acknowledge as proper findings. But the down-to-earth assistant persists 
and discovers, among other things, a bottle containing a message. from a 
woman called Doris, who was Noab's charwoman. Back in antediluvian 
times Doris, together with a small group of other women, discovered the 
real story behind the big fakery, which today is known as Genesis. Her 
message in the bottle, quoted above, siguals to readers that she survived 
the Flood and with her the memory of a gigantic cover-up, staged by God 
and Noab. Although Soames will not let it become part of official history, 
her note remains an inappropriate and unauthorized commentary, a riddle 
that occupies Gardener for the rest of his life. Conclusion 219 
Boating for Beginners is a carnivalesque and grotesque realist rewriting 
of the Bible's story of the Flood. Ancient Nineveh is conceived in the 
image of a modern capitalist consumer society, with refrigerators, fast 
food, clinics for cosmetic surgery, etc. Noah is an inventor and a thriving 
businessman in a company specializing in a mixture of tourist and religious 
sightseeing. Carnivalizing Feuerbach's thesis that the divine is a human 
invention, the novel depicts the biblical God as a cyborg, created by Noab. 
Basically, God is the result of a flash of lightning that accidentally strikes 
a half-putrefied Black Forest Gateau and a decomposed scoop of ice-cream 
that Noab is about to take out of his refrigerator. The incident gives Noab 
an insight into methods of producing artificial life and, like another 
Frankenstein, he creates an ice-cream cyborg-God, who addresses him as 
'mother', neatly inverting the biblical obsession with father-son genealogies. 
Noah uses his creation as a tool in the founding of a new religion that 
celebrates a 'natural' lifestyle and food, preserved without refrigerators, 
echoing the ancient saying that everything passes away except immortal 
God. 'Selling' God and 'his' messages becomes a profitable business for 
Noah, who arranges boat trips so that people can watch God's 'sensational 
miracles', and publishes popular books, such as Genesis or How I Did It, 
in which the Bible's version is told as a cover-up for the real story. 
At the beginning of the novel, Noab is about to launch a big theatrical 
event and fihn project, based on Genesis .... He expects it to be a block­
buster that will make him even richer. However, in one more parallel with 
the Frankenstein myth, events run out of Noah's control. God becomes 
tired of his role of walk-on player in his 'mother's' virtual flood event, and 
decides to show his power by flooding the world for real. So the Flood 
becomes a reality in the novel, but its Biblical 'truth' is rendered dubious 
by the fact that both the almighty Fathergod and his Genesis are nothing 
but pawns in a grandiose lie, invented to hide God's monstrous birth and 
the trivial, embarrassing and non-marketable story of his cyborg descent 
from a piece of bad cake and an ice-cream. 
Seen in our context, the notion of the distant Cyber-Godfather of 
faraway galaxies and his modernized versions ·of Genesis are, in a way, also 
implicitly carnivalized. Winterson's cheerful trivialization of God-the­
Almighty-Creator as the simple, coincidental progeny of base matter and 
a phallogocentric desire to construct disembodied origin stories ~at veil, 
fake and lie about the active role of matter and (female) bodies can also be 
read as a carnivalesque comment on some of the patriarchal stories that 
were invented as part of the search for extraterrestrial intelligence. 
COSIRodOiphins 220 
To Posit a Female Divine, a Carnival May be Necessary 
Sic transit glor£a mund£ [Thus passes away the glory of the world]. (Ancient 
Christian saying) 
The counter-image to the apparently august, but in reality faked Fathergod 
in Boating for Beginners is the female world body. She appears allegorically 
as a widowed working mother, Mrs Munde (from Mundus: World), and 
her daughter Gloria (playing on the words aureole and glory in both a 
liturgical and secular sense). Together, the names of mother and daughter 
echo the heavenly message about the decay of everything human conveyed 
in the above quote. But, as an exuberant and carnivalesque mock-mirror 
of the renunciation, asceticism and contempt for bodily pleasures in general 
and the female body in particular that the saying implies, mother and 
daughter are both vigorous and non-languishing figures. 
The daughter, whom Noah has hired to collect animals for his Flood 
film, is part of the team of women who discover the fakery. Like Doris, 
she is determined to disturb the plans of God and Noah -i.e. to survive 
the Flood in order"to keep the true story alive. She wants to ensure that 
the glory of a world full of trivial and down-to-earth things such as ice­
cream cyborg-gods, cosmetic surgery and refrigerators that delay decay in 
their own, both perverse and life-affirming, ways becomes a part of his­
torical memory. 
The mother is a poetic combination of trivial everyday consciousness, 
macrocosmic grandeur and an unfailing vitality. She is Noah's cook and, 
unlike the daughter and her suspicious friends, she is a truly naive and 
devout believer in his and God's projects. Besides cooking for Noah, she 
happily takes on a job in his son Ham's profitable restaurant chain 
specializing in spiritual dishes. Here she energetically produces 'Hallelujah 
Hamburgers' for low wages, using a dangerous and ineffective machine, 
invented by Noah. She loses an arm in the machine, but her faith in God 
and Noah remains unshaken. 
However, intermingled with all her trivial pursuits, Mrs Munde is, in 
a grandiose and poetic way, also one with the cosmos. Originally, she wanted 
to become an astronomer. However, her poor background did not make 
such a career possible for her. As a true optimist, she does not despair, but 
redefines herself as an 'Astronomer without a Telescope' and shifts to a 
love of God and the cultivation of a mystical feeling of interconnectedness 
with the cosmos and the stars. In particular, she celebrates her oneness with 
the powerful fire of the Zodiac sigu Leo. She feels that she has a roaring Conclusion 221 
lion inside her -a primal and elemental force which she thinks will one 
day make her (combusi', but which is also likened to a 'storm at sea' 
(Winterson 1990: 20, 61). 
Mrs Munde is cast as an allegory over the experience of oneness 
between macro-and microcosmos that is central to astrological cosmology. 
Accordingly, Gloria's description of her mother's way of knowing is in 
line with Cassirer's definition of mythical realism and the bodily episteme 
of premodern thought. She notices that her mother makes 'no distinction 
between thinking things and objects of thought' (ibid.: 48) and, in another 
parallel with astrological thought, Mrs Munde's life is totally guided by 
her intuitive responses to the coincidences that seem to imprint macro­
cosmic meaning. onto her life. 
Being too naive to either fake or lie, Mrs Munde is a counter-image to 
God, who pretends to be the universal and spiritual father of all things, 
while being no more than the product of base matter and a simple co­
incidence. In contrast to God, Mrs Muncie does not hide the fact that she 
is one with elementary material forces; she is happy and proud to have the 
fire of Leo inside her and to be a tiny, bodily part of the universe instead 
of its august creator who demands to be worshipped on the (false) pretext 
of having been there before everybody else. 
As an embodied counter-image to God, Mrs Munde shares many 
features with the Great Cosmic Mother, whom we traced in different 
versions in the astrological texts. Interpreted together with Gloria, she 
comes even closer to exposing a female divine. As an allegory of the female 
world body and her daughter, the aureole, whom the 'immortal Fathergod' 
threatens to overthrow with his Sic transit gloria mundi, Mrs Munde 
and Gloria act as an alternative to the Bible's phallogocentric Trinity. 
Winterson's novel casts them as a down-to-earth version of the divine 
mother-daughter genealogies of pre-patriarchal religions that appear as 
the 'overthrown goddesses' of Trivia in Noah's flood film (ibid.: 21). 
Insisting on this mother-daughter pair, whose vigour and vitality cannot 
be totally repressed by the master narrative of the Fathergod, Winterson's 
novel offers an image of the female divine that meets the need we, together 
with Irigaray, ascribed to modern women. We traced one version of this 
female divine in the astrological universe, but in a limited form that Boating 
for Beginners manages to transgress. In line with Irigaray, who criticizes 
spiritual feminists and astrologers for their reversion to a regressive and 
non-empowering symbiosis with the Great Cosmic Mother, the novel 
rewrites the figuration in a carnivalesque, down-to-earth manner that avoids 
projecting it as an alien, transcendent authority, like Moira, to whom we 
Cosmodolphins 222 
remain p'owerless as babies. Mrs Munde radiates.macrocosmic and'poetic 
grandeur, but she is also a trivial, everyday woman who lays no claims to 
transcendency. Moreover, the novel shows that the mother-daughter 
symbiosiS is not a statiC given. The depictions of Gloria entering a second 
phase of personal development and becoming a mature, independent sub­
ject, who has reached a mental stage that goes beyond Mrs Munde's 
mythic-realistic world view, are allegoric illustrations of this. In this second 
developmental phase, Gloria can understand, love, bond and interact with 
her mother in new and more productive ways than before. 
Ocean and Cosmos Revisited: A Feminist· Reconfiguration 
She gave up her heart quite willingly. (Mcintyre 1983: 1) 
Her suit glowed faintly blue against the formidable bhickness. Lacking even 
a tether, she floated in space as she might float in the sea. (ibid.: 220) 
The great blue whale blinked at him again, embracing Radu in sound. [ ... ] 
He lay motionless, entranced by the whale's sheer presence. (ibid.: 285) 
The last of the three novels, Vonda Mcintyre's Superluminal (1983), is a 
part of our conclusion because it questions the gendered and ethnicized 
hierarchy between cosmos and ocean. It challenges the stereotypes of Father 
Sky and Mother Sea which we saw revitalized by a post-Second World War 
science that perceived the trinity Woman-Native-Nature emerging from 
the ocean, while Cyber-Godfathers and supermen in the guise of astronaut­
heroes occupied the cosmos. With this challenge, the novel promotes 
subversive processes that are in line with the scope of our argument. 
However, compared to the texts of Pelevin and Winterson, the critical 
mode of Mcintyre's novel is quite different. In contrast with the (;afnival­
esque and deconstructive styles of Omon Ra and Boating for Beginners, 
Superluminal is a romantic Utopianist novel. It is grounded in a classic 
feminist utopianism and constructs counter-images that are as romantically 
closed on certain standpoints and identities as the master narratives it 
challenges. Nevertheless, with its alternative approaches to cosmos aod 
ocean, and its discussions of space flight and cetaceans, Superluminal's 
themes are close to our own, and we find it relevant to our -arguments. 
Mcintyre's novel focuses on three extraterrestrial spaces: the ocean, the 
cosmos of galaxies and interstellar space, and ,finally the nothingness on 
the other side of the 'edge' of the universe's current expansion. Each of 
the three spaces represeots a specific kind of desirable wisdom, all of equal Conclusion 223 
value, but different from one another. Cetaceans, and in particular one old 
female blue whale, embody the wisdom of the ocean in the novel. The 
oceanic environment has bestowed on these sea mammals a different and 
higher intelligence than humans. Instead of a wisdom built primarily from 
visual experiences, the intelligence of the cetaceans is based on their highly 
developed intuitive communication skills, and on their sensitivity to sound, 
touch, scent and heat perception that altogether intensify the 'density of 
experience' (ibid.: 172) as well as on their capability to see across a broader 
spectrum than humans (their vision includes ultraviolet and infrared wave­
lengths that are not perceptible to the humao eye). 
In the futuristic setting of the novel, a large group of former humans, 
now 'divers', are in the process of transforming bodily and mentally into 
cetaceans in order to share their wisdom and conditions of life. The 
transformation is engendered by bio-engineering processes based on the 
controlled use of viruses; the divers are cyborgs existing in a state of 
transition between human and cetacean. 
In our context, these human--<::etacean cyborgs represent a counter­
image to the cyborg-dolphin icon we have previously outlined. Cyborgifiea­
tion as the means to promote an education in humanity is substituted by 
one that aims at an education in animality. But although this reversal 
brings to mind the self-other relationship of the noble savage dolphin 
narrative that imprints the human with a 'purely natural' wisdom, it should 
be noted that the divers' story is also different from this version of the 
traditional dolphin master narratives. Superluminal does depict the wise 
blue whale matriarch, the playfulness of cetaceans, their extraordinary 
wisdom and life in harmony with nature in a way that is close to the 
pastoral images of the noble savage dolphin story, but the means by which 
the humans attempt to become one with the cetaceans makes the story-line 
significantly different. The divers' education in animality is engendered 
via a relentlessly artificial reinvention of nature that inscribes it in the 
cyborg world. 
Unlike the oceanic intelligence, which is connected to sound, touch, 
etc., the wisdom of interstellar space is tied to the sense of vision within 
the spectrum of colours and light and to a mathematieal, but also intuitive, 
perception of seveo dimensions that makes it possible to understaod and 
embrace the whole universe beyond Einsteinian space. Those who can 
reach an understanding of this post-Einsteinian universe are space pilots, 
who have gone through a scheme of bodily modifications just as drastic as 
those of the divers. To become a space pilot, whose body cap survive 
superluminal flight without being anaesthetized, it is necessary to sacrifice 
Cosmodolphins 224 
the human heart in favour of a mechanical one that detaches its bearer 
from dependency on biorhythms and circadian rhythms, on natural life 
cycles and ageing processes. But, even so, not every pilot can actually 
perceive all seven dimensions. The mechanical cyborgification of the body 
is only a first step. Mathematical skills and in particular iotuition, a feeliog 
for and openness towards the experiences encountered during-superluminal 
flights, are important factors too. 
While the oceanic wisdom of the cetaceans to which the divers aspire 
is embodied and multisensorial, the pilots' insight draws on visual and 
mathematical skills .. Moreover, detachment from the demands of the bio­
logical body, i.e. total bio-control, is a prerequisite. Such a description 
directs the attention towards a traditional picture of the masculine subject 
of Enlightenment ratio and the cool, detached superhero that we met in 
the master narrative of space flight. But the cyborg pilots of Superluminal 
are different. Intuition, feelings and aesthetic perception are also 
prerequisite in their gaining of universal insight. Their wisdom is inspired 
by the aesthetics and beauty of mathematics and physics, i.e. by a ratio 
that is informed by feeling and intuition. Moreover, the pilot who discovers 
the seventh dimension -·the most difficult and decisive of them all -is a 
woman._ 
The third space of the novel, the abyss of nothingness beyond the 
'edge' of expanding interstellar space, is in the strictest sense not a space 
at all; it has no dimensions and no past, present or future. It is 'a place that 
did not yet exist and never would exist', because ·'the universe, still expand­
iog, would engulf it, and it never would have been' (ibid.: 208). It is a place 
unable to give sensual clues either; no vision, no sound, a place which is 
unknowable io the sense that no known means of gaining iosight can lead 
to understanding. It is the sphere of ultimate mystery, and as such it 
represents a deep meditative wisdom, not unlike the one the novel romantic­
ally ascribes to the cetaceans. It is a wisdom that priocipally evades the 
enlightened vision to which interstellar space gives rise. 
As an antipode to the cosmos of light and Enlighterunent, which historic­
ally suggests masculinity, the mysterious nothingness could be interpreted 
as a space of female divine wisdom. But the novel evades this dichotomy, 
posing the 'space' beyond the 'edge' as one that attracts the most complex 
and inappropriate figure io the novel, the diver Orca (who shares her name 
with her cousins, the killer whales or orcas). She is in a process of trans­
formation from human to animal and has developed cetacean senses; but 
she also wants to become a pilot, i.e. begin the transition from a creature 
embedded io biorhythms to machinic detachment and mechanical bio--l 
1 
I I 
I I 
I Conclusion 225 
control. This desire is aroused by the abyss of nothingness that she, unlike 
the pilots and due to her cetacean sensuality, can understand as a source 
of wisdom. In her complex aspirations and desires, she comes to embody 
a network of interrelations between cosmos and ocean, between human, 
animal and pilot (posthuman machioe) and to transgress the traditional 
boundaries and hierarchies between them. Through her attraction to it, the 
abyss of nothingness comes to share this transgression; it is articulated as 
a space of mediations, where the traditional opposition between Father Sky 
and Mother Sea is displaced. 
In our context, Orca's complexities make her a cousin to the dolphin, 
whose arnaziog iconographic polysemy we have displayed. We showed how 
it performed now as o~eanic noble savage, and now as cosmic high-tech 
cyborg; now as stand-in for Mother Sea, and now for Father Sky. In this 
way, we exposed the dolphin as a jester capable of carnivalesque acts of 
blurring boundaries and mocking genderized and ethnicized hierarchies 
and oppositions whose displacement the Orca-figure of Superlumina/ sum­
marizes. 
We have travelled a long way io the writing of this book -from a 
feminist conference in Dublin to the void beyond the edges of the universe 
-and traversed some truly amazing landscapes. We hope that our journey 
has helped to open up the worlds of both space flight and astrology for 
further feminist iovestigation. Space flight is important for fernioists both 
because of its technological spin-offs and because it touches on esoteric 
questions of the nature of cosmos and the divine. As we hope to have 
shown, it is far more than a nuts-and-bolts, hard science, toys for the boys 
endeavour. The question of how we should relate to that which we cannot 
control is still up for grabs, and as this question has become displaced, 
along with the wilderness, into the ocean deeps and the depths of space, 
so feminists must follow, or else leave the way open for the twin spectres 
of sacralizing and canrubalizing that, as we have shown, weave their way 
through the discourses of the spaceship, the horoscope and the dolphio. 
Perhaps the most important thing we have learned from the research 
for this book is that present-day cultural oscillations between the two 
illusory positions of self-aggrandiziog and self-abandoniog, vis-a-vis the 
wild other, are destructive and dangerous, based as they are on com­
plementary denials. While the former tries to deny that, as living beings, 
we cannot evade our position as objects of cosmic and biological forces 
beyond our control, the latter, conversely, attempts to ignore the fact that, 
nevertheless, we do have some opportunities for subjective and socio­
technical intervention. In confronting these complementary positions and 
Cosmodolphins 226 
denials via the configuration of stories about our three icons, we hope to 
have created a discursive space for the transgression of both. 
Note 
r. Written in the Cyrillic alphabet of Russian, Omon spells homo backwards. How­
ever, the name is also an acronym for Soviet military special forces. Bibliography 
Adams, C. J. (1990) The Sexual PoHt£cs of Meat: A Fem£nist-Vegetar£'an Critical Thewy, 
New York: Continuum. 
Adams, C.]. and]. Donovan (eds) (1995) Animals and Women. Fem£nist Theoretical 
Explorations, Durham and London: Duke University Press. 
Ainnatov; Ch. (1995) Tavro Kassandry, Moscow: Eksmo. 
Aldrin, E., Jr. 'With W. Warga (1973) Return to Earth, New York: Random House. 
Alpers, A. (196o) A Book of Dolph£ns, London: John Murray. 
-(1961) Dolphins: The Myth and the Mammal, C:nnbridge, MA: Riverside Press. 
Arrhenius, S. (1907), Viirldarnas Utveckling, Stockholm: Hugo Gebers FOrlag (1st edn 
1906; translated as Worlds t'n the Ma!..•£ng, New York 1908). 
Bakhtin, M. (1984) Rabelais and his World, Bloomington: Indiana University Press. 
Bardach,]. (1968) Harvest of the Sea, New York: Harper & Row. 
Barker, A. (1993) 'The divided self: Yuri Rytkheu and contemporary Chukchi literature', 
in D. Diment and Yu. Slezkine (eds) Between Heaven and Hell: The Myth of SWeria 
in RussUm Culture, New York: St Martin's Press. 
Barnes, R. (1994) The Blue Dolphin, Tiburon, CA: H. J. Kramer Inc. 
Barr, M. S. (1993) Lost in Space: Probing Feminist Science Fiction and Beyond, London 
and Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press. 
Belkovich, V., S. K.leinenberg and A. Yablokov (1965) Zagadka okeana, Moscow: Molo­
daya Gvardiya. 
-(1967) Nash drug-de/fin, Moscow: Molodaya Gvardiya. 
Benford, T. B. and B. Wilkes (1985) The Space Program Quiz t5 Fact Book, New York: 
Harper & Row. 
Berry, P. and A. Wernick (eds) (1992) Shadow of Spirit: Postmodernism and Religion, 
London and New York: Routledge. 
Birke, L. (1994) Feminism, Animals and Science: The Naming of the Shrew, Buckingham 
and Philadelphia: Open University Press. 
Bitov, A. (1976) Dni cheloveka, Moscow: Molodaya Gvardiya. 
-(ed.) (1994) Nachatk£ astrologii russkoy literatury, Moscow: Fortuna. 
Borisenko, I. and A. Romanov (1982) Where All Roads into Space Begin: An Account of 
the Baikonur Cosmodrome, Moscow: Progress Publishers. 
Bova, B. and B. Preiss (eds) (1991) F£rst Contact: The Search for Extraterrestrial Intel­
ligence, New York: Plume Books. 
Cosmodolphins 228 
Boym, S. (1996) 'Everyday culture', in D. N. Shalin ( ed.) Russian Culture at the Crossroads: 
Paradoxes of Postcommunist Consciousness, Boulder, CO and Oxford: Westview Press, 
pp. I57-83. 
Braidotti, R. (1991) Patterns of Dissonance, C:nnbridge: Polity Press. 
-(1994) Nomadic Subjects: Embodiment and Sexual Difference in Contemporary Feminist 
Theory, New York: Columbia University Press. 
Brecht, B. (1964) Brecht on Theatre: The Development of an Aesthetic, ed. md trans. 
]. Willett, London: Eyre Methuen. 
Brill, R. and W. A. Friedl (1993) Reintroduction to the Wild as an Option for Managing 
Navy Marine Mammals, Technical Report 1549, U.S. Navy, Naval Command, Control 
and Ocean Surveillance Center, San Diego, October. 
Erin, D. (1996) Startide Rising, London: Orbit (1st edn 1983). 
Brougher, V. G. (1997) 'The occult in Russian literature of the 1990s', The Russian Review, 
Vol. 56, No. r: no-.24. 
Bryld, M. ( 1998) 'The days of dogs md dolphins: Aesopian metaphors of Soviet science', 
in M. Bryld and E. Kulavig (eds) Soviet Civilization between Past and Present, Odense: 
Odense University Press, pp. 53-'75· 
Burke, E. (1990) A Philosophical Enquiry into the Origin of Our Ideas of the Sublime and 
BeautifUl, Oxford: Oxford University Press (1st edn 1756). 
Cadigan, P. (rggr) Synners, London: HarperCollins. 
Caldecott, L. and S. Leland (eds) (1983) Reclaim the Earth: Women Speak Out for Lift on 
Earth, London: Women's Press. 
Cameron, A. (ed.) (1963) Interstellar Communication, New York and Amsterd:nn: NASA/ 
Institute for Space Studies. 
Campbell,]. (1968) The Hero with a Thousand Faces, Bollingen Series XVTI, Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press (1st edn 1949). 
Capra, F. (1991) The Tao of Physics: An Exploration of the Parallels between Modern Physics 
and Eastern Mysticism, Shambhala Publications (3rd edn). 
-(1982) The Turning Point: Sci.ence, Society, and the Rising Culture, New York: Simon 
and Schuster. 
Carpenter, M. S., G. Cooper, Jr,]. Glenn, Jr, V. Grissom, W. Schirra, Jr, A. Shepard, Jr 
and D. Slayton (1963) We Seven, New York: Pocket Books (1st edn 1962). 
Carson, R. (x961) The Sea Around Us, Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press 
(1st edn 1951). 
Casper, M.]. and L.]. More (1995) 'Inscribing bodies, inscribing the future: gender, 
sex, and reproduction in outer space', Soc£ological Perspecti-ves (Summer): 311-23. 
Cassirer, E. (1922) Die Begriffiform im mytlt£schen Denken, Leipzig and Berlin: Teubner. 
-(1987) Das mythische Denken. Philosopltie der symbolischen Formen, 2. Teil, Darmstadt: 
Wissenschaftliche Buchgcsellschaft. 
Chaikin, A. (1994) A Man on the Moon: The Voyages of the Apollo Astronauts, London: 
Michael Joseph. 
Chapskii, K. K. and V. Sokolov (eels) (1973) Morphology and Ecology ofMan·ne Mammals, 
New York and Toronto: John Wiley & Sons. 
Cixous, H. (1985) 'The laugh of the Medusa', trans K Cohen and P. Cohen, in E. Marks 
and I. de Courtivron (eds) New French Feminisms: An Anthology, Brighton: Harvester 
Press, pp. 245-65 (1st French edn 1975). Bibliography 229 
-(1991) Coming to Writing and Other Essays, trans. S. Cornell, D. Jenson, A. Liddle 
and S. Sellers, Cambridge, MA and London: Harvard University Press (1st French 
edn 1977). 
Cixous, H. and C. CI&ment (1986) The Newly Born Woman, trans. B. Wing, Vol. 24 of 
Theory and History of Literature series, Minneapolis and Oxford: University of 
Minnesota Press (1st French edn-1975). 
Clarke, A. C. (1960) The Challenge of the Sea, New York, Chicago and San Francisco: 
Holt, Rinehart & Winston. 
-(1964) Profiles of the Future, London: Pan Books (1st edn 1962). 
-(1966) Voices from the Sly: Previews of the Coming Space Age, London: Gollancz. 
-(1988) The Deep Range, London: VGSF Classic Series (1st edn 1957). 
Clynes, M. E. and N. S. Kline (1960) 'Cyborgs and space', Astronautics, September. 
Reprinted in C. H. Gray, H.]. Figueroa-Sarricra and S. Mentor (eels) (1995) The 
Cyborg Handbook, London and New York: Routledge, pp. 29-33. 
Cocconi, G. and P. Morrison (1959) 'Searching for interstellar communication', Nature 
184: 844. Reproduced in D. Goldsmith (ed.) (1980) The Quest for Extraterrestrial 
Life: A Book of Readings, Mill Valley, CA: University Science Books. 
Collins, M. (1974) Carrying the Fire: An Astronaut's Journey, New York: Farrar, Strauss 
& Giroux. 
Costlow,]. T., S. Sandler and]. Vowles (eds) (1993) Sexuality and the Body £n Russian 
Culture, Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. 
Cousteau,]. Y. and F. Dumas (1953) The Silent World, London: Hamish Hamilton. 
Cousteau, J. Y. with J. Dugm (1963) The Living Sea, New York and Evanston: Harper 
&Row. 
Coward, R. (1989) The Whole Truth: The Myth of Alternative Health, London md 
Boston: Faber & Faber. 
Cowen, R. C. ( 1960) Frontiers of the Sea: The Story of0ceanograph£c Exploration, London: 
Gollancz. 
Crick, F. (1981) Life Itself: Its Origin and Nature, New York: Simon & Schuster. 
Cullen, M., M. Fine-Davis, E. McCarthy, G. Moane and A. Saunders (eds) (1987) Book 
of Abstracts: Women's Worlds. Visions and Revisions, Third International Interdisciplin­
ary Congress on Women, Trinity College, University of Dublin, Ireland. 
Daniloff, N. (1972) The Kremlin and the Cosmos, New York: Alfred A. Knopf. 
Davis, S. G. (1997) Spectacular Nature: Corporate Culture and the Sea World Experience, 
Berkeley, CA and London: University of California Press. 
Dawson, G. (1994) Soldier Heroes: British Adventure, Empire and the Imagining of Mascu­
linities, London and New York: Routledge. 
Derrida, J. (1979) Spurs: Nietzsche's Styles, tnms. B. Harlow, Chicago md London: 
University of Chicago Press (1st French edn 1978). 
-(1987) Positions, trans. A. Bass, London: The Athlone Press (1st French edn 1972). 
Devine, E. and M. Clark (eds) (1967) The Dolphin Smile: Centuries of Dolphin Lore, New 
York and London: Macmillan/Collier-Macmillan. 
DeVorkin, D. H. (1992): Science with a Vengeance: How the ·Military Created US Space 
Sc£ences After World War II, Berin and New York: Springer-Verlag. 
Diamond, I. and G. F. Orenstein (eds) (1990) Reweaving t!te World: The Emergence of 
Ecofeminism, San Francisco: Sierra Oub Books. 
Cosmodolphins 230 
"-Doria, C. (1974) 'The dolphin rider', inJ. Mcintyre (ed.) Mind in the Waters: A Book to 
Celebrate the Consdousness of Whales and Dolphins, San Francisco: Sierra Oub Books, 
pp. 33-51. 
Douglas, G. (1981) Physics, Astrology and Semiotics, London: author's own publishing 
house. 
Drake, F. and D. Sobel (1992) Is Anyone Out There? The Scientific Search for Extra­
terrestrial Intelligence, New York: Delacorte Press. 
Dugan, J. and R. Vahan (eds) (1965) Men Under Water, Philadelphia and New York: 
Chilton Books. 
Dyson, F. (1979) Disturbing the Universe, New York: Harper & Row. 
Earle, S. A. (1995) Sea Change. A Message of the Oceans, New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons. 
Easlea, B. (1983) Fathering the Unthinkable: Masculinity, Scientists and the Nuclear Arms 
Race, London: Pluto. 
Edmonds, R. ( 1994) Pushkin: The Man and his Age, London: Macmillan. 
Elias, G. H. (1990): Breakout into Space: Mission for a Generation, New York: William 
Morrow. 
Engel, L. and the Editors of Life (1961) The Sea, New York: Life Nature Library, Time 
Inc. 
Fairchild, H. N. (1961) The Noble Savage: A Study in Romantic Naturalism, New York: 
Russell & Russell. 
Farrant, S. (1989) Symbols for Women: A Matrilineal Zodiac, London and Wellington: 
Mandala. 
Fedorov, A. and I. Izvekov (1998) 'Predstartovaya podgotovka "Altairov"', Novosti Kos­
monavti/...i, No. 171I8: z-6. 
Feuerbach, L. (1957) The Essence of Christianity, trans. George Eliot, New York, San 
Fnmcisco and London: Ha.rper & Row. 
Feuerstein, T. Lamb (1998) Bibliography on the Whale-Watching-Web: www.physics. 
helsinki.fi/whale/ 
Fogg, M. J. (1995) Terraforming: Engineering Planetary Environments, Warrendale, PA: 
Society of Automotive Engineers. 
Foucault, M. (1978) The History of Sexuality: An Introduction, Vol. I, trans. R. Hurley, 
London: Penguin (xst French edn 1976). 
-(198o) Power/Knowledge: Selected Interviews f5 Other Writings I972-1977, ed. C. Gor­
don, New York: Pantheon Books. 
-(1989) Madness and CiviHzation: A History of Insanity in the Age of Reason, London: 
Routledge. 
Freudenthal, H. (xg6o) Lincos: Design of a Language for Cosmic Intercourse, Part I, Studies 
in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics, Amsterdam: North-Holland Pub­
lishing Company. 
Fuller, R. Buckminster {xg8x) Critical Path, New York: StMartin's Press. 
Gaard, G. (ed.) (1993) Ecofeminism: Women, Animals, Nature, Philadelphia: Temple 
University Press. 
Gagarin, Yu. (1971) Est Plamya!, Moscow: Molodaya Gvardiya (znd edn). 
Galison, P. and B. Hevly (eds) (1992) Bt'g Science: The Growth of Large-Scale Research, 
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. Bibliography 231 
Gareev, Z. (1991) 'Allergiya Aleksandra Petrovicha', Volga, No.4= 86-106. 
George, D. (1992) Mysteries of the Dark Moon: The Healing Power of the Dark Goddess, 
San Francisco: HarperSanFrancisco. 
Gibson, W. (1995) Johnny Mnemonic, New York: Ace Books (1st edn 1981). 
Gimbutas, M. (xg8z) The Goddesses and Gods of Old Europe, Berkeley and Los Angeles: 
University of California Press. 
GlobaLearn, Inc. (1998) The Dolpht'ns of Sevastopol, www.globalearn.com/ expeditions/ 
bsne/ 
Glueck, N. (xg66) Deities and Dolpht'ns: The Story of the Nebateans, London: Cassell. 
Goldsmith, D. (ed.) (1980) The Quest for Extraterrestrial Life: A Book Of Readings, Mill 
Valley, CA: University Science Books. 
Goldsmith, D. and T. Owen (1992) The Search for Life in the Universe, Reading, MA, 
New York and Paris: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company (znd edn). 
Golovanov, Ya. (1994) Korolev: Fakty i mify, Moscow: Nauka. 
G6ttner-Abendro'th, H. (1980) Die Giittin und ihr Heros: Die matriarcha/en Relig£onen in 
Mythos, Mirchen und Dichtung, Munich: Frauenoffensive. 
Grah:un, L. R. (ed.) (1990) Science and the Soviet Social Order, Cambridge, MA an:d 
London: Harvard University Press. 
Gray, C. H., H. J. Figueroa-Sarriera and S. Mentor (eds) (1995) The Cyborg Handbook, 
London and New York: Routledge. 
Green, M. ( 1990) The Robinson Crosoe Story, Pennsylvania: Pennsylvania State University 
Press. 
-(1991) Seven Types of Adventure Tale: An Etiology of a Major Genre, Pennsylvania: 
Pennsylvania State University Press. 
-(1993) The Adventurous Male: Chapters in the History of the White Male Mind, Penn­
sylvania: Pennsylvania State University Press. 
Greene, L. (1984) The Astrology of Fate, London, Boston and Sydney: Allen & Unwin. 
Greenleaf, M. (1994) Pushkin and Romantic Fashion, Stanford, CA: Stanford University 
Press. 
Greimas, A. J. (1983) Structural Semantics: An Attempt at a Method, Lincoln, NE and, 
London: University of Nebraska Press. 
Griffin, D. R. (1974) Listening in the Dark: The Acoustic Orientation in Bats and Men, 
New York: Dover Publications (1st edn 1958). 
-(1992) Animal Minds, Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press. 
Grimwood, K. (1996) Into the Deep, New York and Auckland: Onyx. 
Grossberg, L. and C. Nelson, P. Treichler (eds) (1992) Cultural Studies, London and 
New York: Routledge. 
Gunn, J. (1974) The Listeners, New York: Signet. 
Haraway, D. (1989) Primate VtSions: Gender, Race and Nature in the World of Modern 
Science, London and New York: Routledge. 
-(1991) St"mians, Cyborgs and Women: The Ret"nvention of Nature, London: Free Associ­
ation Books. 
- (1991a) ''The actors are cyborg, nature is coyote, and the geography is elsewhere: 
postscript to "Cyborgs at large"', in C. Penley and A. Ross (eds), Teclmoculture, 
Cosmodolphins 232 
Cultural Politics, Vol. 3, Minneapolis and Oxford: University of Minnesota Press, 
pp. 21-J. 
-(1992) 'The promises of monsters: a regenerative politics for inappropriate/ d others', 
in L. Grossberg, C. Nelson and P. Treichler (eds), Cultural Studies, London and 
New York: Routledge, .PP· 295--338. 
-(1997) Modest_Witnesfi9Second_Millermium. FemaleManc_Meets_OncoMouseTM. Fem­
inism and Technoscience, London and New York: Routledge. 
Hartmann, W. K., R. Miller and P. Lee (I984) Out of the Cradle: Exploring the Frontiers 
Beyond Earth, New York: Workman Publishing. 
•Z~ Hastrup, K. (I992) Det antropologiske projekt: Omforbloffilse, Copenhagen: Gyldendal. 
Heidegger, M. (1979) 'The age of the world view', in W. V. Spanos (ed.) Martin Heidegger 
and the Question of Literature. Toward a Postermodern Literary Hermeneutics, Bloom­
ington and London: Indiana University Press, pp. I-IS (Ist German edn 1938). 
Heinlein, R. A. (1950) Farmer in the Sky, New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. 
Herman, L. (ed.) (1980) Cetacean Behavior: Mechanisms and Functions, New York and 
Toronto: John Wiley & Sons. 
Hess, D.]. (1993) Science in the New Age: The Paranorma4 Its Defenders and Debunkers, 
and American Culture, Madison: University of Wisconsin Press. 
Holmes, D. C. (1967) The Search for Life on Other Worlds, Toronto, New York and 
London: Bantam Books. 
Hunter, R. (1980) The Greenpeace Chronicle, London: Picador. 
Irigaray, L. (1981) 'And the one doesn't stir without the other', trans H. V. Wenzel, Signs 
Vol. 7, No. 1: 6o-7 (1st French edn 1979). 
-(1985a) Speculum of the other Woman, trans. G. C. Gill, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University 
Press (1st French edn 1974). 
-(1985b) This Sex Which is not One, trans. C. Porter and C. Burke, Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press (rsr French edn 1977). 
-(1993) Sexes and Genealogies, New York: Columbia University Press. 
Jakobson, R. (1987) 'Marginal notes on the prose of the poet Pasternak', inK. Pomorska 
and S. Rudy (eds), Language and Literature, Cambridge, MA and London: Harvard 
University Press, pp. 301-18. 
Jung, C. G. (1972) Synchronicity: An Acausal Connecting Principle, London: Routledge & 
Kegan Paul (1st German edn 1952). 
Keller, E. R (1983) A Feeling for the Organism: The Life and Work of Barbara McClintock, 
New York: W. H. Freeman and Company. 
-(1985) Rejlet#ons on Gender and Sdence, New Haven, CT and London: Yale Uni­
versity Press. 
-(1989) 'The gender/science system: or, is sex to gender as narure is to science?', in 
N. Tuana (ed.), Feminism and Science, Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 
pp. 33-45· 
-(1992) Secrets of Life. Secrets of Death. Essays on Language, Gender and Science, New 
York London: Routledge. 
Keller, 0. (1887) Thiere des Classischen Alterthums in Culturgeschichtlicher Beziehung, 
Innsbruck: Verlag der Wagner'schen Universitiits-Buchhandlung. 
Kelley, K. W (ed.) (1988) The Home Planet, Reading, MA arid Moscow: Addison-Wesley 
and Mir Publishers. Bibliography 233 
Kellogg, W. N. (1961) Porpoises and Sonar, Chicago and London: University of Chicago 
Press. 
Kesarev, V. (1968) 'A chem dclfinu dumat?', Znanie-sila, No. 7: 22-4. 
-(1971) 'The inferior brain of the dolphin', Soviet Science Review, Vol. 2: 52-8. 
K.indersley, K. (undated) Eyes of the Soul, video trailer, KK. films (not for sale or broad-
cast). 
Konstantinov, B. (ed.) (1972) Naselen:nniy kosmos, Moscow: Nauka. 
Kopylova, T. and G. Yurkina (eds) (1962) Pioner iz Pionerov, Moscow: Molodaya 
Gvardiya. 
Koval, A. and L. Desinov (1987) Space Flights Serve Life on Earth, Moscow: Progress 
Publishers. 
Kraus,]. (1995) Big Ear Two: Listening for Other-Worlds, Ohio: Cygnus-Quasar Books. 
Kristeva, ]. (1g8o): Desire in Language: A Semiotic Approach to Literature and Art, trans. 
T. Gora, A. Jardine and L. S. Roudiez, New York: Columbia University Press (xsr 
French edns 1969 and 1977). 
-(1984) The Revolution in Poetic Language, trans. M. Waller, New York: Columbia 
University Press (1st French edn 1974). 
-(1986) The Kristeva Reader, ed. T. Moi, Oxford: Blackwell. 
-(1987) In the Beginning was Love: Psychoanalysis and Faith, trans. A. Goldhammer, 
New York: Columbia University Press (xst French edn I985). 
Kurrels,]. (1992) Astrology for the Age of Aquarius, London: Tiger Books International. 
Laan, N. v.d. (1997) 'Ukraine t::mins kamikaze dolphins to heal', The Electronic Telegraph, 
23 July '997· 
Laird, S. (1999) Voices of Russian Literature: Interviews with Ten Contemporary Writers, 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Latour, B. (1993) We have Never been Modern, New York and London: Harvester Wheat­
sheaf. 
Lebedev, L., B. Lykyanov and A. Romanov (eds) (1973) Sons of the Blue Planet (Syny 
Goluboi Planety), New Delhi: Amerind Publishing (Russian edn 1971). 
Le Guin, U. K. (1972) The Farthest Shore, New York: Atheneum. 
Lewis,]. R. and J. G. Melton (1992) Perspectives on the New Age, Albany: State University 
of New York Press. 
Lilly,]. C. (1962a) Man and Dolphin, London: Gollancz (1st edn 1961). 
-(1g6zb) 'K.ak ya nauchilsya govorit s moimi delfinami', Nauka i zhizn, No. 12: 82-6. 
-(x967) The Mind of the Dolphin: A Nonhuman Intelligence, New York: Doubleday. 
-(1973) The Centre of the Cyclone: An Autobiography of Inner Space, London: Calder 
& Boyars. 
-(1975) Lilly on Dolphins: Humans of the Sea, New York: Anchor Books. 
-(1978) Communication between Man and Dolphin: The Possibilities of Talking to Other 
Spec-ies, New York: Crown Publishers. 
-(1994) The Emerg:'ng Love of Man (5 Dolphin (ECCO), Silent Records CD, USA. 
Lovelock., J. (1987) Gaia: A New Look at Life on Earth, Oxford and New York: Oxford 
University Press (1st edn I979). 
Lukina, L. (1996) 'Results of using Afalina dolphins with a purpose of rehabilitation, 
social adaptation and medical treatment of children in the program called Dolphin 
Cosmodolphins 234 
Therapy', paper delivered at a symposium arranged by AquaThought: www. 
aquathought.com 
Lykke, N. (1997) 'To be a cyborg or a goddess?', Gender, Technology and Development, 
Vol. x, No.· 1: 5-22. 
Lykke, N. and R. Braidotti _{eds) (1996) Between Monsters, Goddesses and Cyborgs: Feminist 
Confrontations with Science, Medicine and Cyberspace, London: Zed Books. 
Mailer, N. (1971) A Fire on the Moon, London: Pan Books. 
Malmgren, C. D. (1991) Worlds Apart: Narratology of Science Fiction, Bloomington: 
Indiana University Press. 
Markley, R (1997) 'Falling into theory: simulation, terraformation, and ceo-economics 
in Kim Stanley Robinson's Martian Trilogy', Modern Fiction Studies, Technocriticism 
and f!ypernarrative, Vol. 43, No. 3: 773-99· 
Marx, G. (ed.) (1988) Bioastronomy: The Next Steps, Dordrecht, Boston and London: 
Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
McCaffrey, A. (1996) The Dolphins of Pern, London: Corgi (1st edn 1994). 
Mcintyre, J. (ed.) (1974) Mind in the Waters: A Book to Celebrate the Consciousness of 
Whales and Dolphins, San Francisco: Sierra Oub Books. 
Mcintyre, V. (1983) Superluminal, Boston, MD: Houghton Mifflin. 
Merchant, C. (198o) The Death of Nature: Women, Ecology, and the Scientific Revolution,. 
San Frnncisco: Harper & Row. 
Merle, R. (1969) The Day of the Dolphin, New York: Simon and Schuster (French edn 
1967). 
Mooney, T.. (1983) Easy Travel to Other Planets, London: Arrow Books. 
Morgan, J. H. and]. R:lgusa (1987) 'Women: a key work. force in preparation for space 
flight', in M. Cullen et al. ( eds), Book of Abstracts, Third International Interdisciplin­
ary Congress on Women, University of Dublin, Ireland, p. 433· 
Morrison, P. (1962) 'Interstellar communication', Bulletin of the Philosophical Soc£ety of 
Washington, Vol. 16: 58. Reproduced in D. Goldsmith (ed.), The Quest for Extra~ 
terrestn'al Life: A Book of Readings, Mill Valley, CA: University Science Books, 198o, 
pp. 122-31. 
Mowat, F. (1978) A Whale for the Killing, Toronto: Seal Books, McClelland- Bantam 
(znd edn). 
Nash, R. (1982) Wilderness and the American Mind, New Haven, CT and London: Yale 
University Press (3rd edn). 
Nyc, D. E. (1994) American Technological Sublime, Cambridge, MA, London: MIT Press. 
O'Barry, R. with K. Coulbourn (1988) Behind the Dolphin Smile, Chapel Hill, NC and 
Dallas: Algonquin Books. 
O'Barry, R. (1999) 'Why call it science?', www.dolphinproject.org/Rehab.html 
Oberg,]. E. (1981) New Earths: Transforming Other Planets for Hu:manity, New York: 
Stackpole Books. 
~·Ocean, J. (1997) Dolphins into the Future, Hawaii: Dolphin Connection. 
O'Neill, G. K. (1978) The High Frontier: Hu:man Colonies in Space, London: Corgi (rst 
edn 1976). · 
Ong, W.J. (1997) Orality 5 Literacy: The Technologizing of the Word, London and New 
York: Routledge (1st edn 1982). Bibliography 
Panov, E. N. (198o) Znaki Simvoly Yazyk£, Moscow: Znanie. 
Pelevin, V. (1992) 'Omon Ra', Znamya, No. 5: II-63. 235 
-(1992h996) Omon Ra, trans A. Bromfield, London :llld Boston: Faber & Faber. 
Penley, C. (1997) NASA/TREK: Popular Science and Sex in America, London :llld New 
York: Verso. 
Penley, C. and A. Ross (1991) Technoculture: Cultural Politics, Vol. 3, Minneapolis and 
Oxford: University of Minnesota Press. 
Piccard,J. and R. S. Dierz (1961) Seven Miles Down: The Story of the Bathyscape Tr£este, 
New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons. 
Plant, J. (ed.) (198<)) Healing the Wounds: The Promise of &ofeminism, Philadelphia and 
Santa Cruz: New Society Publishers. 
Plato (1973) The Timaeus of Plato, ed. R. D. Archer-Hind, New York: Arno Press. 
Plumwood, V. (1993) Feminism and the Mastery of Nature, London and New York: 
Routledge. 
Polevoi, B. (1970) A Story about a Real Man, London: Greenwood Publishing (1st Soviet 
Russian edn 1946). 
Popovich, P. R., E. E. Malakhovskaya and N. G. Polivin (eds) (1989) Kosmos- moya 
rabota, Moscow: Profizdat. 
Propp, V. (1975) Morphology of the Folktale, trans. L. Scott, Austin, TX: University of 
Texas Press (znd edn). 
Ragni, G. and J. Rado (1970) Hair: The American Tribal Love-rock Musical, New York: 
Pocket Books. 
Redfield, J. (1993) The Celestine Prophecy: An Adventure, New York: Warner Books. 
-(1996) The Tenth Insight: Holding the Vision. Further Adventures of the Celestine 
Prophecy, London: Bantam. 
-(1997) The Celestine Vtsion: Living the New Spiritual Awareness, London: Bantam. 
Redfield J. and C. Adrienne (1995) The Celestine Prophecy: An Experiential Guide, New 
York: Warner Books. 
Ridgway, S. (1987) The Dolphin Doctor: A Pioneering Veterinarian Remembers the Extra­
ord~·nary Dolphin that Inspired h£s Career, New York: Ballantine. 
Robertson, G., M. Mash, L. Tickner, J. Bird, B. Curtis and T. Putnam (eds) (1996) 
FutztreNatural: Nature, Science, Culture, Loridon and New York: Routledge. 
Romanyshyn, R. D. (1989) Technology as Symptom 5 Dream, London: Routledge. 
Rosenberg, A. (1984) Zeichen am Himmel: Das Weltbild der Astrologie, Munich: KOsel­
Verlag (xst edn 1949). 
Rosenthal, B. G. (ed.) (1997) The Occult in Russian and Soviet Culture, Ithaca, NY and 
London: Cornell University Press. 
Ross, A. (1991) Strange Weather: Culture, Science, and Technology in the Age of Limits, 
London and New York: Verso. 
Rudhyar, D. (1975) Occult Preparations for a New Age, Madras and London: Theosophical 
Publishing House. 
-(1991) The Astrology of Personality, Santa Fe, NM: Aurora Press (1st edn 1936). 
Rybakov; B. A. (1981) Yazychestvo drevnikh slavian, Moscow: Nauka. 
Rytkheu, Yu. (1977) 'When the whales leave', Soviet Literature, No. 12: 3-'73· 
Cosmodolphins 236 
Sagan, C. (ed.) (1973) Communication with Extraterrestrial Intelligence (CETI}, Cam-
bridge, MA and London: MIT Press. 
-(1975) The Cosmic Connection: An Extraterrestrial Perspective, New York: Dell Books. 
-(1995) Pale Blue Dot: A Vtsion of the Human Future in Space, London: Headline. 
-(1997) Contact, London: Orbit (1st edn 1985). 
Said, E. (1979) Orienta/ism, New York: Pantheon Books. 
Saint-Pierre, B. ].-H. de (1989) Paul and Virginia, trans. J. Donovan, London and New 
York: Penguin (1st French edn 1788). 
Saussure, F. de (1974) Course in General L£nguist£cs, ed. ]. Culler, trans. W. Baskin. 
London: Fontana. 
Savinych, V. P. (1983) Zemlya zhdet £ nadeetsya, Perm: Permskoe knizhnoe lzdatelstvo. 
Schi.ebinger, L. (1993) Nature's Body: Gender in the Making of Modern Science, Boston, 
MD: Beacon Press. 
Scholes, R. (1976) 'The roots of science fiction', in M. Rose (ed.) Science Fiction: A 
Collection of Critical Essays, Englewood Oiffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
Scholes, R. and E. S. Rabkin (1977) Science Fiction: History, Science, Vision, Oxford and 
New York: Oxford University Press. 
Schusterman, R. ]., J. A. Thomas and F. G. Wood (eds) (1986) Dolphin Cognition and 
Behavior: A Comparative Approach, Hillsdale, NJ and London: Lawrence Erlbaurn. 
Science (196o) 'Science in the news', Science, Vol. 131, No. 3413: 1592. 
Sebeok, T. A. (1972) Perspectives in Zoosemiotics, The Hague and Paris: Mouton. 
Shepard, A. and D. Slayton (1995) Moon Shot: The Insitie'Story of Americas's Race to the 
Moon, London: Virgin Books. 
Shklovsky, I. S. (1976) Vselennaya, Zhizn, Razum, Moscow: Nauka (rst edn 1962). 
-(1990) Theory of Prose, Elmwood Park, IL: Dalkey Archive Press (trans B. Sher from 
2nd Russian edn 1929). 
-(1991) Five Billt'on Vodka Bottles to the Moon, New York London: W. W. Norton & 
Company. 
Shklovsky, I. S. and C. Sagan (1968) Intelligent Life in the Universe, New York: Delta (1st 
edn r966). 
SjOO, M. (1992) New Age and Armageddon: The Goddess or the Gurus? Towards a Feminist 
Vision of the Future, London: The Women's Press. 
Sji:ii:i, M. and B. Mor (1987) The Great Cosmic Mother: Rediscovering the Religion of the 
Earth, San Francisco: Harper & Row. 
Slonczewski, J. (1986) A Door into Ocean, New York: Arbor House, 
Solomko, Yu. M. (1994) The Memorial Museum ofCosmonautics, Moscow: Aero-S. 
Spangler, D. and W. I. Thompson (1991) Reimagination of the World: A Critique of the 
New Age Science, and Popular Culture, Santa Fe, NM: Bear and Company. 
Spretnak, C. (1991) States of Grace: The Recovery of Meaning in the Postmodern Age, San 
Francisco: HarperSanFrancisco. 
Springer, H. (ed.) (1995) America and the Sea: A Literary History, Athens, OH and 
London: University of Georgia Press. 
Steels, L. and R. Brooks (eds) (1995) The Artificial Life Route to Artificial Intelligence: 
Building Embodied, Situated Agents, Hillsdale, NJ and Hove, UK: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
).. Stenuit, R. (r969) The Dolphin: Cousin to Man, Harmondsworth: Penguin. Bibliography 237 
Stetson, H. T. (1934) Earth Radio and the Stars, New York London: McGraw-Hill. 
Strathern, M. (1987) 'Out of context: the persuasive fictions of anthropology', Current 
Anthropology, Vol. 28, No. 3, June: 251-81. 
Sullivan, W. (1966) We are not Alone: The Search for Intelligent Life on Other Worlds, New 
York and London: McGraw-Hill (rev. edn). 
Sullivan, W. T., III (ed.) (1984) The Early Years of Radio htronomy, Cambridge: Cam­
bridge University Press. 
Suvin, D. (1979) Metamorphoses of Science Fiction: On the Poetics and History of a Literary 
Genre, New Haven, Cf and London: Yale University Press. 
Swift, D. W. (1990) SET! Pioneers: Scientists Talk about their Search for Extraterrestrial 
Intel~igence, Tucson and London: University of Arizona Press. 
Szilard, L. (1992) The Voice of the Dolphins and Other Stories, Stanford, CA: Stanford 
University Press (1st edn 1961). 
Tarasov, N. I. (1956) More zhivet, Moscow: Sovetskaya Nauka. 
-(1960) Zhivye zvu/...-t" morya, Moscow: Akademiya Nauk SSSR. 
Tavolga, W. N. and J. C. Steinberg (1961) 'Marine animal sounds', Science, Vol. 134, 
No.1: 288. 
Tomilin, A. G. (1965) Istoriya slepogo kachalota, Moscow: Nauka. 
-(1969) Delfiny sluzhat cheloveku, Moscow: Nauka. 
-(198o) V mire J..:itov i delfinov, Moscow: Znanie. 
Tovmasyan, G. M. (ed.) (1965) Vnezemnye Tsivilizatsii. Trudy Soveshschaniya Byurakan, 
2o-23 maia I964 g. Yerevan: Izd. Akademii Nauk Armyanskoj SSSR (English trans­
lation: Extraterrestrial Civilizations, Israel Programme for Scientific Translations, 
!PST r8z3, r967). 
Traweek, S. (1988) Beamtimes and Lifetimes: The World of High Energy Physics, Cam­
bridge, MA and London: Harvard University Press. 
Tsiolkovsky, K. E. (1954) Sobranie Sochinenii, Vol. 2, Moscow: Izdatelstvo Akademii 
Nauk SSSR. 
-(1962) The Call of the Cosmos, Moscow: Foreign Languages Publishing House. 
Turkle, S. (1984): The Second Self: Computers and the Human Spirit, London and New 
York: Granada. 
Turner, F. J. (1996) The Frontier in American History, New York: Dover Publications (1st 
edn 1920). 
Ulubekov, A. T (1984) Bogatstva vnezemnykh resursov, Moscow: Znanie. 
Ursul, A. D. (ed.) (1990) Osvoenie kosmosa i problemy ekologii, Kishinev: Shtiintsa. 
Vasilchikov, N. V. (1964) Podelis Neptun!, Moscow: Sovetskaya Rossiya. 
Von Beneke, M. ]. (1997) The Politics of Space: A History of US.-Soviet! Russian Com­
petition and Cooperation in Space, Boulder, CO and Oxford: WestView Press. 
Voronin, L. G. (1970) 'Povedenine "primat" morja-delfina afaliny Tursiops Trunchatus 
Montagu', Uspekhi sovremenno:' biologi~ vyp. 2: 191-207. 
Warren, K. J. (1990) 'The power and the promise of ecological feminism', Environmental 
Ethics, Vol. 12, No. 2: 125-46. 
WCED (World Commission on Environment and Development) (1987) Our Common 
Future (the Bruntland Report), Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press. 
White, F. (1987) The Overview Ejfoct: Space Exploration and Human Evolution, Boston, 
MD: Houghton Mifflin. 
Cosmodolphins 238 
Whitford, M. (1991) Luce lrigaray. Philosophy in the Feminine, London and New York: 
Routledge. 
Wilford, J. N. (1969) We Reach the Moon, the New York Times Story of Man's Greatest 
Adventure, New York and London: Bantam Books. 
Williams, H. (I988) Whale Nation, London: Jonathan Cape. 
Winterson,J. (Iggo) Boating for Beginners, London: Minerva (Ist edn 1985). 
Wolfe, T. (r988) The Right Stuff, Bantam Books (r7th edn). 
Wood, F. G. (1973) Marine Mammals and Man: The Navy's Porpoises and Sea Lions, 
Washington, DC and New York: Robert B. Luce. 
Wyschogrod, E. (I990) Saints and Postmodernism. Revisioning Moral Ph£/osophy, Chicago 
and London: University of Chicago Press. 
Yefremov, I. (I987) Zvezdnye korabli. Tumannost Andromedy, Moscow: Khudozhest­
vennaya literatura (rst edn 1957). 
Young, H., B. Silcock and P. Dunn (1969)]ourney to Tranquility: The History of Man's 
Assault on the Moon, London: Jonathan Cape. Index 
Adams, C.J., 32 
adventure stories, Io, II, 72, 76-8, Ioo, 
122; analysis of, 56-8 
Age of Aquarius, I7, 59, ISO 
Aimatov, Chingiz, Tavro Kassandry, 169 
Aldrin, Edwin E., I 18 
Aldrin, Edwin E. Sr., I2I 
Alpers, A., I70 
amazement, 5o-7I, 69; cultural, 23 
Amaz£ng Stories, 44 · 
American Wilderness Society, So 
animals, as feminist issue, 32-3 
Aphrodite, as dolphin goddess, r85 
Apollo, 64; portrayed as riding dolphin, 
r8s-6,r97 
Apollo II, 54, 65, 115, nS 
Apollo 13, IIIj disaster, I6 
Apollo IJ, 78 
Apollo Project, 78, 87, I97; women's 
involvement in, 74 
Armstrong, Neil, I IS 
Arrhenius, Svante, I04; Worlds in the 
Making, 103 
Askold, a Russian flight technician, 
129, I35-6 
astrologers, interviews with, I22-3S 
astrology, 28, 35, 58, 5g-6o, I22-38; 
and gender, I3o-6; as icriture 
ftm£nine, qo-t; attitude of 
conventional science to, I32; 
attraction for women, I3o-6; 
cyclicity of, I so; different uses of, 
I39; femininity of, 132; place of 
men in, I34; place of women in, 
I33-4; traditional patriarchy of, 132 
astronauts, 41, 45, 53. 54-5, s6, 84, 88, 
98, I08, I28, I35, 2I6; as soldier heroes, 54. sS, I I 8; women as, 89, 
90, III-I3 
atheism, 28, 83, I25 
Baikonur launch site, 4I; construction 
of, 99 
Bailey, Alice, 151 
Bakhtin, Mikhail, 23, 143, 148-51 
Barnes, R., I67 
Barr, Marlene, 40 
Bateson, George, 20I 
Belkovich, V., 205 
Berry, P., 38 
'big mission' of space flight, 72-91, 95; 
devotion to, 73-6 
bio-power, 92, 93-6, II5-I6, 14o; 
cosmic, 99-IOO 
Birke, L., 28, 32, 33, 37 
Bitov, Andrey, I25-6, 170 
Blavatskaya, Helena, I 51 
Bracewell, R.N., I95 
Brecht, Bertolt, so, 5I 
Erin, David, Startide Ris£ng, 68 
Brundtland Report, 20 
Cadigan, Pat, Synners, 170 
Calvin, Melvin, I96 
Campbell,]., 6r 
Capra, Fritjof, 63 
carnivalesque, spirit of, I2, 18, 23, 217, 
218, 2I9, 22o-2 
Carpenter, Scott, I I 1; et al., We Seven, 
I09 
Cassirer, Ernst, 143, I45-8, 154. 156 
Cathy, an American astrologer, I3 I 
Celestine messages, 51)-61 
Challenger disaster, 85 
Cosmodolphins 
chora, concept of, I 56 
Chukchi people, 208, 209 
Cixous, Helene, 37, 39, qo, I4I, I 53 
Clarke, Arthur C., I or; The Deep 
Range, I 66, I 67 
Clynes, Manfred, 3 I 
Cocconi, Giuseppe, I76 
coincidences, I23j meaningful, sg-6I 
Cold War, 85, I6o, I7I, I87, I88 
colonialism, 2I5; in space, 93 
Columbus, Christopher, 76-7, 8I, 93 
commons, global, I<)-2I, 7I, 95, I6I-4; 
imprinted with human meaning, 7I 
Communication Research Institute, 48, 
189, I9o, Igz, I99 
Communication with Extra Terrestrial 
Intelligence (CETI), 176, 177 
contiguities, inappropriate, I7, 24, 
2I5-26 
correspondences, theory of, 143 
cosmic exodus, 85 
cosmic flashes, Izo 
cosmodolphins, message of, rsg-6r 
cosmology: gendering of, r8; need for, 
34---{; 
cosmonauts see astronauts 
cosmos: as 'deserts of space', g8, IOOj 
as commons, I<)-2Ij as living body, 
143-4, 145; as mother body, r48--5r; 
as Mother Goddess, 136, 139, 142; 
boundary with human body, I55i 
interconnectedness with, 137; 
perceived as noisy, 172-5; refiguring 
of, 222--6; viewed as enigma, 8 I -3 
Cousteau, J.Y., r67 
Coward, R., 38 
Coyote, as trickster, 37 
cradle-image of Earth, 107 
Crick, Francis, rr6; Life Itself, I05 
critical distance, 6g 
cultural studies, scope of, 4o-2 see also 
feminist cultural studies 
Cyber-Godfather, r6, 17, rg, IOI--2, 
103, I04, I05, 107, u6, 139. I 59. 
rg8, 199, zog, 2I r, 218, 222 
cybergods, 1041 I 14, 1221 151, I77 
cyborgs, 6, 34. 36, ss,.6g, 92, IOI, 106, 
IIJ-I5, 170, 224; concept of, 3o-2; 
dolphins as, rgr-4, 194-7 see also 
dolphins as cyborgs Dana, Bill, r ro 
Debbie, a Space Camp teacher, go 
Defoe, Daniel, Robinson Crusoe, 57 
Delphi, oracle at, 64, I85, rg7 
delphys, r85; meaning of, I 
demographic problems of space 
expansion, So 
Denmark,27 
Derrida, Jacques, r8 
desire in language, 141, 142, 153-7 
Discovery space shuttle, 27 
DNA, discovery of, u6 240 
dolphins, 14-Ig, z6, 33. 51, 66, 68, 
I5g-6r; ambiguities of, !84-6 
(sexual, rgB--9); appearance in 
advertisements, r8, 21 r; as 
boundary figures, r 68; as cyborgs, 
sz, 63-4, 67, 191-4, 194-7; as 
healers, r6g; as icons, 13, z3, 28, 41, 
44-9, 52, 63, I83-2I3, zzs; as jester, 
225; as mines, r8o; as minesweepers, 
r8r; as noble savages, 5z, 63-4, r68, 
170, 202, 206, zag, 2ro; connotation 
of femininity, rgz; 
'grandmammification' of, 205j 
inferiority of brains, 203; 
intelligence of, I3 (superior, rg8, 
206); linguistic abilities of, 49, 65, 
168-71, I92, rg5, zoo; longing to 
merge with, 64; mapping of brain 
of, 48; masturbating of, zoo; 
mythology of, 8; polysemy of sexual 
appearance o~ r84-5; protection o~ 
203; research into brains of, rgi-4; 
sacralization of, 206; sonar abilities 
of, 186; within circulating meanings, 
zog-r2 
Doris, Noah's charwoman, 2I8-rg 
Dr B, a Nasa doctor, 77, 78, 79 
Drake, Frank, 195, 196 
dyadic mother/child relationship, 3, 
136---?, qg, I 53, 199 
Dyson, Freeman, Disturbing the 
Universe, g6 
Earth Dolphins picture see McCulloch, 
Daniel 
Earth: as blue planet, 14, ro8, rog; as 
radio star, 174; as spaceship, 54; as 
womb, Io8; recreation of, 96, ro8; 
viewed from space, 2, 95 Index 
Earth Mother, 2, 3, 5, 4. 14. r6, rag, 
III, I27, 136, 151 
icriturefeminine, 14o-I, 142, 143, 153-7 
Eden, Garden of, 64, 65, 96 
Eisenhower, "Dwight D., Christmas 
speech, roo 
elsewhere, II, 50, 51, 56, 571 62, 86, 93, 
I 52; quest for, 7. 8, r6 
Enlightenment, 8, rz, 22, 38, 58, 139, 
r6g, 224 
estrangement, SD--7I 
European Particle Research Laboratory 
(CERN),35 
extraterrestrialism, 39-40, so, 69, 8z, 
176 
fable, 53; concept of, 51 
Fairchild, H.N., 66 
fairy tales, theory of, 57, 6r 
Farida, a Russian astrologer, 129, 130, 
133, I34. 137 
father sky, refiguring of, r 59-7g 
female body, speaking of, I 53-5 
female divine, 3g, 22o-2, Z24; 
reclaiming of, I 56-7 
feminine libidinal economy, r 56 
feminine principle, 132 
femininity, 131, 133, 136 
feminism, g, 27, 36---7, 39-40, 132, 133, 
154; and cosmology, 34-6; animals 
and, 32-3; attitude to space flight, 
ro; eco-, zg, 30, 34; liberal, I r; 
spiritua~ 17, 36 
feminist cultural studies, 25, 28-30 
feminist fabulation, 40 
feminist science fiction, 34 
feminist science history, 34 
feminist science studies, 30, 32 
feminization of poverty, 9 
Feuerbach, Ludwig, 157, 219 
Flipper, r87, r88, 200 
Foucault, Michel, zi; analysis of 
power, g2, 93-6, rog, II5 
Freudenthal, H., 176 
frontier, myth of, 78, So, roo (of Soviet 
Union, g3; of Wild West, 93) 
Gaard, G., 3Z 
gadget-fetishism, r6 
Gagarin, Yuri, 13, 55, 75, 77, So, III, 
197 Gaia, 2, 14, 16, 24 
'garbage' hypothesis, 104 
Gareev, Zufar, 144; The Allergy of 
Aleksandr Petrovich, I 52 
gender reversals, 17 
gender I nature nexus, 28 
Genesis, new, 103-6 
genetic code, universality of, 105 
George, Demetra, 144, I 52-3 
Gernsback, Hugo, 44 241 
Gibson, William, Johnny Mnemonic, 68 
Gimbuta, Marija, 132 
Glenn, John, 13 
God: Christian, 4. r6, 35, 93, xor, 13g, 
2r8, 220, 2Zij the Father, ro6, rss. 
157, 163, zzo see also Cyber­
Godfather 
goddess worship, 36, 37, 63 
Goodall, Jane, zoo 
GOttner-Abendroth, H., 61 
gravity, 107, ro8; escape from, ro6 
Great Cosrriic Mother, 39, 15I-3, 154, 
t57,.159, r85, 2r8, 221 
Great Goddess, 132 
Great Year, 150, 158 
Green, Martin, 57-8, r r 5 
Greene, Liz, 143-4; The Astrology of 
Fate, 144-5 
Greenpeace, zo6, zo7 
Gregory, an American astrologer, 124, 
129, 130 
Griffin, Donald, 190 
Grimwood, Ken, Into the Deep, 64-5, 
r68 
grotesque, 154; images of, 148 
Gunn, J.E., The Listeners, 177 
Haraway, Donna, zS, 30, 31, 33, 34. 36, 
37, 3g; cyborg manifesto, 6g 
Hastrup, Kirsten, 6g 
Haun, Jeffrey, r82 
Heidegger, Martin, 4, 5 
Heinlein, Robert, Parmer in the Sky, g2 
Heller, Renee, 35 
Herman, Louis M., r 89 
Hess, DJ., 38 
homo spaciens, 53. 56, 74 
horoscopes, 14-rg; as icon, 13, 17, 28, 
41, 44-9, 52, 63, 70, reading of, 129, 
130, 145. 146, I 50 
Cosmodolphins 
Howe, Margaret, 2oo-r, 210 
human body: as machine, 94, rog--r3; 
of astronauts, monitoring of, r 14, 
ns; redesign of; 31; speech of, II4 
human, the, 3o-2 
human-nature axis, 3o-2 
Hunter, Robert, 207 
imaginary, 21; concept of; S 
imprinting with cosmic meaning, 
I26--30 
Institute of Cosmic Research (IKI), 42, 
n, SI, S2, I2S; interviews with 
employees, 72--9I; male domination 
0~ 89 
Interdisciplinary Congress on Women, 
9 
International Space Station, 53 
intuition, 13 I 
Irene, a Kennedy Space Center doctor, 
75-6,79 
Irigaray, Luce, 37-8, 39, 140, I4I, 142, 
153 
Jimenez, Jose, no-n, 2I7 
Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, 
44,45 
jouissance, 37, I 55 
Jung, C.G., 6I, I-44, 146 
Keller, Evelyn Fox, 30, 32, 36, IIS-I6 
Kennedy Space Center see NASA 
Kindersley, Kim, Eyes of the Soul, 
207--9 
Kleinenberg, S., 205 
Kline, Nathan, 3I 
know, to, S4-7 
know-how, to, S4--'7 
Korolev, Sergei P., 41 
Kristeva, Julia, 37, 39, 140, 141, 142, 
'53 
Laan, N., rSr 
Lai~ the dog, roo, 217 
Latour, B., 2S 
Le Guin, Ursula, r 67 
Leary, Timothy, 107 
Lederberg, J., 104 
Leonov, A., r 13 
Leopold, Aida, So 242 
Lilly, John C., 48-<), 65, 68, r64, IS6, 
rS9-94, 191, 196, 198--zor, 203; 
experiments on dolphins, I9I-~ 
Man and Dolphin, 4S, rS9 
lingua ·cosmica (Lincos), 176-7 
Lizzie the dolphin, 4~ 
Logos Spermatikos, r 5 I 
Lovell, Jim, 4., 8 
Lovelock, James, 24 
Lukina, Ludmilla, 180 
magic helpers, 55, 6o 
Mailer, Norman, us, I20 
male genius, myth of, 35 
A Man on the Moon, I II 
Manhattan Project, IS7, I95 
Marianas Trench, descent in, 2I 
Martians, I02 
Marxism-Leninism, 139, I70, 2I7 
masculine hero, S7-9I 
masculinity, 54-t s6-8, 6z, 72 
:Matyshovna, Svetlana, ISo, ISI 
McAuliffe, Christa, r 5 
McCaffrey, Anne, The Dolphins of Pern, 
68 
McCall, Robert, Washington mural, 
54-5, 56, 57 
McOintock, Barbara, 37 
McCulloch, Daniel, I -8, 14; Earth 
Dolphins picture, I --8, I4t 64, 71, 
I09, 2IO 
Mcintyre, Vonda, Superluminal, I 5, 
2I6,222 
mechanical men, IIo-II 
Memorial Museum of Cosmonautics, 
Moscow, 55 
menfish, relationship with sea, I67 
menstruation, I 52 
Merchant, Carolyn, zS, 34, 36, 143, 
148-51 
methodology, z6 
Metzner, Ralph, 202 
Mikhail, a Russian astrologer, I23-4. 
I26, I33, I34-s 
Mir, 53 
Moon, ZI, 27, I2S; as female body, n9; 
as symbol in astrology, I34; dark, 
152-3, I54; dark side of, n8--zi; 
imprinting o~ S~ landing on, 74, 
75, 76, 7S, S7, IoS; mining of, So; oedipal relationship with, 120; 
planting of flags on, S~ power of; 
135; reconnecting with, 45; rock 
samples, 44-5; symbolic in New 
Age astrology, 127 
Moon,Mxrion, r2r 
Mooney, Ted, I67; Easy Travel to Other 
Planets, I8g 
Morgan, JoAnn, 9, IO, 74, 79, S4-6, SS 
Morrison, Philip, 176, I95 
mother sea, refiguring of, I 59--'79 
mother-images, I44 
Mowat, Farley, 65-6; A Whale for the 
Killing, 65 
Munde, Mrs, 22o-I 
mysterious,.view of cosmos, Sr-3 
mysticism, S2 
mythical semiosis, I43, I45, I46, 147 
NASA, 2, 3, 6, 7, 9, 24, 6S, 74, 7S, So, 
8z,S5, III, I27, I9~Anrican­
Americans in, 75; as allegedly civil 
organization, 73; Astronauts' 
Memorial, 53; attitude to sexuality, 
I2; criticism of, Iz; interviews with 
employeeS,.J4, 72--9Ij involvement 
with military, 9; Kennedy Space 
Center, II, 7S, I07; mask of 
openness, 4I; Mission to Planet 
Earth, 95; rational outlook of 
interviewees, S3; sla11 at contruction 
of imageries, 8I; women employed 
at, 7 5, SS, S9 
National Air and Space Museum, 
Washington DC, 54 
National Oceanographic Institute of 
Ukraine, ISo 
national parks, underwater, I9 
native, as icon, 7, S, IS 
nature, 30; as icon, 7, IS; as primal 
mother, 37; death of, 36; in feminist 
cultural studies, 28--3o; return to, 
22, 66; sublime and sacred, 7 
naturism, 33; concept of, S (coinage of, 
29) 
New Age, 7, I3, 14, r6, 17, 25, 2S, 36, 
3S, 39, 46, 49, SI, s8-<), S3, I22-3S, 
I3g--s8, 159, ISI, IS3, 207, 209, 
2n; master narrative, S, IS, 6r-3, 
I40, I 52, I6o, 2IO Nikolai, an IKI astrophysicist, 75, So, 
86 
Noah, 218--19, 220 
noble savage, 52, 66 see also dolphin, as 
noble savage 
novum, 67' 92; space fable as, s6 
O'Barry, Rick, IS2 
ocean: as commons, I9-2I; as deep 
frontier, 2I, 26; as pastoral source, 
I66-8; as wilderness, for recreation, 
I67; farming of; I6~ military 
expansion in, I6~ mining of, 164 
Ocean, Joan, I6o-I, 21o-I2; Dolph£ns 
Into the Future, ZIO 
Olga, a radio engineer.at IKI, 77, 7S 
O'Neill, Gerard, The High Frontier, 79, 
107 
Ong, W.J., x6I-2, I64, 172 
Opo, the 'gay dolphin', 170 
orality, I6I-z; primary, I6I, I69, 199; 
secondary, I6I, I6z, I64, I65, I72, 
I7J, I75, I99 
Order of the Dolphin, I96 
Orgel, L., I05 
Others, 2I, 25; dialogue with, 2IS; 
treatment of; zg; wild, 32, 48, 7I see 
also elsewhere 
out of the cradle, notion of, Io6--g 
Pamela dolphin, 200 
panspermia, I03-6, II6, I5Ij directed, 
105 
parkr-fennne, I4I, IS3-7 
patriarchy, 40, 63, S9, I3I, I34, I 52 
Pavlov, Ivan, 203, 205 
Pelevin, Victor, Omon Ra, IS, 41, 
2I6-IS, 222 
Penley, Constance, I3, 34; NASA! 
TREK, I2 
Peter Dolphin, zoo, 2IO 
Petr, a Russian doctor, 12S, I33-4, I35, 
'37 
phallagocentrism, 35, 36, 39, 57, 6z, 63, 
69, I03, Io6, n6, I42, 151-3, I85, 
2I9; subverting of, ISS 
-Piccard,Jacques, 21, I65 
pioneering spirit, 79 
Pioneers organization, 77 
Plato, IS6 
Cosmodolphins 
Plumwood, Val, 29 
Plut~ 145, 146, I47 
pollution of space, I9 
population policies, 94 
post-human, 3o-2, 69, II3-I5 
poststructuralism, 37, 38 
potency, 58 
potestas, 58 
Propp, Vladimir, 57, 6I 
Pushkin, 27 
quasars, I 7 5 
questing hero, fairy tale of, 57, 73, I23 
racism, 97 
radio waves of the universe, .r63 
Ralph, a New Age philosopher, I3I, 
132 
ratio, cult of, 17 
reading out of context, 39, so, 69-71 
Reagan, Ronald, I r 
Redfield, James: The Celestine Prophecy, 
59-6I; The Celest£ne Vis£on, 6o; The 
Tenth Insight, 6o 
religion, revival of interest in, 38 
Renaissance, 21, 34, 76 
Return to Earth, n8 
reversals, world of, 6I-3 
Rick, a New Age philosopher, 127, I32 
'right stuff' masculinity, 87-8, go, g8, 
r 13, 217; in the Soviet Union, 88 
robots, no 
rockets: aesthetics of, q.; as icon, I 88 
Rodin, Auguste, Thinker, 35 
Romanticism, 2, ro, 22, 66 
Ross, a NASA ecobiologist, So, 82, 84 
Ross, A., 38 
Rousseau, J.J., 22 
Rudhyar, Dane, 125, 143-4. I48-5r, 
152 
Rybakov, B.A., I33 
Rytkheu, Yuri, When the -Whales Leave, 
65,208 
sacred, 34. 37; reordering of, 93 
Sagan, Carl, 83, 102, zor; Contact, 
!73-4 
Said, Edward, 96 
de Saint-Pierre, Bernard, Paul et 
Virgin£e, 66 
satellites, roo-r, 102 Saturn V rocket, I I 
de Saussure, Ferdinand, I40 
Savchenko, Nikolai, I8o 
Save the Whale campaigns, 207 
Schiebinger, L., 28 
Scholes, Robert, 40, so-I, 69 
science: as story-telling, 39; objectifying 
gaze of, 5, 6 
science fiction, 35, 40, so, 52, 62, 67 
Sea of Tranquillity, I o8, r I 8 
sea, refiguring of, 222-6 see also ocean 
secularism, 8, 34, r r 6, I39 
Sergei, a student at IKI, 76, 82 
sexism, 97, III 
sexual difference theory, 34 
Shamu, the killer whale, 190, 214 
Shannon, a computer science engineer 
at Nasa, 76, 79 
Shepard, AI, Io8, I ro 
Shklovsky, I., 175, I.S., I02, 196 
SjOO, Monica, rsz; and B.·Mor, The 
Great Cosm£c Mother, 152 
slash-writing, 12, 23 
space: as high frontier, 20, 2I, 26, 
78-8o; as panopticon, roo, Io8, 109; 
conquest of, 46, 53; humanization 
of, 103; imbued with sounds, r6I-4; 
impenetrability of, 20; inner, 24; 
messages from, 175-8; mining of, 
171 
Space Camp, Kennedy Space Center, 90 
space flight, 3, 8, 13, 35, 127; 
celebration of, 94.; critical inquiry 
of, n; feminist attitude to, Io; in 
feminist cultural studies 
perspective, 34.; masculine 
subculture of, 27; master narrative 
of, rz, IS, r6, 53, 6z, 72, 122, 215 
(in USSR, zrfr-17) 
space race, r o-I I 
space-off perspective, 3 
spaceship, as icon, I4-I9, 28, 4I, 44--9, 
52., 63, 70 
Spiritual Alliance, I 6o 
spirituality, 28, 32, 36-7, 38, 39, 83, Io6 
Sputnik, 75, So, 82, 83, 85, roo, I02, 
175, I88, 197 
Star Wars, I I 
Stephanie, an American astrologer, 124, 
126---;, I37 IDUUX 
Stephens, Holly DeNio, 133 
story-telling, 39-40 
Struve, Otto, 174 
Suvin, Darko, so-r, 56, 62, 69, 70 
Sveta, a Russian astrologer, 128 
swimming with dolphins, 27, r8o-I, 
210, 2I I 
synchronicity, concept of, I46 
Szilard, Leo, 'The Voice of the 
Dolphins', I87 
Tavolga, William, r89-9o 
technoscientifi.c Venture, 15, I~ 211 281 
29, 54, 84, 85, 86 
Tereshkova, Valentina, 88, I II-I3, 2I7; 
wedding of; II3 
terraforming, 24, 85, 86, 92-II7 
toadfish, communication of, 165-6 
Tomilin, A. G., Dolphins Serve Man, 
204 
trickster, figure of, 192, 225 
Tsiolkovsky, Konstantin, 8, ro6, 128 
Turner, Frederick J., 79 · 
UFOs, I6o; stories about, 82 
Ukraine, dolphin research centre, r8o 
Ulubekov, A.T., Io8 
uncontrollability, r 5 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 
(USSR): 1917 Revolution, 97; 
collapse of, 42, 46, 8r, r8o 
Universal Feminine, 62, 63 
Universal Man, 31 
Universe, as incomprehensible, 82 
uplift, 68--g 
Ursul, A.D., 96 
Utopia, 8, 22; feminist, 222 
Vasiliev, Dr, 82, 89 
VDNKh exhibition park, 46, 55 
Venus, 104 Vera, a Russian astrologer, 46-7, I25, 
126, I36 
Verne, Jules, ro 
Victoria, an American astrologer, IJO 
Victoria, an IKI mathematician, 82-3 
virility, 55 
Vostock space ship, 27 
Walsh, Don, 2I 
Warren, Karen, 29 
weightlessness, I 13; and gender, 88 
Weird Tales, 44 
Wernick, A., 38 
wet live-in with dolphins, 197-2oi, 210 
Whale Nation, 202 
whales, I8, 33, 66 
Where All Roads Into Space Begin, g6 
White Desert Sun, 96--9 
wilderness, 19, 20, 21-3,40, 78, 79, 87; 
as symbol, 98; as topos, 27; 
reinvention of, 23 
wildness, r8r, 194; of nature, 7; 
reintroduction of dolphins, I82 
will, to, 84-7 
Winterson, Jeanette, Boat£ngfor 
Beg£nners, 15, 2I6, 218-19, 22o-2 
Wolfe, Tom, 87 
woman, as icon, 7, 8, 15, r8 
woman/nature relationship, 19, 28, 29, 
I33, 135, 136, 163, 206, 215, 222 
women: exiled from divine space, r 57; 
role of, in myth, 13 I 
World Commission on Environment 
and Development (WCED), 20, 94 
worship, desire for, 21-3 
Yablokov, Aleksei, 205 
Yefremov, I., The Andromeda Nebula, I74 
Zhanna, an IKI engineer, 8z, 84 
Zodiac, 59. I47. 149. 150, I5I, 220 
