Peter Gendolla, Jörgen Schäfer (eds.)
The Aesthetics of Net Literature
The series “Medienumbrüche | Media Upheavals” is edited
by Peter Gendolla.
               
Peter Gendolla, Jörgen Schäfer (eds.)
The Aesthetics of Net Literature
Writing, Reading and Playing inProgrammable Media
               
Medienumbrüche | Media Upheavals | Volume 16
The Collaborative Research Center 615 at the University of Siegen with
funding by the Deutsche F orschungsgemeinschaft (German Research
Foundation) produced this book.
               
Bibliographic information published by Die Deutsche BibliothekDie Deutsche Bibliothek lists this publication in the Deutsche National-bibliografie; detailed bibliographic data are available in the Internet athttp://dnb.ddb.de
© 2007 transcript Ve rlag, Bielefeld
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced
or utilized in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means,now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording,or in any information storage or retrieval system, without permission inwriting from the publisher.
Cover by: Kordula Röckenhau s, Bielefeld; Maik Pluschke,
modulbüro, Siegen
Layout & T ypeset by: Maik Pluschke, modulbüro, Siegen
Printed by: Majuskel Medienproduktion GmbH, We tzlar
ISBN 978-3-89942-493-5
Distributed in North America by:
Transaction Publishers Tel.: (732) 445-2280
Rutgers University Fax: (732) 445-3138
35 Berrue Circle for orders (U.S. only):Piscataway, NJ 08854 toll free 888-999-6778
Contents
Preface ....................................................................................................................... ....9
Approaches and T erminologies
Peter Gendolla and Jörgen Schäfer
Playing With SignsTowards an Aesthetic Theory of  Net Literature ..................................................17
Roberto Simanowski
Holopoetry, Biopoetry and Digital LiteratureClose Reading and Terminological Debates ..........................................................43
Frank Furtwängler
Human PracticeHow the Problem of  Ergodicity Demands a Reactivation of  Anthropological Perspectives in Game Studies ...............................................67
Philippe Bootz
The Problem of  FormTransitoire Observable,  a Laboratory for Emergent Programmed Art .................89
Typologies, Histories, and Case Studies
Mela KocherThe Ludoliterary CircleAnalysis and Typology of  Digital Games ............................................................107
Jörgen Schäfer
Gutenberg Galaxy Revis(it)ed A Brief  History of  Combinatory, Hypertextual and Collaborative Literature from the Baroque Period to the Present ...........................................121
Friedrich W . Block
Humor — Technology — Gender
Digital Language Art and Diabolic Poetics (2004) .............................................161
Playable Literature
Markku Eskelinen
Six Problems in Search of  a SolutionThe Challenge of  Cybertext Theory and Ludology to Literary Theory .........179
Noah Wardrip-Fruin
Playable Media and Textual Instruments .....................................................211
Stories and Games
Marie-Laure RyanNarrative and the Split Condition of  Digital Textuality ...........................257
Fotis Jannidis
Event-Sequences, Plots and Narration in Computer Games ...................281
Writing and Programming
Jean-Pierre BalpePrinciples and Processes of  Generative LiteratureQuestions to Literature ...........................................................................................309
Loss Pequeño Glazier
Code, Cod, OdePoetic Language & Programming or Pequeño Lector/Klein Leser: Es gibt (See)lachs ﬁ let? ............................................................................................319
Practical Examples
Laura Borràs CastanyerE-Learning and Literary StudiesTowards a New Culture of  Teaching? ..................................................................333
Susanne Berkenheger 
i’m dying, honeydramatized proceedings from super-space (2004) ..............................................355
Thomas Kamphusmann
Another ABCA Model for “Augmented Business Communication” ......................................367
Contributors .............................................................................................................385
 
9Preface
In this volume we are dealing with ruptures and upheavals in literary communi-
cation through computerized networked media. As a result of  the programmed manipulations of  signs and the networking of  computers and their users forms of  literature have developed that can only be described as results of  feedback processes between man and machine. No longer can we de ﬁ ne computer nets 
as mere channels for messages generated by more or less brilliant creators. Un-like processes of  linguistic signs in print media with their comparably stabilized textual meanings computers can process signi ﬁ ers according to programmed in-
structions that cannot be controlled any longer in a universal way by “authors,” “lectors,” or “readers.” We therefore have to ask in which of  these literature projects indeed a new, a different literary quality is developing. The question will 
be in what way the fundamental openness of  networked communications can be successfully amalgamated with the aesthetic demands of  closure, perfection or coherence of  literary creations as they at one point were formulated for works that were written by hand or that were printed so that after their publication any change of  the signifying chains was excluded. 
The contributions of  this volume are grouped around this question begin-
ning with terminological and conceptual questions discussing terms like “digital literature,” “net literature,” “ergodic literature,” or “hyper ﬁ ction.” Peter Gendolla 
and Jörgen Schäfer are trying to argue why we should talk of  “net literature” re-
garding the above-mentioned literary communications and where in this case the speci ﬁ c cognitive interest might lie. The term is focusing on the decisive 
difference to traditional literary texts that lies in the recursive processes be-tween humans and machines. Consequently we have to look at the non-hierarchi-
cal exchange-processes between all participating elements ⎯between “authors,” 
“works,” and “readers” ⎯in the analysis of  literary processes in computer nets. 
Not only individual roles of  activities in the literary system are redistributed here; we also experience characteristic hybridizations encompassing the whole system: In many cases we cannot decide without doubt which textual elements can be attributed to the intentions of  an “author,” to calculations of  a computer or to the (re-)actions of  a “reader.”
Additionally, Gendolla and Schäfer are discussing the question in what way 
the speci ﬁ c aesthetic  difference characterizing literature in traditional print-media 
as “language art” can be also identiﬁ  ed under the current altered medial con-
ditions. Their proposal maintains that literature, in the sense of  “networked” 
10Preface
trial-activities, can aesthetically re ﬂ ect the far-reaching (man-machine-)commu-
nications that occur in networked computer systems, thereby making invisible 
processes visible and communicable. For it seems that only in current com-puter-aided and networked media literary forms emerge that cannot any longer be described adequately as aesthetic re-internalizations of  perceptions since in networked processes these are immediately followed by externalization into ac-tivities of  the recipient.
Conversely, Roberto Simanowski favors the term “digital literature” on the 
grounds of  a mediatechnological  concept of  “digitality,” thereby differing from 
the concerns of  Gendolla and Schäfer. His considerations are centered on the question of  the genuineness and relevance of  “digital” media for “literary texts.” With this Simanowski not only is reaching out for a widening of  the traditional hermeneutical approach in literary studies trying to interpret the meaning of  signs. He rather is looking for a hermeneutics of  intermedial, interactive and per-formative signs that also considers the meaning of  the “behavior” of  the sign on 
the screen as in the intermedial connections of  words with visual signs or as re-actions to the activities of  readers, machines, or ⎯as in “biopoetry”⎯bacteria.
Frank Furtwängler  is dealing with one of  the subjects with the most theo-
retical impact concerning our topic: the idea of  “ergodic” literature that Espen Aarseth has developed in his publication Cybertext: Perspectives on Ergodic Literature  
as well as in numerous essays on literature in computer-aided media and lately especially regarding computer games. To be precise, Furtwängler here is criti-cizing the misleading adaptation of  the “ergodicity”-concept into literary and game studies through which Aarseth wanted to re-determine the function of  the recipient of  “cybertexts” on the grounds of  a changed materiality of  the medium. This concept is derived from physics and there precisely characterizes the unpredictability  of  random processes. In computer games, however, consisting 
of  scripted sequences and similarly non-chaotic structures the attentiveness of  the player is directed to a high degree by the technical system. The adaptation of  the theory of  ergodicity, according to Furtwängler, therefore would only make sense if  we were talking about leaving the player out of  the system altogether. Conversely, he is advising game studies to model itself  on the concepts of  liter-ary anthropology as developed for instance by Wolfgang Iser. 
Philippe Bootz, by introducing an elaborate procedural model of  literary 
communication between man and machine, also aims into that direction. He is discussing literary forms as processes of  programming aesthetic rules that are independent of  the surface aesthetics of  the screen. In this model, writing and reading are two functions within a system: Authors and readers produce mental representations that he calls texte-écrit  (text-as-written) and texte-lu (text-
as-read). Between these cognitive processes, however, an “author”-, a “text”- 
11Preface
and a “reader”-domain is placed so that a procedural text can only be explained 
as the working together of  three functions or processes: The author creates a texte-auteur (author-text) to which everything belongs which he has encoded in a signiﬁ  cant form. He therefore can control the structure of  the text but not all 
parameters of  execution like the varieties of  “programming” or reader activi-ties. This transformed notion of  the text therefore does not only encompass the texte-auteur but also the autonomous technological processes. The reader, on his end, observes a texte-à-voir (text-to-be-seen), i.e. a temporary, multimedial status 
that is bound to time and space and that includes the interface.
Mela Kocher  attempts to structure the range of literature in computer-aided 
media. She introduces a “ludoliterary circle” that is able to cover similarities as well as differences between adventure games, hyper ﬁ ctions, interactive mov-
ies, society simulations, cyberdrama and role-playing games by means of the parameters interactivity, perspective and narrative mode.
The fact that all these novel literary forms can in no way be contemplated 
without a long literary tradition or concrete historical predecessors is substan-tiated by Jörgen Schäfer wi th  n um e r o u s  e xam p l e s  o f  c o m b ina t o rial,  h yp e rt e x -
tual and collaborative texts from German literary history since baroque times. Therewith he is providing us with a historical basis in order to work out the common features and differences that with computers have entered literary texts.
Friedrich W. Block  is describing comical and diabolical aspects in current me-
dia art. He is using Peter Dittmer’s Die Amme  as an example for an installation 
that stages machines as grotesque caricatures of  a robot capable of  communi-cating. Block furthermore shows with the help of  Cornelia Sollfrank’s network-happening female extension , in which the artist identi ﬁ ed the productions of  a net-
art generator as the artistic work of  women, submitting them (without success!) to an international art competition, how both gender-politics of  the art system as well as habitual man-machine symbols are stymied. 
As might have become clear already in the conceptual contributions, 
the analysis of the new forms, procedures and objects that are manifest in literary processes in the net can rely on theories and methods of game studies. For example, the “ludologists” like Espen Aarseth, Jesper Juul or Gonzalo Frasca mainly focus on working out the ludic character of net literature or computer games—quite in the spirit of the double meaning of ludus and paidia , 
i.e. game and play. The scholarly work on these genres in the meantime has established its own transmedial discourse regarding its topics not only as mere derivatives of narratives or plays. Thus Markku Eskelinen  in his characteristic 
provocative attitude demands of literary scholars to turn the tables and ⎯if 
they cannot part with their traditional terminology ⎯instead of persistently 
12Preface
searching for narrative elements in computer games to de ﬁ ne all narratives as 
“games of interpretation.”
In six steps he is dealing with Aarseth’s concepts of cybertext and game 
studies that challenge literary theory. Among other things he demands giving 
up the fear of variety and multiplicity, thereby renouncing the idea of literary entities or totalities and instead trying one’s luck with the proposals of indi-vidual parts and phases. One possibility of such literary works seems to be on its way in the agenda of “playable media,” “instrumental texts,” and “tex-tual instruments” developed by Noah Wardrip-Fruin  in analyzing those works 
with which admittedly we are playing (and are producing for playing) but that cannot be called games in the more narrow sense of the word. Here we are rather dealing with textual and literary structures in which elements of play are used as means of interaction. In all his projects ⎯like Screen, Regime Change  
and News Reader ⎯Wardrip-Fruin is concerned with the artistic investigation 
of the speci ﬁ cities of (electronic) media ⎯be they the World Wide Web or even 
the virtual reality environment of CAVE. This has led to the construction of texts as instruments, and we all know that instruments can be played: They constitute the frame for the activities of the user allowing the production of interesting variations of the original material. This approach avoids the reli-ance on formal de ﬁ nitions of games. The aim is neither to reach a certain goal 
nor to come to a speci ﬁ c result. We are rather talking about the playability of 
the texts, e.g. the question how they are played.
The challenge mentioned above is that of ludology to traditional narratol-
ogy. It has to ask whether and in what way the logics of playing and that of the reading of narrative texts that seem at ﬁ rst glance to contradict each other 
(keywords would be: playing as acting vs. reading as interpretation) now can be brought together productively for the analysis of net literature—especially regarding the combination of man and machine.
Marie-Laure Ryan  is pursuing the observation that even though “digi-
tal” forms of texts are reaching an academic public with avant-garde liter-ary experiments and a mass public with computer games they have not yet, according to her thesis, found a cultured public that primarily reads for fun. Contrary to Eskelinen, in her contribution she is looking for possibilities to overcome this gap by strengthening the narrativity of digital texts. She is look-ing at three possibilities of interactive narratives: embedded stories as they appear in mystery games, emergent stories such as The Sims, and texts with a 
prescripted, but variable story, represented by Michael Mateas and Andrew Stern’s interactive drama Façade.
Fotis Jannidis is equally critically analyzing both the “pure” ludologists and 
the model suggested by Ryan. In a sort of  “close reading” of  two computer 
13Preface
games he is developing a differentiated position: Compared to “prototypes” of  
narration the organization of  event-sequences in games establishes phenomena of  liminality that as such, however, can be nevertheless described and analyzed from a narratological point of  view.
Additional contributions are concerned with the relationship of  writing and 
programming; they deal with literary texts created by computer programs or “lit-erary machines” as well as with the consequences this has for concepts like “au-thor,” “work,” or “reading.” Jean-Pierre Balpe, for example, is de ﬁ ning generative 
literature as the production of  texts that continually change since they are based on a speciﬁ  c dictionary, on a set of  rules and the use of  algorithms. He shows 
that texts like his generative novel Trajectoires that were produced by a computer 
and not written by an author demand a speciﬁ  c type of  “engrammation” and 
reading. The point of  departure of  Loss Pequeño Glazier  is that the mutation or 
modulation of  words as a rule leads to orthographical relationships between variants. Sometimes, however, they also engender hardly tangible interactions, which he is trying to con ﬁ rm in poems that use sequences and gaps in signifying 
chains. From these observations he is developing his concept of  the reading of  codes as poetic material.
Finally, the last three texts allow for variations of  the perspective regard-
ing our subject by ﬁ rstly giving an insight into quite different practical realms 
like the didactics of  literature as well as into the work of  an internationally renowned author. Laura Borràs Castanyer  shows how computer-aided media can 
be made useful for an innovative teaching of  literature at the Universitat Oberta de Catalunya in Barcelona, a completely virtual distance learning university. She is trying to ﬁ nd out where the chances and dangers of  E-Learning/Teaching 
can be located. Susanne Berkenheger  introduces her latest play: the dramatic chat-
distillation i’m dying, honey: dramatized proceedings from super-space. It was generated 
in chats and consists to 90 percent of  original dialogues in the chat-room. The main character in the play is playing with chunks of  communication as if  she were a computer program and the chatters speculate wildly about her identi-ty, become impatient, curse and carry on, thereby co-writing a play that in the meantime has been performed at several German theaters and that in the end will ﬁ nd its way back into the net as an audio-installation.
Thomas Kamphusmann’s contribution at ﬁ rst glance seems out of  place. From 
the perspective of  information management, i.e. the analysis of  the ﬂ ow of  
communication in business, his contribution is questioning the possibilities but most of  all the limits of  improving or augmenting the exchange of  informa-tion within business communication. In order to optimize these processes he is pleading for the inclusion of  supplementary structures like aesthetic or literary forms into the development of  the more abstract models put into operation. 
14Preface
This book is based on a three-day conference Netzliteratur: Umbrüche in der li-
terarischen Kommunikation [Net Literature: Upheavals in Literary Communication] that took place between November 25-27, 2004 at Siegen University. We want to thank the Volkswagen Foundation and especially Dr. Vera Szöllösi-Brenig for the generous ﬁ nancial support for this international symposium that allowed 
our guests to travel on in some cases somewhat arduous paths from the US, France, Finland, Spain, Switzerland and Germany to Siegen in southern West-phalia.
Our special thanks go to Brigitte Pichon and Dorian Rudnytsky for trans-
lating several of  the texts into English and for giving the necessary ﬁ nishing 
touches to most of  the others. Patricia Tomaszek completed the essential task of  unifying quotations and bibliographic information. We are also indebted to her for proof-reading the manuscript. Maria Beissel ﬁ  nalized the typesetting of  
this volume. We are also grateful to Georg Rademacher for his critical advice.
Siegen, November 2006
Peter Gendolla and Jörgen Schäfer
Translated by Brigitte Pichon and Dorian Rudnytsky
Approaches and T erminologies
17Peter Gendolla and Jörgen Schäfer
Playing With Signs
T owards an Aesthetic Theory of Net Literature          
Abstract:
Considering upheavals in literary communications through computerized, networked media we suggest describing communications in computer-nets as open, multiple recur-sive processes between “authors” and “readers” whose practices of  writing and reading are transformed by “autonomous” programs, “agents” etc. This, however, poses several questions: What are the common features that allow us to speak of  an operational ﬁ eld 
called “literature” under historically changed medial conditions? Can the speci ﬁ c aes-
thetic difference that in traditional media characterizes literature as language art be also pinned down under these changed medial conditions? 
As a rule, events are characterized as upheavals if they have far-reaching and 
long-lasting consequences, both negative and positive. This entails natural or cultural catastrophes, massive destruction of things, circumstances, struc-tures, or systems and their elements just as much as it does their completely new construction, i.e. the long-term establishment of other, historically not yet existing constellations. Both meanings only refer to the two poles of one single process: the radical capsizing or the sudden end of conditions and orders of things. Typically, their partial or complete dissolution is followed by new sets of laws, different circumstances, structures or newly stabilized conditions.
Literature as a speci ﬁ c organ of  perception, as a “high-voltage” sixth sense 
for socio-cultural change of  any kind, takes part in such upheavals on several levels. It always has sensed the slightest tremors, the hairline cracks, the ampli-fying reverberations of  conditions that announce or launch the catastrophic breakdown—even if  never directly, but by more or less labyrinthine detours albeit in a very lucid manner. A good example would be Der Mann ohne Eigen-
schaften [The Man Without Qualities]  by Robert Musil heralding the end of  the 
Austro-Hungarian Empire, but also Der Process [The Trial] by Kafka that regis-tered the bureaucratically automated genocide. During the upheaval itself  no other instance of  observation is able to record and comment on the events as does literature. Even though, compared to the world of  objects, literature is a wholly arbitrary medium composed of  letters, yet its signs (and maybe for this very reason) are able to amalgamate the perception of  all our senses in a speci ﬁ c, 
18Gendolla and Schäfer  |  Playing With Signs
synaesthetic way. This is possible only here in the literary interface as a sensitive 
area of  contact between outer and inner worlds. We only have to remember the titles accompanying the great socio-cultural disruptions from the 19
th to the 20th 
century: Manhattan Transfer , USA, Ulysses,  or Berlin Alexanderplatz . These novels 
ﬁ nd images and stories for a new urban perception that had never existed in 
such density; they ﬁ nd possibilities to express the stream of  unmitigated im-
pressions of  disjointed, freely combinable series of  voices and glances in radio, cinema and telecommunications that were assimilated and made available by the new technical media. 
But literature not only records and comments on the ruptures of  social, 
cultural and—last but not at all least—medial conditions. It also participates constructively in their modeling as we can see already at the beginning of  the 20
th century when literature had not only registered or commented on the ﬁ rst 
great medial ruptures of  audio-visions. It had also, both positively and nega-tively, designed, expelled or stabilized identities, self-images, goals of  action, and possible ways of  behavior for individuals, groups or even whole collectives. The whisper of  literature not only re ﬂ ects the stream of  daily images and sounds. It 
also orders, frames and perspectivizes, thereby not only tying together multiple sensory perceptions but also furnishing them with possible meaning. A series of  literary texts on the so-called Jewish world conspiracy for example equipped the bio-politics of  fascism with quite practical goals and the “Protokolle der Weisen von Zion” (‘Protocols of  the Elders of  Zion’) transferred them into quite real-istic actions (cf. Eco). And without the dissolution of  traditional role models in women’s literature from Virginia Woolf  to Margaret Atwood the development of  the questions regarding gender, family, or career in at least Western cultures would have been quite improbable.
In the 21
st century another position is assigned to the participation of  litera-
ture in socio-cultural transformations; literature acts on a different level, so to speak, or, to be more exact, it acts within a hitherto inaccessible realm. Within the context of  the developments in media technology, the so-called second rup-ture of  media—i.e. in short, the digitalization of  all technical media—literature operates not only on the two levels of  registering and commenting. Its third domain, namely that of  designing or of  conceptualizing, today with the help of  networked computers has widened in such a way that it surpasses the familiar interplay of  authors, media and public. Computers and nets are therefore not only more comfortable typewriters and faster channels of  distribution; they also creatively compose together with their users that speci ﬁ c interplay of  signs that 
we call literature.
19Gendolla and Schäfer  |  Playing With Signs
T ele-Communication: Language, T exts, Nets
We are talking of  a literature then that is now not taking place in books any more 
but in computers and of  a literature, to name but a few of  the equally well rea-soned terms—depending on the theoretical perspective—that is traded under the name of  “digital,” “electronic,” “ergodic,” or “net” literature.
1 In our thesis 
of  upheavals it may have become quite obvious that we refer to far-reaching and wide-ranging changes in literary communication regarding both literature in print-media and also literature in computer-aided media. Yet, we still need a theoretical frame enabling us to describe this speci ﬁ c phenomenon as a literary 
one. To be more precise, two questions arise that within the presented argument inevitably lead to a third one: Wherein, despite all differences, lie the common features that allow us to talk of  a sphere of  objects we can continue to call literature even across historically replaced constellations of  media? And what difference is produced by the various media of  production, distribution, and reception of  literature, or, to put it otherwise: Wherein lies the distinguishing feature between the chains of  letters of  a text ﬁ xated in print and the “ﬂ  ickering 
signiﬁ  ers” (Katherine Hayles) of  computer-aided media? And even if  it should 
be possible to ﬁ nd plausible arguments for these two questions, they will lead 
directly to a third one: Why do we, referring to literature in computer-aided media, speak of  “net literature” and do not elect one of  the earlier mentioned alternatives?
Let us at ﬁ rst remain in a quite general area, since in answering these ques-
tions once again the tension between the letters of  literature, i.e. the realm of  linguistic signs, and that of  media technology has to be considered. In his latest publications on the “inner economy” of  media, Hartmut Winkler has made an interesting suggestion to describe this relationship. His point of  departure is language as a basic technology on the basis of  which the linguistic praxis—as a ﬂ uid discourse—is connected inexorably with its material inscriptions or com-
ponents that are manifested on the one hand in concrete media products like texts, ﬁ lms, images etc., and on the other in a more general sense in the ma-
chines and infrastructures of  media technology itself. Already this ﬁ rst step in 
his media-theoretical argument connects the semiotic with the medial or better, with the media-technological process. Winkler ﬁ nds two de ﬁ nitions for writing 
and—more generally—signs, which at ﬁ rst glance are surprising, but that are 
able to perspectivize the relationship between the symbolic and the technical realm in a manner that is helpful for our project.
On the one hand, he is adopting Derrida’s concept of  the deferral of  signs, 
or simpler, its change from the context of  production to the context of  recep-tion. On the other hand, he stresses the aspect of  the repeatability of  signs by 
20Gendolla and Schäfer  |  Playing With Signs
labeling them “Maschinen der Wiederholung” (‘machines of repetition’) (Wink-
ler, Diskursökonomie  25).
Der enge Rahmen von Sender und Empfänger ist damit überschritten; beide sind nur Teil einer unendlichen Kette von Wiederholungsakten, die sie nicht überschauen oder kontrollieren können; Zeichen werden von Kontext zu Kontext verschickt oder übertragen, Zeichen sind in-sofern immer Telekommunikation. Dass sie auf  Kontexte verweisen, die im Moment ihrer Aktualisierung nicht zur Verfügung stehen, macht ihren eigentümlich fremden Charakter aus. (98)
Thereby the narrow frame of  sender and receiver is transgressed; both 
are only a part of  an in ﬁ nite chain of  acts of  repetition, which cannot 
be grasped or controlled; from context to context signs are sent or transferred, signs then insofar are [always] telecommunication. Their peculiar, strange character is constituted by the fact that they refer to contexts that are not present in the moment they are actualized.
One could of  course intuitively object that by using the expression “insofar” he is hiding the fact that the term telecommunication, contrary to its common usage, here is generalized to an extent that makes it useless. But in our context the aim is not to understand the elaborate and very abstract derivation which lets Winkler arrive at this de ﬁ nition of  the sign. The crucial element is ﬁ rstly that 
semiosis is always already technical, i.e. that it skillfully connects in the sense of  techné (i.e. operation or procedure); secondly that it always takes place in media 
and that these media invariably organize distance communications, irregardless whether the distance is bridged by the human voice, the physical transport of  a book, or the immaterial sending by wires; thirdly that already in the process of  the creation of  signs the logic of  transferal or transmission begins to work.
2
In order to conceptualize a communicative model it follows that media 
not only are added as whatever kinds of  objects, appliances or infrastructures after the conclusion of  the process of  sign-creation in order to establish neutral channels of  transport between sender and receiver, but that they are already also participating in this very process:
Dies bedeutet, dass die technische Leistung der Medien, räumlich-zeitliche Abgründe zu überbrücken, in den Kern des Semiotischen vorrückt. Zeichen also werden keineswegs zuerst konstituiert und dann (sekundär) verschickt. Das Zeichen selbst ist die Klammer, die die un-terschiedlichen Kontexte zusammenzieht, und die technischen Medien 
21Gendolla and Schäfer  |  Playing With Signs
exekutieren nur, was als Kontextwechsel im Zeichen immer schon an-
gelegt ist. (Winkler, Diskursökonomie  168)
This means that the technical achievement of  media to bridge spatial-temporal chasms now advances into the core of  semiosis. I.e. signs in no way are ﬁ rst constituted and then (secondarily) sent. The sign itself  
is the bracket drawing together the different contexts whereas the tech-nical media only execute those elements that are always already existent as contextual change within the sign.
But ﬁ rst this point has to be re-concretized, and we have to make this turn if  we 
want to use Winkler’s model for our purposes. How can we concretely concep-tualize this continuity between the semiotic mechanism of  a change of  context and its implementation through technical media? And wherein do the different modalities of  these implementations differ, once we compare different media of  storage and transmission?
We therefore suggest to expand the ideas attained with the help of  our 
brief  outline of  Winkler’s media theory with some of  the categories of  Espen Aarseth’s cybertext theory in order to ultimately attain a model of  levels for the man-machine-dynamics in net literature, which, admittedly initially will be somewhat coarse. Such a model begins with the two traditional instances of  language that cyclically refer to each other: the paradigmatic system of  “langue” and its expression, “parole.” Ordinarily—and this is important—these expres-sions materialize in syntagmatic chains. In the special case of  a literary text in the medium book, the speci ﬁ c verbal externalizations of  an author that he derives 
from “langue” are ﬁ  xed in a storage medium and then transported or transmit-
ted to the reader in various ways. 
The essential point of  Aarseth’s model consists in the fact that he, in a 
very concrete and not only metaphorical sense, considers such texts to be ma-chines for the production and reception of  signs; however, in another place he also regards them as machines for the transmission of  signs, hereby following Winkler.
3 This machine consists of  a technical medium, a user, and a set of  
signs composed of  two levels, the so-called “scriptons,” i.e. the character strings which the reader encounters on the user interface and the “textons,” the charac-ter strings that hide in the textual memory.
Such a text then not only consists of  a syntagmatic chain, but is in itself  
composed of  two levels, which are again—and this is the main point—related to each other by the so-called “traversal function.” It is described in more de-tail by seven variables (dynamics, determinability, transience, perspective, access, linking, user function). In our context the most important variable is the user/
22Gendolla and Schäfer  |  Playing With Signs
reader function: The literature that Aarseth calls “ergodic” demands more of  
its users or “readers” than the mere interpretation of  the read text. In addition it requires non-trivial efforts in order to navigate the text. These activities can be explorative (when the user is able to decide how to navigate, like in hyper-ﬁ ctions), or they can be con ﬁ gurative (when the user can vary or add “textons” 
or traversal functions). This model then can provide a ﬁ rst approach to relate 
verbal expressions—i.e. also literary texts—with technical media.
4 However, by 
regarding a text as a machine does not yet bring us to the computer, since the outline is explicitly usable for all texts. Wherein, then, lies the speci ﬁ city of  the 
universal medium computer, and—in a further step—wherein lies the speci ﬁ city 
of  networked individual computers for literary communication?
With computer usage literary communications for the ﬁ rst time have ac-
quired a programmable medium that does not only store and pass on its input. Rather, programming activities (protocols, browsers, word processing, electron-ic tools of  whichever kind) enter the process thereby producing an output that is contingent for the “reader.” Unlike in print media, in literary communication recursive processes between human beings (programmers, authors, readers) and machines are built in.
But even the idea that we are dealing with feedback between these two ac-
tants is too simple. Both the human- and the machine-related share in these processes in itself  is characterized internally by feedbacks between various lev-els. Regarding the computer, on the one hand on the hardware level we have to differentiate between input and output devices, as well as the CPU (processor, bus and RAM). However, we also have to add the various levels of  software. If  several individual computers are connected into a net, these effects that already are executed of ﬂ ine still amplify, since the mediality of  a computer is owed to 
the structural correspondence of  the (‘space between the individual digital ma-
chines and the space within these machines’) (Winkler, “Medium Computer”). 
We might even venture to say with Winkler that the computer has only become a medium because within it circulate signs, so that it is controlled by the logic of  telecommunication. In this realm as well signi ﬁ ers are transmitted, stored, 
processed and permuted.
On the other hand, neurobiological theories regarding creative processes 
exist maintaining that we also have to regard the products of  the human brain as effects of  feedback loops between nerves within networks of  the brain. For example Wolf  Singer describes the emergence of  creative processes as an out-come of  the human capacity to generate symbolic representations of  internally coded relations in abstract form and to transmit these to other brains:
23Gendolla and Schäfer  |  Playing With Signs
Die bereits für die einzelnen Gehirne charakteristischen rekursiven 
Prozesse weiten sich aus und beziehen die Gehirne der kommuni-kationsfähigen Artgenossen mit ein. Diese Iteration von Perzep-tion, Re ﬂ exion, Rekombination, Abstraktion, Kommunikation und 
Perzeption, die sich als unendliche Reihe fortsetzen kann, ist in der Lage, neue Systeme von fast beliebiger Komplexität hervorzubringen. (221)
The recursive processes already characteristic for individual brains 
open out and enfold the brains of members of the same species that are able to communicate. This iteration of perception, re ﬂ ection, re-
combination, abstraction, communication and perception, which can be continued in a never-ending chain, is able to bring forth new sys-tems of almost any complexity.
Of course we do not intend to put the functioning of human brains on the same level with computers in an offensively simpli ﬁ ed way. The decisive ques-
tion is, however, to what extent we can talk o f an expanded ars combinatoria  
regarding creative processes between human beings, whose internal life is structured symbolically, and machines that process symbols. 
It seems that we are dealing with recursive loops on and between different 
levels and actants. Following Winkler once more, the point of this recursion lies in the fact that it allows relating repetition and variation to each other in a very speci ﬁ c way. In fact, recursions permit the 
. . . Wiederanwendung einer Verarbeitungsvorschrift auf eine Vari-able, die bereits Ergebnis derselben Verarbeitungsvorschrift ist. Der Variablenwert ändert sich mit jedem Durchlauf der Schleife, und Ef-fekt der Wiederholung ist gerade nicht die Herstellung von Identität sondern einer vorde ﬁ nierten Variation. Rekursion ist insofern nicht 
einfache, sondern erweiterte Reproduktion; und Rekursion ver-schränkt Wiederholung und Variation mit dem Ziel, ein Neues her-vorzubringen, ein Ergebnis, das in dieser Form nicht vorvollzogen werden kann. ( Diskursökonomie  173)
. . . renewed application of a processing rule to a variable that already is the result of the same processing rule. The value of the variable is changing with each loop and the effect of the repetition is exactly not the creation of an identity but of a prede ﬁ ned variation. Recursion 
then is not a simple reproduction but an expanded one, and recursion 
24Gendolla and Schäfer  |  Playing With Signs
links repetition and variation in order to bring forth something new, 
i.e. a result that could not be prede ﬁ ned in this manner.
These are the merely sketched reasons for centering our thoughts for the analy-sis of  these recursive processes between humans and machines on the notion of  the net. On purpose we are using here a wide notion of  the net, encompass-ing more than computer networks so that we can include in it the interplay of  humans and machines outlined above. The philosopher Hartmut Böhme for example (and we could just as well name Manuel Castells or others) has recently deﬁ ned “nets” in the following way: 
Netze sind biologische oder anthropogen artiﬁ  zielle Organisationsfor-
men zur Produktion, Distribution und Kommunikation von materiel-len und symbolischen Objekten. . . . Netze bilden komplexe zeiträumli-che dynamische Systeme. . . . Sie tun dies nach stabilen Prinzipien, doch in instabilen Gleichgewichten, selbstgenerativ, selbststeuernd, selbster-weiternd, also autopoietisch und evolutionär. (19)
Nets are biological or artiﬁ  cial anthropogenetic forms of  organization 
to produce, distribute and communicate material and symbolic objects. 
. . . Nets create complex, dynamic systems of  time-space. . . . They do this in a self-generating, self-controlling and self-expanding way ac-cording to stable principles, however, with instable balances, i.e. in an autopoietic and evolutionary manner. 
Relating this to our ﬁ eld of  literature this means that when we speak of  “net 
literature” we do not speak of  literary texts on the World Wide Web only, even though this may be somewhat irritating considering the general usage of  the term “net” that directly thinks of  the global internet.
5
For those traditional models of  literary communication that have stood 
the test of  time for the analysis of  literary communication in book culture this would then mean that the strict and clean division between the acts of  produc-tion, distribution and reception on the level of  different users now is collapsing, or at least is becoming less complex. This was the system that bound the well-known triad “author,” “work,” “reader.” And as long as we have not found any better terminology, we will necessarily have to hold on to this triad, even if  only as a horizon—if  necessary, we will have to use quotation marks! If  we want to understand the speci ﬁ c characteristics of  literary communication in computer-
ized, networked media, as a point of  departure we will have to take distributed generating systems and reciprocal connections between “authors,” “works,” and 
25Gendolla and Schäfer  |  Playing With Signs
“readers.” For an author like Jean-Pierre Balpe this means that he has to work 
on all the described levels—he calls them “niveaux d’engrammation” (‘levels of  engrammation’). This differentiates him from the “author” of  a book, who only has to bring the text to paper, but who can then leave the whole process of  production and distribution to the publisher, the printer and the bookstores or publishing trade:
Faire écrire du texte par un ordinateur implique donc une relation à l’ensemble des composantes de la structure, donc, d’une façon ou d’une autre, une relation à la programmation que celle-ci soit directe ou indirecte. L’écrivain se trouve là face à des niveaux d’engrammations techniques très différents qui vont de la conception abstraite de la no-tion de texte à la dé ﬁ nition d’un style en passant par la représentation 
de connaissances dans les univers sur lesquels ses textes doivent se con-struire. (Balpe, “Littérature numérique”) 
To have a computer write a text implies a connection between all com-
ponents of  the structure. One way or another this entails also a connec-tion to the programming process, whether this is a direct or an indirect one. The writer thus ﬁ nds himself  facing very different technical lev-
els of  engrammation that extend from an abstract text-concept to the deﬁ nition of  a style, also traversing a representation of  those levels of  
world-knowledge on which its texts are based.
6
If  in the speci ﬁ c man-machine-dynamics we can see the new and interesting 
elements of  literary processes within, with, or between computers we may pro-visionally differentiate net literature according to the following parameters of  communication:
■ Communications of  humans with humans, i.e. several authors cooperate via 
nets and become co-authors of  cooperative texts.
■ Communications of  humans with machines, i.e. programmed processing 
of  signs from which letters, poems, scripts, or narratives “automatically” emerge (text-generators or “literary machines”); this also enables the reader to choose between different possibilities of  rami ﬁ cations de ﬁ ned at certain 
nodal points.
■ Summing up the two other levels brings us to the last possibility, namely 
communications of  a man-machine-man-machine-etc. approach, tending towards an interminable cooperation of  several authors, editors, designers, censors or whomever. In these processes between “authors” and “read-
26Gendolla and Schäfer  |  Playing With Signs
ers”—i.e. before, during and after the production, transmission and recep-
tion of  “communication”—technical media are present in diverse forms and on various levels. They already contribute to the intentions, or better the strategic efforts of  authors, and even more extremely in their realiza-tion. This in-between, or rather this intersubjectivity, gains a quite different dimension with the help of  a certain autonomy that is granted the auto-matic transcriptions of  the intended and realized texts.
Quite in our line of  thought Philippe Bootz has worked out a model of  proce-dural function in the communication between humans and machines. Writing and reading are seen as two functions within a system: authors and readers bring forth mental representations that are called “texte-écrit” (‘text-as-written’) and “texte lu” (‘text-as-read’). Between these cognitive processes an “author”-, a “text”-, and a “reader”-domain are placed. A procedural text therefore can only be explained as a cooperation of  three functions or processes that are autono-mous:
■ Writing function:  The author creates a “texte-auteur” (‘author-text’) that in-
cludes everything since he has encoded it in a form that is signi ﬁ cant for 
him. Therefore, he can indeed control the structure of  the text, but not all parameters of  their implementation like different types of  programming or readers’ activities.
■ Generating function: The changed notion of  text not only comprises the 
“texte-auteur” but also autonomous technical processes. Bootz therefore deﬁ nes the textual domain in which the text is generated and which in the 
end is read by the reader as “subsystem with a principal function: the gen-erating of  entrances and exits, in connection with its substances of  works” (“Reader/Readers” 104).
7 
■ Reading function: Finally, the reader observes a “texte-à-voir” (‘text-to-be-
seen’), a transitory status that is bound to time and space and that includes the interface. 
However, also these proposals can refer to any form of  a text. They do not yet reﬂ ect a speci ﬁ c literaricity. If  in computerized media that alternately “read” and 
“write” each other on different human and mechanical levels multiple encoding and decoding steps are necessary between the writing and the reading of  texts, then we can identify literature as a re ﬂ ection or as an aesthetic perception of  the 
transitions and disturbances between these levels. 
27Gendolla and Schäfer  |  Playing With Signs
The Aesthetics of Net Literature
So far, our considerations of  the determining technical factors and of  the for-
mal possibilities of  an altered textuality in electronic space have proven to be insufﬁ cient for a critical study of  net literature since they might just as well 
describe all communication in computer networks. This also seems to be the blind spot in Aarseth’s theory of  “ergodic literature,” since in analyzing struc-tures and functional differences of  the media in literary communication it looses track of  a speci ﬁ c literaricity. We therefore have to add the question whether in 
changed medial conditions we can also discover a speci ﬁ c aesthetic difference 
like ﬁ ctionality
8 and metaﬁ  ctionality characterizing literature as language art in 
traditional media. Literature, with its very special usage of  words, indeed differs from everyday language and writing in two ways.
For one, it de-automates through distancing, exhibiting irony, and by using 
effects of  alienation, i.e. through playing with utilitarian processes of  communi-cation, thereby creating the above mentioned aesthetic difference that always is a difference in perception by observing itself, thereby simultaneously distancing itself  from becoming merely utilitarian. It seems that literature internally negates itself  as a uni ﬁ ed entity thereby enabling itself  to capture its readers. This differ-
entiates its speci ﬁ c texts from other texts like newscasts, cooking recipes, busi-
ness letters etc. This means that literature precisely does not allow for a simple distancing from every day concerns, institutional constraints or too personal obsessions. To be precise, it distances itself  from itself  and from its own story, i.e. from the ﬁ ctitious worlds it creates with the same amount of  energy that for 
example a more trivial travel-, adventure-, or love-story uses in ever-new varia-tions in order to create their imagined worlds. This means that it asserts a power, an aesthetic imagination or imaginativeness surpassing all dialectics between the constraints of  every-day life and our small ﬂ ights of  fancy. This power is always 
able to map out more than any book can fulﬁ  ll.
Secondly, literature changes with and through the respective media through 
which it is processed and experienced. Above, we have already made some com-ments about this. It is important to us that only through the interplay or the interaction of  both components, i.e. the text and its medium, the concrete lit-erary form emerges. For, as we have seen, media are always necessary to give a form to the communicated aspect. We therefore might say that the medium always inscribes itself  into the contents. If  with regard to computerized and networked media we then want to speak of  net literature we have to ask the question whether it conserves this aesthetic difference described above regard-ing communication within the net itself  as much as regarding traditional literary texts. Up to date literary studies that bear in mind the interplay of  texts with 
28Gendolla and Schäfer  |  Playing With Signs
their media therefore have to consider to what extent—i.e. in what forms and 
with which operations—this literature, in the sense of  networked experimental activities, aesthetically re ﬂ ects the far-reaching (man-machine-)communications, 
thereby making invisible processes visible and communicable.
Castells has shown extensively that computer nets create both technical 
connections between spatially distanced computers and also social connections between their users. Therefore, it should have become clear by now that the forms and contents of  these communications in computer-aided networks are not merely transmitted neutrally. During the recursive circulation of  the signals, signs, and symbols de ﬁ ned phases, sections, or parallel processes are automated 
more and more. This is true for the simple corrections of  texts as well as for the organization of  complete procedures of  repair, operation or processes activated with the help of  expert systems or software agents that do not need intercep-tions by human agents, who might not even be able to intervene or control the procedure without the knowledge of  the respective program codes. Despite that, traditional sociology—and this is true from Parsons to Luhmann—con-tinues to de ﬁ ne communication as a simple relation of  sender–channel–receiver 
and here the medium as “channel” is attributed no more function than simple transfers containing more or less disruptions and noise pollutions. Our position clearly is a different one: the channel is not merely neutral but generates unpre-dictable events.
It is just this development that constitutes the motivation and basis, the 
original object of  perception of  net literature insofar as we can continue to rec-ognize it as literature, as literary aisthesis, aesthetic perception, and perception of  
perceptions. We then see the current pivotal and most momentous disruption in media systems in the growing autonomy of  the technical medium within the processes of  communication between man and machine and we see these pro-cesses as quite con ﬂ icting and at odds with each other: By implementing natural 
and especially cultural processes in networks they are made calculable; but at the same time they are thereby right away again eluding the desired control. 
Net literature inscribes its narratives onto this open ﬂ ank of  technically 
supported processes of  socio-cultural differentiation. Media technology then precisely does not widen—as some of  its engineers maintain—but withdraws individual control; it hinders the transfer of  control from individuals or groups to systems functioning without friction as much as possible thereby enabling a transfer necessary for cultural evolution. This transfer to systems becomes nec-essary because these systems are the agents that guarantee the survival of  society and not foremost that of  individuals. Aesthetic processes in their turn com-ment on and reﬂ  ect this disinterest in individual concerns, be they imaginary 
self-positionings or physical needs. They have visions of  short- or long-term 
29Gendolla and Schäfer  |  Playing With Signs
consequences and effects of  this withdrawal of  control from or its handing 
over to the individual. They activate or intensify, they condense or focus those perceptions that take place in processes of  socialization, be they the most sensi-tive feelings or the most brutal, traumatizing pain. Literature is—as are all the arts—engaged in individual aesthetization rather than social “anesthetization.” 
This engagement would be quite practical and could be directly observed 
and analyzed on the net. For example, if  a client of  a bank is relieved of  the fussy banking transaction by a smart agent in internet banking, or if  virtual travel agencies choose the holiday destination and accurately program the itin-erary including even pit stops or if  the traveler even can be relieved of  writing a love letter to his Dulcinea at <http://www.liebste.de/liebesbrief2.html> or <http://www.writeexpress.com/love.htm>.
9 Here, or in the Chats, MUDs and 
MOOs introduced by Uwe Wirth in his article on “talkative correspondence” as a new form of  initiating real love stories, we can see the development of  new original literary forms within which Werther’s fever is repeated on an electronic level as “modem-fever.”
We could also show this for a literary contemplation of  violence. Computer 
games can allow us to observe the changes of  perspective, the role playing, i.e. the aesthetic difference or distance to these social feedbacks that hardly can be blocked off, that even feed on themselves and that then culminate in concrete acts of  violence when we weigh the high-tech control of  killings in Iraq against the high-speed training at the Joystick.
And we maybe should also name the quite unstoppable automation of  our 
movement in space represented by the growing number of  systems of  orienta-tion, GPS, the proximity sensors, the above mentioned travel agencies to which net literature in its turn reacts with its speci ﬁ c “discovery of  slowness.” We 
might name experiments in space, games of  communication with the webcams in banks and the monitors in airports, as well as with special programs of  ex-change between text and body (cf. Gendolla). 
Net literature now can be divided into different aspects, some of  which are 
commented on in the contributions of  this book. Looking at Michel Chaouli’s article on the possibilities of  computers and nets, which has generally chal-lenged the notion that the interactive potential of  the net can generate this other 
aesthetic state that we normally call ﬁ ction, we may have to ask: What about the 
great narrative, the conclusive, indissoluble work that can’t be supplemented or shortened that until now has kept us sitting in our reading- (or viewing-)chair if  the machine is constantly interrupting our processes of  imagination? A similar question is posed by Florian Cramer: What about the aesthetic moment ( kairos, 
epiphany), the moment of  a feeling of  truth that was made conceivable by the poetic avant-garde with their effective simultaneous double illumination of  liter-
30Gendolla and Schäfer  |  Playing With Signs
ary idea and realizing method if the poets on the net do not even understand 
the methods through which they work so that the codes play with them and not vice versa? What happens if  the good will—or let us say the intention—to write the great “Hyper”-novel of  the “Lost-in-Cyberspace-Generation” is located clearly before one’s mind’s eye but when in the process of  writing this beautiful idea other authors always intervene or if  a transformation grammar or a hidden Markov algorithm carries out a spelling reform of  the third kind?
The furthest reaching dimension of  our whole subject probably is playing. 
Literature always has had an af ﬁ nity with playing if  we regard the many word-
games of  antiquity, or the lipograms of  women in the baroque era or even the methods suggested by Oulipo, even though without computer. With electronic devices and nets this playful literature now enters other dimensions and not only economic ones in the sense of  “The novel after the videogame”—in this realm, ﬁ lm continues to be much more successful. No, our thesis is that in today’s com-
puter-aided and networked media literary forms are developing that cannot be described any longer solely in the sense of  internalization or sublimation of  pro-cesses of  disciplining or civilizing, as mentioned above, because in networked processes internalization is immediately followed by  externalization, which cannot 
be instantly understood in Marcuse’s sense as a repressive de-sublimation. On the contrary: “authors,” “readers,” and their “media” are not playing as silent machines but are playing with, against or into one another in a highly re ﬂ exive 
way. Such practical integrations of  traditional literary subjects, forms and meth-ods into the activities of  “authors” and “readers” that are connected with the narrative or performative staging of  their own technical aids, automations and translations in a new way provoke the critical examination of  some traditional aesthetic categories in computer-aided networked literature. First of  all we will have to describe the present and long-ranging intentions of  the contributing writers and the activities of  the participating programs in detail. Secondly the speciﬁ c emergence of  poetical and narrative elements has to be considered, and 
thirdly we have to illustrate the performative contexts of  their implementation. And in all probability—this would be a fourth premise—the new forms of  net literature, their methods and “works” could be integrated within the notion of  “games” as “playing” or vice versa. We cannot go into this in more detail. All we can do here is to hint at a direction, which then would have to be examined in individual analyses.
We are therefore coming back to our idea of  upheaval, which implies that in 
current computer-aided and networked communications the quality of  interac-tion between man and machine is once again effectively changing and that net literature registers, comments on and above all annotates this change—even if  in an experimental way. We would like to repeat the claim that the automated 
31Gendolla and Schäfer  |  Playing With Signs
or programmed part of  communications directed at practical solutions in our 
present societies are inexorably growing for reasons of  differentiation and com-plexity and that the generation, circulation and storage of  socio-economically or culturally necessary sign-processes is more and more turned over to agents of  communication so that this results in hardly separable amalgamations of  soft-ware with “human” ideas and of  manager-brains with mechanized processes of  understanding, converting and deciding.
For the programming of  software agents we can turn to the projects of  
AI research by Luc Steels. In the Talking Heads project, for example, the experi-
ment between “human” and so-called “arti ﬁ cial” intelligence has indeed already 
moved forward quite far: Here programmed agents get into simulated situations that force them into the development of  a “dialogue” with rudimentary syntax and grammar, the semantics of  which we, as observers, are able to decode:
Die Agenten spielen ein Sprachspiel, das wir Ratespiel nennen. Da-bei übernimmt ein Agent den Part des Sprechers, ein anderer den des Zuhörers. Die Agenten wechseln sich in diesem Rollenspiel ab, sodass am Ende jeder beide Fähigkeiten entwickelt hat. Das Spiel kann so er-weitert werden, dass ein menschlicher Mitspieler eine der beiden Rol-len übernimmt und an die Stelle des Künstlichen Agenten tritt. (Steels, “Kognitive Roboter” 181)
The agents are playing a language game, which we are calling guessing 
game. Here an agent takes over the part of  a speaker, and another the part of  a listener. The agents take turns in this role-playing so that in the end each has developed both capacities. We can develop the game to the extent that a human player takes over one of  the two roles, taking the place of  one of  the arti ﬁ cial agents. 
Of  course such experiments trigger off  the primordial fears of  the replacement of  the species by their own technical creations. Recently, Bill Joy with his theses of  the end of  humanity, of  a post-human era in societies of  clones with manipu-lated genes, mixed beings, cyborgs, autonomous robots who ﬁ nally can go about 
their business peacefully has set off  a debate of  pros and cons that reverberated throughout all media. As if  the species had not already replaced itself  with its ﬁ rst scream and its ﬁ rst carving of  a line into a branch by articulating or invent-
ing signs through which it could invent itself  away from its present state into an 
open future. Of  course, the species believed it was talking about something that already had to be there, something that gave reason and coherence to things, from the stones to the angels. But this is only the undoubtedly necessary illusion 
32Gendolla and Schäfer  |  Playing With Signs
of  signs, their insurance system, their anchoring in the past so that the design 
would not become arbitrary, random, and unbearably open. In our present time, however, with the possibilities of  media, or better technologies of  simulation this illusion is dissolving more and more. The fact that we rigidly hold on to it probably rather proves the fear of  individuals and of  societies to have to take over the responsibilities for their own designs instead of  leaving them forever to other, “higher,” metaphysical authorities. At the present time, under the socio-technological conditions of  a species that could through its media to all intents and purposes become aware of  its activities, the fact that it is holding on to such metaphysical illusions of  a different, higher will cannot lead to any other than a grotesque fundamentalism with all its atrocious consequences. The creation of  artiﬁ  cial intelligence indeed is nothing but the exploration of  one’s own in-
telligence, even though it is a practical exploration that makes one’s own pos-sibilities visible and communicable and explicitly not its replacement or its end. For Steels there is still a “weiter Weg, bis wir eine der menschlichen Intelligenz vergleichbare künstliche Intelligenz erreichen” (‘long way until we have reached an arti ﬁ cial intelligence that is comparable to human intelligence’) (182). But it is 
this experiment that allows us to see the beginnings how intelligence might have developed and what we might be able to launch with its liberation:
Indem eine breite Öffentlichkeit hier erstmals direkt in die Interak-tion mit Künstlichen Agenten involviert war, konnten alle Beteiligten für sich selbst entscheiden, inwieweit das, was die Agenten tun, sich tatsächlich mit unseren Vorstellungen von kognitiven Phänomenen wie Lernen, Wahrnehmen, Sprechen, Kommunizieren deckt und ob die Kohabitation zwischen Künstlichen Agenten und Menschen in der Praxis überhaupt durchführbar ist. (Steels 182)
By involving a wide public for the ﬁ rst time in the interaction with ar-
tiﬁ cial agents, all participants could decide for themselves in how much 
the activities of  the agents match with our ideas of  cognitive phenom-
ena like learning, perceiving, speaking, or communicating and whether the cohabitation between arti ﬁ cial agents and human beings in praxis 
can even be accomplished.
This suggests cohabitation, the living together with media-technological dupli-cations instead of  technophobia and aggression, which is nothing but a denial of  our own capacities, nothing but self-blinding regarding the notion that some-body else, outside of  ourselves, is controlling and directing our own activities. 
33Gendolla and Schäfer  |  Playing With Signs
It is this, and not more or less than this permanent and fatal self-illusion 
that the projects of  net literature are trying to bring to the screens, monitors, or 
interfaces and they thereby are initiating a playing with the possibilities of  self-imposed determinations as well as surprising realms of  freedom.
The linkage or coupling of  our perceptions with sensor technology and 
of  our activities with technical motoric functions or the not yet experienced net of  interdependencies of  neural patterns and computer programs does not simply run along by itself  effectively. Net projects attempt to open up this link-age to cognition in another way. Like already one hundred years ago, in classical avant-garde like Futurism, Dada or Surrealism, practical experiences are also at present transformed into aesthetic perception, and technical con ﬁ gurations 
into more or less artistic designs. The inability to perceive electronic processes that remain unclear but that (almost) with the speed of  light increasingly take part in the scopes of  political, economical or social activities here are made perceptible in—also technically—artistic ways. Its means or methods are those that for a long time already literature has articulated: it disturbs, irritates, and breaks expectations and thereby de-automates etc., i.e. it suggests alternatives in perception by inventing new shapes, coherences, “gestalts” that have not yet been perceived in this speci ﬁ c way.
Special projects for instance make the delineated close connection or the 
control of  realms of  perception or action perceivable with the help of  pro-grams and protocols; they playfully show the dependence of  human behavior on automated rules and illustrate them aesthetically as irritations. For example in Susanne Berkenheger’s Die Schwimmmeisterin [The Bubble Bath]  users at ﬁ rst glance 
in groping their way into virtual space believe that they can choose freely among the directives, requests, commands or prohibitions within the windows of  the monitor, thereby quickly making decisions. However, the interaction between them and the machine decides even faster than their eyes can see. A sort of  mul-tiple being made of  human impulses, movement and programmed activities sets off  quite unexpected images and texts; it makes windows disappear and open up new ones, sometimes obeying the users’ will, often, however, only following the chance decisions of  the machine. The group Netzaktivismus tries to illustrate 
the artiﬁ  cial processes behind it, the scripts that generate the texts, the relation-
ship of  authors’ intentions and their programs by visualizing the source codes. This type of  illumination of  computer processes was continued for example by Vuk Cosic, a member of  the ASCII Art Ensemble . Dragan Espenschied and 
Alvar C.H. Freude tried to demonstrate the possibilities of  control in their art project insert_coin that was accompanied by a research program. The images of  
traditional audiovisual media at present are massively digitalized and the ana-logue archives of  images are brought into archives on the net. Thereby with a 
34Gendolla and Schäfer  |  Playing With Signs
little bit of  programming the digital can be made visible as a shape. The ASCII 
Art Ensemble  is carrying out an about-turn, a reverse transfer of  moving images 
in ﬁ lm into “net-based moving ASCII”:
Erklärtes Ziel des 1998 gegründeten ASCII Art Ensembles (eine 
Gruppe mit Mitgliedern in Amsterdam, Ljubljana und Berlin) ist die “Rückübertragung” bewegter Filmbilder in “netz-basiertes bewegtes ASCII.” Hier ist es nicht, wie bei Jodi, der Sourcecode, der zum Bild wird, sondern hier werden (bewegte) Bilder durch ASCII-Zeichen dar-gestellt. Das Verfahren erinnert an frühe, gra ﬁ klose und 24-nadelige 
Stadien der Druckertechnologie, als Bilder nur durch im Computer vorhandene ASCII-Zeichen dargestellt werden konnten und dement-sprechend unentzifferbar waren. Das ASCII Art Ensemble hat bereits ein Javascript und einen Java Player für bewegte ASCII-Bilder entwick-elt. Nun wird noch an einem schnellen Konverter gearbeitet, der bewe-gtes ASCII in Echtzeit im Netz unterstützt. Hehres Endziel ist die Ent-wicklung eines RealPlayer G2 Plug-Ins, das besagtes neues Dateiformat unterstützt und für eine weite Verbreitung sorgen könnte. Bislang ent-wickelt worden sind u.a. die ASCII to Speech history of  art for the blind, die 
in ASCII-Zeichen gewandelte Bilder aus der Kunstgeschichte Zeichen für Zeichen vorliest. . . . Auch existiert bereits eine History of  Moving 
Image, die in sieben Clips eine Übersicht über die Stilentwicklung und 
die Distributionsmedien des bewegten Bildes gibt, sowie Deep ASCII,  
eine ASCII-Version des Films Deep Throat, die auf  einer Pong Arcade 
läuft. Hier sind nicht die pornograﬁ  schen Bilder, sondern nur deren 
unentzifferbare ASCII-Versionen zu sehen. (Arns 239f.)
The declared aim of  the ASCII Art Ensemble, founded in 1998 (with 
members in Amsterdam, Ljubljana, and Berlin) is the transfer of  mov-ing images in ﬁ  lm back into “net-based moving ASCII.” It is not, as in 
Jodi’s case, the source code that becomes the image; here (moving) im-ages are represented with ASCII signs. The method reminds us of  early states of  24-pin needle-printer technology without graphics, when im-ages could only be shown with the help of  ASCII signs available in the computer, thereby becoming quite indecipherable. ASCII Art En-semble has already developed a JavaScript and a Java Player for moving ASCII-images. Now they are working on a fast converter supporting moving ASCII on the internet in real time. The noble ﬁ nal aim is the 
development of  a RealPlayer G2 PlugIn that supports the mentioned new format and could thereby take care of  a wide circulation. So far, 
35Gendolla and Schäfer  |  Playing With Signs
the ASCII to Speech History of  Art for the Blind was developed, reading 
sign by sign images from art history that were transformed into ASCII-
signs. . . . There is also a History of  Moving Image offering an overview 
of  the development of  styles and media of  distribution of  the moving image in seven clips as well as Deep ASCII, an ASCII-version of  Deep 
Throat running on a pong arcade. One does not see the pornographic 
images but only their indecipherable ASCII-versions.
Finally, the media art project ]insofern[ attempts to visualize the aforementioned 
coupling of  the central nervous system or certain neuronal patterns with com-puter programs:
Die von Cod.Act entwickelte Maschine ist ein mobiler Scanner, der es erlaubt, ein künstliches menschliches Gehirn zu erforschen. Der Zus-chauer steht isoliert in einer Schleuse, allein mit dem Gehirn. Er ist ein-geladen zu einer Reise voller Klänge und Bilder, während er in eine be-wegte, transluzide Welt eintaucht. Sobald der Lichtstrahl des Scanners die Nervenmasse durchdringt, erwacht diese zum Leben: sie bewegt sich, schwillt an und sendet Töne aus. Fragmentarisch offenbart sie die in ihrem Gewebe eingeschlossenen Informationen, lässt sie zu Zeugen des sensoriellen Kontakts mit der Außenwelt werden. Mittels einer Si-multanübertragung verlässt das individuelle Erlebnis den geschützten Raum der Schleuse und gelangt hinaus zum Publikum. Der Vorgang lässt sich erinnern, er ist Gedächtnis geworden und verbreitet sich im öffentlichen Raum. (Cod.Act)
The machine developed by Cod.Act is a mobile Scanner allowing in-
vestigating an arti ﬁ cial human brain. The viewer stands isolated in a 
“lock,” alone with the brain. S/he is invited to a journey ﬁ lled with 
sounds and images while being submerged in a translucid world. As soon as the light-ray of  the scanner penetrates the mass of  nerves, it awakens to life: it is moving, swelling, and sending out sounds. It re-veals the information contained in its tissue in fragments, making them into witnesses of  the sensorial contacts with the outer world. With the help of  simultaneous transmission this sensorial experience is leaving the protected room of  the lock and reaches the outside public. The incidence can be memorized; it has become memory, thereby spreading into the public realm. 
36Gendolla and Schäfer  |  Playing With Signs
These projects may mean nothing to many lovers of  familiar art and literature; 
in the best-case scenario they seem to be intelligent games with the complex technologies of  the computer or an interested exploration of  public possibili-ties of  cooperation between networked cultures. The actual dimensions of  this upheaval in media history may only be visible in fragments, more as the disap-pearance of  beloved shapes of  medial dimensions than as the discernible out-lines of  new ones. Networked computer technologies currently are only offering scaffolds that help to construct something. The forms, structures and shapes that can be erected with these scaffolds are less apparent than in the gothic cathedrals or the skyscrapers of  the 20
th century. Net literature does not only 
register or comment on the socio-cultural dislocations and shifts connected to these upheavals. The fact that it is directly—and not only later on—connected to these processes, and above all the fact that it is a direct contributor to the pro-cess of  designing the 21
st century allows it to also discern some possible shapes, 
so that perceiving the obscure, highly accelerated recursive processes becomes a bit more easy by opening up the realm of  sensual perception, thereby possibly allowing more premeditated decisions.
Translated by Brigitte Pichon and Dorian Rudnytsky
Notes
1. Cf. Roberto Simanowski’s article in this book. 2. Ludwig Jäger uses similar arguments by stressing the fundamental impor-
tance of  language as anthropological archimedium regarding cognitive pro-cesses. Language for him is a “semiological form of  processing,” which actually allows the creation of  inner, mental episodes only within the net-works of  linguistic signs (cf. Jäger). These episodes then are externalized via other media (cf. Schäfer).
3. Aarseth’s main de ﬁ nitions can be found in two areas. In order to de ﬁ ne a 
text as a machine he says: “As the cyber preﬁ x indicates, the text is seen as a 
machine—not metaphorically but as a mechanical device for the production and consumption of  verbal signs. Just as a ﬁ  lm is useless without a projector 
and a screen, so a text must consist of  a material medium as well as a col-lection of  words. The machine, of  course, is not complete without a third party, the (human) operator, and it is within this triad that the text takes place. The boundaries between these three elements are not clear but ﬂ uid 
and transgressive, and each part can be de ﬁ ned only in terms of  the other 
37Gendolla and Schäfer  |  Playing With Signs
two. Furthermore, the utilitarian possibilities of  each element combine with 
those of  the two others to produce a large number of  actual text types. . . . Cybertext . . .  is the wide range (or perspective) of  possible textualities seen as a typology of  machines, as various kinds of  literary communication systems where the utilitarian differences among the mechanical parts play a deﬁ ning role in determining the aesthetic process.” (Aarseth 21f.) Further 
on, he sketches the aforementioned parameters of  his typology: “A text, then, is any object with the primary function to relay verbal information. Two observations follow from this de ﬁ nition: (1) a text cannot operate in-
dependently of  some material medium, and this in ﬂ uences its behavior, 
and (2) a text is not equal to the information it transmits. Information is here 
understood as a string of  signs, which may (but does not have to) make sense to a given observer. It is useful to distinguish between strings as they appear to readers and strings as they exist in the text, since these may not always be the same. For want of  better terms, I call the former scriptons and 
the latter textons . . . . In addition to textons and scriptons, a text consists 
of  what I call a traversal function—the mechanism by which scriptons are revealed or generated from textons and presented to the user of  the text.” (Aarseth 62)
4. Concerning the relationship between language and technical media, Wink-
ler even goes a step further, thereby surpassing Aarseth who presupposes a more or less autonomous development of  media technology. Winkler, on the other hand, presupposes an erratic transition, or better turn from “soft,” symbolic to “hard” technological procedures—and back! This is not the place to discuss advantages or disadvantages of  this idea. However, it could be helpful for a further discussion of  a media history of  litera-ture to view discursive articulations and media technology as two cyclically connected forms of  enunciation instead of  ideas that follow a determin-istic approach regarding technology. Winkler maintains “dass es ein Kon-tinuum gibt zwischen der Abrundung/Freistellung einzelner Äußerungen oder Texte (die nur auf  Basis dieser Abrundung zirkulieren können), der Systembildung im Umschlag von Diskurs in den Code (die oben Verdich-tung genannt wurde), der Herausbildung von Institutionen und der Einsch-reibung/Abrundung/Einkapslung spezi ﬁ sch ‚technischer’ Infrastrukturen. 
. . . Der Übergang von der Enunziation_1 zur Enunziation_2 nämlich hat seine Besonderheit darin, dass die Enunziation_2 den Raum des Symbolischen 
verlässt.  Die Enunziation_2 argumentiert nicht im Symbolischen sondern im 
Faktischen” (‘that there is a continuum between the rounding off/release of  individual articulations or texts (which can only circulate on the basis of  this release), the creation of  systems within the change of  discourses into 
38Gendolla and Schäfer  |  Playing With Signs
codes (which was called condensation above), the forming of  institutions 
and the inscription/rounding off/encapsulation of  speci ﬁ cally technologi-
cal infrastructures. . . . The transition of  enunciation_1 to enunciation_2 is speci ﬁ cally remarkable because enunciation_2 leaves the realm of  the symbolic.  
Enunciation_2 argues not in the symbolic but in the factual realm’) (Win-kler, Diskursökonomie  145f.).
5. However, how do we deal in this context with texts that are stored as linear 
chains of  signs in connected computers, but that could just as well be stored and distributed as print media? This type of  literature for heuristic purposes might rather be called “literature on the internet,” in order to differentiate it from “net literature.” We make this differentiation on the following grounds: Computers are disperse machines that are integrated only within a speci ﬁ c 
frame of  discursive practice into speci ﬁ c constellations (cf. Schröter). As a 
universal medium the computer potentially can simulate all media. This is why in the literary system at ﬁ rst the orientation was focussed on the func-
tions and semantics of  book culture. Widely discussed in the nineties was the metaphor of  a “universal library.” It stood for the provisional limitation of  a freely programmable universal machine to the function of  a medium for downloading (also literary) texts that seemed to realize the utopia of  a universal archive on the internet. This brings forth speci ﬁ c extensions 
and upheavals of  the traditional literary scene, or rather the “social system literature,” from which in the 18
th century the four activities production, 
mediation, reception and processing emerged (cf. Schmidt). The mediation of  literature in particular has been expanded through the World Wide Web. The transfer of  texts through electronic media consists in a replacement of  the channel of  distribution with a completely differently structured system. It reaches from text databases like the “Gutenberg Project” <http:/ /www.gutenberg.org>; <http:/ /gutenberg.spiegel.de>, that makes classic texts available in a free online edition to the innumerable websites of  authors that cannot be systematized—mostly hobby writers who cannot interest any publishers—to e-book or book-on-demand-offers of  commercial pub-lishers. 
6. Cf. also his contribution to this book: “Principles and Processes of  Genera-
tive Literature: Questions to Literature.”
7. Cf. Bootz’ article in this book: “The Problem of  Form: Transitoire Observable, 
a Laboratory for Emergent Programmed Art.”
8. We do not talk of  ﬁ ctitiousness in the sense of  things or events that are 
simply invented. We remain insistent on Käte Hamburger’s idea of  a differ-ence between the ﬁ ctional and the ﬁ ctitious. From this very difference she 
has deduced the speci ﬁ c “Logic of  Literature.”  Cf. The Logic of  Literature .
39Gendolla and Schäfer  |  Playing With Signs
9. For example: “Dear Yinka, I am still on my knees begging for love, not to a 
stranger but to one I know . . . you. I’ve been in love and know it’s fun. Each 
night and day I hope and pray that you’ll be mine forever more. I know it’s hard to trust a man—giving your heart, body and soul, but know it’s me that’s on my knees swallowing my pride, begging you, please . . . once again I say please; be mine. Love always, Lanre.”
 “Dear Chris, I’m so in love; I get this warm sensual feeling every time I 
think of  you. When I sleep at night, all I can dream about is you. I wish I could hold you in my arms. I dream of  the day when I could kiss you passionately on your soft sweet lips and listen to your heart beating be-cause it’s sweet music to my ears. All I can say is let me be the one you love; let me be the one whose love you need. Love always, Secret Admirer.”On March 21, 2005 an automat writes: “At the moment I am imag-ining you you’re standing in front of  me dressed only in heels and coat. No woman I’ve ever met was as beautiful as you. I hardly can wait till I can sip champagne from your navel. I also want to kiss your shoulders, knees, and lips, especially if  you’ve eaten pudding earlier.I have never experienced a relationship that was as exceptional as ours. Just forget for a moment modesty and telephone and ful ﬁ ll my dreams. I also 
would do everything for you—I would even walk through town with you as a dog on a leash.” We can’t get rid of  the suspicion that this machine was fed with texts by followers of  Peter Weibel—some contemporaries may remember quite well when he was pulled through the streets of  Vienna by Valie Export. Cf. Valie Export, “Aus der Mappe der Hundigkeit.”
Works Cited
Aarseth, Espen. Cybertext: Perspectives on Ergodic Literature. Baltimore: Johns Hop-
kins UP , 1997.
Arns, Inke. “‘Unformatierter ASCII-Text sieht ziemlich gut aus’: Die Geburt 
der Netzkunst aus dem Geiste des Unfalls.” Kunstforum International: Der gerissene 
Faden. Nichtlineare Techniken in der Kunst  155 (2001): 236-241.
Balpe, Jean-Pierre. “Littérature numérique, contraintes et ouvertures de l’écran: Du stylo à l’ordinateur ou du livre à l’écran.” Dichtung Digital 6.3 (2004). 27 June 
2006 <http://www.dichtung-digital.com/2004/3-Balpe.htm>.
40Gendolla and Schäfer  |  Playing With Signs
Berkenheger, Susanne. Die Schwimmmeisterin. 2002. 27 June 2006 <http://www.
schwimmmeisterin.de>. 
———. The Bubble Bath.  2003. 27 June 2006 <http://www.thebubblebath.de>.
Böhme, Hartmut. “Netzwerke: Zur Theorie und Geschichte einer Konstruk-
tion.” Netzwerke: Eine Kulturtechnik der Moderne . Ed. Jürgen Barkhoff, Hartmut
Böhme, and Jeanne Riou. Cologne: Böhlau, 2004. 17-36. 
Bootz, Philippe. “Reader/Readers.” p0es1s: Ästhetik digitaler Poesie/The Aesthet-
ics of  Digital Literature. Ed. Friedrich W . Block, Christiane Heibach, and Karin 
Wenz. Ostﬁ  ldern: Cantz, 2004. 93-121.
Chaouli, Michel. “How Interactive Can Fiction Be?” Critical Inquiry  31.3 (2005): 
559-617.Cod.Act. ]insofern[. 2003. 27 June 2006 <http://db.swr.de/imkp/IMKP .
detail?p_lw=g&p_kwid=586>.Cosic, Vuk.  Unreal. 1999. 27 June 2006 <http://www.ljudmila.org/~vuk/ascii/
unreal/>.Cramer, Florian. “Warum es zuwenig interessante Netzdichtung gibt.” Netzlitera-
tur.net. 2000. 27 June 2006 <http://www.netzliteratur.net/cramer/karlsruher_
thesen.html>. Eco, Umberto. “Fictional Protocols.” Six Walks in the Fictional Woods. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard UP , 1994. 117-142.Espenschied, Dragan, and Alvar C.H. Freude. insert_coin. 2001. 27 June 2006 
<http://odem.org/insert_coin/>.Export, Valie. “Aus der Mappe der Hundigkeit.” 1969. 27 June 2006 <http://
www.medienkunstnetz.de/werke/mappe-der-hundigkeit>. 
Gendolla, Peter. “Auf  50 Meter genau: Die neueren Ephemeriden.” Ephemeres .  
Medicale Innovationen 1900/200.  Ed. Ralf  Schnell and Georg Stanitzek. Bielefeld: 
Transcript, 2005. 217-235.
41Gendolla and Schäfer  |  Playing With Signs
Hamburger, Käte. The Logic of  Literature. Trans. Marilynn J. Rose. Bloomington, 
IN: Indiana UP , 1973.
Jäger, Ludwig. “Zeichen/Spuren: Skizze zum Problem der Sprachzeichenmedi-
alität.” Schnittstelle: Medien und kulturelle Kommunikation . Ed. Georg Stanitzek and 
Wilhelm Voßkamp. Cologne: DuMont, 2001. 17-31.
Joy, Bill. “Why the future doesn’t need us: Our most powerful 21st century 
technologies—robotics, genetic engineering, and nanotech—are threatening to 
make humans an endangered species.” Wired Magazine  8.4 (2000). 27 June 2006 
<http://www.wired.com/wired/archive/8.04/joy.html>.
Schäfer, Jörgen. “Sprachzeichenprozesse: Überlegungen zur Codierung von Lit-
eratur in ‘alten’ und ‘neuen’ Medien.” Analog/digital—Opposition oder Kontinuum? 
Zur Theorie und Geschichte einer Unterscheidung . Ed. Jens Schröter and Alexander 
Böhnke. Bielefeld: Transcript, 2004. 143-168.
Schmidt, Siegfried J. Die Selbstorganisation des Sozialsystems Literatur im 18. Jahrhun-
dert. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp, 1989.Schröter, Jens. Das Netz und die Virtuelle Realität: Zur Selbstprogrammierung der Ge-
sellschaft durch die universelle Maschine. Bielefeld: Transcript, 2004.
Singer, Wolf. “Neurobiologische Anmerkungen zum Wesen und zur Notwen-digkeit von Kunst.” Der Beobachter im Gehirn: Essays zur Hirnforschung . Frankfurt 
am Main: Suhrkamp, 2002. 211-234. 
Steels, Luc. “Kognitive Roboter und Teleportation: Artefakte reagieren auf  ihre 
Umwelt und er ﬁ nden sich eine Sprache.” Weltwissen/Wissenswelt: Das globale Netz 
von Text und Bild. Ed. Christa Maar, Ernst Pöppel, and Hans U. Obrist. Cologne: DuMont, 2000. 175-184.
Winkler, Hartmut. Diskursökonomie: Versuch über die innere Ökonomie der Medien. 
Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp, 2004. 
———. “Medium Computer: Zehn populäre Thesen zum Thema und 
warum sie möglicherweise falsch sind.” Understanding New Media, Heinz-
Nixdorf-Forum, Paderborn. 19 Feb. 2003. 27 June 2006 <http://www.uni-paderborn.de/~winkler/compmed2.html>. 
42Gendolla and Schäfer  |  Playing With Signs
Wirth, Uwe. “Schwatzhafter Schriftverkehr: Chatten in den Zeiten des Modem-
ﬁ ebers.” Praxis Internet. Ed. Stefan Münker and Alexander Roesler. Frankfurt am 
Main: Suhrkamp, 2002. 208-231.
43Roberto Simanowski
Holopoetry, Biopoetry and Digital Literature
Close Reading and T erminological Debates 
Abstract:
What are the characteristics of digital literature? Does it already emerge when it is transferred from one medium to the next? What is the relevance of genuineness in media, what that of the medium itself? How much text does a hyper-medial work have to contain in order to belong to the realm of digital literature and not to that of digital arts? How does the role of the author change when reader, machine or bacteria take his/her place? This article connects terminological questions with case studies of some interesting examples.
Last year a book was published for which I had been waiting for a long time: 
Close Reading New Media: Analyzing Electronic Literature , edited by Jan Van Looy 
and Jan Baetens. After years of terminological and theoretical debates this book is aiming at providing the case studies long overdue. It does not insist on asking whether we should talk of digital, electronic, interactive, or ergodic, of hypertext-, net-, cyber-, or code-literature but rather asks how we can read 
this literature.
1
According to the editors there are three reasons for the rarity of such 
hermeneutic endeavors in comparison to terminological or theoretical works: “First of all there is the basic conviction that critical attention does not matter, or even that it is not appropriate to works belonging to a medium which has as one of its primary principles the absence of—literally— ﬁ xed shapes and—lit-
erally— ﬁ xed meanings” (Looy and Baetens 7).
The fact that electronic literature principally is open indeed seems chal-
lenging for literary studies whose main orientation is determining signs. But this is not problematic for the ﬁ rst time; concrete poetry as well demanded of 
literary studies an adaptation of its methodical tools by assigning predicative processes to the non-linguistic realm. The editors of the book af ﬁ rm that we 
have to develop a dialogue with form and I can only con ﬁ rm this. If form 
consists in elusiveness or variableness then we must interpret this very charac-teristic. “Second, there is the idea, which is not entirely false, that hyper ﬁ ction 
is born on the margins of a medium, the computer, which is still considered a number cruncher rather than a literary device” (8). In this case the editors 
44Roberto Simanowski  |  Holopoetry, Biopoetry and Digital Literature
refer to Espen Aarseth: “The emerging new media technologies . . . should be 
studied for what they can tell us about the principles and evolution of human communication” (8). We might add that this technology should also be looked at regarding the principles of the aesthetic  communication this involves.
Thirdly—and this is the true problem—“we often hear the argument that 
hyper ﬁ ction has not yet produced enough interesting works to justify a turn 
towards a more literal and literally tackling of the material” (8). The editors correctly object to this argument maintaining with a quote from Marie-Laure Ryan that even in the case of lacking quality working out a close analysis would be worth while since “[f]or the literary scholar, the importance of the electronic movement is twofold: it problematizes familiar notions, and it challenges the limits of language” (8). I would like to support this argument underlining that even works of mediocre quality—and maybe precisely these—can illuminate to what extent electronic literature can handle its material in a meaningful and convincing way and where the traps of it may lie.
The book itself, however, gives us the impression that the editors them-
selves do not really believe that hyper ﬁ ction has produced suf ﬁ ciently interest-
ing works. The three contributions to classic hyper ﬁ ctions—Stephanie Strick-
land’s True North , Shelley Jackson’s Patchwork Girl und Marjorie Luesebrink’s 
Caliﬁ a—are followed by analyses of Geoff Ryman’ s novel 253 and Raymond 
Federman’s novel Eating Books , which were already published as books, thereby 
providing evidence for the fact that they hardly need the electronic medium. The last three contributions deal with a site promoting a ﬁ lm, with the “Nar-
ra tiv e  o f  an  In terfac e”  an d  wi th  Hypertextual Consciousness.  This book, ﬁ  nally 
promising concrete case studies after all these theoretical considerations seems barely convinced of its own interests. The meager result of this beginning hard-ly lets us hope for a continuation. 
Let us therefore describe the situation more positively. The range of elec-
tronic literature is vast. The transfer of a novel from print can be as much part of it as the website for a ﬁ lm playing with interesting text-graphic-elements. But 
is it true that already the transformation from one medium to the next creates electronic literature? How much text does a hypermedial work need in order to pertain to electronic literature  and not to electronic art? This is the moment, 
however, in which after all terminological considerations are necessary. How quickly we get to a point where we didn’t want to be: We have to talk about terminology and concepts. The matter at hand as well as its notoriety allows, respectively demands that I at least attempt to connect these considerations with some interesting case studies. 
45Roberto Simanowski  |  Holopoetry, Biopoetry and Digital Literature
1. The Genuineness of the Artifact
When the Brazilian artist Eduardo Kac discovered holography in the eighties, 
he began with some basic questions: 
It is very important to emphasize that not all texts recorded on hologra-phic ﬁ lm are holopoems. It is technically possible, for example, to re-
cord a symbolist sonnet on a hologram. Such a sonnet does not become a holopoem simply because it is displayed on holographic ﬁ  lm. What 
deﬁ nes a holopoem is not the fact that a given text is recorded on ho-
lographic ﬁ lm. What matters is the creation of  a new syntax, exploring 
mobility, non-linearity, interactivity, ﬂ uidity, discontinuity and dynamic 
behavior only possible in holographic space-time. (“Biopoetry” 184-5)
Kac’s aim is the differentiation of  genuine holopoetry from one that only brings old artifacts into the new medium. He sees the necessity of  this differentiation in the disparity between technical skills and artistic concepts while using new technologies—a general problem at that time (cf. Coyle 65-68). The hologra-phy-artist Margaret Beyon for example differentiates between the mere use of  a technology and its utilization for aesthetic purposes: “The credit for exhibitions arranged by artists of  laser beams as purely physical phenomena, for instance, should go to the inventor and manufacturers of  the laser, rather than to the  
‘artist’” (Coyle 73). In a similar sense the art critic Peter Fuller is questioning the share of  the artist in holographic objects: 
[T]he very process  of  making a hologram does not allow for the admissi-
on of  a human imaginative or physical expressive element at any point. The representation is not worked, it is posed and processed . . . hence the hologram remains a particularly dead medium compared with pain-ting. (Coyle 74)
It is just this disesteem of  holography that is answered by Kac’s demand for holopoetry emerging from the medium itself  by using its technical potential for aesthetic and conceptual purposes.
I do not want to discuss the characteristics that holography as technology 
has in store for speciﬁ  c artistic statements. It was important to show that the 
problems surfacing with new media are not new ones. But we have to discuss the characteristics that digital technologies keep ready for speci ﬁ c artistic statements.
In earlier texts
 (2002) I have identi ﬁ ed these speci ﬁ c characteristics as interactiv-
ity, intermediality, and performance:
46Roberto Simanowski  |  Holopoetry, Biopoetry and Digital Literature
Interactivity aims at motivating the recipient to co-construct the work, including 
several possibilities:
■ reacting to characteristics of  the work (programmed interactivity: human–
software). This includes ﬁ rst of  all (but certainly not any more exclusively or 
even mainly) multilinearity in hypertexts requesting the readers to assemble navigational decisions on their own.
■ reacting to activities of  other recipients (network-bound interactivity: hu-
man–human via software). This includes cooperative writing projects re-questing all readers entering the website to become authors of  the project introduced.
Intermediality as a further characteristic of  digital literature marks the (conceptual-integrative) connection between the traditional media of  expression, language, image, and music. The academic discussion differentiates performative nuances that are reﬂ  ected in terminological variants. In his analysis of  intermediality 
Jürgen Müller for example differentiates between medial elements that perform alongside each other and those that conceptually cooperate. The ﬁ rst variant he 
calls multimedial, the latter intermedial (cf. Müller 83). It remains questionable, however, whether this differentiation is suf ﬁ ciently discriminating. In scholarly 
discussions the term intermedia is used quite variably and in some instances only indicates a change of  media or a reciprocal fertilization among the differ-ent media, like literature in ﬁ lm, literature in painting etc. regarding the contents 
(cf. Eicher and Bleckmann; Zima). Müller’s demand regarding a conceptual fu-sion also lacks conceptual de ﬁ nitions. When do side-by-side events merge with 
cooperation? How can we, for example, answer this question in a simple TV documentary connecting image and sound commenting and deconstructing the statement by a sophisticated camera? The decision whether a TV documentary or a photo-novel—to add a popular genre of  net literature—is intermedial or multimedial will depend on the decision of  the viewer. 
Performance, my third characteristic, designates the programming of  an in-
trinsic performance or of  one that is dependent on reception. One could in-scribe aspects of  the performance into the invisible textual level of  the digital work so that words and images are allowed on stage. Such an invisible textual level can be found for example in animated images into which the activity of  its individual images was inscribed. The change of  the image in most cases was supplied by a text editor with a text that can be revealed again within such an editor by showing the succession of  images, the number of  loops, or the background color. Another textual level, much more easily accessible, is the HTML-Source with its executive commands and the JavaScripts that, while not 
47Roberto Simanowski  |  Holopoetry, Biopoetry and Digital Literature
appearing as text, continue their activity unseen in the background. The prompt 
of  this performance can either come from the program or from the recipient. In the latter case, however, we are referred back to interactivity as the earlier characteristic of  digital literature.
I don’t have to underline speci ﬁ cally that in this concrete case we see the 
aforementioned characteristics acting in different degrees and encounter them in the most different combinations. But I do want to underline that in this list of  characteristics I am referring to phenomena of  the monitor and not to the underlying arithmetic operations per se. The very fact of  encoding for me is not a suf ﬁ cient element since in a computer every phenomenon by necessity is 
encoded, even the classic linear text. The mere existence of  such a text in the computer makes it as little into digital literature as the recording of  a poem onto holographic material makes this poem into holopoetry. The encoding for me is interesting only insofar as it takes presence on the monitor as an aesthetic ele-ment of  expression.
By specifying characteristics I have actually determined after the event what 
I mean by digital literature. But why am I operating with this word at all and not with one of  the competing terms? The answer is: for pragmatic reasons. The term digital literature seems to offer the least occasion for misunderstandings. It does not refer to concrete individual characteristics of  digital literature like interactivity, networking or non-sequentiality as do the terms interactive litera-ture, net literature or hypertext. It rather designates a certain medium, which I am, by the way, describing as digital and not as electronic in order to ensure the differentiation from other electronic media like cinema, radio or television. The linkage of  my subject matter to this medium implies that it depends on that me-dium for reasons that refer to the form of  this literature and not, for instance, its distribution. This dependence I call the genuineness of  the medium. The relevance for this de ﬁ nition is not the fact but the necessity  of  its existence not 
only in the net but more comprehensively in digital media.
2
However, media relevance  has to precede the genuineness of  the medium. 
This term digital in digital literature relates to the medium of  its production and not to the semiotics of  its material. Since language consists of  discrete signs one could say that literature is always the result of  digital encoding, contrary to im-ages that are based on non-discrete signs. This is where semiotitians’ objections against the prevailing expansion of  the term language to non-linguistic signs reside.
3 Since digital literature by de ﬁ nition is different from traditional literature 
it also by de ﬁ nition has to surpass semiotic digitality. This is achieved by con-
necting to visual signs and performative elements that all can be described as non-discrete signs. The characterization of  the term “digital literature” there-fore points to the technological  notion of  the medium and not to its semiotic  one. 
48Roberto Simanowski  |  Holopoetry, Biopoetry and Digital Literature
With this speci ﬁ cation we can also answer the objection asking what non-digital 
literature might mean contrary to digital literature.4 
The consequence of  this characterization of  our object of  analysis is a shift 
from linguistic hermeneutics to a hermeneutics of  intermedial, interactive, and 
performative signs. It is not alone the meaning of  a word that is at stake, but the meaning of  the performance of  this word on the monitor, connected to visual signs and as a reaction to reader activities. This hermeneutics cannot be based on a system of  de ﬁ ned meanings, as in the case of  linguistic signs. In taking up 
Umberto Eco’s thoughts relating to cinema in his Theory of  Semiotics: The semiol-
ogy of  digital literature is a semiology of  parole that has no langue at its basis.
Matters are still getting more complicated: What legitimates us to talk of  
genuineness of  media? Espen Aarseth reminds us in his book Cybertext that the 
digital medium is not even needed for hypertext or combinatorial poetry. Nor do the animated texts of  the Young-Hae Chang Heavy Industries really need the digital medium nor does David Knoebel’s “Click Poetry” that is set to sound and that indeed does not demand more interactivity of  the user than one single click. They could indeed run on the movie screen as did some literary texts that were made into movies in the tradition of  text- ﬁ lms since the end of  the sixties 
(e.g. Michael Snow’s So It Is in 1982). And what about a work like The Child by 
Alex Gopher and Antoine Bardou-Jacquet, which not only dynamizes the text and parallelizes it with sound but also uses it simultaneously as a linguistic and visual sign in the tradition of  concrete poetry? Should we attest medial genuine-ness to such a work?
5
Fig. 1. Alex Gopher and Antoine Bardou-Jacquet: The Child. 
The Child  shows a woman in labor an d her partner speeding through Manhattan 
in a taxi to get to the hospital. This story, in itself  quite unspectacular and also told with quite conservative camera work visualizes all characters and objects by 

49Roberto Simanowski  |  Holopoetry, Biopoetry and Digital Literature
their respective letters. For example in the beginning the skyscrapers of  Manhat-
tan are named by vertically readable names; the window through which the view-er is led into one of  the apartments is formed by the word WINDOW formed by two lines of  letters placed in a square. Inside the apartment the body of  the woman is outlined in the vertical placement of  the words “BROWNHAIR / PRETTYFACE / WOMAN / PREGNANT / REDDRESS / SNEAKERS,” while the man standing next to her is shown with the words “BLACKHAIR / PLEASANTFACE / BIGGLASSES / HUSBAND / LITTLEMAN / DARK-SUIT” that change into “BLACKHAIR / BIGGLASSES / ANXIOUSFACE  
/ HUSBAND” after the woman cries out “The baby, its coming” with ANX-
IOUSFACE  appearing in luminescent colors and ﬂ  uttering handwriting. The 
third and main textual level is the script in addition to the words of  the song and the sparing dialogue of  the main actors (i.e. the exclamation of  the preg-nant woman, the anxious “OK” of  the husband, the shouting for a taxi, the instructions to the driver, and the short dialogue with the police following the racing taxi.
The work is interesting not only regarding its visualization, but also re-
garding its concept. It is the digitalizing of the world in a semiological way and reminds us of Jeffrey Shaw’s Legible City . But it works in a different way since 
it does not tell an invisible story behind walls, but reduces the visible objects to their momentary meaning for an unspeci ﬁ ed narrator. A Cadillac stretch-
limousine holding up traf ﬁ c is only endlessly long if you are trying to reach 
your maternity ward. Is it beautiful nevertheless? Does one of the three people in the waiting taxi think that this Cadillac is beautiful? What would this mean for the character? If the other cars are just perceived as “cars,” this already seems to ﬁ  t with the situation described. In such moments one does not have a 
sense for aesthetic details. Nevertheless: the taxi-driver is a “DREADLOCKS RASTAMAN CABDRIVER.” Why is it important to concretize this? And why aren’t we told sex, ethnicity, age or build? Is it the hair that speaks most for such a chase, which, by the way, includes a serious accident with what looks like several casualties? Which cultural stereotypes were used here? Had we seen the “DREADLOCKS RASTAMAN CABDRIVER” we might have had 
the same associations, but probably without realizing it. But already the des-ignation of this one characteristic points to the mechanism of typifying. The textualization of visual signs forces us to choose and is unavoidably direct by its discreteness. The work, by casting everything into language, speaks about the different methods of encoding visual and linguistic languages. It speaks, to use its own metaphor, about the birth of meaning.
6 
50Roberto Simanowski  |  Holopoetry, Biopoetry and Digital Literature
This is a very nice example of  digital literature insofar as it is character-
ized by meta-re ﬂ exivity (by comparing linguistic and visual levels of  meaning), 
intermediality (through the conceptual coexistence of  medial elements) and per-
formance (by staging the letters like a running ﬁ lm). It is a work that is most in-
teresting because of  its tension between ambitious and conventional aesthetics: The narrative level and the camera work are located in mainstream-aesthetics and seems to present the (necessary) opposite pole to the provocation of  the viewers by presenting the narrated reality in such an unusual way. Nevertheless it is a video-clip that was shown in the movie theatres as Clip Cult Vol. 1—Ex-ploding Cinema by the Cologne distributor Rapid Eye Movies in 1999. There is a lack of  the terminologically relevant genuineness of  the medium in it since the fact that it is using a digital technology for its production hardly is suf ﬁ cient 
since nowadays every cut, every musical arrangement and every textual format-ting is done with the use of  the computer.
Maybe one should ﬁ  nd pragmatic reasons assigning this work—just like 
the text- ﬁ lms by David Knoebel and Young-Hae Chang Heavy Industries—to 
the realm of  digital literature in order to have a further example for showing how interesting the phenomena are that are brought forth by this ﬁ eld of  in-
vestigation. We could counter the objection that these are merely ﬁ lmed texts 
by pointing out their media- typicality : It is correct that there are also multilinear 
texts in the print-medium as well as dynamized writing in the medium ﬁ lm but 
in both cases these are atypical features in the medium crossing experimentally the borders of  another, in which this exception then becomes a rule speci ﬁ c for 
the medium. Only digital technology provides a medial home for multilinearity and dynamization of  texts.
7 
Does this mean that the terminological and taxonomic problems have been 
solved to a certain extent? By no means. We still have not talked about the term literature in digital literature. What is the literary element in digital literature?
2. The Disappearance of Genre-Boundaries
When Richard Ziegfeld in his Interactive Fiction acquainted his readers with the 
interactive, audio-visual widening of literature he knew that this widening also would make the term literature into a problematic one. He therefore is directly asking, “Is interactive ﬁ ction a literary or a visual art form?” arguing in his 
answer with proportions:
Interactive ﬁ ction addresses language concerns—with visible rather 
than oral words—that readers can contemplate for so long as they 
51Roberto Simanowski  |  Holopoetry, Biopoetry and Digital Literature
wish and to which they may return for further study. While interac-
tive ﬁ ction offers potent possibilities in the visual realm, it presents a 
proportion of word in relation to graphic device that sharply distin-guishes it from the visual electronic media. Thus, interactive ﬁ ction is 
the ﬁ rst literary electronic form. (370)
For the time frame we are dealing with the borderline to the other visual forms—ﬁ lm, TV , video, software adventure games—is clear. In 1989, still some years 
before the arrival of  the WWW , the interface of  digital media was dominated by words. It was the time in which one could still exclaim, as did Michael Joyce in 1988: “Hypertext is the word’s revenge on TV” (47). Even ten years later the argument of  proportionality might have been plausible in order to character-ize a work of  digital media, or of  net literature as Christian Köllerer calls it, as a “complexly structured, mostly linguistic-aesthetic artifact” (53) in the face of  
multimedia. But even if  the criterion of  quantity seems to be quite convincing at ﬁ rst sight it is hardly practicable since we have to ask ourselves soon: How can 
we measure the primacy of  the word—by the space it takes on the monitor or in the memory? After the attention it captivates or the amount of  information in comparison to visual elements? And what does it mean if  through staging a word is emphasized mainly in its materiality as a typographic sign and therefore is not effective as a text but as an image? The Child already has shown this pos-
sibility even though it is aiming at both visual and linguistic functions, much like the tradition of  concrete poetry. In a piece like Camille Utterback’s and Romy Achituv’s Text Rain the situation is already more dif ﬁ cult.
Fig. 2. Camille Utterback and Romy Achituv: Text Rain. 
In the interactive installation Text Rain of  1999 the viewers stand or move in 
front of  a big monitor in which they see themselves as black and white projec-tions and on which letters fall from the top edge: 

52Roberto Simanowski  |  Holopoetry, Biopoetry and Digital Literature
Like rain or snow, the text appears to land on participants’ heads and 
arms. The text responds to the participants’ motions and can be caught, lifted, and then let fall again. The falling text will land on anything dar-ker than a certain threshold, and “fall” whenever that obstacle is remo-ved. (Utterback and Achituv) 
Therefore, Text Rain  is more about playing with the text than about narration. 
Nevertheless this work is indebted to literature and doubly inspired by it. On the one hand it picks up on Apollinaire’s concrete poem “Il Pleut” (1918) distribut-ing the letters in ﬁ ve slanted verticals across the page like falling raindrops. On 
the other it is using the poem “Talk, You” from Evan Zimroth’s book Dead, Din-
ner, Or Naked (1993) that can become a reading object in spite of  the game:
If  a participant accumulates enough letters along their outstretched arms, or along the silhouette of  any dark object, they can sometimes catch an entire word, or even a phrase. The falling letters are not ran-dom, but form lines of  a poem about bodies and language. “Reading” the phrases in the Text Rain installation becomes a physical as well as a 
cerebral endeavor. (Utterback and Achituv)
The lines of  the poem create the following text:
I like talking with you,simply that: conversing ,
a turning-with or -around,as in your turning aroundto face me suddenly …At your turning, each partof  my body turns to verb.We are the oppositeof  tongue-tied, if  therewere such an antonym;We are synonymsfor limbs’ looseningof  syntax,and yet turn to nothing:It’s just talk.
Clearly, Text Rain is working with the statement of  the poem by manipulating 
the way in which it can be read: The conversation between two people, word-
53Roberto Simanowski  |  Holopoetry, Biopoetry and Digital Literature
less and aimless, which lets the movement of  the bodies change body parts into 
words, becomes a playful conversation between the bodies of  the viewers and the letters of  the installation. The subject of  the poem, namely the relationship of  body language and verbal language is also the subject of  the interactive in-stallation. Therefore, the choice of  the text is not accidental and therefore the reading process is important for understanding this work.
The documentation of  Text Rain, however, shows that the lines can only be 
deciphered after a tenacious collection of  all letters and even then only with dif-ﬁ culty. The viewers also don’t really address the reading process but mainly test 
the interface. Utterback’s description then deservedly puts “Reading” in quota-tion marks and at the same time divulges the fact that even the author does not expect a real reading from the viewers. The cerebral effort that was announced probably consists more in the “reading” of  Text Rain, i.e. in the interpretation of  the physical effort than that of  Zimroth’s poem. The work illustrates its en-tire attraction on the physical level; the fascinating elements of  the installation are the movements that it creates in front of  the monitor among the viewers in the interaction with the falling letters. Virtually as an inversion, this interaction brings forth what the poem describes: Letters change the bodies of  the viewers while they are moving. The irony is that even still the non-reading of  the text (or rather only its non-reading) actually realizes it, since the change of  its func-tion from the linguistic to the visual level while becoming an interactive partner corresponds to the aimless conversation that is celebrated in the end: “. . . turn to nothing: / It’s just talk .” As Evan Zimroth’s poem reﬂ  ects on the communica-
tion of  two people going beyond the pettiness of  mere concrete information, the installation frees the text of  its representative function letting it become pure self-suf ﬁ cient presence.
It should be mentioned that it is rather Utterback’s work with Zimroth’s 
poem that elevates it above the concrete message. The original is longer by seven lines and contains different line-breaks than Utterback’s video-documen-tation of  Text Rain and it does contain information exchange.
8 This interference 
shows most clearly that Utterback was aiming at the relationship between bodily and verbal language or rather at the playful interaction between letter and body. Poetry like Apollinaire’s rain poem or some other text about rain or snow might 
have been more obvious but would have given away the deeper meaning by 
drowning Text Rain in the banality of  a double rain metaphor.
Insofar as this installation does not aim at the reading of  the text it acts 
rather as digital art than as literature. Therefore my suggestion of  differentiation is not so much based on proportionality but on the role played by the text as a whole. If  the text continues to be important as a linguistic phenomenon and can be perceived as such, we can talk of  digital literature. If  the text becomes a visual 
54Roberto Simanowski  |  Holopoetry, Biopoetry and Digital Literature
object of  interaction, we are dealing with digital art, which may be speci ﬁ ed as 
digital installation or performance art, depending on the taxonomic diligence. 
With this differentiation we are not trying to de ﬁ ne literature with regard 
to the letter (lat.: littera) but with regard to its characteristic of  teaming up with 
other letters forming meaningful words. This seems to be a quite conservative method in the light of  futurist and dadaist avant-garde efforts to free the letter from its stronghold of  meaning in sentences or words, as did for example Mari-netti in his Parole in libertà or shortly after him Hugo Ball, Richard Huelsenbeck 
and Kurt Schwitters in their sound poetry. Regarding a meaningful text however, and in light of  recent decentralizing movements, this conservatism offers a prac-ticable basis for distinguishing literature from other genres like painting, ﬁ lm, or 
music. But is that necessary? Some scholars, like for example Katherine Hayles, working in the areas of  digital aesthetics question concerns of  categorization and deﬁ  nition in order to remain open for the speciﬁ  c characteristics of  the new 
inter- and transmedial phenomena (45).
9 We might add that this is done from 
the beginning in order to avoid battles of  authority with literary scholarship that is both trying to expand its objects of  research and, in an old pattern, to dis-tinguish itself  as a discipline from scholarship in neighboring aesthetic studies. In the interest of  openness and underlining once more the earlier mentioned preference for interpretive work over a terminological one, I can only agree with this rejection and avoidance. I cannot do this, however, if  the rejection of  terminological questions leads to a loss in interpretation. As the discussion of  examples so far has shown, very often only the question whether a work acts as literature, or ﬁ lm or installation sharpens the eye for all its levels of  meaning.
Regarding Text Rain  the classi ﬁ cation remains more difﬁ  cult and more ex-
citing than it might look after the clear differentiation between the linguistic and the non-linguistic role of  the text. Text Rain on the one hand only realizes the 
underlying poem when it is not perceived as a linguistic phenomenon; but we can only come to this conclusion after we have read the poem.
10 This installation 
ﬁ rst has to be treated as literature before we can realize that in reality it wants to 
be art. Only those who submit the interaction with the letters to the goal-orien-tation of  deciphering realize that those who refrain from it do with the text what it is suggesting. This is where the deeper wit of  Text Rain lies; it possibly wasn’t 
even intended and in most cases probably only becomes visible by presenting a readable version of  the poem in the documentation of  Text Rain, which at the 
same time simultaneously invalidates it.
11
55Roberto Simanowski  |  Holopoetry, Biopoetry and Digital Literature
Fig. 3. Noah Wardrip-Fruin et al.: Screen. 
In Noah Wardrip-Fruin’s Screen  we have a comparatively clear case (Wardrip-
Fruin et al.). This work can be viewed in the “Cave,” a small room onto the three 
sides and the ﬂ oor of  which information can be projected; the viewer wears 
spectacles allowing a three-dimensional perception of  the information. S/He is also provided with a glove that allows calculating the position of  his hand in space. The work starts by playing a recorded text about the loss of  memory. Sub-sequently three walls are covered with the text of  short episodes. Finally, single words from these texts drop from the wall approaching the viewer who now has the option to push them back with his gloved hand into their old position. The frequency and speed of  this dropping increases in the course of  the episode; in the end, all those words are falling off  the wall that were not pushed back.

56Roberto Simanowski  |  Holopoetry, Biopoetry and Digital Literature
In Screen the text then ﬁ rst voices the general subject matter—the loss 
of  memory through the loss of  words. The interaction then builds on this in 
an illustrative manner by showing the dropping of  the words from the storage medium “wall” and the reader’s option to counter the dropping. The irony of  this interaction lies in the fact that memorization becomes a sport or game in which winning is more important than the perception of  the words threatened by loss. This playful interaction with memory is also expressed in the invitation for a new round expressed in the end: “If  memories de ﬁ ne us what de ﬁ nes us 
when they are gone? An unbearable prospect. We retrieve what we can and try again” (Wardrip-Fruin et al.). Learned in media theory we could say with Plato’s Phaidros-dialogue: The renewal of  that which is threatened by forgetting in mental memory is replaced by the questionable attempt to ﬁ xate it in the exter-
nal medium wall.
12
Noah Wardrip-Fruin calls Screen  an “instrumental text” which he also sees 
as a sub-genre of  “playable media” including computer games among others (cf. “From Instrumental Texts”). Without doubt we could also assign Text Rain to 
this sub-genre. What is said in the documentation of  Screen  applies to both: “It 
creates new experiences of  text in relation to the reader’s body” (Wardrip-Fruin et al.). 
Contrary to Text Rain of  course the relationship in digital literature of  the 
literary to the physical or digital, i.e.  those elements about which the digital text 
was expanded, is showing in  Screen  with the desired clarity. We might therefore 
call it an ideal case in the attempt at characterizing literaricity within the term digital literature. 
3.  Authorship in Digital Literature
Talking about the speci ﬁ cs of  digital literature we ﬁ nally also have to ask about 
the role of  the author. In the following, however, I will not talk about the so-called death of  the author in hypertext nor of  collaborative authorship in co-writing projects.
13 But I will talk of  the dismissal of  the author from text 
production through narrative machines and bacteria.
Narrative machines are the contemporary form of  experiments in automat-
ed writing that go back to the dadaists and surrealists of  the 1920s and that later were taken up again by William Burroughs. The aim of  these experiments in an aleatoric, non-intentional writing was not dismissing the author but surpassing the limits of  his creativity, overcoming his personal perspectives. This could be achieved by narcotizing
14 or multiplying the author.15 Automated writing in the 
reality of  actual narrative machines is based on a previous schematization of  
57Roberto Simanowski  |  Holopoetry, Biopoetry and Digital Literature
characters, potential con ﬂ icts and their solutions. This, however, does not re-
ally lead to a widening of  expressive forms as we can see in the story generator 
Makebelieve  by Hugo Liu and Push Singh, Scott Turner’s Minstrel  or TALE-SPIN  
by Meehan.16 In these cases the automatic text-production means in effect the 
opening out of  alienation—as a social phenomenon of  modern society—to include also the poetic process that in its turn produces the alienation on the re-ception side. Namely, if  the reader is not confronted any more with the speci ﬁ c 
self-awareness and world-perception of  an author what then is the point in the reading process? What message can a text still have without a real sender?
Fig. 4. Simon Biggs: Great Wall of  China.
I do not want to get myself  absorbed by this discussion.17 I do, however, want 
to point out an example in which the producer of  the software and the writer share the authorship. It is Simon Biggs’ Great Wall of  China generating syntacti-
cally correct but semantically meaningless sentences from the vocabulary of  the English translation of  Kafka’s fragment Beim Bau der Chinesischen Mauer.  Biggs’ 
text generator is especially interesting because of  its transmedial offer for the reading process. The reader has to read Kafka’s text in order to understand the text of  the text generator as a sensual permutation of  the primary text. Like the human beings there are waiting in vain for the arrival of  a messenger, here the reader is waiting in vain for the arrival of  a message. In the same way as Hermes never arrives in the primary text, the hermeneutic activity in Great Wall of  China  
is grasping at blanks. Biggs’ authorship is superimposed on Kafka’s authorship, 

58Roberto Simanowski  |  Holopoetry, Biopoetry and Digital Literature
as is the narrative machine on the written text. Great Wall of  China does not tell a 
story; it is the commentary of  a story nevertheless. It is the translation of  a text 
into immediate perceptibility and its linguistic share is the fact that the linguistic material does not make any sense.
The model of  a double reception—of  the performance of  the text gen-
erator and that of  the text it is based on—reminds us of  Text Rain  and Screen. 
Comparable to those cases here as well we can speak of  digital literature, which, however—if  the reading of  the text is not carried out—will be perceived rather as digital art. Returning to Eduardo Kac in the end, the next example is more complicated: He seems to make matters easy for us with his own terminology, but in reality he makes it rather more dif ﬁ cult.
Fig. 5. Eduar do Kac: Genesis.
Kac not only addressed holopoetry, he also claimed biopoetry in which not narrative machines but living organisms take over the co-authorship of  a text: “Now, in a world of  clones, chimeras, and transgenetic organisms, it is time to consider new directions for poetry in vivo. Below I propose the use of  biotech-
nology and living organisms as a new realm of  verbal creation” (“Biopoetry” 184). The fourth of  the following points reads as follows:
Transgenic poetry: synthesize DNA according to invented codes to write words and sentences using combinations of  amino acids. In-corporate these DNA words and sentences into the genome of  living organisms, which then pass them on to their offspring, combining with words of  other organisms. Through mutation, natural loss and 

59Roberto Simanowski  |  Holopoetry, Biopoetry and Digital Literature
exchange of  DNA material new words and sentences will emerge. 
Read the transpoem back via DNA sequencing. (“Biopoetry” 184)
Here Kac is describing what he has experimented with in his project Genesis , 
begun in 1998, in which bacteria rewrite a sentence from the bible in coopera-tion with the visitors of  a website: “Let man have dominion over the ﬁ sh of  
the sea and over the fowl of  the air and over every living thing that moves upon the earth.” Kac transferred the sentence into Morse and replaced its signs with the letters of  a genetic code: the periods were replaced by C (Cytosin), the lines by T (Thymine), gaps between words by A (Adenine) and spaces between let-ters by G (Guanine). From this results an AGCT-Chain representing a gene nonexistent in nature. Kac connected it to ﬂ uorescent protein and injected it 
into E. Coli bacteria. These bacteria are stored in a Petri dish on a counter of  an exhibition hall under an ultraviolet light that can be switched on by the visitors of  the exhibition or the visitors of  the corresponding website. The light affects the DNA-sequence of  the bacteria and speeds up their mutation. After a certain time the changed genetic code is translated back according to the same pat-tern. The result of  the cooperative writing activity between visitors and bacteria shows only a small change, which however already disguises the subject of  the originally promised human dominance: “Let aan have dominion over the ﬁ  sh of  
the sea and over the fowl of  the air and over every living thing that ioves ua eon the earth” (Kac, “Genesis”).
The message of  this project is easily recognizable. By acquiring authority 
over all other living beings, humans destroy the scriptural foundation that had originally authorized them. The judgment passed by the rewriting of  the sen-tence at the same time reminds us of  the confusion of  tongues in ﬂ icted by god 
as a reaction to the tower of  Babel, another famous symbol for human hubris. The more hidden message of  the project is talking about a con ﬂ ict between the 
aesthetic experience and individual responsibility, since the click of  the mouse speeding up the mutation of  the bacteria offers up a fascinating play of  colors, since the bacteria are glowing in cyan and yellow under the ultraviolet light. The curiosity and joy of  seeing this play of  colors suppresses the question of  the actual results of  the activity. 
Hence, the future body in the present constellation is not written in a 
goal-oriented manner, but blindly, which therefore hardly corresponds to the logic of any responsible intervention in creation. Since this involvement lacks every concept, we cannot even say: The word is becoming ﬂ  esh. Rather, 
here it is the subconscious that is becoming ﬂ esh, namely the temptation to 
use our own curiosity inconsiderately. The point is that the ﬂ esh again is 
becoming word, sentencing by rewriting the original sentence: The origi-
60Roberto Simanowski  |  Holopoetry, Biopoetry and Digital Literature
nally promised dominance is taken back as a direct result of the executed 
dominance.
The fact that the perpetrators are becoming victims is part of  the aesthetic 
experience of  the public. Jessica Wyman speaks of  a trauma into which we are thrown: “What surprises is the degree of  trauma into which we are psychically thrown by the creation of  this gene and the action (sometimes read as violence) that we do to it as viewers by the activation of  an ultraviolet light which speeds its mutation” (“On Eduardo Kac’s Genesis”). And Steve Tomasula stresses the associative connection with the object of  ones own activity: 
Standing in the box formed by the walls of  Genesis , it’s easy for view-
ers to reverse the scale and think of  themselves in the position of  the bacteria with ultraviolet light streaming down (possibly through a hole in the ozone layer?). We’re invited to contemplate consequences of  in-terfering with evolution when Kac translates, at the end of  the exhibit, the DNA code of  his original message back into English. . . . In Kac’s Genesis , though, we see an icon for our new-found ability to rewrite our-
selves—instantly, and in ways whose rami ﬁ cations might not become 
apparent for generations. (255f.)
Genesis therefore is not only asking the question of  authorship, it is itself  an ar-
tifact on authorship. Beyond that it also asks the question whether this is poetry, as suggested by Kac’s terminology, or rather an installation. Where could we note the difference between poetry and installation? The spontaneous answer again could lead us to the linguistic aspect: If  the words produced by the bacte-ria in their singularity were meaningful the result of  their work could possibly be called poetry, to be more exact: aleatoric poetry. But in Genesis  the words gener-
ated by the bacteria are not meaningful in themselves. Once we have made this observation, we can continue with our argument in a twofold way. On the one hand we can refer to sound poetry as a playful form of  literature and therefore, from the perspective of  the text, assign Genesis  to digital literature. On the other 
hand we can see the linguistic meaning of  the words generated by the bacteria in the very fact that they become semantically fragile, since the halfway coherent words function like the exclamation or even the call for help of  a degenerate author. In this case Genesis  could be assigned to digital literature from the per-
spective of  the installation.
However we are going to decide this question, it has become clear that the 
phenomena of  digital aesthetics confront us with many borderline cases. It is advisable to verify what role is played by the text in each concrete instance. In general we should use categories sparingly and only provisionally. For the rest 
61Roberto Simanowski  |  Holopoetry, Biopoetry and Digital Literature
we will have to reckon with at least as many “taxonomic scandals” (Nies 327) in 
the area in which intermediality is the main characteristic, as they exist in literary studies. This at least is a continuity on which we can build.
Translated by Brigitte Pichon and Dorian Rudnytsky
Notes
1. I admit to have contributed to this terminological debate in my book Interﬁ -
ctions. In all probability instead of  clearing up some of  the questions I have produced new ones. Coming to my defense I can say, however, that the chapter “Begriffe, Merkmale, Typologie” (Terms, Characteristics, Typology) takes up only 5% of  the book and that its greater part consists of  extensive case studies. 
2. The term “net literature” remains problematic even if  it is disengaged from 
the net and widened into feedback-processes in the computer or even in social systems. With this widening of  the expression “net,” the term net literature looses its differentiating power regarding traditional phenomena in literature that are as well bound to social systems and into the feedback-processes of  the computer, as the case may be.
3. Roland Barthes points out this problem at the beginning of  his essay on the 
“Rhetoric of  the Image” in: Image, Music, Text.
4. Cf. Schäfer. See in this context also Hans H. Hiebel’s differentiation between 
primary digitality (discrete-distinctive signs) and secondary digitality (digi-talization of  signs as consequence of  the computer) (8). Digital literature then can be related to secondary digitality. It has been pointed out that digital media strictly speaking should be called binary media (cf. P ﬂ üger), so 
that the term digitality, relating to the computer, proves to be a questionab-le criterion of  de ﬁ nition. But since the term “digital media” has generally 
been accepted—and has to be the chosen one compared to the even more inaccurate one of  “new media”—it would be quite unserviceable to speak of  “binary” instead of  digital literature.
5. I am talking of  Alex Gopher’s arrangement The Child  (1999) using a sample 
by the jazz-legend Billie Holiday. The details of  the technical production of  this Clip, camera work etc. are described in detail by Reither.  
6. Saskia Reither underlines, however, that this textualization also leads to a de-
stereotyped perspective since the architectural highlights of  the city (MoMA, Guggenheim, Chrysler Building etc.) do not appear in their generally known form but as texts that are put alongside the other buildings (cf. Reither). 
62Roberto Simanowski  |  Holopoetry, Biopoetry and Digital Literature
7. Since The Child despite its textuality belongs to the genre video-clip and is 
successful as such, the argument of  a typical feature of  the medium, however, 
stands on shakier ground than in the case of  the text- ﬁ lm by David Knoebel 
and Young-Hae Chang Heavy Industries. A prime example for a piece of  art bound to its medium is John Cayley’s Overboard which is produced algorithmi-
cally in real time and could truly not be shown as a ﬁ lm.
8. In the original the poem reads as follows:
“I like talking with you, simply that:conversing , a turning-with or -around, as in
your turning around to face mesuddenly, saying Come, and I turn
with you, for a sometimehand under my under-things, and you telling mewhat you would do, where,on what part of  my bodyyou might talk to me differently.At your turning,each part of  my body turns to verb.We are the opposite oftongue-tied, if  there were such anantonym; we are synonymsfor limbs’ loosening of  syntax,and yet turn to nothing:It’s just talk .”
9. For the differentiation of  transmediality and intermediality cf. Simanowski, 
“Transmediale Kunst.”
10. This consecutiveness of  reception ﬁ rst as literature and then as visual art fol-
lows the principle of  alternating reception that we also experience in concrete poetry (see for example Eugen Gomringer’s Schweigen  (1954) in which we ﬁ rst 
have to read the word “Schweigen” (‘silence’) and understand its meaning be-fore we can meaningfully refer it to the gap between the nine words “Schwei-gen”). 
11. In the moment the underlying poem is identi ﬁ ed in the accompanying text of  
the installation, thereby becoming accessible, the repressive power of  the text over the interpretation of  the image (in this case the installation) sets in, which Roland Barthes has underlined in his essay Rhetoric of  the Image.  Insofar as the 
viewers can only read the poem after their encounter with the installation, a “belated repression” sets in, or rather a correction that transfers the comple-tion of  the interpretation outside of  the representation of  the installation.
63Roberto Simanowski  |  Holopoetry, Biopoetry and Digital Literature
12. For a detailed consideration of  Screen  see my interview with Noah Wardrip-
Fruin.
13. Cf. my articles “Autorschaften in digitalen Medien” and “Tod des Autors? 
Tod des Lesers!”
14. A speci ﬁ c form of  “narcotizing”—apart from alcohol or drugs as the usual 
stimulants—is the diversion of  the author in the process of  writing by simul-
taneously reading texts to him, as in the experiments by Gertrude Stein and Leon Mendez Salomon in 1896. Cf. Schulze 42.
15. Cf. the Cadavre éxquis  invented by the surrealists as the most popular form of  
collective automatism, in which two players each write one word one after the other without knowing the previous one. 
16. Makebelieve works on the basis of  9,000 pre-structured sentences that are       
catalogued on a trans-frame regarding verb, object, and adjective and that are provided with the attributes before (cause) and after (effect). The automatic 
generation of  the text is carried out in such a way that for a cause in a sentence 
entered by the user ﬁ tting effect-sentences are searched for in the catalogue 
of  sentences. The program makes sure that verb, object, and adjective of  the sentences connected with each other have a semantic relationship. In this way the program automatically produces a text of  ﬁ ve to twenty lines 
in reaction to a sentence typed in by the user, like in the following example: “John became very lazy at work. John lost his job. John decided to get drunk. He started to commit crimes. John went to prison. He experienced bruises. John cried. He looked at himself  differently.” 
17. For an extensive discussion see the chapter on narrative machines in my  
book Ästhetik des Spektakels , which will be published in 2007
.
Works Cited
Aarseth, Espen. Cybertext: Perspectives on Ergodic Literature. Baltimore: Johns Hop-kins UP , 1997.
Barthes, Roland. Image, Music, Text. Ed. and trans. Stephen Heath. New York: 
Hill, 1977.
Biggs, Simon. Great Wall of China. 1996. 25 Apr. 2006 <http://hosted.simon-
biggs.easynet.co.uk/wall/greatwall1.htm>.
Cayley, John. Overboard. 2004. 25 Apr. 2006 <http://www.shadoof.net/in/over
board.html>.
64Roberto Simanowski  |  Holopoetry, Biopoetry and Digital Literature
Coyle, Rebecca. “Holography ⎯Art in the Space of  Technology: Margaret Ben-
yon, Paula Dawson and the development of  Holographic Arts Practice.” Culture, 
Technology and Creativity.  Ed. Philip Hayward. London: John Libbey, 1990. 65-88.
Eicher, Thomas, and Ulf  Bleckmann, eds. Intermedialität: Vom Bild zum Text . 
Bielefeld: Aisthesis, 1994.
Gopher, Alex. The Child.  1999. 25 Apr. 2006  <http://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=ZGWkdNWFZiI>.Hayles, N. Katherine. Writing Machines . Cambridge, MA: MIT P , 2002.
Hiebel, Hans. Kleine Medienchronik: Von den ersten Schriftzeichen zum Mikrochip.  Mu-
nich: Beck, 1997.Joyce, Michael. “Siren Shapes: Exploratory and Constructive Hypertexts.” Of  
Two Minds. Ann Arbor: U of  Michigan P , 1995. 39-59. First in: Academic Comput-
ing 3.4 (1988): 10-14, 37-42.Kac, Eduardo. “Biopoetry.” Cybertext Yearbook 2002-03.  Ed. Markku Eskelinen 
and Raine Koskimaa. Jyväskylä: Research Center for Contemporary Culture, 
2003. 184-185. 25 Apr. 2006 <www.ekac.org/biopoetry.html>.
———. “Genesis.” 1999. 25 Apr. 2006 <http://www.ekac.org/translated.
html>.
Köllerer, Christian. “Die feinen Unterschiede: Über das Verhältnis von Literatur 
und Netzliteratur.” Literatur und Kritik 339/340  (1999): 50-54.
Looy, Jan van, and Jan Baetens, eds. Close Reading New Media: Analyzing Electronic Literature. Leuven: Leuven UP , 2003. 
Müller, Jürgen E. Intermedialität: Formen moderner kultureller Kommunikation . Mün-
ster: Nodus, 1996.Nies, Fritz. “Für die stärkere Ausdifferenzierung eines pragmatisch konzipierten 
Gattungssystems.” Zur Terminologie der Literaturwissenschaft: Akten des IX. Germa-
nistischen Symposiums der Deutschen Forschungsgesellschaft Würzburg 1986. Ed. Christi-
an Wagenknecht. Stuttgart: Metzler, 1988. 326-336.
65Roberto Simanowski  |  Holopoetry, Biopoetry and Digital Literature
Pﬂ üger, Jörg. “Wo die Quantität in Qualität umschlägt.” HyperKult II: Zur 
Ortsbestimmung analoger und digitaler Medien. Ed. Martin Warnke, Wolfgang Coy, 
and Georg Christoph Tholen . Bielefeld: Transcript, 2005. 27-94.
Reither, Saskia. “46 Cuts in 3 Minuten: Rhythmisierte Typogra ﬁ e im 
Musikvideo ‘The Child’.” Geteilte Zeit: Zur Kritik des Rhythmus in den Künsten.  
Ed. Patrick Primavesi and Simone Mahrenholz. Schliengen: Edition Argus, 
2004. 126-137.
Schäfer, Jörgen. “Sprachzeichenprozesse: Überlegungen zur Codierung von Li-
teratur in ‘alten’ und ‘neuen’ Medien.” Analog/Digital—Opposition oder Kontinuum? 
Beiträge zur Theorie und Geschichte einer Unterscheidung. Ed. Jens Schröter and Alex-
ander Böhnke. Bielefeld: Transcript, 2004. 143-168.
Schulze, Holger. Das aleatorische Spiel: Erkundung und Anwendung der nichtintentio-
nalen Werkgenese im 20. Jahrhundert . Munich: Fink, 2000.
Shaw, Jeffrey. The Legible City. 1989-91. 25 Apr. 2006 <http://www.jeffrey-shaw.
net/html_main/show_work.php3?record_id=83>.
Simanowski, Roberto. Interﬁ  ctions: Vom Schreiben im Netz . Frankfurt am Main: 
Suhrkamp, 2002.———. “Autorschaften in digitalen Medien: Eine Einleitung.” Digitale Literatur. 
Ed. Heinz L. Arnold and Roberto Simanowski. Munich: Text + Kritik, 2001. 
3-21.
———. “Tod des Autors? Tod des Lesers!” p0es1s: Ästhetik digitaler Literatur / 
The Aesthetics of  Digital Literature . Ed. Friedrich W . Block, Christiane Heibach, 
and Karin Wenz. Ost ﬁ ldern: Cantz, 2004. 79-91.
———. “Transmediale Kunst als Phänomen aktueller Ästhetisierungsprozesse.” 
Transmedialität: Zur Ästhetik paraliterarischer Verfahren.  Ed. Urs Meyer, Roberto 
Simanowski, and Christoph Zeller. Göttingen: Wallstein, 2006. 39-81.
Tomasula, Steve. “Gene(sis).” Eduardo Kac: Telepresence, Biotelematics, and Transgenic 
Art. Ed. Peter T. Dobrila and Aleksandra Kostic. Maribor: Kibla, 2000. 85-96. 
Rpt. in Data Made Flesh: Embodying Information.  Ed. Phillip Thurtle and Robert 
Mitchell. London: Routledge, 2003. 249-257.
66Roberto Simanowski  |  Holopoetry, Biopoetry and Digital Literature
Utterback, Camille, and Romy Achituv. “Text Rain.” 1999. 25 Apr. 2006 <http://
www.camilleutterback.com/textrain.html>.
Wardrip-Fruin, Noah. “From Instrumental Texts to Textual Instruments.” 2003. 
25 Apr. 2006 <http://hypertext.rmit.edu.au/dac/papers/Wardrip-Fruin.pdf>.
———. Digital Literature. Interview with Roberto Simanowski. 2004. 25 Apr. 
2006 <http://www.dichtung-digital.org/2004/2-Wardrip-Fruin.htm>. ———, et al. Screen . Quicktime documentation. 2004. 25 Apr. 2006 <http://
www.dichtung-digital.com/2004/2/Wardrip-Fruin/Screen.mov>.Wyman, Jessica, “On Eduardo Kac’s Genesis.” YYZ Artists’ Outlet.  2003. 25 Apr. 
2006 <http://www.ekac.org/jessica.yyz.html>.Ziegfeld, Richard. “Interactive Fiction: A New Literary Genre?” New Literary 
History: A Journal of  Theory and Interpretation 20.2 (1989): 341-372.
Zima, Peter, ed. Literatur intermedial: Musik, Malerei, Photographie, Film.  Darmstadt: 
Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1995.
67Frank Furtwängler
Human Practice
How the Problem of Ergodicity Demands a Reactivation 
of Anthropological Perspectives in Game Studies1
Abstract:
This article presents a critical review (not a rejection) of  the concept of  “ergodic litera-ture” when applied to computer and video games. Therefore it goes back to some of  the sources Espen Aarseth triggered when he appropriated the term from physics in 1997 for the subject of  cybertext and explains the necessary consequences of  the term “ergodicity” for literature and games when it is not merely used metaphorically. A more cautious use of  terms and concepts from other disciplines is suggested, especially as the term “ergodic” in physics has a different but relevant meaning in the context of  these games. The article tries to mediate between some of  the general anthropological claims of  cybertext theory/game studies and the understanding of  “ergodic systems” in ther-modynamics and statistical physics. The problems that result from this mediation can be seen as symptomatic for the challenges of  game studies in the more general mediation between different perspectives on games.
I.  Introduction
As the conference abstract that motivated this text argued, certain aspects of  
digitalization, of  coproduction and cooperation, and new forms of  literary in-teractivity between human beings and machines have been discussed as domi-nant features in a ﬁ eld de ﬁ ned by terms like digital literature, internet literature , 
cyber- and hyperﬁ  ction, e-poetry or interﬁ  ctions. I could well situate my own interests 
in this ﬁ  eld, although there has to be a liberal notion of  the category text, which 
however should be unproblematic. Some years ago I had the opportunity to explore the very odd relationship between interactivity and narrativity  in computer 
games. A goal was to sketch a historical and systematic framework for further explorations at a time when appropriate heuristics for the academic understand-ing of  computer and video games were basically non-existent. Still, now that there actually has been a lot of  work done in the new academic ﬁ eld called game 
studies  many problems in coming to grips with the new medium and especially in 
the way methods were conceived to conceptualize this task have not ceased to puzzle me. Some researchers appear to be optimistic concerning the possibili-
68Frank Furtwängler  |  Human Practice
ties of  general theories of  computer and video games, possibilities I don’t really 
trust. I also don’t trust conceptions of  terminology in many parts of  the ﬁ eld, 
which is indeed the main topic of  this paper. As a result, my own basic demands regarding computer game research were to avoid terminological debates , particularly 
concerning such terms and notions that are derived from traditional theories only to get projected on new phenomena straight away so that accompanying 
new qualities get obscured. This is a kind of  credo in game studies, although opinions about the consequences differ widely. This is not merely an allusion to the often-criticized application of  narratological models, but also to the suppos-edly “new” approaches that force existing traditional theories about game and play  
onto the subject. We have seen some applications in this respect that are virtually meaningless for an understanding of  the way computer and video games work as a medium, e.g. the typological classi ﬁ cations using Caillois’ game categories as 
an approachable and straightforward example of  an application that turned out as a self  ful ﬁ lling prophecy. Nevertheless, discussions re ﬂ ect a growing sense 
of  respect for the diverse forms of  these “games” and for the diverse (meth-odological) approaches derived from different disciplines since Espen Aarseth announced his “Year One of  Computer Game Studies” in 2001, even though many of  the approaches remain questionable and are not common sense .
When it comes to “terms” there is quite often no coming to terms. It seems 
difﬁ cult to build or even detect a network of  communication based on key 
terms everyone agrees on. Helpful discussions are complicated by fundamen-tal communication problems. The term “interactive,” to take only one random example, may count as well established on the one hand, on the other hand its descriptive value is doubted. Eskelinen and Tronstad refer to this term as an “unspeci ﬁ ed banality” (199), despite the efforts some spent in establishing it 
as a critical term. Skipping other comparable problematic implications, I can only indicate that there are some important questions the community of  game researchers has to face: Do they work in the same ﬁ eld? Do they even work on 
the same subject or notion of  the subject that allows for a sense of  community and identity? Or are subgroups of  a virtual community ﬁ ghting each other for 
the sake of  the big “theoretical shot”: a great uni ﬁ ed theory of  computer and 
video games? What role do terms like digital literature, internet literature , cyber- and 
hyperﬁ  ction, e-poetry or interﬁ ctions mentioned above play? In which strategic func-
tion are terms and neologisms justi ﬁ ed: as means of  communication about the 
phenomena or to highlight one’s own research (to put it in diplomatic terms)? Further: Will they ever win with the de ﬁ nition of  terms and is it possible to 
use terms on a common basis that helps to overcome the hermetic borders of  disciplines and research positions? 
 
69Frank Furtwängler  |  Human Practice
My impression is that communication by means of  terms is becoming in-
creasingly dif ﬁ cult. Authors introduce terms into discourse but they often be-
come an end in itself, so that even their authors lose interest. This seems to 
be the case with the term “ergodic literature” introduced by Espen Aarseth as a synonym to “cybertext,” a term he actually introduced on the ﬁ rst pages in 
his groundbreaking book Cybertext: Perspectives on Ergodic Literature  (1997). Some 
authors accept such terms introduced by others for their own work and try to activate their potential value, basically doing the job the originators should have done before they lost interest. Others prefer to use established terms as some negative foil against which they try to establish their own inventions. In fact they are introducing yet some more synonyms providing simply new facets of  diverse polemic discussions that dominated game studies  in an unfortunate ﬁ  ght 
between disciplines claiming the subject as theirs from the beginning. Regarding this topic game studies  have already spent too much energy and time for pointless 
(though interesting) discussions. Tragically or prophetically Aarseth foresaw this development when he summarized the problems I just sketched:
But the prevailing attempts to rejuvenate and relocate existing theories by insisting on their relevance for the new media and their largely un-suspecting users, is a ‘colonialist’ strategy that is always a demonstration of  (unnecessary) power and often a misreading of  the theory being used. (“Aporia and Epiphany” 32)
Considering the damage done, it may prove fruitful to go back to some of  the sources of  either the problem or the discipline (which sometimes are the same). An appropriate beginning could be seen in a reconsideration of  the triad “author”—“work”—“reader,” the de ﬁ nition of  which—following the abstract 
mentioned at the beginning—has to be extended considerably for further explo-rations in our ﬁ eld. To determine the state research is in, let us look at the inter-
relation of  its individual parts again. There may indeed be quite some distance ahead before an extension of  the triad is within grasp. And apparently there is still a lesson to be learned from the demands of  traditional models, e.g. from the study of  literature and the anthropological turn following reader-response theories. These lessons will be sketched as an outlook at the end. I emphatically imply this as lessons to be learned from the experiences  of  traditional disciplines, 
especially from their past failures and impasses, and I do not mean from their speciﬁ c models or the application of  their models. My intention is not to sug-
gest another uncritical application of  traditional tools, derived e.g. from nar-ratology or the study of  literature in general. I am obviously in agreement with Aarseth’s basic plan, when he said almost ten years ago: 
70Frank Furtwängler  |  Human Practice
Especially, I wish to challenge the recurrent practice of  applying the 
theories of  literary criticism to a new empirical ﬁ eld, seemingly without 
any reassessment of  the terms and concepts involved. This lack of  self-reﬂ ection places the research in direct danger of  turning the vocabulary 
of  literary theory into a set of  unfocused metaphors, rendered useless by a translation that is not perceived as such by its very translators. (Cybertext 14) 
But adding to this perspective, the uncritical, metaphorical use of  terms (the vo-cabulary) from other disciplines should also be excluded, particularly when such terms were established to describe phenomena in the original context that might eventually appear as relevant for the discussion about digital texts or computer games. My starting point is the observation that way too often we are discussing the “work” alone, isolating the middle part of  the triad from its crucial parts “author” and “reader” or the newly born hybrid form of  “riter”/“wreader” who has some “production value” but doesn’t kill the “author” on the computer and video game production side.
II.  The Problem of “Ergodicity”—For a Change
Let me continue illustrating the observation and its consequences with a discus-sion of  a crucial term that has been mentioned here before, well aware of  the fact that this may be taken as a contradiction of  my own plan not to do theory by a discussion of  terms, established or not. The term in question is “ergodic-ity” and has been introduced in hypertext theory over a decade ago in ﬂ uencing 
game studies to a great extent. In advance I would like to emphasize my inten-tion of  delivering a decidedly constructive critical approach, and I do not intend to contribute to a devaluation of  the concept of  cybertext as such, although some people in the “community” would appreciate any new fuel for keeping things burning. The problems discussed here would have never occurred by sticking to the term “cybertext” alone. But the fact that the terms “ergodic lit-erature” and “ergodicity” have been established rather well in cybertext theory and game studies perfectly illustrates the conceptual de ﬁ ciencies in the very 
basic foundations of  a greater part of  our theoretical approaches to the subject and according to my arguments may be viewed as symbolic examples of  these deﬁ ciencies.
The earliest de ﬁ nition of  “ergodic” in this context is by Aarseth, found in 
his book Cybertext: Perspectives on Ergodic Literature  from 1997. This de ﬁ nition is as 
often quoted, as it is relevant. Therefore I will present it here at full length:
71Frank Furtwängler  |  Human Practice
The concept of  cybertext focuses on the mechanical organization of  
the text, by positing the intricacies of  the medium as an integral part of  the literary exchange . However, it also centers attention on the consumer, or 
user, of  the text, as a more integrated ﬁ gure than even reader-response the-
orists would claim. The performance of  their reader takes place all in his head, while the user of  cybertext also performs in an extranoematic sense. During the cybertextual process, the user will have effectuated a semiotic sequence, and this selective movement is a work of  physical construction that the various concepts of  “reading” do not account for. This phenomenon I call ergodic, using a term appropriated from physics 
that derives from the Greek words ergon and hodos, meaning “work” and 
“path.” In ergodic literature, nontrivial effort is required to allow the reader to traverse the text. If  ergodic literature is to make sense as a concept, there must also be nonergodic literature, where the effort to traverse the text is trivial, with no extranoematic responsibilities placed on the reader except (for example) eye movement and the periodic or arbitrary turning of  pages. (1-2; accentuation by Furtwängler)
The concept of  “ergodic literature” claimed to consider the user as a highly inte-grated ﬁ gure, supposedly radicalizing the program of  reader-response theory—
integrating him or her on the very basic level of  the materiality of  the medium. This radical claim promised to be the ideal means of  conceptually integrating the triad “author”—“work”—“reader.” But unfortunately—or others may per-haps say necessarily as the ﬁ rst steps—the decision of  user integration on the 
basic level of  the medium’s materiality actually led to a concept of  the user who gets de ﬁ ned by parameters that reduce his or her levels of  experience to trivial 
dimensions. It is quite possible to say that the user has become a more integrated ﬁ gure than he ever asked or wished for, paying the price of  identity loss.
So the emancipation from reader to user/player is paid with a high price in 
the model of  “ergodic literature.” While he
2 must “traverse the text” with non-
trivial effort, his experiences may be quite trivial for the sake of  “user control” in the model itself, which makes it necessary to dissolve the user in the (mate-riality of  the) medium introducing the most radical rhetoric of  technological immersion. That all this appears to be a critical approach to Aarseth’s model lies in the merits of  his concept that made some of  the most vital contributions to the establishment of  game studies. But the vast expansion and generalizations of  this “text-model” into the realm of  the phenomenon of  electronic games has developed into a problem. This extension is decidedly not the work of  Aarseth alone, who apparently lost interest in the cybertext model when he switched to the study of  games, perhaps for good reasons. 
72Frank Furtwängler  |  Human Practice
In the last statements of  Cybertext, Aarseth emphasizes his focus on “broad, 
highly visible issues” (183) and mentions e.g. the con ﬂ icts between “desires of  
users” and “ambitions of  creators,” which, for my money, should be among the 
more vital issues in the study of  these new forms of  media. So it is rather sad that Aarseth places this emphasis at the end of  his book without really focus-ing on the desires of  the user. To do that would have ful ﬁ lled two tasks: ﬁ rst, a 
relativization of  the radical emphasis of  the materiality of  the medium as given in his approach; and second, a real revision or radicalization of  reader-response theory, which was in fact a veiled theory of  production. Nonetheless, while Aarseth mentions the problem of  technological determinism as a crucial point in his theoretical approach right at the beginning of  Cybertext, he sticks to the “material technology of  the medium” (14) resulting in his research plan: 
In the context of  this study, the question of  the text becomes a ques-tion of  verbal media and their functional differences (what role does a medium play?), and only subsequently a question of  semantics, in-ﬂ uence, otherness, mental events, intentionality, and so forth. These 
philosophical problems have not left us, but they belong to a different level of  textuality. In order to deal with these issues responsibly, we must ﬁ rst construct a map of  the new area in which we want to study 
them, a textonomy (the study of  textual media) to provide the playing 
ground of  textology (the study of  textual meaning). (15)
I have doubts about the construction of  an adequately useful map of  the new area that leaves out textual meaning (which is the medium’s most important link to the user), especially in computer games.
3 All of  this is an expression of  disre-
spect concerning user dimensions. In recent texts (Aarseth, “Playing Research”), Aarseth alluded to the concept of  “textology” as an enterprise worth aiming at, although not in the framework of  cybertext theory or theory of  “ergodic literature,” which only seems to be a logical consequence of  the model itself  and its deﬁ  ciencies that don’t allow for that kind of  an anthropological perspec-
tive. As a result and with the growing relevance of  computer and video games in the ﬁ eld of  interactive media, the model Aarseth introduced in Cybertext and 
pushed towards the direction of  game studies  in his summarizing article Aporia and 
Epiphany in Doom and The Speaking Clock , became a static reference point in game 
studies. Meanwhile all have apparently agreed that computer games are describ-able if  not as “ergodic literature” then at least as “ergodic art” and are in fact “ergodic.” I will argue that the latter statement is either a misconception of  the term or a straightforward decision.
73Frank Furtwängler  |  Human Practice
Actually the impression might arise that the interest in recipients or consumers 
in this case (and several others) has only rhetorical functions. No one in game studies can justify research without attention to the role of  the player or user. Then, there are two possible strategies: The ﬁ rst would be to tackle the problem 
and the second to integrate the user in the way just described. There is also an in-between strategy, and that is leaving the next step to the imagination, espe-cially that of  others. Gonzalo Frasca put it this way, calling the research tradition by its name in a laudable manner: 
However, formalism is not the ﬂ avour of  the month in these postevery-
thing times. Certainly, formal approaches are limited—and ludologists should always keep that in mind—but they are probably the easiest way to uncover the structural differences between stories and games. I personally see this structural approach as a ﬁ  rst, necessary step in video 
game studies, which we will de ﬁ nitely outgrow once it helps us to better 
grasp the basic characteristics of  video games. (222)
But will it ever be possible to consider some further steps within the framework of  a theory that treats users or players in such a manner? 
The status of  the user in cybertext theory as described—especially if  it is 
extended to the subject of  computer and video games—may be well buttressed by the term “ergodic” in its original meaning as it was conceptualized in statisti-cal physics ﬁ rst in the works of  Boltzmann. But I think Aarseth did not have 
the consequences of  this support in mind. They certainly are no reason for celebration either as they wipe out the supposedly radical claims in the theory of  “ergodic literature” as a model that “centers attention on the consumer, or user, of  the text, as a more integrated ﬁ gure than even reader-response theorists 
would claim” (Aarseth, Cybertext 15). I even think that this backing disquali ﬁ es 
the model for further studies of  the subject seeing that the notion of  “ergodic-ity” only highlights the far more radical claim I suspected earlier in this paper: It advances a more or less “mechanical organization of  the user” and does not support an anthropological perspective on user integration merely emphasizing the text.
The enterprise of  going back to the original meaning of  the term is le-
gitimate here as Aarseth himself  explicitly marks the appropriation of  the term from physics in Cybertext. There was no need to do so, but it gave Aarseth’s model a touch of  “exact science” from the start. The “appropriation of  the term from physics” is a piece of  information that is perpetually mentioned when someone refers to the de ﬁ nition of  “ergodic literature.”
4  In this respect it is not derived 
from its etymological source ergon and hodos .5 My ﬁ  rst assumption here is that 
74Frank Furtwängler  |  Human Practice
cybertext theory is not violating its very basic claims in appropriating the term 
“ergodic” as an unfocused metaphor, “rendered useless by a translation that is 
not perceived as such by its very translators,” as Aarseth put it ( Cybertext 14).
III.  The “Ergodic Problem” in Physics
For a basic understanding of  the concept of  “ergodicity” in the so-called “er-godic hypothesis” and “ergodic theory” (which are separate things), no math-ematical equipment is necessary. This makes the fact that Aarseth does not at all specify his “appropriation from physics” even more puzzling—I could ﬁ nd 
no reference to any source, not even a small hint in a footnote. Why then this appropriation?
A good starting point for a brief  investigation is Boltzmann’s (and presum-
ably Maxwell’s) belief  in the so-called “ergodic hypothesis,” saying: 
A mechanical system, if  left undisturbed, will pass through every point of  the phase space lying on a certain energy surface. In other words, the positions and velocities of  all the mass points (representing the atoms) will eventually take every possible value consistent with the given total energy of  the system. (Brush 363)
The system will pass through all kinds of  possible states, leaving the system in free evolution and waiting for a (very) long time. Though working in statistical 
mechanics, this was in fact a hypothesis that proved to be too strong and in 1913 both Plancherel and Rosenthal showed independently that a trajectory passing through any “phase space” couldn’t be a mechanical one. Their ﬁ nding led to 
the weakened “quasi-ergodic hypothesis,” that said that a trajectory can go by any point in phase space “as near as is wanted.” We may only note that this weakened hypothesis was of  not much use as it was the equality of  “time aver-age” with “phase average” that made “ergodic hypothesis” so convenient, which in fact was the reason why the hypothesis was put forward by Boltzmann after all. This equality made the method of  statistical ensembles possible, a very basic foundation in statistical mechanics. In the early 1930s Birkhoff, Koopman and von Neumann tried to prove the equality without the assumptions of  the “ergo-dic hypothesis,” which resulted in “ergodic theory,” being a more mathematical theory about general dynamics.
6
You may well question the relevance of  all this for the subject of  hypertexts 
or computer games. I will try to show a possible relevance by breaking it down to something that at least looks like a game, because it uses its devices. Accord-
75Frank Furtwängler  |  Human Practice
ingly, a very simple and basic ergodic system may then be exempli ﬁ ed by a set 
of  dice: There is no difference between the throwing of  one dice one thousand 
times and throwing one thousand dice only once—the more dice one throws or the more throws one makes the better it is.
7 That is because the “ergodic hy-
pothesis” says that time average and average over the statistical ensemble are the same—that is what the statistical example of  the throwing of  the dice means. And this is equivalent to the statement that all accessible microstates are equally probable over long periods of  time. 
Now, even in a most rough metaphorical treatment of  all this: Who is inter-
ested in microstates in a macroscopic world in which the games we are interested in take place? There is no need to make guesses about relevant states of  “phase space” in computer games, although it would be possible to construct such an abstract “space” for computer games on the basis of  observable characteristics. But the treatment of  the potential possibilities of  different states by means of  statistical methods is not evident at all. Even if  such states were in fact possible, they would be highly irrelevant for players, as they have no function for seman-tic structures in games. Take for example a huge room in a 3D computer game with a door as an entrance and another as an exit. There are inﬁ  nite trajectories 
possible to get from the entrance to the exit. Thus there is an in ﬁ nite number of  
irrelevant states of  the “mechanical” system, but only one semantically relevant route, that is the direct one. Research questions assuming homogeneous space not organized hierarchically in game environments are only possible if  the user or player and his needs and intentions are kept in a blind spot. To assume that computer game design in the planning of  game structures leaves these needs and intentions out of  account is a fallacy. Especially the production side (author) has to anticipate what the user thinks to provide any sense and dramaturgy etc. 
Without exploiting the metaphorical exaggeration of  the analogy to physi-
cal systems any further, I think that the statement about the same probability of  all states was in fact the main reason for treating cybertexts including computer games as “ergodic.” And this has to be the source of  many vital questions about our research practices and the different levels or layers of  observation we are in-terested in. It is typical for ergodic systems not to be predictable; chaotic systems and real random processes are ergodic. It would be rather absurd to even com-pare such systems with computer games where contingency and randomness get permanently controlled via user’s attention that is controlled via things the player recognizes and accepts as stereotypes etc.—computer games in particular rely on strict mechanics of  anticipation. Aarseth commented on ergodicity in his understanding of  the term after the appropriation: “Ergodic phenomena are produced by some kind of  cybernetic system, i.e., a machine (or a human) that operates as an information feed back loop, which will generate a different 
76Frank Furtwängler  |  Human Practice
semiotic sequence each time it is engaged.” (“Aporia and Epiphany” 32) But 
information feedback loops in this sense are not part of  ergodic systems, except perhaps only if  information is considered to be deprived of  meaning, which may just be the case if  you separate “textonomy (the study of  textual media)” from “textology (the study of  textual meaning)” (“Aporia and Epiphany” 15). 
What is dominant in ergodic systems is a strong tendency away from cogni-
tive authorities of  decision. So you may say that biological systems are in fact non-ergodic. Let me explain this with another simple example that may just il-lustrate the border between physical and biological systems, when we project the example of  the throwing of  the dice onto a swarm of  mosquitoes: If  you are interested you can measure the average (scalar) speed of  this swarm. First, you follow a random mosquito for quite some time and measure its speed at certain times—which stands for an observable or a property—and then calculate the average. That is the time-average. Second, you measure the speed of  quite a lot of  mosquitoes at one time and calculate the average of  the single speed mea-surements. That may be the phase average. If  there is no statistical variation in the behavior of  the mosquitoes then both methods are bound to result in the same statistical average. In this scenario, no mosquito leaves the swarm, has its own will, joins the swarm, dies, or gets eaten. The system is closed and isolated, without any feedback particularly from the outside. Ergodic systems are no sys-tems for individualists or achievers: In such systems it is therefore advantageous to submerge both independent thoughts and emotions. The best strategy would therefore be to avoid giving any feedback to the system. Now we take the ex-ample to the next level: 
Take one thousand players and let them play the same game (not together 
but separately) and measure their quality or quantity of  experience (if  not pos-sible then measure their amount of  sweat) and calculate the average. Then let one single player play this game one thousand times. Not the same? The player’s motivation will probably sink endlessly or he will learn or discover and explore states of  the game no one had in mind, not even the player. Loss of  motivation or losing a game will result in the player’s leaving the system/game thus chang-ing the character of  the system—resulting in loss of  ergodicity.
How player experience affects the system “computer game” can be observed 
in myriads of  different examples, e.g. and to name just two, training effects obvi-ous in the popular “speedruns” through games like Quake or even Super Mario 
Bros., or the player’s experience relevant for effective navigation through virtual 
environments, which was shaped outside the game and gets into the game by a transformation of  real-world experience.
8 Aarseth is quite aware of  these effects 
and describes them in a more recent article “Playing Research: Methodological Approaches to Game Analysis” as “part of  the game” and as signi ﬁ cant for di-
77Frank Furtwängler  |  Human Practice
verse types of  players whom he calls—in reference to Bartle— socializers, killers, 
achievers and explorers .9 Thus Aarseth concludes: “Like ergodic works in general, 
there are variations in the realization of  the games which means that a collective 
pool of  experience will always bring new aspects forward” (6).
But is there a way to integrate human dimensions of  experience in the 
concept of  “ergodic works”? I guess not and that is why I think it is time to be honest about the limits of  the cybertext concept sketched by Aarseth and oth-ers. These questions about experience are not in line with the early assumptions of  “ergodic literature” and simply in order to preserve some of  the original meaning of  the term ergodic—as it is understood in physics and also literary studies—it is necessary to mark these limits of  scope. Talking about games as “ergodic” and taking user experience seriously at the same time is not really an option and as a consequence there has to be a change of  attitude. In the follow-ing I will further explain why I think this is necessary. 
IV.  Consequences
Part III was by no means a strict and incontestable examination of  the meaning the term “ergodic” has in mathematics and physics, but instead a quite liberal one that allowed a transfer of  the properties of  microscopic systems to our macroscopic world of  experience. To assign ergodicity to systems that may rep-resent the system “user—machine” in computer games is making a very strong assumption. To assign ergodicity to any kind of  system in fact always makes a strong assumption. The application of  the term only makes some sense when the integration of  the user is radical in a sense that both “text” (in the original sense of  the theory) and “user” are organized mechanically, which is another strong assumption. In this scenario games may be ergodic systems just in the sense that all possible states are accessible and playable, so that statistical conclu-sions about a certain player’s state are actually possible. The probability of  this state would then represent the frequency of  that very state in the ensemble. Re-duced to statistical quantities the loss of  user perspective is evident in this state-ment. Let me repeat Brush’s description of  systems that are characterized by the “ergodic hypothesis”: They are mechanical systems that will pass through every point of  the phase space lying on a certain energy surface— if  left undisturbed. A 
treatment of  computer games as ergodic systems is unable to take diverse kinds of  user action into account, thus reducing interaction to trivial dimensions so that the player is no source of  disturbance of  the system. The scope of  such a model is then considerably limited in its anthropological perspective. 
78Frank Furtwängler  |  Human Practice
To sum it up, there are two views of  looking at the problem of  “ergodicity” 
in this context, both of  them leading to desperate prospects for the concep-
tual foundations of  cybertext theory as an appropriate model for computer and video games, not to mention a complete model. First, Aarseth literally integrated the term “ergodic” in the sense of  its original meaning, as “a term appropriated from physics” as he says ( Cybertext 1), which means that there is no place for an 
integration of  the user in a non-trivial sense. This implies that the mechanical organization of  the text has to be also the mechanical organization of  the user. Or second, Aarseth was in fact practicing what he dislikes most, namely that “lack of  self-re ﬂ ection places the research in direct danger of  turning the vo-
cabulary of  literary theory into a set of  unfocused metaphors, rendered useless by a translation that is not perceived as such by its very translators” ( Cybertext 
14). Only this time—“the theoretical perspective of  ‘ ﬁ ll in your favorite theory/
theoritician here’ is clearly really a prediction/description of  ‘ ﬁ ll in your favorite 
digital medium here’” (Aarseth, “Aporia and Epiphany” 31)—“literary theory” is replaced by “statistical physics/mechanics.”
I have already commented on the ﬁ rst view several times here. Let me add 
only this: I’m aware of  the fact, as I have already mentioned here, that no one has ever seriously claimed completeness of  the “formalistic approach” and this should be something worth considering for those who attack this model. But if  we agree on the ﬁ rst view then it seems important to explicitly mark the ﬁ rst 
view as part of  the research program in the line of  cybertext theory, as the prob-lematic status of  the user is not self-evident for great parts of  game studies and it is also not evident that the decisions of  the cybertext model and its concept of  “ergodic literature” in extensive use in game studies is a “ ﬁ rst necessary step” 
(Frasca 222). Many misunderstandings would actually have never occurred by naming this limited scope more explicitly for others from the start. 
The second view de ﬁ nitely needs some more comments: Eskelinen and 
Tronstad tell us in their article “Video Games And Con ﬁ gurative Performanc-
es”: “Now, there’s no doubt that games and computer games are ergodic if  not art, because in games we have to produce, encounter, and respond to variable sequences of  action” (197). While we all agree on the second part of  this ob-servation, which is partly a result of  cybertext theory’s success in focusing us on the importance of  the materiality of  the medium, there is no real evidence to assume ergodicity here from a physicist’s point of  view, who just might be a bit puzzled in the apparently improbable case that he or she stumbles across it. An easy way to reply to objections would be to stick to the etymology of  the term Aarseth executed when he introduced it for the purpose of  his cybertext model, despite the fact that the etymology in physics is not certain (cf. Gavalotti 36
). This does not change the fact that Aarseth appropriated the term “ergodic” 
79Frank Furtwängler  |  Human Practice
from a highly speciﬁ  c ﬁ eld of  statistical physics for no evident reason. Such 
an appropriation doesn’t have to be tragic at all at ﬁ rst sight, but it is not at 
all a laudable decision when it comes to a possible dialogue between the dis-
ciplines of  the natural sciences and the humanities. Considering the relevance of  information science and the subject of  dynamical, complex systems etc., such a dialogue is not mistaken at all. The consideration of  complex systems has supported an exchange between disciplines like physics, chemistry, biology, economy, ecology and sociology e.g. in “synergetics,”
10 as these systems are built 
by many interacting parts and are relevant for all disciplines that try to predict the behavior of  systems and therefore understand the way they work. Their relevance is by far not purely metaphorical and a term like “ergodic” might just be a relevant interface in the discussion between disciplines that have a different sense for the role strict meanings of  terms play in their theoretical models. 
In addition to that, “ergodicity” in a more literal appropriation from physics 
has already been introduced as a topic in literary studies, e.g. as the “Ergoden-problem” of  society in Christian Kassung’s and Albert Kümmel’s studies on Robert Musil’s Mann ohne Eigenschaften , where “ergodicity” is explicitly linked 
to the ever puzzling discoveries of  thermodynamics and statistical physics in their relevance for reversible and irreversible time order; a discussion result-ing basically from the discovery of  entropy, since reversibility, i.e. symmetry or time invariance, is with few exceptions a general property of  physical laws.
11 
This topic has considerable relevance for the studies of  computer games, where experience of  reversibility—the manipulation of  the arrow of  time—in “mac-roscopic” processes is one of  the most central forms of  non-trivial experience that affects causal order of  events in the medium of  the game. It even is a popu-lar playﬁ  eld.
12  I ﬁ nd it still striking that with all the focus on non-linearity in the 
study of  new media, not much has been done to explore the question of  the reversibility in causal order of  events experienced in computer and videogames. Martin E. Rosenberg showed this relevance early in hypertext theory, saying: 
In this sense, what hypertext theorists mean by “nonlinearity” is more properly analogous to what physicists call “symmetry,” or “reversibili-ty.” Since the focus in hypertext theory is on the functional direction of  signiﬁ  cation, the correspondence with symmetry and reversibility 
works more precisely, because these terms refer to the direction of  the ﬂ ow of  duration or time. (Rosenberg 275)
Still, no one ever seemed to have paid attention to the semantic dimension of  this process, meaning that the “functional direction of  signi ﬁ cation” is not re-
ducible to the materiality of  the medium. If  you allow me a short digression 
80Frank Furtwängler  |  Human Practice
about this other case of  problematic disrespect against user dimensions: These 
omissions are obvious and signiﬁ  cant in Rosenberg’s article when he contin-
ues “Words must be read one after another, and cannot be read backwards; we might say that the reading process is linear in the sense that its trajectory remains irreversible” (275). Thus again, obvious and easily obtainable observations are blocked by the celebration of  “mechanical” processes, most evident in the meta-phorical use of  “trajectory.” One of  these strikingly apparent observations is by far most notably obvious in the computer and video games of  recent times. In these games it is often inevitably necessary that the order of  events has to be re-peatable; it has to be possible to reproduce every act or sequence of  the game to correspond with the strategic development of  user decisions in these sequences, where failure (“load a saved game”) and success (“save the game”) provide for continuous informational feedback loops in both respects: player and game/medium. This highly important issue for the interrelations of  technological and anthropological questions has certainly to be on the list of  reasonable future game studies. The substantial role of  the user in this process prohibits making statistical assumptions about the equality of  states or succumbing to the urge to understand the path the user takes through the “work” (his or her trajectory) as an approximately random one predominantly determined by the materiality of  the medium. Like David Z. Albert puts it: “. . . ergodicity (if  you think about it) is clearly also the sort of  thing one has in the back of  one’s mind when one speaks of  trajectories wandering aimlessly and randomly and all over the place and in no particular direction” (Albert 59). There is a distinct lack of  the user’s freedom to take such trajectories, which is determined predominantly by the “semantics” of  or in the medium that give a sense to the users’ actions. This may only come into view by a substantial integration of  anthropological per-spectives. To further illustrate my point, Rosenberg sees or says that one might see the series of  “lexias,” units of  text and information, in a hypertext system as a means to enable “users to leap forward or backward, lexia by lexia,” and that “each lexia remains separate, virtually autonomous; the wreader’s experience of  the sequence of  lexias remains discontinuous, except as the author or reader establishes linkages among them” (280). My task here is not to decide about the right or wrong of  this in hypertext models. In the transition to computer games, however, “sequences of  lexias” most likely became denser, so that on the same level of  observation discontinuity is not a dominant structural feature of  the audiovisual worlds anymore. Of  course, there are still comparable discrete structures of  events, but if  we leave out the even more complicated questions about corresponding levels of  observation for the moment, I think that the user plays an integral role in building dense sequences of  lexias or semiotic sequences (Aarseth) by ﬁ lling the gaps, bridging the space between lexias. 
81Frank Furtwängler  |  Human Practice
To cut a long story (particularly about Rosenberg’s article) short and to come 
back to my more speci ﬁ c exploration of  Aarseth’s appropriation from physics, 
I would like to stress here that my interest is not some repetition of  arguments 
in the line of  Rosenberg who said that the term “nonlinear” is primarily a trope from physics (and chaos theory). Aarseth legitimately ﬁ nds this statement to be 
“somewhat overstated” (“Aporia and Epiphany” 43) as it is signi ﬁ cant for many 
statements of  Rosenberg’s impressive article. The problem is also not located in the de ﬁ nition of  “ergodic literature,” which is suf ﬁ ciently clean and sharp. The 
problem lies in an obvious gap of  communication between certain disciplines that may be bridged by a proper use of  terms by not using unfocused meta-phors, rendered useless by a translation, to come back to Aarseth’s admonition once again. The relevance of  “ergodicity” for this is, I think, an important one in the sense I have just tried to sketch as an unfortunate historical occurrence that seems to have come to pass: the original meaning of  an appropriated term challenges its metaphorical use in the same ﬁ eld.
But if  we agree on loosening the strict meaning and de ﬁ nitions of  the term 
“ergodic” in physics and allow a certain kind of  metaphorical appropriation, the systems described as “ergodic” in cybertext theory are only “ergodic” in the scope of  this theory and only on its formalistic level of  re ﬂ ection, examina-
tion and observation. What is at stake then is the anthropological dimension of  game studies which we might lose by the radical integration of  users, resulting in their ﬁ  xation. The project of  “textual anthropology” is easily in danger, us-
ing an expression Aarseth put at the end of  an earlier article he wrote before he worked on “perspectives on ergodic literature” (“Nonlinearity and Literary Theory” 82) and which is published in the same volume as Rosenberg’s. Aarseth described the object of  study in the anthropological approach as “a process (the changing text) rather than a project (the static text)” in 1994, assigning the source of  the change in text to the user. But I suspect that the study of  “tex-tonomy” instead of  “textology” is equal to the decision which part is attributed dynamic properties: the text or the user. In this respect the appropriation of  the term “ergodic” is highly signi ﬁ cant and a symbol for this decision. If  we can’t 
alter the path cybertext theory would prescribe for game studies then we must ask for complementary theoretical approaches that are able to save the user in his dynamic signi ﬁ cance by formulating a comparable radical rejuvenation of  
anthropological perspectives. Such an agreement is, I think, possible. 
In my introduction I already mentioned a lesson to be learned from the 
demands of  traditional models, and I meant it in that very respect e.g. from the study of  literature and the anthropological turn after reader-response the-
ory.
13 Wolfgang Iser has coined part of  this turn with statements like “Litera-
ture is not self-suf ﬁ cient, so it could hardly bear its own origin within itself. 
82Frank Furtwängler  |  Human Practice
What it is is the result of  its function” (Iser 210) only partly in connection to 
the reader-response model Aarseth wanted to radicalize. Iser was aware of  the fact that reader-response theory and its famous concept of  the “gap” (‘Leer-stelle’) was not suf ﬁ cient for an anthropological turn within the discipline and 
in many respects reader-response theory reminds us of  some of  the properties and shortcomings that I described here for cybertext theory. Perhaps as a logi-cal development of  this, the anthropological turn was distinctly oriented at the question why we have a medium. This is in line with an obvious triviality, i.e. that media are human constructions usable for human constructions. Media result from their functions and taking media as a starting point does not have to imply a strict focus on material sign production—it can actually point to a place of  consensus. This brings us once again back to the fallacy that “the question of  the text becomes a question of  verbal media and their functional differences (what role does a medium play?)” without considering the “question of  semantics, in ﬂ uence, otherness, mental events, intentionality, and so forth” 
(Aarseth, Cybertext 15). The question “what role does a medium play?” is not 
separable from semantics and should provoke an altered concept of  media. The (also) radical claim of  literary anthropology even was to have developed an ex-plorative instrument for ﬁ  nding out about the “human equipment” in reverse 
direction. Iser once responded to a question about the connections between reader-response theory and his concept of  literary anthropology that “reading as text processing also means—and this was an implication which may not have come suf ﬁ ciently to the fore— ﬁ nding out something about the human makeup: 
namely, the way in which the letters we perceive translate into a stream of  im-agery in our minds” (Iser and van Oort). According to Iser this orientation can only foster our understanding about the phenomenon that literature really is. Furthermore this concept frees us from the tiresome questions about what’s literary in literature and poetic in poetry and hopefully also from the burden of  working on genre typologies. As in other forms of  the anthropological turn in several disciplines ontological determinations fade out of  the discussion when the reader, recipient, user or player is subject in his relation to the “work.” In the case of  Iser this was a direct consequence of  certain impasses he diagnosed in literary theory. According to this view, literary theory was occupied mainly with building frameworks for methods of  interpretation before the 1990s and texts existed for conﬁ  rmation of  their model’s claims (Iser 209), which is a highly 
problematic issue—in general and particularly in game studies (as mentioned here before)—because theoretical claims are not meant to construct the subject but the other way around. 
Eskelinen und Tronstad rightly say: “. . . there’s a limit to formalizations, as 
they don’t say much about the player’s experience and deeper motivations” (214). 
83Frank Furtwängler  |  Human Practice
To agree on this limitation means to accept the combination of  complementary 
models that support each other to compensate their de ﬁ ciencies. I don’t want to 
answer to the question whether it makes sense to follow one speci ﬁ c path alone 
without considering others from the very beginning or accepting these paths as intertwining. An anthropological perspective may help to wake the mechanically organized user from its potential, virtual death in cybertext theory by a new fo-cus on user’s experience and needs, while the insights into the structural makeup of  games provided by cybertext theory may balance possible generalizations of  the anthropological view.
Iser’s observation that “literature as a medium is also indicative of  the needs 
to which it responds” still seems to be an important step in the right direction. As he continues: “In addressing itself  to this issue, literary theory is bound to change direction. Instead of  providing a matrix for model-building, it has to explore the sign-function of  the medium, thus turning the text into a re ﬂ ec-
tion of  the needs in question” (Iser 209), it becomes apparent once more that sign-production (cybernetic or not) is inseparable from sign-function on the way to a 
deeper understanding of  a medium. In interactive media of  course we are chal-lenged to quite another degree as we have a system of  user and game or machine that consists of  two interacting subsystems that are dynamic in themselves. So the decision of  cybertext theory to ﬁ xate the dynamics of  the user to some de-
gree or radically for the moment is just an understandable way of  reducing the complexity of  the system as a whole. Literary anthropology may easily accept the recipient, the reader, as the dynamic part of  the system, which is obvious as the texts that for example Iser had in mind are static especially from the view of  cybertext theory. So my account and the close reading of  the term “ergodic” as something Aarseth should have done in the past should de ﬁ nitely not be 
taken as an offence but as an honest explanation why things are the way they are in game studies. To take close-reading into account is necessary because the supposedly radical anthropological claims of  cybertext theory and its concept of  “ergodic literature” are in fact a pack of  lies, most evident in close-reading the appropriation from physics that was in fact not a lie but just misleading. To reconsider the term “ergodic” and re ﬂ ect the way in which it now is appropri-
ated from Aarseth’s cybertext model in game studies is important for a growing respect towards the terminology necessary in the future course of  our studies and a possible subsequent and desirable respect game studies still have to earn from other disciplines and even from within the own ﬁ eld to seriously establish 
a new discipline.
84Frank Furtwängler  |  Human Practice
Notes
1. This article is a revision and more detailed version with some changes in 
argumentation of  Furtwängler, “Menschliche Praxis.” 
2. The male personal pronoun is of  course only used by convention.
3. As I have argued several times elsewhere, e.g.: Furtwängler, “Mensch-Ma-
schine Computerspiel.”
4. I experienced this practice in several texts in the ﬁ eld of  game studies , also in 
semester works by students.
5. The strategy of  shielding concepts with appropriations from the “hard” sci-
ences against objections is well known and especially understandable consid-ering unfortunate objections against decidedly “soft” anthropological con-cepts that often get mocked. Regarding Aarseth’s “vulnerable” explorations of  his own gaming experiences he describes in “Playing Research” I have not only come across silly mockery in internal discussions of  the forum spielkul-
tur.net, but I myself  also have been subjected to this. 
6. For an excellent, brief  introduction to the subject cf. Badino.7. Time usually plays an ambivalent role in ergodic systems, because on the one 
hand time gets “transformed away,” on the other hand time has to be a long time. As Manfred Eigen and Ruthild Winkler show in their book Das Spiel: Naturgesetze steuern den Zufall  the observed times quickly surpass the life-span 
of  the universe: “Beim Nachrechnen der Zeiten aber, die zur Reproduk-tion einer bis ins kleinste ﬁ xierten Verteilungskonstellation nötig sind—der 
Physiker nennt diese die (Poincaréschen) Wiederkehrzeiten—, kommt her-aus, dass diese im allgemeinen größer als das Lebensalter des Universums sind, das ist größer als zehn Milliarden Jahre. Boltzmann berechnete, dass man für eine Reproduktion der Lagekoordinaten aller Atome innerhalb von zehn Angstrom sowie für eine Reproduktion der Geschwindigkeiten in-nerhalb von 0.2 Prozent ihres mittleren Wertes in einem Kubikzentimeter eines verdünnten Gases (ca. 1/30 des Atmosphärendrucks) bereits mehr als (10
10)19 Jahre benötigen würde.” (Eigen and Winkler 196)
8. For an extensive account on that topic illustrated with examples, cf. Furt-
wängler “Mensch-Maschine Computerspiel.” Unfortunately the article I pres-ent in this volume is deprived of  speci ﬁ c examples due to its focus on con-
cepts, which is usually a thing I very much despise in game studies practice.
9. “The four types are socializers  (the players who play to enjoy the company of  
other players), killers  (players who enjoy preying on and harassing other play-
ers), achievers  (players who like to win and triumph) and explorers  (players who 
enjoy discovering the game’s secrets and hidden mechanics, including discov-ering and exploiting programming errors)” (Aarseth, “Playing Research” 3).
85Frank Furtwängler  |  Human Practice
10. For an introduction to the aims of  this ﬁ eld in interdisciplinary perspectives 
cf. Haken.
11. In discussions with the authors it took some time to explain the assumption 
of  “ergodicity” in the cybertext model due to compatibility problems in the 
conceptions. But I want to thank Kassung and Kümmel for very fruitful discussions. Furthermore I want to thank all the colleagues particularly from physics who were a great help in the mediation between disciplines over the last years, especially Wolfgang Dieterich, head of  the department “Statist-ische Physik” at the University of  Constance and Hans Diebner, head of  the Institute for Basic Research at the Zentrum für Kunst und Medientechnologie ZKM , 
Karlsruhe at that time.
12. This is by the way also a perpetually recurring theme in popular media. To 
balance the sad absence of  examples from computer and video games in my text, I want to name only some of  the games that are actually linked to that subject and are central for my main research on that topic. While most games have some kind of  save/load possibilities, the following are examples of  games that re ﬂ ect time reversibility as part of  their mechanics: The new 
Prince of  Persia  series (Ubisoft Montreal Studios, Ubisoft 2003-2005), Viewti-
ful Joe 1  and 2  (Capcom Production Studio 4, Capcom Co., Ltd., 2003-2004) 
and the forthcoming Timeshift (Saber Interactive, Atari, 2006), where manip-
ulation of  time dominates game mechanics and dynamics. This may also be seen in several examples of  temporal slowdown, cf. Max Payne (3D Realms 
Entertainment, Remedy Entertainment Ltd., Gathering, 2001) or F.E.A.R.: 
First Encounter Assault Recon  (Monolith Productions, Inc., Vivendi Universal 
Games, Inc., 2005), important as a preliminary stage of  speci ﬁ c time rever-
sal. Furthermore examples affecting “global” organization of  reversibility in thematic and narrative content affecting game mechanics indirectly, cf. TimeSplitters  series (Free Radical Design, Eidos/Electronic Arts, 2001-2005); 
The Legend of  Zelda: Ocarina of  Time (Nintendo EAD, Nintendo Co., Ltd., 1998), The Legend of  Zelda: Majora’s Mask  (Nintendo EAD, Nintendo Co., 
Ltd., 2000), Chrono Trigger (Square Co., Ltd., 1995), Chrono Cross  (Square Co., 
Ltd., 1999), Dark Chronicle (Level-5 Inc., Sony Computer Entertainment In-
corporated, 2003). These are all more recent examples, hinting at a logical historical developments of  computer game structures, ﬁ rst apparent in the 
90s, cf. Timequest (Legend Entertainment Company, 1991), Day of  the Tentacle  
(Lucasarts, 1993), Lost in Time (Coktel Vision, Sierra, 1993).
13. Perhaps a hint to the irony as hypertext or cybertext theory is in fact part of  
literary studies.
86Frank Furtwängler  |  Human Practice
Works Cited
Aarseth, Espen J. “Nonlinearity and Literary Theory.” Hyper/Text/Theory. Ed. 
George P . Landow. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UP , 1994. 51-86.
———. Cybertext: Perspectives on Ergodic Literature . Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UP , 
1997.———. “Aporia and Epiphany in Doom and the Speaking Clock: The Tem-
porality of  Ergodic Art.” Cyberspace Textuality: Computer Technology and Literary Theory. Ed. Marie-Laure Ryan. Bloomington: Indiana UP , 1999.31-41. 
———. “Computer Game Studies, Year One.” Game Studies 1.1 (2001). 30 May 
2006 <http://www.gamestudies.org/0101/editorial.html>.———. “Playing Research: Methodological approaches to game analysis.” Game 
Approaches / Spil-veje. Papers from spilforskning.dk Conference , August 28-29, 2003. 
30 May 2006 <http://spilforskning.dk/gameapproaches/GameApproaches2.
pdf>. 
Albert, David Z. Time and Chance. Cambridge, MA: Harvard UP , 2000.Badino, Massimiliano. “The Foundational Role of  Ergodic Theory.” Preprint 
292 of  the Max Planck Institute for the History of  Science. 2005. 30 May 2006 <http://www.mpiwg-berlin.mpg.de/en/forschung/preprints.html>.
Bartle, Richard. “Hearts, Clubs, Diamonds, Spades: Players who suit Muds.” 
1996. 30 May 2006 <http://www.mud.co.uk/richard/hcds.htm>.
Brush, Stephen G. The Kind of  Motion We Call Heat. Book 2: Statistical Physics and 
Irreversible Processes. Amsterdam: North Holland Publishing Company, 1976.
Eigen, Manfred, and Ruthild Winkler. Das Spiel: Naturgesetze steuern den Zufall.  
Munich: Piper, 1976. Eskelinen, Markku, and Ragnhild Tronstad. “Video Games and Con ﬁ gurative 
Performances.” The Video Game Theory Reader. Ed. Mark J. Wolf  and Bernard 
Perron. New York: Routledge, 2003.195-220. 
87Frank Furtwängler  |  Human Practice
Frasca, Gonzalo. “Simulation versus Narrative.”  The Video Game Theory Reader. 
Ed. Mark J. Wolf  and Bernard Perron. New York: Routledge, 2003. 221-235.
Furtwängler, Frank. “Menschliche Praxis: Wie das Ergodenproblem die Re-
Animation anthropologischer Perspektiven in den game studies herausfordert.” Dichtung Digital 7.34 (2005), 30 May 2006 <http://www.brown.edu/Research/
dichtung-digital/2005/1/Furtwaengler/>.
———. “Mensch-Maschine Computerspiel: Über eine notwendige Paarthera-
pie in der Medienrealität.” Jahrbuch für Computerphilologie  7. Paderborn: mentis, 
2006. 111-130. 30 May 2006 <http://computerphilologie.uni-muenchen.de/jg05/furtwae.html>. 
Galavotti, Giovanni. Statistical Mechanics: A Short Treatise. Berlin: Springer, 1999.Haken, Hermann. “Synergetics as a Strategy to Cope with Complex Systems.” 
Interdisciplinary Approaches to Nonlinear Complex Systems. Ed. Alexander S. Mikhailov and Hermann Haken. Berlin: Springer, 1993. 5-11.
Iser, Wolfgang. “Towards a Literary Anthropology.” The Future of  Literary Theory. 
Ed. Ralph Cohen. New York: Routledge, 1989. 208-228.
Iser, Wolfgang, and Richard van Oort. “The Use of  Fiction in Literary and 
Generative Anthropology: An Interview with Wolfgang Iser.” Anthropoetics III. 2 
(Fall 1997/Winter 1998) <http://www.anthropoetics.ucla.edu/ap0302/Iser_int.htm>. 
Kassung, Christian. EntropieGeschichten: Robert Musils “Der Mann ohne Eigenschaften ” 
im Diskurs der modernen Physik . Munich: Fink, 2001.
Kümmel, Albert. Das MoE-Programm: Eine Studie über geistige Organisation.  Munich: 
Fink, 2001. Rosenberg, Martin E. “Physics and Hypertext: Liberation and Complicity in 
Art and Pedagogy.” Hyper/Text/Theory. Ed. George P . Landow. Baltimore: Johns 
Hopkins UP , 1994. 269-298.
89Philippe Bootz
The Problem of Form
Transitoire Observable,  a Laboratory for Emergent Programmed Art1 
Abstract:
I will present some conceptions of  programmed art focused on the problem of  form. I will not explain here the different approaches but only open the question in the per-spective of  the procedural model. I will start from the basic common point of  view of  the collective Transitoire Observable and, after an overview of  some aspects of  the proce-
dural model, I will pose the question of  form as a speci ﬁ c management in the program-
ming of  arbitrary aesthetic constraints that are posed by the author in his management of  the situation of  communication created by the work whatever the surface aesthetics is on screen. In this sense, we will speak of  “programmed forms” as forms in programming and not as forms of  the programmed multimedia event.
1.  Transitoire Observable and the Question of a Speciﬁ  city of   
 Programmed Forms
1.1. Pr ogramming as a Matter
E-poetry ﬁ rst focused on a programming approach. But since the end of  the 
1990s, many e-poetry works have focused on video art aspects of  multimedia 
events on screen or have explored “traditional” usage of  the link in hypermedia. Many others use the electronic medium only as a simple medium and as a sup-port for a classical visual poetic approach or as classical visually illustrated texts. These orientations are encouraged by ﬁ rms that produce software in which the 
speciﬁ cs of  the numerical medium are masked by video metaphors. I do not 
deny that these kinds of  poetic projects change the traditional understanding of  the text. They also produce different and non-classical manners of  expression. But it seems to me, and also to several other poets and artists, that this popular approach does not meet the speci ﬁ c needs of  this medium because it does not 
engage programming. Thus these approaches are unable to propose a situation of  communication that is truly new. 
This is why, in 2003—on the suggestion of  Alexandre Gherban—Alexan-
dre, Tibor Papp and I decided to break with these approaches and to create a new collective that relocates programming at the core of  electronic art. We thought that certainly there existed speci ﬁ c forms close to programming; forms we did 
90Philippe Bootz | The Problem of Form
not know and had to explore. We wrote a manifesto in which we explained that 
we consider programming (and not the program) the material of  this art; that the multimedia event that appears on screen is only a transient observable state (a “transitoire observable” in French) that occurs while a computer is operating. We think that forms exist that engage the complexity of  the situation of  com-munication created by programmed works. We also think that these forms are close to programming and highly independent of  the nature of  the transitoire ob-
servable . Programming is a new kind of  material that artists can sculpt and model. 
It is a matter of  a formal approach to the duality of  algorithms/processes. What is pointed out in this approach is the relationship between the algorithmic nature of  the code and the pragmatics of  reading.
So, at this level, e-poetry certainly does not exist but one can indicate a gen-
eral art of  programming. This is why several poets and artists quickly joined the collective: Jim Andrews, Wilton Azevedo, Jean-Pierre Balpe, Bluescreen, Patrick Burgaud, Philippe Castellin, Xavier Leton, Loss Glazier, Antoine Schmitt, Eric Serandour, and Reiner Strasser.
1.2. Major Directions of Exploration
These artists employ numerous different surface aesthetics, generally issued 
from previously programmed works, often published in alire. These works can be interactive or not, but they always put the reader in a particular position where he is responsible for an experiment of  reading, and is not the focus of  the work: The reader is a partner. He has a special role to play in the work. His reading no longer remains outside of  the work. Through its dark moments, its failures, its shortcuts, its questionings, and its great place of  non-meeting, the reading activity fully participates in the work, it is a process of  the work, it is an intrinsic component of  the work. Reading is truly a sign, as is the operational process that it confronts, even in non-interactive works. The work is not de-signed to satisfy a reader nor is it to be read in the same manner as a book or a video. It is designed to operate because physical running is its raison d’être. In alire12 , interactive works by Burgaud, Strasser, Schmitt, Gherban and Andrews 
satisfy such an assertion on different levels.
Interactive or non-interactive works are conceived to confront the inten-
tionality of  the author and that of  the reader. The intentionality of  the reader passes through interactivity and expressive non-interactive behavior. The inten-tionality of  the author is expressed on screen and in the program, not only in lines of  code that generate visible materials or that govern expressive visible behaviors, but in more speci ﬁ c meta-stylistic rules applied as arbitrary constraints 
on the procedures that manage the observable multimedia transient event.
91Philippe Bootz | The Problem of Form
It appears in Transitoire Observable that meta-stylistic rules can be similar in e-
poetry and in more general programmed art; it is the basis of  the collective. This 
convergence of  points of  view asks whether speci ﬁ c programmed forms exist, 
independent of  the aesthetical surface level on screen. It also opens, perhaps, the possibility of  a-media multimedia in which meta-rules would be managed on a very high abstract level, without directly taking into account the speci ﬁ city 
of  media. 
2. Main Theoretical Features Appearing in alire
To explain how these authors arrived at these conceptions, it is useful to know the most important concepts that emerged from works published in  alire. These 
conceptions are relative to the problem of  meaning and to the relations that ex-ist between signs and author, signs and reader, author and reader. 
These works have broken new ground on three levels. The second and third 
levels constitute what I will call the “procedural model.”
2.1. The Surface Rhetorical Level
First, alire has added some new speci ﬁ c rhetorical possibilities, namely syntacti-
cal animation. It has also published other new speci ﬁ c rhetorical possibilities: 
Poetic hypertext, kinetic poetry, and algorithmic poetry (combinatory or auto-
matically generated poetry). 
In each case, generally, we only need traditional semiotic theories to explain 
this surface rhetorical level. For example, all features in syntactical animations can be explained by using a traditional linguistic de ﬁ nition of  text and a tradi-
tional approach to syntax. We only need to consider the difference between the temporal and the spatial construction of  signs inside the same set of  words and letters (spatial reading and temporal reading).
Unfortunately, this level fails to explain most of  the signi ﬁ cant features in 
interactive works. It also fails to explain the changing of  meaning with time or the difference between combinatory and automatic generation. So, we need to consider the totality of  the situation of  communication between the author and the reader that constitutes a system. This communication passes through the work. Writing and reading are internal functions of  this system, which consti-tutes the second level of  signs.
92Philippe Bootz | The Problem of Form
2.2. The Communicative Level 
a. Cognitive and T echnical Understanding
At this level, we cannot neglect the technical behavior of  the system in the 
construction of  meaning. Communication features, ergodic activity of  reading, semiotic features, cognitive features and technical features cannot be disjunctive. Notably, the reader cannot construct a meaning of  the work without constructing at the same 
time a meaning of  the totality of  the situation of  communication.  From a systemic point 
of  view, the work has no reality. It can only be understood as a subsystem of  the situation of  communication that cannot be extracted from this situation. Two important, non-classical rhetorical features (namely double reading and aesthet-ics of  frustration) use this relation between the construction of  the meaning of  the work and the construction of  the meaning of  the communicative situation. 
Fig. 1. The system’s structural scheme.
It is useful to consider the cognitive level because the archetypal mind represen-tations that are used by a reader are not stable; they are based on experiments of  reading or writing in his particular medium and do not come from a deep cultural tradition. Thus they can differ greatly from one person to another. This mind representation has been called the profondeur de dispositif (“system depth”) in 
the procedural model. A profondeur de dispositif is applied as a ﬁ  lter by the cognitive 
strategy of  reading or writing in order to decide what is the signi ﬁ cance of  the 
signs in the transient observable event that is produced during operation. We 

93Philippe Bootz | The Problem of Form
can ﬁ nd many relations between different works in alire that show that a number 
of  these pieces, independently of  the nature of  the work, have constructed the 
actual mind representation (which is described by the procedural model) by us-ing in fact exactly the same strategy to manage reading. 
At a technical level, author and reader are only users of  the computer. Nota-
bly, the author in the working process does not manage the totality of  the rules that are used by the computer while it is running. Hence the computer no longer is a Turing machine. Another model must be used. I have constructed the model of  the “machines de monstration” (‘showing machines’). The program written by the author does not totally manage the physical process during the comput-ing operations. That is, the algorithmic level of  the program is not completely responsible for the functioning of  the transitoire observable . We can say that the 
author is the author of  the program and data, but only the co-author of  the physical process that appears to the reader while the machine is running. Using more traditional literary language, we can say that the author’s program contains a large level of  the “non-said.” But this non-said does not play the same role as the non-said of  the classical printed text: This non-said will be interpreted by the machine and not by the reader to produce the observable sign. Thus it is necessary to consider that while the computer is running, program (algorithmic level) and physical process are two different and complementary parts of  the work. Adaptive generation uses this unsaid as a constraint for programming. 
Fig. 2. Technical left unsaid.
b. Semiotic and Communicative Understanding 
From a semiotic point of  view, we can separate the classical and general semiotic notion of  text (the text is the object of  interpretation) into three different parts that do not act in the same space. Program and data (in high level forms) con-stitute the texte-auteur (“author-text” or “text-of-inscription”).
2 This is a sign that 
is only accessible by the author. It is in the domain of  the author. The second sign is constituted by what will be considered as “the text” by the reader. It is 

94Philippe Bootz | The Problem of Form
the texte-à-voir (“text-to-be-seen” or “text-of-visualization”). It is a part of  the 
observable transient event that can differ from a reader to another because read-
ers will not apply the same profondeur de dispositif on the transitoire observable . The 
physical process itself  is a function. From a semiotic point of  view, it transforms the texte-auteur into the texte-à-voir. Because it generates the transitoire observable , it 
is called “generation” in the model. 
Fig. 3. The different structural and functional components of  the work. 
The totality of  this subsystem constitutes the “domain of  the work.” It plays the role of  an interface between the domain of  the author and the domain of  the reader. Thus it is the part of  the model that is most similar to the classical no-tion of  work. A work can no longer be regarded as an object, but as a complex set of  components of  different natures (object for the texte-auteur, state for the 
texte-à-voir and process for the generation) that can only exist while the program is running. 

95Philippe Bootz | The Problem of Form
Fig. 4. Structural and functional schemes of  the domain of  the work. 
This set of  signs must be completed by two mind representations that are the 
classical meanings of  the work and the totality of  the situation of  communica-tion. These two mind representations are the texte-écrit  (text-as-written) and the 
texte-lu  (text-as-read). The texte-écrit  is used by the author to construct the texte-
auteur and, notably, to elaborate strategies of  temporal, space, and media behav-iors on screen, to delimitate what he will consider as interface and what he will consider as texte-à-voir in the transient event, to manage interactivity.
As he is inside the system of  communication, the reader can give meaning 
to his own ergodic activity while he is interacting. This special meaning is called “double reading.” Generally, it arrives during reading to reorient the construc-tion of  the work’s meaning in another way. Double reading uses the activity of  reading as a sign intended for the reader. In double reading, interactivity acts as a reﬂ exive sign: The reader interacts with himself. Double reading has been used 
since the beginning of  the 1990s.

96Philippe Bootz | The Problem of Form
Fig. 5. Double reading.
Fig. 6. Complete description of  the situation of  communication 
in an example where the author has an algorithmic profondeur 
de dispositif  and the reader a video profondeur de dispositif.
 

97Philippe Bootz | The Problem of Form
Fig. 7. Functional scheme of  the situation of  communication. 
2.3. The Meta-Level
The theory of  double reading has shown that reading can act as a sign. When it 
does, for example in the aesthetics of  frustration, this sign is a part of  the situ-ation of  communication and not of  the domain of  the work. Thus the totality of  the situation can become a sign, a meta-work. It is an iconic sign of  a con-ceptual reality of  the work that does not reach the surface rhetorical level. The referent of  this sign is usually a situation or a process in life. The meta-work is iconic in the situation it creates or in its functioning. This meta-work is intended for a person watching the reader while he is reading. This person is not reading himself, but watching somebody else reading. He is a meta-reader. Reading and meta-reading do not apply to the work by the same canal. They are two different functions applied to the work, even if  they can be successively applied by the same person. The meta-reader can understand the reactions and actions of  the reader in a certain manner that differs from the reader’s double reading. But he can only do this if  he knows the meaning the author gave to the reading activity. This meaning is expressed in papers or other paratexts.
3 It is not expressed at all 
in the texte-auteur. Some features in the program or other data of  the texte-auteur 
can only play the role of  an index for this meta-level of  the author’s intentional-ity. Meta-reading is not an interpretation of  the situation but a recognition of  it. The meta-reader must also perceive the speci ﬁ c inﬂ  uence of  the program non-
said while operating. Thus meta-reading can been seen as “a most intellectual understanding” of  what happens in the situation of  communication whereas reading can be regarded as “a most affective understanding” of  what happens in the work. For double reading, the activity of  reading is a signi ﬁ cant level of  the 
communication between the author and the reader. For meta-reading, the activ-ity of  reading is an expressive level of  the communication between the author and the meta-reader.
4

98Philippe Bootz | The Problem of Form
Fig. 8. Total activity of  the author. 
Fig. 9. Difference between reading and meta-reading. 
The aesthetics of  frustration gives a speci ﬁ c role to reading and considers that 
the reader is not the only person addressed by the work. The reader plays a 
speciﬁ c, unexplained role in the reading process because reading is the scene of  
this role. Expressive reactions, or actions, are signs. They are in an iconic rela-

99Philippe Bootz | The Problem of Form
tion to real life activities. This aesthetics considers that the traditional failure of  
reading or rereading is a speciﬁ  c modality of  reading; it has a speci ﬁ c meaning 
at the scene of  activity. Thus the work can be very frustrating for the reader but, from the point of  view of  meta-reading, a failure of  reading cannot exist. Even a failure produces meaning but this meaning doesn’t pass through a reader’s understanding of  the work when reading fails.
When using meta-reading, e-poetry is fundamentally concerned with com-
munication by natural language and by the real nature of  reading and writing in a society of  communication. Many works argue that the cultural basis of  soci-eties of  information and communication is a myth. These works are based on miscommunication. They are using the most mythic device of  communication, the computer, because it is fundamentally a machine of  language, a machine of  programmed language, whatever the nature of  signs on the surface of  the screen may be.
3. The Question of Form in Programmed E-Poetry
3.1. Different Levels of Constraint
The question of  form in this system is relative to the role that the author gives to 
each part of  the domain of  the work. It is fundamentally relative to the profondeur 
de dispositif  of  the author. It depends only on the author, not on the reader. I de-
ﬁ ne a form as a creation and a management of  an arbitrary set of  constraints. It 
is an ef ﬁ cient point of  view because we can ﬁ nd different levels of  constraints 
by taking into account the relationship between the different components of  the domain of  the work.
3.2. Simulation and Intersemiotics
A ﬁ rst set of  constraints is only relative to the surface rhetorical level. There are 
two possibilities nowadays: The transitoire observable  simulates a traditional form 
(from traditional or visual poetry) or it mixes different semiotic behaviors in an 
interpoetic (or intersemiotic) physical behavior. Intersemiotic works can con-front different kinds of  observable signs (for example in video poetry) or with time can be a transformation of  one sign into another from the same semiotics (a manner explored by Jacopo Baboni Schilingi in music). 
When the author only uses these kinds of  constraints, the computer is used 
as a tool, as an ampli ﬁ cation of  complexity, and the only question of  form 
that remains to be solved by the author is the transformation of  the transitoire 
observable  to a texte-à-voir. The other components of  the domain of  the work do 
100Philippe Bootz | The Problem of Form
not play any role at all. These kinds of  systems enter in the class of  “computer-
assisted literature” and not in the class of  Transitoire Observable’s “programmed 
literature.” In programmed literature, the aesthetic problem of  this pure observ-able level is the same as in computer-assisted literature; it concerns the rhetorical level, but the general problem of  form does not restrict itself  to this level. 
For instance, temporal programming uses the transformation of  signs of  
the same semiotic system. In this approach, the beginning and the end of  the transformation can be recognized as a certain sign (or set of  signs) by the reader, but the transient part is only interpreted by a cognitive interpolation with the beginning or the end. It seems that this part uses a speci ﬁ c temporal semiot-
ics that preserves the global coherence of  reading. This temporal semiotics is not interpreted in the same semiotic area. Thus, this transformation has special properties for the reader: It occurs as a continuous physical process but also as a semiotic discontinuity, a step between two non-simultaneous interpretations, and, while the physical process is linear and limited, the cognitive interpretation is looping between the two interpretations: They ﬁ nally coexist in the mind. 
This constraint can be described by two rules: Beginning and end of  the se-quence must be recognizable signs in a certain semiotics and the transformation time must be a physically continuous temporal event. This event, probably, is a unique UST.
5
3.3. Using Meta-Stylistic Rules
The communicative and the meta-levels present types of  constraints that are 
more speci ﬁ c to programmed art because they use real time running while read-
ing. The aesthetics of  frustration or the strategies of  managing the reading pro-cess I have presented above concern one type of  constraint: How to manage the interactivity. In contrast to hypertext philosophy, we see that the reader’s intentionality is not the focus of  the work. In Transitoire Observable, the old adage 
introduced in alire in the 1980s, always applies: Reading forbids to read.
Another set of  constraints is based on the relationship between the texte-
auteur and the texte-à-voir and concerns the generative level of  the work. In this relation, the texte-auteur is a model of  the texte-à-voir. Jean-Pierre Balpe discussed 
this point in his theory of  the meta-author.
6  Historically, the ﬁ rst kind of  pro-
grammed texts using this conception was automatic generation. But adaptive animation made by L.A.I.R.E. also abides by this conception, even if  the ob-servable behavior is very different. The difference is due to the nature of  the algorithms that are used. Automatic generation uses algorithms of  creation of  linguistic material although programmed animation uses algorithms to manage the expressive aesthetic behavior of  the observable material. But this difference 
101Philippe Bootz | The Problem of Form
only concerns the transformation of  the texte-auteur into the texte-à-voir; it neither 
concerns programming itself  nor the conception of  model. In each case, the 
author has to write two different kinds of  rules: Rules of  the semiotic level of  the texte-à-voir
7 and rules of  the management of  these rules. The reader cannot 
see this second set of  lines of  code. Adaptive8 generation shows that today it be-
comes a model of  models. Thus these works manifest two aesthetic levels. The ﬁ rst is classically showing the reader the transitoire observable  through observable 
media, processes, and behaviors. The second is only indexed in the transitoire ob-
servable . To perceive it, it is necessary to re-run the work, sometimes on another 
computer.
9 This second level is the manifestation of  meta-stylistic rules. Because 
they do not directly appear to the reader, we can be sure that—through the op-eration of  reading—the reader no longer is the person addressed in the work. In fact, the person really addressed in the work is a social and cultural meta-reader. A given person, as he is an instance of  this cultural meta-reader, can play the two roles but they cannot be assumed at the same time: Meta-reading does not occur through the reading of  the work. There exists a real rhetorical unity between interactive works that use the aesthetics of  frustration and those that are not interactive but use meta-stylistic rules. 
Generally, the meta-stylistic rules take the form of  parameters, or a logical 
set of  rules for dialogue between parts of  the program, or special non-visible behaviors like measures. These meta-stylistic rules are purely arbitrary rules of  creation. Technical features do not justify them. Thus, they are really artistic constraints. When meta-stylistic rules have been chosen, the problem to man-age them consists of  constructing a suitable tool to describe (on the conception level) and to program them.  For complex projects, the conception level of  the 
constraint is the most dif ﬁ cult to describe. Authors in Transitoire Observable use 
different models of  conception: Jean-Pierre Balpe uses the system of  generation he has created; Tibor Papp uses a grammar in which paradigms are individual behaviors and syntax as a set of  rules of  assembling; Alexandre Gherban also uses a set of  behaviors (temporal behaviors), but these behaviors are chosen and used as parameters by using cellular automata; Antoine Schmitt uses physical mechanical laws and a predictive calculus on temporal speci ﬁ c objectives (aes-
thetic of  causality); Xavier Leton and I use measures and rules of  adaptation, I use generative editing (the horizontal editing) to construct observable behaviors with elementary components; Bluescreen uses arbitrary laws of  interaction be-tween programmed objects to construct a collective behavior. . . . 
To cite examples from alire12 , the visible processes can be managed by 
algorithms of  arti ﬁ cial life (Gherban, Bluescreen), by physical models (Schmitt), 
or by temporal programming (Bootz). But, in each case, transitoire observable  is 
not understood as a simulation. If  life exists, it does not occur in the result but 
102Philippe Bootz | The Problem of Form
in the principle of  the program’s functioning. It is not biological life that would 
obey the laws of  duplication and competition, but an aesthetic life in which these algorithmic rules are constrained by meta-aesthetic rules that do not di-rectly appear in the transient observable event. Aesthetic forms on the surface of  the screen are instances of  forms produced by these meta-aesthetic rules. To do this, the program can measure while running (Bootz). The program uses the results of  these measures in order to modify its own strategy. In this way it is an adaptive generator. For example, the result of  a calculation by an algorithm can be changed by the result of  a measure to obey a certain aesthetic idea, or the measure can forbid certain parts of  the program to function. More generally, the program is constructed as a set of  independent rules that have a relationship while running in order to construct an observable transient state constrained by aesthetic meta-rules. This is the case, even if  the program does not use a speci ﬁ c 
algorithmic model (Papp). The author does not exactly know what will happen, but the author knows the classes of  the main aesthetic features that will be made manifest in the observable multimedia transient event when the technical unsaid does not trouble the programmed process. 
Conclusion 
Thus, even if  each author explores different modalities of  meta-rules, with sometimes very different objectives, I think that the existence of  these meta-rules is suf ﬁ cient to speak of  a common aesthetics. The common direction for 
the author is to search for the best form of  conception and realization of  the class of  meta-rules he explores. This unity is not manifested on the screen, but in the similitude of  the management of  the reader’s and the author’s role: It is not an aesthetics of  text; it is an aesthetics of  creating. 
Notes
1. This article was written with the linguistic assistance of  Loss Pequeño Glazier.2. The  texte-auteur is not the digital form that is stored in the machine but the 
form it takes in which a human being can understand this texte-auteur as 
signs. It is, for example, the source program written in a high-level language of  programming and not the binary code in which it appears for the ma-chine after compilation. In the case of  visual data the  texte-à-voir is the pic-
ture that the eye of  a human being can see and not the ﬁ le. The texte-auteur 
must be translated into digital ﬁ les because the machine cannot use it as is. 
103Philippe Bootz | The Problem of Form
3. The role of  paratext in the interpretation of  an electronic artistic work was 
studied using several examples in the paper “Approche du rôle de la mé-
moire dans la conception et la réception de quelques œuvres en littérature numérique.”
4. Cf. the paper “Approche sémiotique d’un certain art programmé: œuvre 
signe et méta-lecture.”
5. A “Temporal Semiotic Unit.” The theory of  UST was created in the labora-
tory of  computer music of  Marseilles (MIM) in order to analyze music cf. <http://www.labo-mim.org>. Its extrapolation to visual and multimedia art is being explored today. 
6. Cf. Balpe, “Un roman inachevé—dispositifs” and “Méta-auteur.”7. In this case, it is the texte-à-voir for the author, not for the reader. The author 
manages what happens on the screen of  his computer, the semiotic behav-ior of  what he considers on this screen as the texte-à-voir.
8. An adaptive generator tries to manage the technical left unsaid. It changes 
the logical set of  rules used to construct the observable transient by inter-preting physical measures made by the program during its operating time.
9. Adaptive generation is totally transparent on a computer because the mea-
sures it makes always produces the same results. Thus, the change in the logic of  operation is the same from one re-reading to another.
Works Cited
Balpe, Jean-Pierre. “Un roman inachevé—dispositifs.” Littérature 96 (1994): 
37-53.
———. “Méta-auteur.” alire 10  (1997): 95-99.
Bootz, Philippe. “Approche du rôle de la mémoire dans la conception et la ré-
ception de quelques œuvres en littérature numérique.” 2003. @rchivesic. 6 June
2006 <http://archivesic.ccsd.cnrs.fr/sic_00078598>.
———. “Approche sémiotique d’un certain art programmé: œuvre signe et 
méta-lecture.” 2004. @rchivesic.  6 June 2006 <http://archivesic.ccsd.cnrs.fr/
sic_00078604>. 
Typologies, Histories, and Case Studies
107Mela Kocher
The Ludoliterary Circle
Analysis and Typology of Digital Games
Abstract:
How has interactive storytelling been developed in the past 30 years? Where do problems and chances in game narration lie? The ludoliterary circle is a typology that provides tools for analyzing different ludic forms of  storytelling with regards to these questions. It focuses on the perspective and the interactive engagement of  the user and the narrative mode of  the “text.” While showing how these parameters correlate with each other, it will also be demonstrated which and why certain combinations are more successful than others. 
Intro
Whichever innovative forms of  digital storytelling we are demanding and hop-
ing for in the ﬁ  eld of  computer games, it is observable that most games follow 
certain worn-out patterns even though they might have been changing over the last decades and different tendencies can be distinguished. Traditional narrative game genres like adventure games melt more and more into other genres (like Fahrenheit , a mix of  adventure game and interactive movie, the Max Payne  series 
or Hello Kitty: Roller Rescue , unusual narrative action games), following the general 
genre-mix-landscape nowadays. New storytelling forms are also emerging: less prestructured and static but more dynamic and user-input-friendly. This article aims to present a model that captures digital narration patterns, takes a snapshot at past and current digital storytelling and provides a tool to analyze and de-scribe—understanding that it is a formal model, presenting abstract types, which can be discussed with cybertext genres such as computer games, hyper ﬁ ction, 
interactive movies and, hypothetically, VR environments.
1
Talking about digital storytelling one has to admit that there obviously are 
signiﬁ  cant limits of  traditional narrative theories when encountering digital me-
dia. Especially the concepts of  “interactivity” and “perspective of  the user” can only be partly captured by narratology, which often focuses on the narrator—who does not play an important part in games—and handles static texts. These media-speci ﬁ c conditions are taken into account by the model to be presented 
here, which focuses on the parameters perspective, interactivity and narrative 
108Mela Kocher  |  The Ludoliterary Circle
mode. Taking these parameters as a common base for cybertext analysis we 
can discern differences and similarities between different types of  cybertexts that are linked insofar as they do in some way tell digital stories
2—sharing fam-
ily resemblances sensu Wittgenstein. Last but not least the model—including both narratological and digital media tools—tries to build a bridge between the narratological and the ludological approach towards computer games in game studies, a relatively new scienti ﬁ c ﬁ eld that indulges in heavy ideological debates 
on the legitimacy of  the theories to be applied.
3 In the following paragraphs I 
will ﬁ rst explain the features of  the ludoliterary4 circle and then illustrate them 
with speci ﬁ c examples.
   
   
Fig. 1. Ludoliterary circle.

109Mela Kocher  |  The Ludoliterary Circle
The Ludoliterary Circle
The ludoliterary model represents a circle that is equally cut by three axes meet-
ing in the circular centre. Each axe represents a continuum of  values, whereby the two opposite axial poles each mark one extreme. The binary code of  perspec-tive would therefore be internal/external, of  narrative mode diegetic/mimetic, of  interactivity dynamic/static. Positioning a game genre or a certain game on the circle line means that it can be characterized and discussed by means of  the three axial poles that are closest on the circle line. Crucial is therefore the circle line, especially the spots where the line is crossed by the three axes. For example, a game positioned around the diegetic pole could be discussed by diegetic, static and internal parameters. On the other hand, a game lying on the opposite side of  the narrative mode axe is referred to as mimetic, external and dynamic.
The idea of  the model is to catch transitions in game features that cannot 
be captured by a—rather static—matrix. By allowing the positioning of  cyber-texts on any given spot on the circle line one can break binary classi ﬁ cations.
5 
Therefore it is possible, for example, to characterize two cybertexts that are both static and diegetic but vary in their way to include the user’s perspective. Besides showing and discussing different constellations it will be possible to see which constellations are more successful or intriguing than others and why, and also taking into account the history of  digital storytelling.
The three parameters perspective, interactivity and narrative modes can be 
further differentiated. An internal perspective is given when the user has a “lim-ited point of  view” on the events and characters of  the ﬁ ctional world, when 
she shares the knowledge of, for example, the avatar of  a third person adventure game.
6 Furthermore, the role the user slips into is a function inside the onto-
logical time and space of  the ﬁ ction (Genette’s homodiegetic sphere), which 
can result in different ways of  identi ﬁ cation and empathy. Visually the internal 
perspective is usually represented by a ﬁ rst, second or third person perspective. 
Contrarily, taking an external perspective means the player is omniscient and also located outside of  the time and space of  the ﬁ ctional world (Genette’s 
heterodiegetic sphere). This is usually represented in games as the more distant bird’s eye or the isometric view.
Where the interactive involvement of  the user is concerned, the model 
focuses on media-speci ﬁ c extra-noematic—with Aarseth: ergodic—interactiv-
ity, leaving aside the noematic, “psychic” interactive process that takes place between any text and a user as it is described by reader-response theory (1). Borrowing Brenda Laurel’s multidimensional categories, which she sees applied in all human computer interaction, it is possible to discern different shades of  interactive involvement. Laurel considers the frequency, the range and the sig-
110Mela Kocher  |  The Ludoliterary Circle
niﬁ cance of  the user’s actions; frequency as “a measure of  how often user input 
is enabled,” range as “the range of  choices available to users at a given moment 
in the interaction” and signi ﬁ cance as “a measure of  the impact of  the users’ 
choices and actions upon the whole” (78). At the dynamic pole of  the model 
we set cybertexts that show high degrees of  those three criteria and vice versa at the static pole.
Different ways of  digital storytelling can be distinguished by the criteria of  
the narrative mode. The two extreme poles represent the classic categories of  the diegetic and the mimetic—deriving from Aristotelian drama theory as much as from Goethe’s and Schiller’s interpretations. A game that is placed close to the diegetic pole shows therefore some or all of  the following narrative features: The plot typically consists of  a ﬁ xed set of  events which can partly vary in their 
order.
7 A narrator is central to the way of  presenting the story. The ﬁ ctional 
world is experienced in an episodic way, meaning that events are linked the-matically rather than causally. The epic extension of  space is typical for many diegetic games where the user strolls through countries and islands in search for clues. Time is loosely ﬁ xed; playtime—in narrative terms: “Erzählzeit” (‘narrat-
ing time’)—and event time—“erzählte Zeit” (‘narrated time’)—are not related to each other. The time related focus can lie heavily on the past. All in all the narrative game experience can be captured with Laurel’s expression of  “extensi-ﬁ cation” ( Computers as Theatre  94) where emphasis is put not so much in building 
up suspense but rather on a meditative experience.
Mimetic cybertexts in contrast ideally produce different events every time 
the game is started anew.
8 The narrator is much less present than in diegetic 
games, and story seems more to be enacted or performed than prestructured. Events are linked more causally than in diegetic games and can be described with Artistotle’s term of  unity of  action. This is the same with space and time: Unity of  space suggests that events take place in a limited area. Time is also condensed and play and event time are closely related with emphasis of  things happening right now, in the present. All in all the term “intensi ﬁ cation” ( Computers as Theatre  
94) can be used to describe this type of  game experience. 
111Mela Kocher  |  The Ludoliterary Circle
Cybertext Genres
                     
    Fig. 2. Genre typology.
Originally constructed to describe computer game narration, the constellation 
of  the ludolitary circle also allows the discussion of  other cybertext genres like hyperﬁ  ctions and interactive movies. In the following “quests” I will shortly 
play each genre respectively representative cybertexts with the corresponding parameters. 
Quest 1: Adventure Games
Adventure games like Monkey Island, Myst or Runaway: A Road Adventure  are the 
typical tokens when speaking about ludic storytelling, because they most closely represent the classic storytelling genre relatively similar to print literature. In-triguing the player by an internal perspective, she plays ﬁ rst or third person by 
taking up either stereotyped roles or ﬁ gures that show some ironic and self-
reﬂ ecting features. The knowledge of  the player is equal to the knowledge of  
the avatar; according to that “limited point of  view”-concept the main task of  

112Mela Kocher  |  The Ludoliterary Circle
the game play is solving riddles, uncovering murders, saving princesses etc. The 
ﬁ ctional world is often narrated by a narrator through diaries, letters, cutscenes 
etc. that are dispersed all over the game worlds. The player travels on her mission through many places and visits them repeatedly, whereas not only space, but also time seem to be extensive, since narration time stops when the player does not move on in her quest. Often the events do not seem to be intrinsically related to each other and make sense, if  at all, only retrospectively. The plot’s course—and its few endings—are determined; its nodes or riddles may only vary in their order. The interactive offer to the user corresponds well to this diegetic constel-lation: For the coherence of  the story to be satisfactory, the player is not allowed to be too active—one of  the crucial problems of  interactive ﬁ ction. Adventures 
games are therefore very static: The player does not interact very often (disre-garding the minimal navigational clicking), and she is not offered a wide range of  options, either. It seems though, at ﬁ rst hand and especially when looking 
at older games like Monkey Island that are partly text based that there is a large 
set of  objects to be combined with many commands. Mostly just a handful of  combinations remain possible even though usually only one is successful, which makes that range only seemingly wide. The player’s actions are not signi ﬁ cant for 
the course of  the story insofar as it could be in ﬂ uenced or changed. This gam-
ing concept of  internal perspective, diegetic mode and static interactivity works best when narration is of  aesthetic quality and the characters are of  innovative design, since the restrictions of  problem solving and interactive in ﬂ uence can 
often be quite annoying. LucasArts’ games like Monkey Island, Grim Fandango etc. 
are the ever-loved classic adventure games with great stories and hilarious char-acters, but also newer games like Runaway and Fahrenheit  or genre mixes like the 
narrative action game Max Payne are satisfying from a story point of  view.
Quest 2: Hyperﬁ  ction
A similar pro ﬁ le concerning interactivity and narrative mode is shown by many 
hyperﬁ  ctions. The frequency of  interaction with the interface is limited to the 
minimum and consists of  clicking links—again the minimum needed for navi-gation. There is not really a wide range of  options to choose from: Usually you ﬁ nd one to three possible links on one screen; some lead you further in the story, 
some loop you back. Since the text chunks are already programmed there is no signiﬁ  cant impact of  the user’s action on the whole since her part consists of  
choosing the order in which they appear on the screen—a classical feature of  the diegetic mode. As in the narrative mode of  adventure games, there is also a strong narrator. Jumping from link to link the user is often taken to various 
113Mela Kocher  |  The Ludoliterary Circle
places in different time zones; considering that a lot of  combinations of  those 
text chunks make little sense the experience is quite an extensive one regarding time, place and action. Other than in ﬁ rst or third person adventure games, nar-
ration is often carried out through a variety of  characters. Changing perspectives and hopping from character to character puts the user into an external perspec-tive, which makes it hard to identify with one character. On the one hand this perspective can be quite irritating since the position of  the user is often re ﬂ ected 
and she gets addressed as an outsider—which is the case in most of  Susanne Berkenheger’s work.
9 On the other hand the effect of  clicking links, choosing 
the next text chunks and presumably the course of  the story suggest a feeling of  power and omniscience since the user seems to mutate to some sort of  co-author.
10 The play with the author-concept is also part of  the deconstructing 
and reﬂ  ecting on literary processes—a great aesthetic potential of  hyper ﬁ ction, 
a feature which sometimes wins over the lack of  user activity and narrative coherence, and a potential that interactive movies do not quite reach. 
Quest 3: Interactive Movies
Interactive movies11 like I’m Your Man or Swiss Love  are rather mimetic than di-
egetic and often show a clear dramatic structure of  exposition, complication, climax, resolution and epilogue.
12 The dimension of  time depends not anymore 
solely on the actions of  the user, but rather on the text which controls play and event time, with some exceptions: A movie sequence runs in a linear way for minutes and stops only for the user to make her next choice which consists of  clicking one link, then another movie sequence runs again. Since interactive movies play with the idea of  different people running into each other (so the user can choose to follow one, then another), the unity of  place is often given since characters meet at central spots. Also, typically mimetic, a narrator is not present and events are enacted and not told. For the course of  the action this genre behaves in a more diegetic way, since the text consists of  a certain set of  frames that alter only in their order. This is consistent with the position on the ludoliterary model (which puts interactive movies closer to the mimetic pole but also in reach of  the diegetic) and makes sense regarding the static interactivity: The user may choose from convictions of  the characters or determine where the action will lead. For an interactive text it seems very little, since the interac-tive engagement of  the user is reduced to a few clicks (neither worth mentioning considering frequency, range or signi ﬁ cance). For the classical movie watching 
the interruptions are de ﬁ nitely too much since the player repeatedly falls out of  
immersion. The setting of  the perspective is depicted accordingly: Changing 
114Mela Kocher  |  The Ludoliterary Circle
often between the different characters makes it very dif ﬁ cult to immerse in one 
character, so the user ends up taking an external perspective, an objective dis-
tance outside of  ﬁ ctional time and space. This becomes very clear in the follow-
ing scene of  I’m Your Man, an interactive movie which plays with the concept of  
omniscience to a high degree: After he had been attacked with a pepper spray by a woman he was chasing, the villain turns to the camera and addresses the user. Since she was able to observe the action—“you haven’t been maced”
13—she is 
supposed to help him. “That puts us in position of  mutual need. I need you to tell me where they went. You need me not to ﬂ ip the switch, which will lock the 
doors to the theatre and begin a 24-hour marathon of  menudo music. So tell me, where did they go, back to the party or up on the roof?” The meta ﬁ ctional 
subtext and the experience of  different facets of  a story from the perspective of  various characters sound like exciting ideas, but this kind of  constellation of  external perspective, mimetic narration and static interactivity fails mostly because of  similar reasons like in hyper ﬁ ction. The narrative coherence is only 
given when following one character but lacks much when using the variety of  links. Also, while hyper ﬁ ction allow you to wander around and discover the 
story from various perspectives at your own pace, interactive movies are both too hectic and incoherent to be more than an experiment.
Quest 4: Society Simulations
Much luckier proves the combination of  mimetic narration, external perspective and dynamic interactivity that can be observed in society simulations like The 
Sims series. The player focuses alternately on the different avatars, the members 
of  a family, and coordinates their everyday life. This is external perspective at its most: The player is truly omniscient. She knows about the aspirations, wants, fears, needs and even memories of  the Sims. As a goddess she is able to in ﬂ u-
ence their way of  life, their choice of  jobs, husbands and wives, hobbies, skills, social interactions and more. The degree of  interactive involvement is equally high concerning frequency, range and signi ﬁ cance. Since the Sims constantly 
interact with their environment and produce needs and hopes to be ful ﬁ lled 
and fears to be prevented, the player is forced to act very frequently. Given any object or person to be manipulated there is always a variety of  context sensitive options to choose from. The Sims you choose can dance, quarrel, ﬂ irt and make 
love with or talk, hug, tickle, entertain etc. another Sims, depending on how their relationship is developing at the moment. A fridge you can ﬁ ll or empty or sell 
or move to another place, etc. There are no rights or wrongs in choosing from those options but just actions and their consequences. Therefore the player’s 
115Mela Kocher  |  The Ludoliterary Circle
decisions do greatly matter to the course of  the action, the action itself  and 
the behavior of  the Sims.14 Every time the game is played again it most likely 
becomes a different life scenario—unless you make exactly the same decisions again which is almost improbable regarding the pace that game moves in. The dynamics of  interactivity correlate really well with the mimetic mode of  the story. It is not being narrated
15 but acted out by the Sims. The stage is the house 
and the garden—and a few more places to go to like a pool or a shopping mall, but they are secondary—which forms a unity of  place. Unity of  time is also given since playtime and event time are strictly related to each other: One minute of  Sims-time corresponds to one second of  real time. Unless being manipulated by the user
16, system time just moves on in a steady pace. The events are coher-
ent, action is followed by reaction, the processes are—due to capitalistic ideol-ogy—very logic: the better job, the more money, the more friends, the happier housewife or husband and greater life. And vice versa. An arrangement so ﬂ aw-
less it is an ideal environment for those many subversive and creative attempts to let the Sims burn, die, rot, choke and just get as poor as can be. All in all, this constellation of  perspective, interactivity and narrative mode appears to be very immersive and also very popular. 
Quest 5: Online Role-Playing Games
The ludoliterary model also suggests a cybertext genre that is structured by means of  mimetic mode, internal perspective and dynamic interactivity. This pattern is found in utopian cyberspace scenarios of  the 1990s, in Star Trek’s “Holodeck”
17 or in movies like Cronenberg’s eXistenZ , where players get im-
mersed in a digital world and caught up in intriguing events that are evolving ad hoc. The players in such “cyberdrama” (Murray 271) strongly identify with their role and in ﬂ uence the action to a great extent—the ultimate game expe-
rience with the utmost ludic immersion. Current developments in the online role-playing game (RPG) section—like the massively multiplayer RPG World 
of  Warcraft —offer the user an immensely broad spectrum of  actions to choose 
from while interacting with other characters and engaging in quests. Similari-ties to mimetic performative game forms like The Sims2  are obvious. Though 
in online RPGs, other than in the external The Sims2 , you don’t switch between 
different characters during one game session since the main task lies in building up your avatar through an elaborate level and honor system. Therefore, internal perspective is maintained, which is, in combination with the large interactive and communicative potential, the main reason of  the great success of  the game.
116Mela Kocher  |  The Ludoliterary Circle
Quest 6: Role-Playing Games
The cybertext genre that can be described and analyzed with the parameters 
internal perspective, dynamic interactivity and diegetic narration is that of  the ofﬂ ine role-playing game (RPG) like Final Fantasy X-2 or Baldurs Gate II. Taking 
an internal perspective, the player chooses, often creates an avatar with speci ﬁ c 
properties (gender, race, nationality, profession, looks, skills etc.). By this deter-mination of  the role, but also by the many dangers that awaits her avatar (and also by communicating with others in online RPGs), different kinds of  identify-ing processes take place that are stronger than in the genre of  adventure games which often present stereotyped and ready-made characters. The narrative mode consists both of  diegetic and mimetic aspects: Mimetic is the enacting feature which is very central to online RPGs, which not seldom have different quests to be solved for every player and do not follow a speci ﬁ c set of  events. The ac-
tion in ofﬂ  ine RPGs is mainly diegetic. Narrating and structuring elements like 
letters, diaries or cutscenes, that lead the player on her mission, are frequent. Dimensions of  time and space are epic like in adventure games, where the trav-eling through and discovery of  the ﬁ ctional world take up a lot of  playtime. The 
events of  of ﬂ ine RPGs are usually set with a certain beginning and certain end-
ings with variable middle parts, therefore not changing every time the game is played anew (although small parts, like the contents of  chests and hiding places for keys can vary). Other than in adventure games the interactive potential is far bigger, even though the player’s actions do not have much impact on the whole (since that is prestructured). Not only is the frequency of  interactions much greater, considering the many ﬁ ghting scenes one has to survive, but also the 
range of  options is wider: Each avatar has different weapons or spells and other objects that can be chosen from. This correlates with the nonlinear structure of  the story: While adventure games demand a much more correct order of  solving riddles, RPGs are more tolerant and sometimes offer subquests that can be indulged in whenever wanted. Role-playing games sometimes have different endings, which at least suggests a bigger in ﬂ uence of  the user on the events. 
The inﬂ  uence is not by far as big as in society simulations like The Sims , whose 
mimetic and more ﬂ exible narration is more suitable for dynamic interactivity. 
117Mela Kocher  |  The Ludoliterary Circle
Extro
The model presented here re ﬂ ects historical processes as it shows different digi-
tal storytelling modes from the 1970s up to now. Having on the one side rather 
traditional forms dispersed around the diegetic pole, like adventure games, role-playing games and hyperﬁ  ction, it also captures new evolving aspects in digital 
narration. Those more mimetic forms are being observed in society simula-tions like The Sims and in online role-playing games like World of  Warcraft —game 
forms that are drawing in more people than ever and are also very attractive for female players who search for different and innovative gaming concepts. 
As a closed and two-dimensional model the ludoliterary circle clearly shows 
restrictions. The setting of  the axes proposes that game narration is heavily determined by perspective, interactivity and narrative mode, although other features might be equally intriguing, like motives, more semantic values, iconic language and more. Of  course there will also be narrative forms that cannot be described by the typology, which, as a closed circle, of  necessity suggests some sort of  coherence and continuity. It might be a further step to quantify and cal-culate the values along the axes to allow the whole circular space to be used in positioning game genres and speci ﬁ c cybertext tokens. For the moment, though, 
this circle aims at capturing and analyzing tendencies and self-imposed rules that digital storytelling is currently following—hoping that patterns will be broken and more experimental game play will surprise us.
Notes
1. For a more extended version on that subject cf. my German article “Der
ludoliterarische Typenkreis.” Also cf. Kocher, Follow the Pixel Rabbit!  
2. For a computer game to be talked about as narrative, I consider at least fol-
lowing two of  Celia Pearce’s “narrative operators” to be decisive: meta-sto-ry and experiential. Meta-Story: “A speci ﬁ c narrative ‘overlay’ that creates a 
context or framework for the game con ﬂ ict.” Experiential: “The emergent 
narrative that develops out of  the inherent ‘con ﬂ ict’ of  the game as it is 
played, as experienced by the players themselves.” (145).
3. Cf. the “duel” between Julian Kücklich and Markku Eskelinen in their roles 
as “narratologist” vs. “ludologist” (Eskelinen and Kücklich). 
4. Ludoliterary: a neologism of  ludus—Latin for game—and literary.5. This fact seems appealing, considering other circular models like Johann 
Wolfgang Goethe’s circle, which is a typology of  literary genres, Franz K. Stanzel’s circle that captures narrative situations in novels, the “Spider” of  
118Mela Kocher  |  The Ludoliterary Circle
Hermann and Leuthold, a sociological model to evaluate political opini-
ons and voting (Hermann and Leuthold; Fivaz, Schwarz, Hermann and Leuthold).
6. These criteria correspond with Stanzel’s categories of  perspective and per-
son. It is legitimate to discuss them both together for texts where there is no narrator, nobody “who speaks” (Genette). Therefore the ﬁ ctional role 
of  the user is of  bigger interest than of  the narrator. Cf. also Marie-Laure Ryan’s article presenting a matrix working with the criteria.
7. In Aarseth’s terms: The textons do not change, but the scriptons do (62).8. Therefore both scriptons and textons might be changed.9. Cf. Zeit für die Bombe , The Bubble Bath, Hilfe: Ein Hypertext aus vier Kehlen . 
10. This is very nicely illustrated in Die Aaleskorte der Ölig  by Frank Klötgen and 
Dirk Günther. At the beginning you can choose on a chart which text/image-sequences you would like to see. Klötgen and Günther’s artwork lies somewhere between the “hyper ﬁ ction” and the “interactive movies” poles 
of  the model and shows a mixture of  diegetic and mimetic narration: unity of  action, seemingly different outcomes every run (1.6 millions, say the authors) but a strong narrator and structure and different play and event times.
11. The term “interactive movies” is a little misleading since the degree of  in-
teractivity is quite low in comparison to other digital texts. As a commonly accepted technical term it nevertheless makes sense to use it.
12. Cf. the chart depicting those stages according to the movie scenes in Ryan, 
Narrative as Virtual Reality  273.
13. A nice paronomasic pun: “Mace” is not only the brand of  the pepper spray, 
but shows a phonetic resemblance to “maze,” the expression for confusion, labyrinth, a place to lose orientation. 
14. Even scriptons can be changed, considering the fact that you can create and 
import new objects and faces for this game.
15. Except for some occasional comments that are something between expla-
nations of  events and advices for game play (like: “Imre and René are being sent to military school. They didn’t do their homework”). The instance of  those comments is rather an implicit author than a narrator. 
16. Dynamic interactivity in The Sims  allows the user to fast forward time or 
pause it, the latter to sneakily gain some time to stash commands.
17. Cf. Murrays notions on daringly futuristic scenarios in Hamlet on the Holo-
deck. 
119Mela Kocher  |  The Ludoliterary Circle
Works Cited
Aarseth, Espen. Cybertext: Perspectives on Ergodic Literature.  Baltimore: Johns Hop-
kins UP , 1997. 1.
Berkenheger, Susanne. Zeit für die Bombe. 1997. 13 June 2006 <http://www.
wargla.de/index1.htm>.———. The Bubble Bath. 2005. 13 June 2006 <http://www.thebubblebath.de>.
———. Hilfe: Ein Hypertext aus vier Kehlen . 1999. 13 June 2006 <http://www.
wargla.de/hilfe>.Eskelinen, Markku, and Julian Kücklich. “Ludology’s Not Dead.” 2004. 13 June 
2006 <http://blog.cyber ﬁ ction.ch/C1855973910/E365298011/index.html>.
eXistenZ . Dir. David Cronenberg. Perf. Jennifer Jason Leigh, Jude Law, Ian Holm, 
and Willem Dafoe. Miramax, 1999.
Fivaz, Jan, Daniel Schwarz, Michael Hermann, and Heiri Leuthold. Das neue 
Ratsinformationssystem (RIS): Perspektiven bezüglich Transparenz und Öffentlichkeit . 
Berne, 2004.
Genette, Gérard. Narrative Discourse: An Essay in Method . Ithaca, NY: Cornell UP , 
1980.Hermann, Michael, and Heiri Leuthold. “Die 46. Legislatur im Pro ﬁ l.” 13 June 
2006 <http://sotomo.geo.unizh.ch/spider/>.I’m Your Man. Dir. Bob Bejan. Perf. Mark Metcalf, A. Whitney Brown, 
Kevin M. Seal, and Colleen Quinn. ChoicePoint, 1998.
Klötgen, Frank, and Dirk Günther. Die Aaleskorte der Ölig.  1998. 13 June 2006 
<http://www.internetkrimi.de/aaleskorte/>.Kocher, Mela. “Der ludoliterarische Typenkreis: Analyse und Kategorisierung
von Cybertexten.” Dichtung Digital 7.1 (2005). 13 June 2006 <http://www.dichtung-digital.com/2005/1/Kocher/>. 
120Mela Kocher  |  The Ludoliterary Circle
Kocher, Mela. Folge dem Pixelkaninchen! Ästhetik und Narrativität digitaler Spiele . Zu-
rich: Chronos, 2007. 
Laurel, Brenda. “Interface as Mimesis .” User Centered System Design: New Perspec-
tives on Human-Computer Interaction. Ed. Donald Norman and Stephen Draper. 
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 1986. 67-85.
———. Computers as Theatre. Amsterdam: Addison-Wesley Publishing, 1991.
Murray, Janet H. Hamlet on the Holodeck: The Future of  Narrative in Cyberspace . 3rd 
ed. Cambridge, MA: MIT P , 2000.Pearce, Celia. “Towards a Game Theory of  Game.” First Person: New Media as 
Story, Performance, and Game . Ed. Noah Wardrip-Fruin and Pat Harrigan. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT P , 2004. 143-153.Ryan, Marie-Laure. “Beyond Myth and Metaphor: The Case of  Narrative in 
Digital Media.” Game Studies 1.1 (2001). 13 June 2006 <http://www.gamestudies.
org/0101/ryan/>.
———. Narrative as Virtual Reality: Immersion and Interactivity in Literature and Elec-
tronic Media. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UP , 2001. Swiss Love. Dir. Fulvio Bernasconi. Perf. Soraya Gomaa, Marino Campanaro, 
Noemi Steuer, and Hans-Joachim Frick.  Maximage, 2002.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. Tractatus logico-philosophicus: Tagebücher 1914-1916. Philoso-
phische Untersuchungen. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp, 1984. 
121Jörgen Schäfer
Gutenberg Galaxy Revis(it)ed
A Brief History of Combinatory, Hypertextual 
and Collaborative Literature from the Baroque Period to the Present
1
Abstract:
Literature in computer-based media cannot be contemplated without a long literary tradi-tion. This article aims at substantiating this assumption with numerous examples of  com-binatory, hypertextual and collaborative texts from German literary history since baroque times. Therewith it provides us with a historical basis in order to work out the common features and differences that with computers have entered literary texts.
Espen Aarseth and his followers have repeatedly pointed out and proved with 
many examples that their theories of  “cybertext” and “ergodic literature” are focused on the mechanical organization of  text and on the actions of  users/readers on a broad and general level; they are not limited to texts in computer-based media. Although the computer, which strictly separates storage devices from interfaces may be the best-suited medium for “net literature,” “ergodic literature,” “digital literature”—regardless which term is to be preferred
2—it
may be rewarding to have a closer look at the long pre-history of  “net literature” in non-computer-based media, especially in print media.
In modern literatures, it most notably was the international (though pre-
dominantly French) Oulipo group (the acronym is an abbreviation of  Ouvroir de 
la Littérature Potentielle, in English: Workshop of  Potential Literature) whose mem-
bers tied in with the long tradition of  combinatory literature. Raymond Que-neau, the creator of  the famous sonnet-machine Cent mille millards de poèmes [One 
Hundred Million Million Poems] (1961),  explicitly regarded the constraints imposed 
by combinatory procedures as catalysts of  writers’ creativity. The Oulipians were dealing with combinatory procedures in a twofold way: On the one hand, they investigated and reinvigorated poetic possibilities from the past (“anoulip-ism”); they even ironically quali ﬁ ed their predecessors from the Ancient world 
and the Baroque era as “plagiarism by anticipation” (Motte 31). On the other hand, they aimed at developing additional possibilities which were unknown to their predecessors and which were to be based on latest scienti ﬁ c ﬁ ndings and 
technological novelties (“synoulipism”). 
122Jörgen Schäfer  |  Gutenberg Galaxy Revis(it)ed
As my focus in this article is on German literature, the paramount im-
portance of  Oulipo cannot adequately be considered here. But I will certainly 
come across many of  their predecessors in German literature and thus keep up with Oulipo’s analytic tendency. For this purpose, I will focus mainly on three tendencies for characterizing and classifying those many literary texts and pro-cedures in which recursive processes can be identi ﬁ ed. 
First, current text generators can be traced back to previous forms of  com-
binatory literature. In the German-speaking part of  Europe numerous writers 
since the Baroque era were experimenting  with literary forms that did not only 
consider a literary text a symbolic expression of  a person’s subjectivity but also considered a text as determined by the level of  programming and processing of  signs. On the one hand this is re ﬂ ected in the tradition of  word games such as 
anagrams, palindromes or proteus verses, on the other hand it is presented in mechanical text-generating machines.
Secondly, hyperﬁ  ctions, too, are not necessarily dependent on computers: If  
the basic idea of  hyper ﬁ ctions is letting the reader determine how he traverses 
the text by choosing from different story threads, then this is possible in all stor-age media in which texts can be divided into segments which are connected to each other by hyperlinks. Readers have the choice between multiple links and thus need to make decisions during the reading process.
It goes without saying that man-man communication has always been pos-
sible prior to the installation of  computer networks. It thus may be suf ﬁ cient 
to point at two tendencies of  collaborative writing rather sketchily. Collaborative 
texts have always been produced on site, e.g. in literary salons or writers’ groups. However, it was not until the implementation of  postal systems and of  tech-nological transmission media that long-distance collaborations were to become possible, ranging from varying writers’ correspondences to Mail Art or Corre-spondence Art projects of  the 1960s and 70s, from telephone and fax perfor-mances to simultaneous communication via computer networks.
Poetics and Literary Games: 
The History of Combinatory Literature
It is quite evident that literature has not only been confronted with the challenge 
of  interactivity since modern computers were invented, but also that a “perma-nent mutability” of  signi ﬁ ers is a fundamental feature of  all creative processes, 
which do not aim at permanent storage of  strings . It is certainly true that me-
chanical text generators are not computers in a strict sense as they are neither able 
123Jörgen Schäfer  |  Gutenberg Galaxy Revis(it)ed
to convert analog signals into universal machine codes nor do they operate as 
fast as modern digital computers. 
However, there have been some similarities between these machines as 
the algorithmic processing of “literary” signs has already been possible prior to the invention of digital computers. From the Kabbalah to Ramon Lull’s Ars magna generalis ultima (1305-08), from Athanasius Kircher’s famous Ars magna sciendi  (1669) and Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz’s Dissertatio de arte combinatoria  
(1666) to Queneau’s Cent mille milliards de poèmes,  and ﬁ  nally to computer-based 
text generators there have been lots of examples, which can be traced back to three fundamental features. Firstly, there is a compact source code from which an abundance of texts can be generated. Secondly, this generation of texts requires that the processes of word and sentence formation be reproduced in a sort of micro-grammar. Finally, algorithmic procedures  are used for process-
ing linguistic signs (Cramer 245).
Any reconstruction of this tradition in German literature has to begin in 
the Baroque period when writers like Georg Philipp Harsdörffer, Philipp von Zesen and Justus Georg Schottelius worked out a poetic theory in the tradition of Ancient paradigms. They did not consider the successful work of art as an achievement of creative genius but insisted upon the teachability and learn-ability of poetic methods and procedures. Harsdörffer claims: “Ob nun wol etliche zu wolermeldter Kunst geboren / so ist doch die Kunst nicht mit ihnen geboren; sondern muß erlernet werden / wie alles / was wir Menschen wissen wollen” (‘Even though quite a few persons are born to create respectable art, this art is not born with them; it has to be learned, as everything that humans want to know’) ( Poetischer Trichter  2).
These two aspects of combinatorics in the Baroque era had a strong im-
pact on a variety of games in poetry such as anagrams or proteus verses and eventually led to the implementation of combinatorial procedures in mechani-cal text and poetry generators. According to the linguistic universalism repre-sented by Leibniz and others, the whole world is considered a closed system, an order of things that can be algorithmically produced and varied from a preexisting and limited set of elements. This applies both to cosmic elements from which God was believed to have created the world and to the elements of language. According to this theory, any divine acting is regarded inacces-sible while language cannot represent the given order of things as congru-ently. Thus  both Baroque linguists and poets expected to draw conclusions 
about hidden organizational and creative principles either from investigations of rules of word and sentence formation or from implementation of mechani-cal principles into their poetic production. Of course, all these metaphysical premises were to get lost due to the technological execution of combinatorial 
124Jörgen Schäfer  |  Gutenberg Galaxy Revis(it)ed
procedures. The basic principles of theories of order, however, had not been 
abandoned. It is according to the logic of combining that so-called “blind” words can be generated from the lexical elements. These words have no mean-ing but are only legitimate because they have been formed according to word formation rules. Schottelius—and this is the missing link to literature—to a good part aims at “die Teutsche Sprache aus der Teutschen Sprache ferner zuerheben” (‘lifting the German language far away from the German lan-guage’) (Schottelius 98). Baroque literature, this is to be kept in mind, is very much based on playful linguistic practices. But this does not mean that at the core of such games lies the imagination and creativity of a writer. There rather are hidden mechanisms at work in mannerist experiments: “Ob nun wol der Poet bemühet ist neue Er ﬁ ndungen an das Liecht zu bringe / so kann er 
doch nichts ﬁ nden / dessen Gleichheit nicht zuvor gewesen / oder noch auf 
der Welt wäre” (‘Even if the poet aims at bringing new inventions to light, he can ﬁ  nd nothing the likes of which had not been already or still is in the
world’ (Harsdörffer, Poetischer Trichter  8).
Rules and Constraints: 
Anagrams, Proteus Verses and Other Literary Games
The extensive works of  Georg Philipp Harsdörffer may serve as an example for 
demonstrating how countless examples of  rule-governed text production derive from the reﬂ  ection of  language . Harsdörffer explicitly acted on the assumption 
that the subject matters of  literature are not only to be found in the real world but also in language itself:
Die Erﬁ  ndung wird entweder herbeigeführet von dem Wort / oder von 
dem Dinge  selbsten / darvon man handelt / oder von den Umständen 
desselben / oder von gehörigen Gleichnissen . Erstlich das Wort giebet 
eine Erﬁ  ndung entweder in seinem angebornen Laut / unbekanter 
Deutung / oder mit versetzte Buchstaben  / wann solche eine gantze 
Meinung schliessen /. . . . ( Poetischer Trichter  10)
The invention is either brought about through the word,  or by the thing  
itself  of  which one is talking, or from the circumstances or adequate similarities. It is the word  in the ﬁ  rst place that gives to an invention its 
innate sound of  unknown meaning or with mixed-up letters if  they 
include a whole opinion. . . . 
125Jörgen Schäfer  |  Gutenberg Galaxy Revis(it)ed
Many samples can be found in Harsdörffer’s eight-volume Frauenzimmer-Ge-
sprächspiele  (1641-49), a collection of  parlor games framed by a rather simple 
story: Six interlocutors, three women and three men, get together in a mansion 
to talk about social, scienti ﬁ c and poetic matters—and for just having a chat. 
Above all, however, they are setting each other riddles or other exercises and engage in literary games. These games are an integral part of  the inventio prior 
to the real creative act . As exercises, their main function is to make the words 
available to the poet and thus to stimulate his imagination.
The anagram  is certainly the best-known genre of  such a literary game. It is 
a word game that is based on an interplay of  two levels of  text that, according to Aarseth, could be called “scriptons”—de ﬁ ned as strings as they appear to rea-
ders on some material surface—and “textons,” which are “strings as they exist in the text” (Aarseth 62):  A word or a complete phrase is made by transposing the 
letters of  another word or phrase. At ﬁ  rst, the connection between a signi ﬁ er 
and a signi ﬁ ed is dissolved , then the signi ﬁ ers are rearranged—and only ﬁ nally 
semantics comes into play because signi ﬁ eds (and referents) need to be found 
for the newly established strings of  signs. Hence the anagram is a comparatively simple example of  the indeterminate transformation of  cohesive structures into semantically coherent statements.
For centuries, the anagram has very often been discredited as baublery or 
magical practice. But there have also been periods every now and then in which it was quite popular: In German Baroque it was used as a creativity-stimulating parlor game at ﬁ rst, before anagrams were eventually incorporated into literary 
texts. For Harsdörffer, the anagram or “Letterkeer” (‘lettertwist’) was a tech-nique of  poetic invention  because “so kan man die Buchstaben versetzen und 
eine andere Meinung heraus bringen” (‘like this one can move letters and bring forth a different view’) ( Poetischer Trichter  17). The anagrammatic method is only 
due to the reordering of  letters, without any references to the real world. Hence the Baroque treatises contain a variety of  instructions, which make obvious the causal connection between permuting letters and mechanical devices. In his He-
likon, Philipp von Zesen e.g. gives recommendations to facilitate writing ana-grams by using cardboard letters (Zesen 174). Considerations on which means and tools are best suited for producing anagrams have not only been made in the Baroque era. Oskar Pastior—the only German member of  Oulipo and certainly the best-known contemporary anagram writer—recommends various methods and exercises with subtle irony:
Es gibt Hilfsmittel (Karton, Schere, Blockbuchstaben). Es gibt herr-liche Vor- und Begleitübungen: Puzzles (besonders die schwedischen, handgesägten), Zeitunglesen und Fernsehen (Legasthenietraining), ei-
126Jörgen Schäfer  |  Gutenberg Galaxy Revis(it)ed
nige gute Autoren, bewußtes Gehen mit beiden Füßen (hintereinander) 
auf  dem Kies, Schüttelreime, komplizierte Stundenpläne oder gewisse Atem- und Abzähltechniken. Und es gibt die Strategie ‘Steht der Trop-fen, höhlt der Stein.’ . . . Eine Menge Tüftelei also, der Autor konnte fast verschwinden. . . . (Pastior, Anagrammgedichte 82f.)
There are aids (carton, scissors, block-letter). There are wonderful prac-tices and dummy runs: puzzles (especially the Swedish ones that are hand-made), reading the paper and watching TV (training legasthen-ics), some good authors, consciously walking with both feet (one after the other) on gravel, spoonerism, dif ﬁ cult timetables or speci ﬁ c tech-
niques of  breathing or counting. And there is the strategy “Drip stand-ing stone hollowing” [Pastior here invents a word game in German with the saying “steady dripping hollows stone”]. . . . Real brainteasers, the author was virtually to disappear. . . . 
The author was virtually to disappear: This assertion, which encouraged Pastior to re-explore the possibilities of  the anagram in 1985, is similar to statements from poets and poeticians of  the Enlightenment—although their conclusions were diametrically opposed to Pastior’s. As from the age of  Enlightenment, the Ba-roque ars combinatoria  was largely discredited. Instead, creativity and spontane-
ity became the paradigms of  literary theory. The scriptural logic of  letters was replaced by the phonocentrism of  the Goethe era, and the anagram and other forms of  combinatory poetry were discredited as baubleries (“Kindereyen”) by poets and philosophers such as Johann Christoph Adelung (518). 
The anagram was only rediscovered by various 20
th century avant-garde 
movements. Whereas the popularity of  the anagram in the Baroque era was due to the prospect that the secret order of  things may be discovered by permuting signiﬁ  ers, its modern renaissance is due to the expectation of  getting access to 
the unconscious by the play of  letters . The artist Hans Bellmer e.g. relates his 
breaking up and rearranging of  the female body of  his famous sculptural con-struction The Doll to the anagrammatic practice of  language:
Sie ist aus Division, Subtraktion und Multiplikation, aber auch aus jener Vertauschbarkeit geboren, die von den Mathematikern “Permutation,” von den Philologen “Anagramm” genannt wird, und deren Bedeutung auf  folgendes hinausliefe: Der Körper, er gleicht einem Satz—, der uns einzuladen scheint, ihn bis in seine Buchstaben zu zergliedern, damit sich in einer endlosen Reihe von Anagrammen aufs neue fügt, was er in Wahrheit enthält. (Bellmer 95)
127Jörgen Schäfer  |  Gutenberg Galaxy Revis(it)ed
     Fig. 1. Facsimile from Unica Zürn’s notebook.
She has been born from division, subtraction and multiplication but 
also from this permutability, which mathematicians call “permutation” and philologists call “anagram,” and whose meaning adds up to the following: The body, it resembles a sentence inviting us to break it up into its constituent letters, so that these again connect with what they contain in an endless array of  anagrams. 
Unica Zürn, the longstanding partner and lover of Bellmer, is considered to be the most important anagram writer of German post-war literature. From 1953 to 1964, she wrote as many as 123 anagram poems without using cardboards or other devices; she only worked on paper, as can be seen from her “Der Geist aus der Flasche (IV) (‘The Spirit from the Bottle [IV]’)” (1960). First, she wrote down the ﬁ rst line from which she then crossed out the letters of 
the emerging words. She repeated this process until she succeeded in writing a new line ( ﬁ g. 1):
Schlage das Ruder, feisteSau. Der Drache sieg’l festDie Frau, das Segel rechtsLeg’ aus. Der erste Fisch! DaFaucht der Adler: giess’ es,das Feuchte lass der Gier. (Zürn 86)

128Jörgen Schäfer  |  Gutenberg Galaxy Revis(it)ed
In the 1980s, German literature saw a sort of boom of the anagram initiated by 
writers such as Oskar Pastior ( Anagrammgedichte,  1985) or Elfriede Czurda ( Fäl-
schungen,  1987). Following the Oulipo theories, Pastior considers his texts test 
arrangements in which he applies both self-invented rules and models from the history of literatures. He describes his basic principle as “Aufknacken von Wörtern und Wendungen in Bedeutungsklumpen von unbestimmter mittlerer Größe (sozusagen ein molekulares Cracking) und dann Zusammenfügen in irgendwo stupenden, aber exotisch einleuchtenden neuen semantischen Ver-bindungen” (‘cracking of words and phrases into chunks of meaning of unde-ﬁ ned size (a molecular cracking so to speak) and then joining them together in 
somehow startling but in their exotic way convincing new semantic connec-tions’) ( Das Unding an sich  40).
He regards his anagrams as a “permutative und viel engmaschigere Buch-
stabenalchemie (also ein inframolekulares Cracking)” (‘permutative and very strictly meshed alchemy of  letters (a sort of  inframolecular cracking)’) ( Das 
Unding an sich 40). Hence the anagram was well suited as a “super-metaphor” for the processing of  literature, for “etwas, das nicht still steht und nicht wei-tergeht” (‘something that neither stops nor continues’) ( Anagrammgedichte 9). In 
his Anagrammgedichte (1985),  he took the titles of  calendar stories from the table 
of  contents of  an edition of  Johann Peter Hebel’s complete works as ﬁ rst lines 
of  his anagrams:
Unverhofftes WiedersehenSehr oft wird Vene, ehe es fun-diert, frueh von Wehes Senfein des Heftes Heu verworfen.Es fuehrt es Hefe-Vorwindensehr diffuse vor. Wen Teehen-ne vorsieht, der fuenf Seh-westen oder Hufweisen fehver-weist. Von Fehes Duerfen herverseift Fernsehen, wo due-ster Huf es feindverwoehne.Huste, Revers—nen Wiedehoff! (45)
Proteus verses —named after the Greek sea-God who could change his shape at 
will—vary the elements of a verse in any combination. Only the positions of the ﬁ rst and last words of each line are unchangeable, so that a multitude of 
verses can be generated by permuting the elements either in horizontal or in vertical direction. In Germany, proteus verses were only known as from the 
129Jörgen Schäfer  |  Gutenberg Galaxy Revis(it)ed
Baroque period when they were discussed in any major poetic book. In 1657, 
Stanislaus Mink von Weinsheun—a (slightly incorrect) anagrammatic pseud-onym of Johann Justus Winkelmann—published an entire book under the title Proteus. Das ist: Eine unglaubliche Lutznützliche Lehrart / in kurzer Zeit ohne Müh Deutsch= und Lateinische V ers zumachen / auch einen Französischen und Lateinischen Brief zu schreiben (“Proteus. This is an U nbelievably U seful W ay o f T eaching 
How to Rhyme Verses in German and Latin in a Short Time and Without Troubles and Even Writing French and Latin Letters”), which was entirely dedicated to the proteus verse and to permutation of language. 
In his Poetischer Trichter,  Harsdörffer gives the following de ﬁ nition of the 
proteus verse or “Wechselsatz”:
Diese Reimart könte man einen Wechselsatz nennen: dann wann man die ersten Wort (auf  folgt) und die letzten zwey (Fleiß und Preiß) unver-ändert auf  solcher Stelle behält / können die andern Wörter 39916800 / das ist / neun und dreissig tausendmaltausend / neunhundert und sech-zehentausend / und achthundert mal versetzet werden / zu welcher Ver-änderung der allerfertigste Schreiber / der täglich 1200 Zeile abschriebe / gantze 91 Jahre / und 49 Tage würde haben müssen: wolte man aber die Reimwort Fleiß / Preiß / auch versetzen / und Krieg und Sieg dar-für gebrauchen / so kan man noch etlich tausendmal öffter wechseln. (Poetischer Trichter  51f.)
One could call this way of  creating poetry a jumble-sentence: if  you keep the ﬁ rst words and the last two unchanged in the same place, the 
other words could be mixed up 39,916,800, that is thirty-nine thousand times one thousand nine hundred and sixteen thousand and eight hundred times changed, for which change the most learned writer who would write 1,200 lines daily would need 91 years and 49 days. But if  one would also mix up the rhymes Fleiß  (“diligence”) and Preis (“price”) 
and use Krieg (“war”) and Sieg (“victory”) instead one can mix up words 
several thousand times more. 
For Quirinus Kuhlmann, the proteus verse has the function to illustrate the volatility of  being . In his Geschicht-Herold (1672), he argues that all human abili-
ties were “poured” from divine wisdom and that both heaven and earth are op-erating like a “changing wheel”: “der Allmächtige Himmels- und Erdenschöpfer hat Himmel und Erden wi ein wechselrad eingerichtet / die Geschöpffe stat der wechselwörter genommen: Alle Weltdinge wechseln / alle liben / alle hassen” (‘The almighty creator of  heaven and earth has created heaven and earth like 
130Jörgen Schäfer  |  Gutenberg Galaxy Revis(it)ed
a changing-wheel and used beings instead of  the change-words. All things on 
earth change; all love, all hate’) (qtd. in Neubauer 32).
If  it was the case that “di Natur anagrammatisiret und buchstabenwechselt” 
(‘nature anagrammatizes’), this must be re ﬂ ected in language, too. Kuhlmann 
wrote the best-known proteus of  the Baroque period, “XLI. Libes-kuß: ‘Der Wechsel Menschlicher Sachen’ (“41
st kiss of  love: ‘The change of  human mat-
ters’”) (1671): 
Auf  Nacht / Dunst / Schlacht / Frost / Wind / See / Hitz / Süd / Ost / West/ Nord / Sonn / Feur / und Plagen /Folgt  Tag / Glantz / Blutt / Schnee / Still / Land /Blitz / Wärmd / Hitz /
 Lust/ Kält / Licht / Brand / und Noth:
Auf  Leid / Pein / Schmach / Angst / Krig / Ach / Kreutz / Streit / Hohn / Schmertz / Qual / Tükk / Schimpf  / als Spott /
Wil  Freud / Zir / Ehr / Trost / Sig / Rath / Nutz / Frid / Lohn / Schertz /
 Ruh / Glükk / Glimpf  / stets tagen.
Der  Mond / Glunst / Rauch / Gems / Fisch / Gold / Perl / Baum / Flamm /  Storch / Frosch / Lamm / Ochs und MagenLibt  Schein / Stroh / Dampf  / Berg / Flutt / Glutt / Schaum / Frucht /
 Asch/ Dach / Teich / feld / Wiß / und Brod:Der  Schütz / mensch / Fleiß / Müh / Kunst / Spil / Schiff  / Mund /  Printz / Rach / Sorg / Geitz / Treu / und GOtt /
Suchts  Zil / Schlaff  / Preiß / Lob / Gunst / Zank / Ort / Kuß / Thron / Mord/ Sarg / Geld / Hold / Danksagen
Was  Gutt / stark / schwer / recht / lang / groß / weiß / eins / ja / Lufft /  Feur/ hoch / weit / genennt /Pﬂ egt  Böß / schwach / leicht / krum / breit / klein / schwartz / drei / 
 Nein / Erd / Flutt / tiff  / nah / zumeiden  /
Auch  Mutt / lib / klug / Witz / Geist / Seel / Freund / Lust / Zir / Ruhm / Frid / Schertz / Lob muß scheiden  /
Wo  Furcht / Haß / Trug / Wein / Fleisch / Leib / Feind / Weh / Schmach / Angst / Streit / Schmach / Angst / Streit / Schmertz / Hohn schon rennt
Alles wechselt; alles libet; alles scheinet was zu hassen:Wer nur disem nach wird-denken / muß di Menschen Weißheit fassen. (Himmlische Libes-küsse  54f.)
131Jörgen Schäfer  |  Gutenberg Galaxy Revis(it)ed
The sestina,  a poem composed of  six stanzas of  six lines each with a half-stan-
za of  three lines at the end, was invented by troubadour poets in Italy and 
Provence. It has only six rhyming words at the end of  the lines, which change according to a strict rhythm from stanza to stanza: 123456 / 715243 / 364125 / 532614 / 451362 / 246531 / 123.
In German literature, the sestina was not cultivated before the 17
th century. 
There are some sestinas in the works of  the usual “suspects” from the Baroque era such as Schottelius, Zesen, Harsdörffer, Kuhlmann, Martin Opitz or Georg Rudolf  Weckherlin. Throughout the 18
th century, it was rather disregarded. It 
was not until the Romanticist period that August Wilhelm Schlegel drew the at-tention to the sestina in his critical writings. This impulse was then taken up by poets such as August Wilhelm If ﬂ and, Wilhelm von Schütz, Ludwig Uhland and 
Joseph von Eichendorff. 
In contemporary literature, it was Oskar Pastior again who rediscovered 
the genre when he published a book of  34 sestinas under the title Eine kleine 
Kunstmaschine (1994). For the Oulipian Pastior, the sestina guarantees the “text-
generative Potenz zusätzlicher Einschränkungen” (‘text-generating power of  additional constraints’) ( Eine kleine Kunstmaschine  81). This is what brings him to 
programmatically entitling his book a Kunstmaschine  (“art machine”):
Der Gedanke, wie er sich erwähnt, reimwortläu ﬁ g, in dem vertrackten 
Rhythmus mit dem transitorischen Moment von 123456 zu 615243. Um so “in aufbrechender Umarmung” zu “denken,” hat die Sestine perma-nent ihr genetisches Kürzel “im Kopf,” eben diese Fähigkeit, wie ich nach einiger Erfahrung mit ihr denke, in ständig verschobenen Rückver-sicherungs- und prospektiven Falsi ﬁ kationsschlaufen sich herzustellen. 
(Pastior, Das Unding an sich  81f.)
The thought, as it appears in the course of  rhymes, in the intricate rhythm with the transitory moment of  123456 to 615243. The sestina, to “think” like this in a “breaking embrace,” it permanently is aware of  its genetic grammalogue, its ability (as I think of  it after some ex-perience with it) to create itself  in constantly slanting loops of  reassu-rance and prospective falsi ﬁ cations. 
Pastior even escalates and subverts the sestina paradigm by multiplying its con-straints with those of  other genres. In his “sestine mit diabetes” for instance, he combines the sestina with the anagram ( Eine kleine Kunstmaschine  40f.), and in 
“heureka mit euter am pneu,” he only uses two vowels per line (42f.).
3
132Jörgen Schäfer  |  Gutenberg Galaxy Revis(it)ed
Dadaists as well as Surrealists referred back to aleatoric conceptions. But in gen-
eral, they preferred “automatic” and improvising methods to combinatory ones. Tristan Tzara’s famous recipe for composing a Dadaist poem does not de ﬁ ne 
any speci ﬁ c collection of  words but only describes a method for processing any 
data whatsoever ( Œuvres completes  382). Hans Arp’s creative approach is even less 
determined as can be seen from a pivotal statement on “automatic” writing in his essay “Wegweiser”:
Viele Gedichte aus der “Wolkenpumpe” sind automatischen Gedich-ten verwandt. Sie sind wie die surrealistischen automatischen Gedichte unmittelbar niedergeschrieben, ohne Überlegung oder Überarbeitung. Dialektbildung, altertümelnde Klänge, Jahrmarktslatein, verwirrende Onomatopoesien und Wortspasmen sind in diesen Gedichten beson-ders auffallend. Die “Wolkenpumpen” aber sind nicht nur automa-tische Gedichte, sondern schon Vorläufer meiner “papiers déchirés,” meiner “Zerreissbilder,” in denen die “Wirklichkeit” und der “Zufall” ungehemmt sich entwickeln können. Das Wesen von Leben und Ver-gehen ist durch das Zerreissen des Papieres oder der Zeichnung in das Bild einbezogen. ( Wortträume und schwarze Sterne 7)
Many poems in die wolkenpumpe (“the cloudpump”) are related to auto-matic poems. They were written down, like the Surrealistic automatic poems, immediately without thought or revision. Dialectal construc-tions, outmoded sounds, Vulgar Latin, confusing onomatopoetic words and verbal spasms are particularly noticeable in these poems. The “cloud pumps” are, however, not only automatic poems, but already anticipate my “papiers déchirés,” my “torn pictures,” in which “reality” and “chan-ce” can be developed uninhibitedly. The essence of  life and decay is incorporated into the picture by tearing up the paper or drawing. (Qtd. in Döhl, “Hans Arp and Zurich Dada” 118; my revisions)
Arp addresses one of the core problems of any concept of automatic writ-ing here. In all his texts and artworks, the “laws of chance” can only unfold within the frame de ﬁ ned by both the author’s preconception and the speci ﬁ c 
peculiarities of the material. It is not surprising that he took many words and phrases from daily newspapers, particularly from the advertisement sections and “schlang und ﬂ  ocht leicht und improvisierend Wörter und Sätze um die 
aus der Zeitung gewählten Wörter und Sätze” ( Wortträume und schwarze Sterne  
46) (‘interwove the words and sentences selected from the newspapers with freely improvised words and sentences of my own’) (qtd. in Döhl, “Hans Arp 
133Jörgen Schäfer  |  Gutenberg Galaxy Revis(it)ed
Fig. 2. Ramon Lull’s Ars magna generalis ultima.
and Zurich  Dada” 117). Unlike the Futurists, Cubists and Berlin Dadaists, Arp 
never pasted press clippings as pictorial representations into his pictures. For him, newspapers rather provided a habitual vocabulary whose transitory charac-ter ﬁ t well into his poetics of  permanent change.
Combinatory Machines and Text Generators
The rather simple principle of generating an abundance of signs from a limited repertoire is the basic idea of various mechanical devices, which have been constructed in the course of the last centuries for the generation of texts. I already cited some very simple means of mechanizing the literary invention by using cardboard plates or other tools and media. The combination of these plates remains completely up to the user . However, there have been many more 
sophisticated mechanisms and machines for facilitating literary production by combining words or attributes selected from a number of lists. The prototype of such logic machines was the Ars magna  devised by the Catalan monk Ramon 
Lull. Lull’s machine  consists of a stack of three concentric disks mounted on 
an axis where they are able to rotate independently ( ﬁ g. 2). The disks were pro-
gressively larger from top to bottom. Nine fundamental terms, the so-called “principia absoluta” which comprise the main topics of scholastic philosophy, 

134Jörgen Schäfer  |  Gutenberg Galaxy Revis(it)ed
were related to the letters from A to K. By rotating the disks, a large number 
of random statements could be generated from the alignment of words. This mechanism generates “scriptons” which can be read as soon as the rotating disks with “textons” on them come to a complete standstill. At a random point in time, it results in an artifact that could not be predicted in advance . It is, 
of course, still up to the user—as Aarseth’s triad of text/machine, collected words and user indicates (Aarseth 62)—to interpret the resulting strings of signiﬁ ers.
The Ars magna sciendi, Athanasius Kircher’s adaptation and elaboration of 
Lull’s Ars magna, illustrates a common tendency of the Baroque era: In addition 
to books, alternative Aufschreibesysteme  (“systems of notation”) (Kittler)  appear 
that are storage media of traditional knowledge and  generators of new know-
ledge at the same time. Neither the storing nor the production of knowledge, however, is ascribed to an author, and the knowledge is not written or printed in syntagmatic chains but machines are designed, which generate the know-ledge from a compact source code by combinatorial procedures. 
Therefore Harsdörffer implemented the methods of generating stem words 
and word formation rules in his Fünffacher Denckring der Teutschen Sprache  (1651) 
(ﬁ g. 3), and Quirinus Kuhlmann, too, came up with the idea of a changing 
wheel (but, unfortunately, without giving any details, cf. Neubauer 33ff.). 
These word-generating machines are the missing link between the langue  
of the German laguage and Lull’s ars combinatoria . 
Harsdörffer claims that his machine is able to mechanically reproduce all 
possibilities of  German without having to compile voluminous dictionaries. The Denckring consists of  ﬁ ve rotating disks, which the user must cut out from 
the book at ﬁ rst: “Dieses Blätlein muß heraus geschnidten / in fünff  Ringe 
zertheilet / und auf  fünff  gleich-grosse Scheiben von Papyr / also aufeinander gehefftet werden / daß man jeden Ring absonderlich umbdrehen kan / wann solchs geschehen / muß man dises fünfffache Blat wider hinein pappen” (‘This leaﬂ et has to be cut out, parted into ﬁ ve disks and fastened onto ﬁ ve equal leafs 
of  paper so that each disk can be turned around separately and when this has happened one has to glue that ﬁ ve-fold leaf  back in’) (qtd. in Hundt 283).
On the inner disk, there are 49 pre ﬁ xes followed by 60 initial letters, 12 
medial and 120 ﬁ  nal letters as well as 24 suf ﬁ xes. Aarseth would call these ele-
ments “textons” from which millions of  different “scriptons” can be generated . 
It is a speci ﬁ c feature of  Harsdörffer’s machine that by setting the storage it-
self  in motion it simultaneously turns out to be a generator. The linear reading process is transformed into a rotating mechanism. The user has to start the mechanism, and he can either stop the rotating disks or just wait until they come to a complete standstill. From the point of  view of  production aesthetics, the 
135Jörgen Schäfer  |  Gutenberg Galaxy Revis(it)ed
 Fig. 3. Georg Philipp Harsdörffer’s Fünffacher Denckring der Teutschen Sprache (1651).
outcome of  such a machine-based combinatorics cannot substantiate any con-
cept of  artistic originality, and from the point of  view of  reader-response the-ories, we are confronted with a reader who can only interpret transitory strings of  signiﬁ  ers. Thus Harsdörffer did not only use his Denckring for representing 
all possibilities of  word formation but he also considered it a useful tool of  literary writing: 
Ist also dieses eine unfehlbare Richtigkeit / ein vollständiges Teutsches Wörterbuch zu verfassen / und beharren wir in der Meinung / daß alle solchen zusammen gesetzte Wörter / welche ihre Deutung würcken für gut Teutsch zulässig / sonderlich in den Gedichten / ob sie gleich sonsten nicht gebräuchlich / . . . . ( Deliciae mathematicae et physicae  518)
This word-generating procedure then is completely accurate in creating a complete German Dictionary and we retain our opinion that all these composite words should be allowed as good German, especially in po-ems, even though they might not be used otherwise.

136Jörgen Schäfer  |  Gutenberg Galaxy Revis(it)ed
    Fig. 4. André Thomkins: dogma-mot (1965).
This is Harsdörffer’s solution of  the problem of  the non-semantic “blind” 
words. He thus resolves the problem that his machine inevitably generates words, which make no sense in the German language by declaring the outcome of  his Denckring to be the proper language. This is the poetic potential of  the machine; it becomes a generator of  poetic invention or a mobile rhyming dic-tionary “Erﬁ  ndung der Reimwörter / wann man die Reimsilben auf  dem dritten 
und vierten Ring suchet / und die Reimbuchstaben auf  dem zweyten Ring darzu drehet” (‘for inventing rhymes by looking for the rhyming syllables on the third or fourth disk and then turning the second disk to add the rhyming letters’) (Deliciae mathematicae et physicae  518).
Text generators based on rotating disks, however, are no peculiarity of  the 
Baroque era but there also have been some interesting examples in recent times, e.g. in the Fluxus movement. André Thomkins produced his polyglot machine dogma-mot (1965), which allows the user to produce “mobile dogmas” ( ﬁ g. 4). 
This machine consists of  ten hexagonal cards, each with 12 words that are com-mon in each of  the three languages German, English and French (there are 48 German-French, 60 German-English and 12 German-French-English words). The hexagons pivot on a plane and form phrases in three directions on the hex-agonal roof. They can even be arranged differently on the ten slots, so that the number of  combinations can further increase. Thomkins gives an instructive German-English example on the blurb of  his Fluxus Box:

137Jörgen Schäfer  |  Gutenberg Galaxy Revis(it)ed
  WORT  HAT  BALD  SENSE
ein engländer liest:  wurzel hut kahler sinn  (eierkopf, haargenau)
a german reads:
  word has soon scythe  (words mutual short-cut) ( dogma-mot)
Other writers and artists also worked with rotating disks or other moving media: Ferdinand Kriwet wrote many of  his texts on disks, among them are three-disk-texts whose disks overlap and thus make combinations of  elements possible. Dieter Roth produced so-called Leserollen  (“reading rolls”)—paper webs with 
abstract ornamental patterns—for the Apparat zum Simultanlesen (“Apparatus for simultaneous reading”). This machine was invented by his fellow-artists Daniel Spoerri and Jean Tinguely and consists of  a rotating rod  driven by an engine. 
On this rotating rod, paper webs can be ﬁ  xed from which readers can simulta-
neously read varying texts. 
Besides his rotating disks, Harsdörffer designed further mechanisms of 
word formation : He suggested inscribing the letters of the German alphabet in 
the dice. If the user throws two dice, he can create syllables. This method can be extended by using additional dice. If we apply a thematological approach to the history of literature, we also ﬁ nd at least one very prominent example of a 
mechanical apparatus for the production of texts which consists of revolvable wooden dice: the famous machine of the Grand Academy of Lagado in Jona-than Swift’s Gulliver’s Travels  (1726).
Although none of  the following examples can keep up with the fame of  
Swift’s novel, there have been some writers who experimented with dice. Max Bense generated some of  his so-called “Dünnschliffe” by rolling dice, e.g. for combining clippings from a newspaper and sections from a Franz Kafka no-vel (246). It is only a small step from such permutative procedures based on mechanical devices such as rotating disks or dice to the use of  computers for producing literature. In Germany, this was done in the late 1950s and early 1960s by the “Stuttgarter Gruppe” (‘Stuttgart Group’). In 1959, the mathematician and software engineer Theo Lutz produced so-called “stochastic texts” using the ZUSE Z 22 mainframe of  the Stuttgart University’s computer center. Lutz had generated a vocabulary from Kafka’s Das Schloss [The Castle],  which he then 
permuted by using a program written in ALGOL. The computer scientist Rul Gunzenhäuser also published some computer-generated poems. These ﬁ rst pi-
oneering experiments may not have been satisfying for traditionalists but for the 
138Jörgen Schäfer  |  Gutenberg Galaxy Revis(it)ed
“Stuttgarter Gruppe” they appeared as the “incunables of  ‘arti ﬁ cial poetry,’” 
Reinhard Döhl recalls (“Vom Computertext zur Netzkunst”). This concept of  
“artiﬁ  cial poetry,” however, which was explicitly based upon permutative and 
stochastic procedures was soon extended to other literary genres and accom-panied by a variety of  programmatic essays and manifestos such as Abraham Moles’ “Erstes Manifest der permutationellen Kunst [First Manifesto of  Per-mutational Art]” (1962) or “Zur Lage” (1964) by Bense and Döhl.
The interest in working with computers was not limited to the mathema-
ticians of  the group but also inspired writers and artists like Döhl and Klaus Burkhardt who jointly wrote the poem structures through the looking glass (1969). 
Bense and Döhl incorporated computer-generated passages into their so-called “Mischtexte” (“mixed texts”) like Döhl’s ﬁ ngerübungen (1962), Prosa zum Beispiel 
(1965) or the radio play Monolog der Terry Jo [Monologue: Terry Jo] (1968) by Bense 
and Ludwig Harig: 
Der Monolog beginnt mit einem Computer-Text. Es sind neun syn-thetische Annäherungen an die Sprache des Mädchens. Die Tatsache, daß gewisse Analogien zwischen dem zu Anfang unbewußten Zustand des Mädchens und der Unbewußtheit eines Computers bestehen, ließ diese erste Verwendung eines mit einer programmgesteuerten Maschi-ne hergestellten Textes in einem Hörspiel gerechtfertigt erscheinen.Diese Computertexte des Monologs werden in der Realisation über-setzt in eine durch ein kompliziertes Vocoder-Verfahren hergestellte synthetische Sprache, die im Verlauf  des Monologs mehr und mehr abgebaut und von der natürlichen Stimme abgelöst wird. (Qtd. in Schö-ning 58)
The monologue starts with a computer-text. There are nine synthetic ap-
proaches to the language of  the girl. The fact that there are certain ana-logies between the initial subconscious state of  mind of  the girl and the subconscious of  a computer might let us consider that the ﬁ rst use of  
a programmed, machine-generated text in a radio-play can be justi ﬁ ed.
These monologous computer-texts are realized by translating it into a synthetic language created by a complicated vocoder-system that is reduced more and more in the course of  the monologue and thereby replaced by the natural voice. 
The idea of  generating entire texts on computers was soon taken up by some other computer centers during the 1960s: In 1966, Gerhard Stickel produced his Monte-Carlo-Texte on the IBM-7090 mainframe of  the Deutsches Rechenzentrum 
139Jörgen Schäfer  |  Gutenberg Galaxy Revis(it)ed
in Darmstadt which he subsumed under the genre name “Auto-Poems.” One 
year later, Manfred Krause and Götz F. Schaudt published their book Computer-
Lyrik: Poesie aus dem Elektronenrechner (“Computer Poetry: Poems from the Elec-
tronic Computer”); the programs included both rhyme schemes and measures.
From File Boxes to Hypertext: Digressions and Permutative Novels
Alfred Döblin once argued: “Wenn ein Roman nicht wie ein Regenwurm in zehn Stücke geschnitten werden kann und jeder Teil bewegt sich selbst, dann taugt er nichts” (Döblin 21) (‘If  a novel cannot be cut up like a worm into ten pieces so that each bit moves independently, then it is no good’) (qtd. in Mur-phy 21). Although every biologist would repudiate this argument, Döblin’s bon 
mot refers to a fundamental precondition of  all hyperﬁ  ctions in both print and 
computer-based media. The producer of  such a text has to compile a collection of  text segments and to de ﬁ ne relations between these fragments regardless of  
the speci ﬁ c medium he is writing for. In the history of  literature, this ranged 
from fragments, paper slips or excerpts which were collected in ﬁ le boxes and 
notebooks and then presented to the reader—either in books or in text objects like cases, boxes, sometimes even installations or environments such as Michael Badura’s Zettel-Werke.  It is then up to the reader to recombine the segments in 
the course of  reading.
This development, too, was initiated in the Baroque era when various al-
ternative storage devices and discourse networks challenged the ﬁ xed chains of  
signs of  printed books:
Wenn Datenplanspiele und Letternphantasien jenseits aller Metaphern im drucktechnischen Sinne real werden, wird der statische Raum der Bücher selbst zum zwischengeschalteten Medium, zu jenem beliebig (um)sortierbaren Karteikasten, in dem die Zettel potentieller Register-macher landen. (Rieger 100)
If  the data games and letterphantasma become established as printing 
technologies  beyond all metaphors, the static space of  books trans-
forms into an (inter-)medium itself: transforms into this (re)sortable index box  in which the memos of  potential indexers end up. 
But how did writers react to this challenge? For the purpose of  this historical (re)construction, the rather pragmatic approach of  Monika Schmitz-Emans may be helpful. She de ﬁ nes “book labyrinths” on a material level as follows: 
140Jörgen Schäfer  |  Gutenberg Galaxy Revis(it)ed
Als Buch-Labyrinthe verstanden seien darum im folgenden auf  ma-
teriell-visueller Ebene nicht-linear konstruierte Bücher, die den Leser explizit hin und her “schicken,” durch typographische Mittel, Lese-anleitungen, nicht-lineare Numerierungen oder andere Signale, sowie Text-Baustein-Sammlungen. (179)
As non-linear constructed books, which explicitly “send” the reader to 
and fro by means of  typography, reading instructions, non-linear pagi-nation or other signals, or as collections of  text segments. 
Regarding the arrangement of  text segments by the author, two types can be distinguished: Segments can either be put together in succession in a book and highlighted only as loosely associated elements by cuts, numbers, chapter head-ings or various other paratextual elements or, alternatively, they can be printed on loose leaves such as untacked sheets of  paper, cards or lots. In each case, familiar reading conventions have to be relearned, and thus most of  these books contain paratextual features such as reading instructions, game rules, etc. But unlike the rules of  football or board games, these instructions are not intended as a body of  rules imposing sanctions on those who break them . In fact, these 
instructions are ironically broken, and the writers of  such texts usually discuss and question the rules themselves; in many cases, they even call on the read-ers to challenge or to expand them by themselves, so that literature explicitly transcends the space of  the rule-governed game in favor of  a “meta-game” (Schmitz-Emans 193).
Most historical descriptions of  “print hyper ﬁ ctions” have focused on ex-
amples from Romanic and American literatures. Examples of  novels and stories which link the text segments by hyperlinks, indices, annotations, etc. include Jorge Luis Borges’ short stories, particularly El jardin de senderos que se bifurcan 
[The Garden of  Forking Paths] (1941),  as well as Georges Perec’s novel La vie mode 
d’emploi [Life A User’s Manual] (1978) . According to Schmitz-Emans, Perec’s 
novel on the one hand is a novel about a jigsaw puzzle, and on the other hand, the whole novel can be seen as an intricate jigsaw puzzle itself  (Schmitz-Emans 180). Further dazzling literary experiments include Julio Cortázar’s Rayuela [Hop-
scotch] (1963),  which follows the model of  the hopscotch game and its follow-up 
novel 62/modelo para armar  [62: A Model Kit] (1968) , Vladimir Nabokov’s Pale Fire 
(1962), Milorad Pavi ć’s Hazarski re čnik [The Dictionary of  the Khazars] (1984) and 
Predeo slikan čajem [Landscape Painted with Tea] (1988) and Italo Calvino’s Il castello 
dei destini incrociati [The Castle of  Crossed Destinies] (1973),  which was inspired by 
tarot cards. Queneau’s sonnet machine Cent mille millards de poèmes,  though, is 
considered a model of  innovative literary forms on loose leaves just as Marc 
141Jörgen Schäfer  |  Gutenberg Galaxy Revis(it)ed
Saporta’s card-game novel Composition No. 1 (1962) or B.S. Johnson’s “novel-in-
a-box” The Unfortunates (1969). Both consist of  unpaginated sheets on which 
fragments of  a story are printed. The reader can shuf ﬂ e the pages and read the 
resulting random order. 
It is obvious that there seems to be a lack of  prominent examples from 
German-language literature though it would be easy to contradict this impres-
sion by pointing to a long tradition of  German print hyper ﬁ ctions. The printing 
press and the distribution systems of  the Renaissance had established accurate “address-systems,” which for the ﬁ rst time allowed accessing any text passage. 
At the same time, German Baroque writers and linguists established indices or “Blatweiser” for making this access to data easier. In his Mathematische und 
philosophische Erquickstunden (1651), Harsdörffer developed an elaborate ﬁ le-card 
system for keeping the imminent disorder of  data under control: 
Wann man nun das Register machen will / so schreibet man den Inhalt / gehöriger Massen / auf  ein Papyr / schneidet es in absonderliche Stücklein / und leget jedes in sein Buchstabfach: von dar nimmt man sie zuletzt wieder heraus / ordnet einen Buchstaben nach dem andern / und klebet entweder die Papyrlein ordentlich auf  / oder schreibt sie noch einmal. (57)
If  you want to create an index system, you note the contents onto a 
piece of  paper correctly, cut it into distinct pieces and place each one into its corresponding box for that letter. From there you ﬁ nally take 
it, sort the letters into their correct order and then glue the pieces one after another or rewrite them correctly. 
Hence Stefan Rieger described the Baroque knowledge management systems as predecessors of  modern hypertext technologies:
Für das Barock sind hybride Textformen die Folge, die hart an den Grenzen des Buches operieren. Im Zeichen von Ökonomie und Ef ﬁ zi-
enz barocker Datenspeicherung erhält die lineare Organisation von Bü-chern eine mediale Konkurrenz durch alternative Aufschreibeformen, die Zugriffe durch Register organisieren und damit eine strikt lineare Abfolge des Buches durch andere Präsentationsweisen—etwa die Mög-lichkeit der Synopsen—über ﬂ üssig machen wollen. (88)
In the Baroque period, hybrid text forms developed that were touching the borders of  the printed book. Facing the economy and ef ﬁ ciency 
142Jörgen Schäfer  |  Gutenberg Galaxy Revis(it)ed
of  Baroque data storage, the linear organization of  books began to 
compete with alternative forms of  notation. These organized access by indices and thus tried to replace the strict linear sequence of  books by other ways of  presenting knowledge, such as synopses. 
Harsdörffer and his Baroque contemporaries implemented ef ﬁ cient data stor-
age devices and data mining tools by compiling complex registers. This hap-pened in order to get the over ﬂ owing knowledge of  their times under control 
whereas poets emptied the ﬁ le boxes in a rather playful way, as could be seen 
from Zesen’s novel Assenat  (1670). The plot of  the novel—the life and love 
story of  biblical Joseph—is narrated on 344 pages, which are supplemented by an appendix of  another 200 pages with mythological and historic digressions, annotations, etc. 
The works of  Jean Paul have also been repeatedly characterized as hyper ﬁ c-
tions avant la lettre . His excessive use of  digressions, annotations, footnotes and 
periphrases that interrupt his narration again and again and lead him astray are an expression of  the strong sense of  individuality of  early Romanticism. Hence the narrator of  his novels establishes subjectively motivated relations between entirely unrelated elements:
Es wäre daher die Frage, ob nicht eine Sammlung von Aufsätzen nütze-te und ge ﬁ ele, worin Ideen aus allen Wissenschaften ohne bestimm-
tes gerades Ziel—weder künstlerisches noch wissenschaftliches—sich nicht wie Gifte, sondern wie Karten mischten und folglich, ähnlich dem Lessingschen geistigen Würfeln, dem etwas eintrügen, der durch Spiele  zu gewinnen wüßte; was aber die Sammlung anlangt, so hab’ ich sie 
und vermehre sie täglich, schon bloß deshalb, um den Kopf  so frei zu machen, als das Herz sein soll. (Jean Paul, Vorschule der Ästhetik  202f.)
One could ask whether it would not be helpful and pleasant to have a collection of  essays in which ideas from all sciences without any de-ﬁ nite direct (artistic or scienti ﬁ c) goal were mixed together not like 
poisons but like cards; like the mental dice of  Lessing they would be proﬁ table for anyone who knew how to win in games. I have this coll-
ection and add to it daily, if  only to free the head as much as the heart. (Jean Paul, Horn of  Oberon  144)
This method was only possible due to Jean Paul’s excerpts, which he collected from borrowed books since he was an adolescent preparing for studying theol-ogy. Since 1782, these miscellaneous excerpts became the generative moment 
143Jörgen Schäfer  |  Gutenberg Galaxy Revis(it)ed
of  his literary writing (Müller, Jean Pauls Exzerpte  9). However, these excerpts 
did not help compiling encyclopedias from the collected knowledge; they rather 
allowed inﬁ  nite digressions. This was made possible by the wit which Jean Paul 
deﬁ nes in his Vorschule der Ästhetik [School of  Aesthetics] (1804), as an ability to 
discover “die ähnlichen Verhältnisse inkommensurabler (unanmeßbarer) Größen, 
d.h. die Ähnlichkeiten zwischen Körper- und Geisterwelt (z. B. Sonne und Wahrheit), mit andern Worten, die Gleichung zwischen sich und außen, mithin zwischen zwei Anschauungen” ( Vorschule der Ästhetik  172) (‘the similarities be-
tween incommensurable magnitudes, between physical and spiritual worlds (e.g., 
sun and truth), in other words, the equation of  self  and other, of  two percep-tions’) ( Horn of  Oberon  122). In Jean Paul’s works, wit is a method of  combining 
subject matters that are organized in different text units and then recombining them by cross-references and footnotes.
From the “geistige Würfel” (‘mental dice’) Jean Paul is describing with his 
mix of  thoughts and excerpts, it is only a small step to proper dice. Hence it is no surprise that many writers take up rules and procedures of  familiar dice and card games for organizing plots and narratives. The idea of  generating texts by throwing dice and then selecting words from a number of  lists according to the sum of  the pips is not exclusively reserved to the experimental writers of  the Baroque period or the avant-garde writers following Stéphane Mallarmé’s Un 
coup de dés jamais n’abolira le hazard [One Toss of  the Dice Never Will Abolish Chance]  
(1897). As early as the 1820s, Georg Nikolaus Bärmann—at that time known as a rather minor playwright and critic—used dice as a tool for generating texts. First, he published the book Die Kunst ernsthafte und scherzhafte Glückwunschgedichte 
durch den Würfel zu verfertigen  (“The art of  creating serious and funny greeting 
poetry by throwing dice”)  (1825), and only four years later, he brought out Neun-
hundert neun und neunzig und noch etliche Almanachs-Lustspiele durch den Würfe. Das ist: Almanach dramatischer Spiele für die Jahre 1829 bis 1961  (“Ninehundredandninety-
nine and some more almanac-games throwing dice, i.e.: Almanac of  dramatic games for the years 1829 to 1961”) (1829), a parody of  the popular Almanach 
dramatischer Spiele auf  dem Lande (“An almanac of  dramatic games in the coun-
try”). The book contains 1,200 numbered dramatic text fragments including dialogues, stage directions, titles, subheadings, etc. To enable its users to create a readable and playable drama from these fragments, the book is accompanied by a so-called Wurf-Tabelle (“throwing chart”) ( ﬁ g. 5). After each throw, the reader 
must search in the chart for the number of  the particular fragment. For produc-ing a complete drama, 200 throws are required.
Much later, around 1970, many writers were experimenting with non-linear 
texts. This tendency was accompanied by in ﬂ uential reader-oriented theories 
of  literature such as Umberto Eco’s re ﬂ ections on the “open work of  art,” 
144Jörgen Schäfer  |  Gutenberg Galaxy Revis(it)ed
 Fig. 5. Wurf-Tabelle from Georg Nikolaus Bärmann’s Neunhundert neun 
                 und neunzig und noch etliche Almanachs-Lustspiele durch den Würfel (1829).
Roland Barthes’ distinction between “readerly” and “writerly texts,” or the 
gap-concept of  Wolfgang Iser’s reader-response theory. All of  these were ap-proaches conceptualizing the reader as collaborator or “wreader” as George Landow would have called it some thirty years later (14).
In Germany, the subgenre of  the permutative dictionary novel was quite 
successful at that time. The text of  such a novel is subdivided into numerous entries, which are arranged in alphabetical order. Schmitz-Emans argues that the dictionary novel is characterized by discussing order and by re ﬂ ecting the 
contingency of  order since the order of  the alphabet represents a contingent principle of  structuring knowledge that competes with its immanent order—if  there is anything like that (Schmitz-Emans 182). The best-known novel of  this genre certainly is Andreas Okopenko’s Lexikonroman einer sentimentalen Reise zum 
Exporteurstreffen in Druden (“Dictionary-novel of  a sentimental journey to the exporters’ meeting at Druden”) (1970). In the Gebrauchsanweisung (“introductory 
directions”), Okopenko calls on his readers to concoct their individual arrange-ment of  text fragments:
Die sentimentale Reise zum Exporteurtreffen in Druden muß erst voll-zogen werden. Das Material liegt bereit, wie die Donau und die Anhäu-fungen von P ﬂ anzen, Steinen und Menschen an ihren Ufern für viele 
Reisen und Nebenaus ﬂ üge nach Wahl bereitliegen. Das Material ist 
alphabetisch geordnet, damit Sie es mühelos auf ﬁ nden. Wie in einem 
Lexikon. ( Lexikonroman  5)

145Jörgen Schäfer  |  Gutenberg Galaxy Revis(it)ed
The sentimental journey to the exporters’ meeting at Druden has to 
be executed ﬁ rst. The material is waiting, just as the Danube and the 
multitude of  plants, stones and people at its banks are waiting for many side-trips of  their own choice. The material is ordered alphabetically so that you can ﬁ nd it without dif ﬁ culty. Just like in a dictionary. 
The entries are arranged alphabetically. In addition, some fragments are linked by arrowheads (→) and some italicized fragments are privileged: “ Die Hinweise, 
die Ihnen von Etappe zu Etappe die Fortsetzung der Reise ermöglichen sollen und die Sie daher vielleicht mit Vorrang beachten werden, sind schräg gedruckt ” 
(‘Those  references, which may help you to continue the journey from place to 
place and which thus should have priority are printed in italics’) ( Lexikonroman  5). 
In his next novel Meteoriten (1976), Okopenko deliberately intensi ﬁ es the prin-
ciple of  openness by explicitly doing without any game rules and instructions. Ror Wolf  had noted in the early 1970s that he would be highly fascinated by a book, 
das man aus dem Schrank nimmt, wahllos aufschlägt, in dem man auf  jeder Seite anfangen kann zu lesen, und in dem man immer, gleich wo man aufschlägt, den Einstieg ﬁ ndet, in dem es also unwichtig ist, was 
vorher oder nachher passiert. (Baier 154f.)
which you get from the shelves, open at random, in which you can start 
reading on any page, and into which you always ﬁ nd an entry, no matter 
where you open it, so that it is unimportant what previously happened and what is going to happen afterwards.
More than ten years later, he started publishing a series of  literary dictionaries whose ﬁ ctitious editor is Wolf ’s alter ego  Raoul Tranchirer—a pen name which 
explicitly refers to the German verb tranchieren (“to carve, to chop up sth.”): 
The ﬁ rst publication was Raoul Tranchirers vielseitiger großer Ratschläger für alle Fälle 
der Welt (1983), followed by Raoul Tranchirers Mitteilungen an Ratlose (1988), Raoul 
Tranchirers Welt- und Wirklichkeitslehre aus dem Reich des Fleisches, der Erde, der Luft, des Wassers und der Gefühle  (1990) and ﬁ nally by Raoul Tranchirers Bemerkungen über 
die Stille (2005).
Ferdinand Kriwet’s Rotor (1961) is not a dictionary novel but a sort of  text 
kit consisting of  98 elements that can be used in any combination. In his durch 
die runse auf  den redder (1965), however, the reading is being sidetracked from the main text into four auxiliary texts. Peter O. Chotjewitz applied a similar method in his novel Vom Leben und Lernen (1969) whose subtitle reads “stereo texts.” The 
146Jörgen Schäfer  |  Gutenberg Galaxy Revis(it)ed
story starts off  with a seemingly conventional plot on the ﬁ rst pages. But soon 
the reader realizes that numerous footnotes are incorporated into the novel’s 
beginning. The extent of  these footnotes far exceeds that of  the main text. 
Oswald Wiener’s die verbesserung von mitteleuropa, roman  (1969), too, breaks 
with conventional reader-expectations. Although this book is explicitly charac-terized as a novel, the text starts off  with a person and subject index from which the reader can browse through the text. At the end of  the book, there are vari-ous appendices. The main text does not consist of  a ﬁ ctitious story but rather of  
an extensive montage of  both ﬁ ctional and theoretical passages. Arno Schmidt’s 
monumental book Zettels Traum (1970)—a book of  1,334 pages composed of  three columns—tells the story of  a writers’ couple visiting a colleague who is working on a translation of  Edgar Allan Poe. Handwritten notes, blackenings, a strange orthography, etc. are incorporated into the typescript. The reader can permanently jump from the conversation of  the writers in the middle column to the Poe interpretation in the left or to loads of  annotations and citations in the right column. Two years earlier than Schmidt, Franz Mon published Herzzero  
(1968), a text consisting of  two versions arranged in two columns. Similar cross-readings have a long tradition in German literature which can be traced back to Georg Christoph Lichtenberg and turned into one of  the starting points of  the collage of  quotes. 
Konrad Balder Schäuffelen’s “lottery novel” deus ex scatola: entwicklungsroman  
(1964) does not bear any resemblance to a book. The texts are printed on more than 60,000 paper-strips sentence by sentence. These strips have been hand-rolled and put into wooden cases according to the principle of  chance. For the handling of  the language material, tweezers are included. The ironic subtitle of  deus ex scatola  can be taken literally: The “novel” is only being generated if  the 
user/reader uses the tweezers to draw the paper slips on which the text frag-ments are printed from the case—and then unwraps them (in German entwickeln 
means “to develop” or “to produce” but it also connotes “to unwrap”). For other lottery novels, Schäuffelen cut classics such as Thomas Mann’s novella Gladius Dei or well-known poems by Goethe and others into pieces in order to allow the recombining of  the fragments by the user. He also experimented with other alternative ways to arrange text in various storage media. Haus der 
Bienenkönigin (1988) is a case constructed like a bee house; from this bee house, 
the user can draw paper slips on which supposedly all the words from Jean-Paul Sartre’s Les Mots [Words]  are written
Herta Müller’s Der Wächter nimmt seinen Kamm  (1993) is a literary card game 
in the tradition of  Marc Saporta ( ﬁ g. 6). It consists of  a box with 94 facsimiled 
text-image collages in postcard format. Müller cut the words from books and newspapers and pasted them onto the cards. In addition, there are photo collages 
147Jörgen Schäfer  |  Gutenberg Galaxy Revis(it)ed
 Fig. 6. Card from Herta Müller’s Der Wächter nimmt seinen Kamm  (1993).
or silhouettes on each card. The user/reader can arrange and read the cards 
in random order. Although poetic images are densely concentrated here onto single, unbound pages, they form an evolving network of  motifs that give unity to the whole.
A similar box had been produced 30 years earlier by the Fluxus artist To-
mas Schmit . Instead of  postcards, Schmit’s Verlegerbesteck  (1966) contains small 
adhesive labels, which the user can paste on whatever surface wherever he likes (ﬁ g. 7). The lea ﬂ et gives the following reading and acting instruction: 
you—owner of  this case—should have it more in your pocket than somewhere else, since here you’re not so much asked to be reader, but: to be publisher (performer) and to give (real) context and (anonymous) (second-grade-) readers (resp: second-grade-performers: who ﬁ ll them 
out: for the third-grade-readers).

148Jörgen Schäfer  |  Gutenberg Galaxy Revis(it)ed
 Fig. 7. Tomas Schmit’s Verlegerbesteck  (1966).
It is striking that readers of  printed hyper ﬁ ctions are very often called on to 
co-operate in continuing the writing process . In Okopenko’s dictionary novels, 
the reader is invited to improve the alleged shortcomings of  the book: “Nehm-
en Sie das Prinzip für die Durchführung, denken Sie an den ersten Computer, erweitern Sie den Roman durch eigene Weiterknüpfung an Reizwörter, am besten: schreiben Sie ein Buch, das meines in seiner Kleinheit festnagelt” (‘Take the principle for the realization, think of  the ﬁ rst computer, expand the novel 
by amending provocative words, or even better : write your own novel which will 
nail down the insigniﬁ  cance of  my own’) (Okopenko, Lexikonroman  7).
Additionally, there are gaps in the “dictionary” every now and then, in 
which the reader is invited to record his or her connotations and comments (11), paste images (23) or self-written poems (33). Kurt Marti, too, designed his dictionary novel Abratzky oder Die kleine Blockhütte: Lexikon in einem Band (1971) 
“von vorneherein als einen Anfang, als Fragment, als immerwährendes ‘work in progress,’ das jeden Leser zur fortlaufenden Mitarbeit einlädt” (‘from the very outset as a beginning, a fragment, an everlasting ‘work in progress’ inviting its readers to co-operate continuously’) (blurb). Ror Wolf  even stimulates “alle 

149Jörgen Schäfer  |  Gutenberg Galaxy Revis(it)ed
natürlich denkenden Leser” (‘all clear-thinking readers’) to set up “Wirklich-
keitsvereine” (‘reality clubs’) so that “Tranchirers Gedanken das Unglück und die Erfolglosigkeit ersticken” (‘Tranchirer’s thoughts will extinguish misfortune and failure’) (190).
Collaborations, T elecommunication and Literature
This leads me to collaborative writing projects that can be distinguished into two types: ﬁ rstly, collaborative texts, which are produced on site, e.g. in literary 
salons, writers’ groups or creative writing classes; secondly, collaborative long-distance writing projects, which actively involve telecommunication networks. The parlor games of  the Baroque era already aimed at increasing creativity with the help of  group dynamics, and oracle games were anticipating the surrealist ca-
davre exquis  (“exquisite corpse”). In these games, sentence fragments were whis-
pered into the ear of  the neighbor. Thus simple syntagmas and eventually entire sentences were generated step by step . Of  course, this is not a literary genre in 
a strict sense as are, e.g., the so-called Reyenreime  in which rhyme and meter need 
to be held. This method is getting more complicated if  each collaborator has to contribute one and a half  or even two lines as can be seen from the poem “Frül-ings-Freude” by Harsdörffer, Sigmund von Birken and Johann Klaj:
 F.Es fünken und ﬂ inken und blinken 
 S. bunt-blümichte Auen. Es schimmert und wimmert und glimmert  K. frü-perlenes Thauen. Es zittern / und ﬂ ittern / und splittern 
 F. laubträchtige Aeste. Es säuseln / und bräuseln / und kräuseln  S. windfriedige Bläste. Es singen / und klingen / und ringen  K. Feld-stimmende Flöten. Schalmeyen am Reyen erfreuen. . . . (Qtd. in Rühm, Pegnitz Schäfer  10f.)
Up until the present, there have been many collaborative novels, novellas, and stories in German literature that were usually written in sequence. Thus writers were either co-operating at the same place anyway, or they only used the post for sending the completed segments from one to the other. Various kinds of  
150Jörgen Schäfer  |  Gutenberg Galaxy Revis(it)ed
artistic co-operation ranging from mere sociability to programmatic discussions 
in literary salons and in societies and even to collective writing in poets’ circles established during the 18
th and 19th century.
Ludwig Uhland and Justinus Kerner jointly wrote the satire Abendphantasie 
an Mayer (1802) as did Arno Holz and Johannes Schlaf  in writing the novella Papa 
Hamlet (1889). In 1808, the novel Die Versuche und Hindernisse Karls: Eine deutsche 
Geschichte aus neuerer Zeit was published anonymously; it later turned out that Karl 
August Varnhagen von Ense, Wilhelm Neumann, August Ferdinand Bernhardi and Friedrich de la Motte Fouqué had jointly written it. Fouqué was also partici-pating, with E.T.A. Hoffmann, Adelbert von Chamisso and Karl Wilhelm Salice Contessa, in the un ﬁ nished Roman des Freiherrn von Vieren . The Roman der Zwölf  
(1908) was initiated by the publisher Konrad W . Mecklenburg who invited twelve writers into a co-operative venture, among them Hanns Heinz Ewers, Hermann Bahr, Otto Julius Bierbaum, Herbert Eulenburg and Gustav Meyrink.
A variety of  recent serial novels are also based on a similar concept: Das 
Gästehaus  (1965) was inspired by Walter Höllerer when he was director of  the 
Literarisches Colloquium Berlin. Among the contributors were Peter Bichsel, Nico-
las Born, Hans Christoph Buch, Hubert Fichte and Hermann Peter Piwitt. The weekly journal Die Zeit initiated a cliffhanger novel in 1999 to which for one 
year the cream of  German contemporary literature contributed. It set off  with Marcel Beyer’s opening chapter “Anruf  um Mitternacht” which was followed by texts by Birgit Vanderbeke, Andreas Neumeister, Judith Kuckart and many oth-ers until Terézia Mora wrote the ﬁ nal chapter “Höllisches Finale” one year later. 
In genre literature, too, serial novels have been written from time to time. Such famous writers like Heinrich Böll, Christine Brückner, Reinhard Federmann, Hermann Kasack and Hans Weigel contributed to the satiric crime novel Der 
Rat der Weltunweisen (1965), and only recently ten German crime writers, among them well-known writers such as Gisbert Haefs and Ingrid Noll, jointly pub-lished the crime novels Eine böse Überraschung (1998) and Gipfeltreffen  (2000). 
In the international Dada movement,  collaborative writing had a very dif-
ferent quality. In Zurich, Hans Arp, Walter Serner and Tristan Tzara produced some collaborative poems under the name société anonyme pour l’exploitation du 
vocabulaire dadaïste, and Tzara, Richard Huelsenbeck and Marcel Janco had even radicalized the concept of  artistic co-operation with their simultaneous poems. Dadaist simultaneous poems were originally written for the performance on the stage of  the “Cabaret Voltaire” where several speakers were to recite their parts simultaneously. Hugo Ball de ﬁ ned the simultaneous poem as “kontrapunktisch-
es Rezitativ” (‘contrapuntal recitative’) dealing with the “Wert der Stimme” ( Die 
Flucht aus der Zeit  86) (‘value of  the voice’, Flight Out of  Time 57).
151Jörgen Schäfer  |  Gutenberg Galaxy Revis(it)ed
During the 1950s and 1960s, the Dada impulse was taken up in a different man-
ner by both the Wiener Gruppe  (‘Vienna Group’) and the “Stuttgarter Gruppe.” 
It is thus not surprising that the members of  both groups collaboratively wrote and published several texts. Konrad Bayer, H.C. Artmann, Gerhard Rühm, Friedrich Achleitner and Oswald Wiener considered the Vienna Group not only as a forum for joint performances of  their “literary cabaret” but also as a writ-ers’ collective. Thus they collaborated in varying constellations:
jeder brachte geeignetes material heran, wir spielten uns immer besser aufeinander ein, warfen uns die sätze wie bälle zu. Wenn auch jeder für sich die erschlossenen möglichkeiten weiterverfolgte, erwies sich gerade die montage als eine technik, die gemeinschaftsarbeit besonders begünstigte. (Rühm, “das phänomen” 25)
everybody contributed suitable material: we soon became a real team, 
tossed sentences to each other like balls. Although we each individually made use of  the potential we had tapped, montage proved to be a tech-nique particularly conductive to the production of  joint works. (Rühm, “das phänomen” 24; my revisions) 
In Stuttgart, Harig and Döhl jointly wrote the prose text Hans und Grete: Eine 
deutsche Sprachlehre  (1970). Radio plays such as Bense and Harig’s Der Monolog der 
Terry Jo  (1968) or Türen und Tore  (1971) by Jürgen Becker, Harig and Döhl were 
also written in cooperation.
Writers who were physically separated have been using their contemporary 
transmission media for networked collaborative projects for a long time, ranging from letters carried from one writer to the other by post—i.e. the transport net-work—to the more recent technical communication media such as telephone, telegram, telefax, the French “Minitel” system up to the latest computer-based technologies and services like the World Wide Web, e-mail, mobile phones or SMS. 
Writers’ letters  always have been an ambivalent genre: Usually, the published 
correspondence of  writers is nothing but a documentation of  their private let-ters to friends and fellow writers, which at some point was published posthu-mously. Edited letters are characterized by a “double address”: On the one hand, they were originally addressed to a speci ﬁ c addressee; on the other hand, how-
ever, the general public gets access to letters without knowing much about the reason and motivation of  the writer and thus can only rely on the annotations of  the editor. 
152Jörgen Schäfer  |  Gutenberg Galaxy Revis(it)ed
However, there are exceptions to this rule: in some cases letters must be re-
garded as constituents  of  an artwork. The essay “Ueber ‘Wilhelm Meisters Wan-
derjahre’” (1821) by Rahel Varnhagen and her friends is an example of  a text which in fact was written in correspondence but was projected for publication from the outset. 
This is comparable for artists’ contributions to Mail Art or Correspondence 
Art projects, which were promoted in Germany by Klaus Groh, the editor of  the I.A.C. (International Artist Cooperation) Newsletter,  by Géza Perneczky and oth-
ers. A higher degree of  publicity than most Mail Art projects was achieved by the Postversandroman (“Mail Order Novel”) (1970), a collaborative book project 
of  the writer Peter Faecke and the Fluxus and Happening artist Wolf  Vostell, which was published in the renowned Luchterhand Verlag. The purchaser of  this “novel” ﬁ rst received a hardcover jacket and an envelope containing two 
bolts for binding the consecutive deliveries. The users’ instruction was titled Spiel ohne Grenzen  (“Games without frontiers”) thereby explicitly addressing the 
limitations of  the printed book.  In accordance with the tone of  the time, Faecke 
and Vostell called for replacing the institutions of  the literary market in favor of  an autonomous distribution of  texts by the producers themselves. They also tried to overcome the limits of  print by supplementing their “novel” with ob-jects such as a vinyl single with Peter Faecke’s 11 Romanen in 6 Minuten und 5 
Fig. 8. Peter Faecke’s 11 Romane in 
6 Minuten und 5 Sekunden, the 3rd delivery 
to the Postversandroman (1970).Fig. 9. Reader’s contribution to Peter 
Faecke’s and Wolf  Vostell’s 
Postversand Roman.
153Jörgen Schäfer  |  Gutenberg Galaxy Revis(it)ed
Sekunden (“11 novels in 6 minutes and 5 seconds,” ﬁ g. 8). Vostell’s instructions 
for a happening, which callers could retrieve from his answering machine, are 
documented; elsewhere the readers were invited to paste newspaper clippings or account statements and to actively participate in this “work in progress” by sending their own contributions ( ﬁ g. 9):
nutzt den Postversand-Roman, schreibt uns, ruft uns an, bombardiert uns verﬂ  ucht noch mal, wir antworten Euch in den nächsten Liefe-
rungen. Faecke/Vostell: die beiden guten Briefkastenonkels, unsere Frauen helfen uns und sind ganz dabei, wir verteilen die Lieferungen 
auf  der Straße soweit unser Geld reicht und machen einen Film drüber in Kölner Obdachlosen-Vierteln, den Ihr kostenlos an Kölner Haus-wänden sehen könnt, schickt uns Informationen, ruft uns an unter735335  Faecke
oder 517783 Vostellwir antworten direkt mit neuen Ideen, wir haben genug davon,  wenn 
Ihr Geld schicken wollt, OK., schickt uns auf  jeden Fall Informati-
onen, Manuskripte etc., wir wollen Bücher haben, die nicht mehr als 1 Mark kosten, wir wollen Bücher haben, die, nach Wahl durch ein akzeptables Gremium, gratis verteilt werden (Kostenpunkt jähr-lich für alle wichtigen Bücher in der BRD: 500 Millionen Mark). . . .Konkreter: Denk daran: Deine Antwort auf  das, was Du bezahlt hast, wird von uns honoriert in Form einer Antwort in der nächsten Lieferung.Was kommt auf  Dich, was kommt auf  uns zu? Tu uns den Gefallen: spiel mit, tritt Deinen Nachbarn in den Arsch, tritt dich selbst in den Arsch, 
zieh Deine alten Schubladen auf, geh ans Telefon, setz Dich ins Auto und fahr zu uns, hör mit uns die alten Lieder von dazumal, und wenn Du uns nicht passt, schmeissen wir Dich wieder raus!,  fang endlich  selbst an zu schreiben, schreib 
zusammen mit uns dieses Buch. . . . (Faecke and Vostell; italics repre-sent handwritten annotations in original)
Use the Postversandroman (“mail order novel”), write to us, call us, bom-
bard us—damn it, we’ll answer you in one of  the next deliveries. Fa-
ecke/Vostell: the two agony uncles; our wives will assist us and will 
fully take part, we’ll distribute the deliveries in the streets as far as our money will take us, and we’ll shoot a ﬁ lm about these activities in one 
of  the homeless neighborhoods in Cologne; you’ll be able to watch this movie on Cologne house walls, send us information, call us at 
154Jörgen Schäfer  |  Gutenberg Galaxy Revis(it)ed
735335  Faecke
or 
517783 Vostellwe’ll answer immediately with brand-new ideas, we have plenty of them , if 
you’d like to send money, OK., but send us information, manuscripts, etc. no matter what , we want to have books which don’t cost more than 
1 German mark, we want to have books which (being selected by an appropriate committee), will be distributed free of charge (annual expenses for all important books in the FRG: 500 million German marks). . . .More speciﬁ  cally: Remember: We will remunerate your answer of  your 
payment in form  of  an answer in our next delivery. What can you ex-pect to happen, what can we expect to happen? Please do us the favor: join in, kick your neighbor’s ass, kick your own ass, search your old drawers, answer the phone, get into your car and come to see us, listen to the old songs with us, and if  we don’t like you, we’ll kick you out!, start writing yourself, write this book together with us. . . . (Italics represent handwritten annotations in the original)
The avant-garde utopia of  transgressing the boundary between art and everyday life can only be realized, Vostell argues in an interview with Lothar Romain, if  the latest media technologies are being used. Hence he considers his use of  an-swering machines only as a ﬁ rst step towards universal and bidirectional means 
of  communication. Such means would allow and require to mix up all media in existence today:
Jede Kommunikation heißt in Zukunft jeder mit jedem auf  der Welt, so wie jedes Ereignis auf  der Welt mit jedem Ereignis auf  der Welt zu tun hat. . . . Und formal gesehen glaube ich, daß zum Beispiel die Zukunft des Fernsehens darin besteht, daß alle Fernseher im Medium Fernsehen selbst zu Wort kommen, also daß das ein Ende ﬁ ndet, daß Millionen das 
konsumieren, was von wenigen Redakteuren gemacht wird. Das heißt, in Zukunft produzieren die Hörer oder die Seher selbst das Programm. (Faecke and Vostell)
Every act of communication will connect each and everybody all over 
the world, such as each incident in the world has to do with every other incident in the world. . . . And from a formal point of view, I believe that the future of television, e.g., will be that every viewer will have his say on TV, so that we can end a situation in which millions 
155Jörgen Schäfer  |  Gutenberg Galaxy Revis(it)ed
of people are just consuming what is being provided by only a few 
editors. This means that in the future listeners and spectators will create their own program.
What Vostell expects from bidirectional television, complies with the utopian vi-sions, which Bertolt Brecht drew up with the radio in mind some decades earlier. In his famous radio theory, Brecht demanded the transformation of  radio, the grandfather of  all wireless media, from a means of  broadcasting into a multi-channel means of  communication. He argued that the technological potentials of  the medium were not used adequately as long as the back channel was closed:
Der Rundfunk wäre der denkbar großartigste Kommunikationsapparat des öffentlichen Lebens, ein ungeheures Kanalsystem, d.h., er wäre es, wenn er es verstünde, nicht nur auszusenden, sondern auch zu emp-fangen, also den Zuhörer nicht nur hören, sondern auch sprechen zu machen und ihn nicht zu isolieren, sondern ihn in Beziehung zu setzen. Der Rundfunk müsste demnach aus dem Lieferantentum herausgehen und den Hörer als Lieferanten organisieren. (Brecht 553)
The radio would be the ﬁ nest possible communication apparatus in 
public life, a vast network of  pipes. That is to say, it would be if  it knew 
how to receive as well as to transmit, how to let the listener speak as well as hear, how to bring him into a relationship instead of  isolating him. On this principle the radio should step out of  the supply business and organize its listeners as suppliers. (Qtd. in Strauss 15) 
This utopia of  a bidirectional technological medium turning the passive reader, listener or spectator into an actor is a persistent claim of  20
th century media the-
ory. Hans Magnus Enzensberger in his “Baukasten zu einer Theorie der Medien” 
[“Constituents of  a Theory of  the Media”] (1970) explicitly tied in with Brecht’s theory demanding networked communication, “die auf  dem Prinzip der Wech-selwirkung aufgebaut sind” (‘based upon the principle of  reciprocity’) (170). 
Since that time, the latest transmission media such as radio and telephone, 
television and telefax have always been used for collaborative writing projects of  which only a few should be mentioned here: In the context of  the Neues 
Hörspiel  (“new radio play”) movement many writers and radio experts tried to 
put Brecht’s call for a mobilization of  the listeners into action. A good example is Richard Hey’s Rosie: Radio-Spektakel zum Mitmachen für Stimmen, Musik und tele-
fonierende Hörer (1969), a radio play in which the listeners had the opportunity to 
prompt the moderator to select one speci ﬁ c plot variant. On Michael Erlhoff ’s 
156Jörgen Schäfer  |  Gutenberg Galaxy Revis(it)ed
initiative, the Cassetten Radio was carried out from January to December 1984. 
Following the chain letter principle, audiotapes were sent to various collaborators 
who recorded literary texts, noises or songs. Hence a technical storage medium was combined with traditional mail. Robert Adrian X, a Vienna-based Canadian artist, was among the very ﬁ rst artists who used computer-based telecommunica-
tion technologies in the 1980s. He was one of  the initiators of  ARTEX (Artists’ 
Electronic Exchange Program), the ﬁ rst international communication system 
reserved to art, and he also founded, together with Helmut Mark, Zelko Wie-ner, Karl Kubaczek and Gerhard Taschler, the art group BLIX which initiated 
co-operative art projects such as Wiencouver IV (1983), Kunstfunk (1984) or Kunst 
BTX (1985). For Ars Electronica 1982 , Adrian organized the telecommunication 
project The World in 24 Hours in which 16 artists from three continents tried 
for one day “der Mittagssonne rund um die Erde zu folgen und dabei eine Art von telematischer Weltkarte zu schaffen” (‘to follow the midday sun around the planet—creating a kind of  telematic world map’) (Adrian 145). But dealing with Adrian’s work, however, we are already talking about current writers’ and artists’ telecommunication projects in computer-based and networked media, but this is too big a subject for this essay . . . 
Notes
1. This is a short version of  Schäfer, “Literary Machines Made in Germany.” 
I am grateful to Peter Gendolla for his critical advice, to Brigitte Pichon and Dorian Rudnytsky for checking the English version of  this text and for translating quotes from Baroque German into contemporary English, and to Patricia Tomaszek for compiling the bibliographical information.
2. Cf. Roberto Simanowski’s as well as Peter Gendolla’s and my joint article in 
this book.
3. Besides the methods and procedures mentioned so far, there are plenty 
of  other methods of  constrained writing such as chronogram, acrostic, or abecedarius, which I cannot discuss here due to limitated space. For more details cf. Schäfer, “Literary Machines Made in Germany.”
157Jörgen Schäfer  |  Gutenberg Galaxy Revis(it)ed
Works Cited
Aarseth, Espen. Cybertext: Perspectives on Ergodic Literature. Baltimore: Johns Hop-
kins UP , 1997.
Adelung, Johann Christoph. Umständliches Lehrgebäude der Deutschen Sprache, zur Er-
läuterung der Deutschen Sprachlehre für Schulen . Vol. 1. 1782. Hildesheim: Olms, 1971.
Adrian X, Robert. “Elektronischer Raum.” Kunstforum international  103 (1989): 
142-147.Arp, Hans. Wortträume und schwarze Sterne: Auswahl aus den Gedichten der Jahre 1911-
1952. Wiesbaden: Limes, 1953.
———. Gesammelte Gedichte: Gedichte 1903-1930.  Vol. 1. Zurich: Arche, 1963. 
Baier, Lothar, ed. Über Ror Wolf. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp, 1972.
Ball, Hugo. Die Flucht aus der Zeit. Munich: Duncker & Humblot, 1927.
———. Flight out of  Time . Ed. John Elder ﬁ eld. New York: Viking, 1974.
Bärmann, Georg N. Neunhundert neun und neunzig und noch etliche Almanachs-Lust-
spiele durch den Würfel. Das ist: Almanach dramatischer Spiele für die Jahre 1829 bis 1961. 
1829. Munich: Heimeran, 1972.
Bellmer, Hans. Die Puppe. Frankfurt am Main: Ullstein, 1976.
Bense, Max. bestandteile des vorüber: dünnschliffe mischtexte montagen.  Cologne: Kiepen-
heuer & Witsch, 1961.Brecht, Bertolt. “Der Rundfunk als Kommunikationsapparat.” 1932. Große kommen-
tierte Berliner und Frankfurter Ausgabe . Vol. 21. Ed. Werner Hecht, Jan Knopf, Werner 
Mittenzwei, and Klaus D. Müller. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp, 1992. 552-557.Cramer, Florian. “Combinatory Poetry and Literature in the Internet.” Kodikas/
Code: Ars Semeiotica  24.3-4 (2001): 243-247.
Döblin, Alfred. “Bemerkungen zum Roman.” 1917.  Aufsätze zur Literatur . Ed. 
Walter Muschg. Olten: Walter. 1963. 19-23.
158Jörgen Schäfer  |  Gutenberg Galaxy Revis(it)ed
Döhl, Reinhard. “Hans Arp and Zurich Dada.” Dada Zurich: A Clown’s Game 
from Nothing.  Ed. Brigitte Pichon and Karl Riha. New York: G.K. Hall, 1996. 
112-124.
———. “Vom Computertext zur Netzkunst. Vom Bleisatz zum Hypertext.” 
1997. 4 Aug. 2006 <http:/ /www.uni-stuttgart.de/ndl1/computertext_netz-kunst.htm>. 
Enzensberger, Hans M. “Baukasten zu einer Theorie der Medien.” Kursbuch  20 
(1970): 159-186. Faecke, Peter, and Wolf Vostell. Postversandroman. Neuwied: Luchterhand, 1970.
Gardt, Andreas. Sprachre ﬂ exion in Barock und Frühaufklärung: Entwürfe von Böhme bis 
Leibniz.  Berlin: De Gruyter, 1994.
Harsdörffer, Georg Philipp. Frauenzimmer Gesprächspiele.  8 vols. 1641-49. Tübin-
gen: Niemeyer, 1968.———. Poetischer Trichter.  1647-53. Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesell-
schaft, 1969.———. Deliciae mathematicae et physicae: Der Mathematischen und philosophischen Er-
quickstunden Zweyter Theil. 1651. Frankfurt am Main: Keip, 1990.Hundt, Markus. “Spracharbeit” im 17. Jahrhundert: Studien zu Georg Philipp Hars-
dörffer, Justus Georg Schottelius und Christian Gueintz. Berlin: De Gruyter, 2000.
Jean Paul. Vorschule der Ästhetik . 1804. Werke .  Vol. V. Ed. Norbert Miller. Mu-
nich: Hanser, 1963.  ———. Horn of Oberon: Jean Paul Richter’s School for Aesthetics. Trans. Margaret R. 
Hale. Detroit: Wayne State UP, 1973.Kuhlmann, Quirinus. Himmlische Libes-küsse.  1671. Tübingen: Niemeyer, 1971.
———. Geschicht-Herold oder Freudige und traurige Begebenheiten Hoher und Nidriger 
Personen. Jena 1672.
159Jörgen Schäfer  |  Gutenberg Galaxy Revis(it)ed
Landow, George P . “What’s a Critic to Do? Critical Theory in the Age of  Hyper-
text.” Hyper/Text/Theory. Ed. George P . Landow. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UP , 
1994. 1-48.
Marti, Kurt. Abratzky oder Die kleine Blockhütte: Lexikon in einem Band. Neuwied: 
Luchterhand, 1971.Motte, Warren F., Jr. ed. Oulipo: A Primer of  Potential Literature. Normal, IL: Dalkey, 
1998.Müller, Götz. Jean Pauls Exzerpte. Würzburg: Königshausen & Neumann, 1988.
Müller, Herta. Der Wächter nimmt seinen Kamm: Vom Weggehen und Ausscheren. 
Reinbek: Rowohlt, 1993.Murphy, Richard. Theorizing the Avant-Garde: Modernism, Expressionism, and the Prob-
lem of  Postmodernity.  Cambridge: Cambridge UP , 1998.
Neubauer, John. Symbolismus und symbolische Logik: Die Idee der ars combinatoria in der Entwicklung der modernen Dichtung. Munich: Fink, 1978.
Okopenko, Andreas. Lexikon Roman einer sentimentalen Reise zum Exporteurtreffen in 
Druden. Salzburg: Residenz, 1970.
Pastior, Oskar. Anagrammgedichte. Munich: Renner, 1985.
———. Das Unding an sich: Frankfurter Vorlesungen. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp, 
1994.———. Eine kleine Kunstmaschine: 34 Sestinen. Munich: Hanser, 1994.
Rieger, Stefan. Speichern/Merken: Die künstlichen Intelligenzen des Barock. Munich: 
Fink, 1997.Rühm, Gerhard. “das phänomen ‘wiener gruppe’ im wien der fünfziger und 
sechziger jahre.” die wiener gruppe: ein moment der moderne 1954-1960/die visuellen ar-
beiten und die aktionen / the vienna group: a moment of  modernity 1954-1960/the visual works and the actions. Ed. Peter Weibel. Vienna: Springer, 1997. 16-29.
160Jörgen Schäfer  |  Gutenberg Galaxy Revis(it)ed
Schäfer, Jörgen. “Literary Machines Made in Germany: German Proto-Cyber-
texts from the Baroque Era to the Present.” Cybertext Database (forthcoming).
Schmit, Tomas. Verlegerbesteck . Limited edition of  60 boxes. Berlin: n.p., 1966. 
Schmitz-Emans, Monika. “Labyrinthbücher als Spielanleitungen.” Paragrana  11.1 
(2002): 179-207.
Schöning, Klaus, ed. Neues Hörspiel: Texte Partituren. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp, 
1969.Schottelius, Justus Georg. Ausführliche Arbeit Von der Teutschen HaubtSprache.  1663. 
Tübingen: Niemeyer,  1967. 
Schulze, Holger. Das aleatorische Spiel: Erkundung und Anwendung der nichtintentionalen 
Werkgenese im 20. Jahrhundert.  Munich: Fink, 2000. 
Strauss, Neil, ed. Radiotext(e).  New York: Semiotext(e), 1993.
Thomkins, André. dogma-mot. Limited edition of  111 boxes. N.p.: n.p., 1965.Tzara, Tristan. Œuvres complètes. Vol. 1. Ed. Henri Béhar. Paris: Flammarion, 
1975.Wolf, Ror. Raoul Tranchirers Welt- und Wirklichkeitslehre aus dem Reich des Fleisches, der 
Erde, der Luft, des Wassers und der Gefühle. Gießen: Anabas, 1990.
Zesen, Philipp von. Hoch-Deutscher Helikon. 1656. Sämtliche Werke. Vol. X/1. Ed. 
Ferdinand van Ingen, Ulrich Maché, and Volker Meid. Berlin: De Gruyter, 1977.
Zürn, Unica. Gesamtausgabe. Vol. I. Anagramme . Berlin: Brinkmann und Bose, 
1988.
161Friedrich W. Block
Humor — T echnology — Gender
Digital Language Art and Diabolic Poetics
Abstract:
This essay argues that the poetic turn from nothing to form art tends to “diabolic” strategies in present language allowing for a self-referential presentation of  cultural dis-tinctions. This poetic deconstruction of  symbolic forms such as man/machine, male/fe-male, or 0/1 is closely related to humor and gender in cultural and artistic performances. This shall be illustrated by discussing two examples of  language art in the ﬁ eld of  digital 
electronics: the interactive installation Die Amme  by Peter Dittmer and female extension, a 
subversive net art project by Cornelia Sollfrank. These projects are interpreted as gen-dered forms of  the poetic as comic self-observation.
I.  Once Again: Who is Speaking?
Up until now, the intense interest in the distinction (also dedifferentiation) be-
tween “subjective” or “natural,” and “technical” or “arti ﬁ cial” qualities and ac-
tivities has been highlighted in the discourse about computers and their culture, more than anywhere else. The “universal machine,” digital technologies, or no-table concepts such as virtual reality and arti ﬁ cial intelligence are still regarded 
as great challenges. Ascriptions of  vicinity, the amalgamation or analogy of  man and machine—afﬁ  rmative or critical—determine both the technology theory 
and media art.
The Turing Test, which Alan Turing introduced in 1950 in his legendary 
essay “Computing Machinery and Intelligence,” remains discursively highly ef-fective, and is still discussed to this day. This test is laid out as an “imitation game” where a questioner is confronted with answers which come from a hu-man source, initially, and are then produced mechanically—without the ques-tioner’s knowledge. In his essay, Turing then re-de ﬁ nes the man of  body, mind 
and social being as an information processing system, assuming that the crucial question “can machines think?” is not conclusively decided. At the same time Max Bense’s cybernetic aesthetics similarly argue the synthesis of  man and ma-chine in art (cf. Literaturmetaphysik).
This conception is connected with further distinctions important to com-
puter symbolism e.g.: analog/digital, hardware/software, code/interface, natu-
162Friedrich W. Block   |  Humor — T echnology — Gender
ral/arti ﬁ cial language, interactivity/(inter-) passivity, control/autonomy and last 
but not least: male/female. Distinctions such as these are raised artistically when 
technology is staged in a self-referential way.
We shall pursue this perspective, giving humor special consideration. The 
comic aspect is of  interest here, in its af ﬁ nity to advanced, re ﬂ exive or experimen-
tal art, as both areas are concerned with deconstructing symbolism, frequently in the form of  culturally highly prominent distinctions. This deconstruction or literally: dia-bolism clearly illustrates the breaks of  the symbolic. It executes “a constant ambivalence” which Baudelaire de ﬁ nes as a characteristic of  humor in 
his essay De l’essence du rire  (1855): Laughter isn’t of  divine origin—indeed Christ 
never laughed—instead it is satanic (diabolic), and therefore profoundly human. According to Baudelaire, it is executed, in its absolute form, as art. In this sense, contemporary (media-) art per se tends towards humor. 
This shall be illustrated by discussing two examples: Peter Dittmer’s Die 
Amme and Cornelia Sollfrank’s female extension . Although these projects hardly 
count as literature (or net literature)—if  we understand “literature” to mean the literature system with its dominant concepts. The artists of  both projects and their audience would hardly be located here. Nevertheless, this is language art, which net literature participates in, or it is “literature” in the speci ﬁ c sense that 
the technology with which the projects are primarily concerned is of  linguistic nature or alphanumeric code. At all events, the artistic working with language plays an important role, on different levels, in both cases discussed here, espe-cially in point of  view of  communication games. Both examples deal, more or less explicitly, with the gender difference, in a way, where humor is signi ﬁ cant.
II.  Die Amme
We come to the ﬁ rst example which, in parody, reminds us of  the game of  the 
Turing test in its interactive dialog situation: the installation Die Amme  by Peter 
Dittmer, ﬁ rst presented in 1992 and permanently developed since then—up to 
the ﬁ fth generation (2005).1
Here, other than in the Turing test, the user knows that he/she is entering 
into a dialog with a machine, where keyboard and screen are used as classic interfaces. So, for the participant, the distinction between man and machine is explicit. The language dialog proceeds, alternating between arbitrary input by the audience and answers which the computer formulates, using dictionaries and programmed sentence formation rules, and then displays on the screen, after the petition to it has been lexically and syntactically analyzed. During the dialog the program randomly triggers a mechanism which spills a glass of  milk 
163Friedrich W. Block   |  Humor — T echnology — Gender
in a display case. The “dialog ability” of  Die Amme  has been constantly enlarged 
by recording the conversations. In the meantime, the program disposes of  ap-
prox. 400,000 answer modules, as well as more than 50,000 variables of  analysis or input identiﬁ  cation.
The project stands as an example for a number of  works, where machines 
stage a grotesque exaggeration (or a kind of  “caricature”) of  human as well as mechanical features.
2 This has comic effects but is never harmless, however, 
without exception the treatment is in a serious manner. Serious in the sense that strategy and execution of  the work are profound and highly and subtly differentiated
3, as well as of  multi-layered and not only comic importance. This 
versatility also applies to the possibility of  comic ascriptions: In Die Amme , the 
absurd distortion of  human behavior is already indicated in the ironic signal set by the title, attributing a long extinct female profession (wet nurse) to a machine. The hardware of  the spilling mechanism, milk glass and milk is controlled by software which is relatively complicated and where the design and sequences of  operations are not transparent to the user. However, this is done in such a way as to mock the common function of  a wet nurse (i.e. to give milk and not to spill). The desired monotonous, though slightly unpredictable “stupidity” of  this puta-tive malfunction stands in contrast to the considerable technical effort required, and also to the—simulated—communication ability of  the computer, which indeed raises Turing’s question. Also this competence is ironically broken as the answers are in the style of  a “run-down language” (Ernst Jandl) and therefore contradict in their supposed “naturalness” the expectation of  a perfect arti ﬁ cial 
language. This may be illustrated with a short dialog (“>” stands for the audi-ence, “<” for the computer):
     . . .
> ich gehe endgültig.< Meine Warnung lautet: Draussen überfällt den Mensch     nur derene leere Schlund von derene Welt.> ich wünsche dir daß du verschlungen wirst.< Da Sie sollten dem Gott anbeten für.> gott wird dich verschlingen.< Wollen Sie eine telefonische Leitung zum den Gott?> ja her mit gott!< Hallo. Hier bei Gott. Hitler is am den Apparat.> gib mir gott!!! ich will nicht hitler! ich will gott!< Da ich gebe Sie lieber dem Milch als mehr einem     allgemeinen Gegebenen. Vorsehen!
164Friedrich W. Block   |  Humor — T echnology — Gender
MILCHVERSCHÜTTUNG
> na endlich danke für die milch und tschüss.
< Aha. Nehmen und nich geben und gehen.> was willst du denn haben?< Ihrem Gemüt ich will Sie heraus reissen.> du schwein.< HA HA HA HA. Oh bin ich böse!
 (Publikum ab). (Dittmer 25)
 
     . . .
> I’m de ﬁ nitely going .
< my warning is: only their empty abyss of  their 
    world attacks man outside.> I hope that you are swallowed.< there you should adore God for it.> God will swallow you.< Do you want a telephone line to the God? > yes here with God!< Hello. Here with God. Hitler is on this apparatus.> give me God!!! I don’t want Hitler! I want God!< I prefer to give you the milk rather more than     a general given one. Provide!
MILK-SPILLING> ah at last thanks for the milk and bye.
< Aha. Take and don give and go.> What do you want to have?< your soul I want to rip it out.> you pig.< HA HA HA HA. Oh am I bad!
 (audience leaves).
This extract from a far longer dialog shows that the communication works for 
the participant, always assuming its general and speci ﬁ c improbability. For him/
her the answers connect. They offer a hybrid mix of  speech defects, verbal col-loquial speech, corrupted historical word material and quotation material, in this 
165Friedrich W. Block   |  Humor — T echnology — Gender
case a ridicule is included: Can machines laugh? The machine is staged as fallible; 
and exactly this seems to personalize it as a (crazy) partner. Language design and milk spill keep the participant at a distance and this comic tension can be applied to the “communication process” taking place. This is also true for the art event itself. Especially in the context of  the extremely expensive interactive media art of  the nineties, which was euphorically celebrating the new technology age. Here—ironic in turn—this is met with exceptionally “low” technology, as far as the language processing is concerned (a simple PC is enough), contrasting with the high tech needed for the milk spill and to restore the outset situation.
Finally, such comic ascriptions can be found in the immediate vicinity of  
the work. Dittmer, who has a theater background, presents transcriptions of  the conversations between audience and machine in the form of  a comedy text. He always refers to his work in an ironic tone, avoiding the usual technical jargon, using, e.g., a style that may be associated with Heidegger:
Die Amme . . .  ist ja tatsächlich, in ihrem ungeschützten Hingestelltsein in den Exhibitionsraum, das Beispiel für eine geschundene öffentliche Person mit nur begrenztem Weltverständnis, die in jeder Ansprache auch Zumutung und drohende Überwältigung vermuten muss. (Ditt-mer 15)
In the element of  being placed unprotected in the exhibit area, Die 
Amme is actually an example of  a maltreated public person with a lim-
ited understanding of  the world, who must fear unreasonable demands and the threat of  being overpowered in every address. 
Also, the illustrations enclosed with the commentary can be understood to be comic ( ﬁ g.1): Far removed from technical diagrams, the drawings can be under-
stood as close to the tradition of  comic drawing. The contrast between “sublime” language concepts and “trivial” pictures repeats the aesthetic basic structure of  the installation.
The difference between man and machine (naturalness and arti ﬁ ciality, act-
ing and functioning; or according to Dittmer’s “Schalten und Walten”: switching and operating etc.), the question, whether machines can think, perhaps even laugh, is turned about satirically in the concept of  Die Amme. It is exaggerated 
in its real satire: Vilém Flusser thought that simulation was per se a form of  caricature—though in no way harmless:
Es vereinfacht das Nachgeahmte und übertreibt einige wenige seiner Aspekte. Ein Hebel ist eine Simulation des Arms, weil er alle Aspekte
166Friedrich W. Block   |  Humor — T echnology — Gender
      Fig. 1. Peter Dittmer: Die Amme.
des Arms außer seiner Hebefunktion vernachlässigt, die Funktion 
aber so weit auf die Spitze treibt, daß er weit besser hebt als der Arm. Das sich durch die digitalen Codes ausdrückende und bildermachende Denken ist eine Karikatur des Denkens. Aber es wäre geradezu ge-meingefährlich, diese neue Denkart deswegen etwa als dumm oder auch nur einseitig verachten zu wollen. (Flusser 143)
It simpli ﬁ es imitated aspects and exaggerates a few of these. A lever is 
a simulation of the arm because it neglects all aspects of the arm apart 
from its lever function, but so exaggerates this function that it far excels in lifting compared to the arm. The thought process expressed by digital codes and visualized in pictures is a caricature of thought. However, it would be virtually criminal to want to despise this new way of thinking as, say, stupid or one-sided, because of this.
Should anyone still wish to claim that the question of stupidity is also raised in Dittmer’s installation (as an inability to interpret appropriately, or as a non-in-tentional form of comic, cf. Wirth 6-9), there would be no need to immediately decide whether, and in what manner, this should be ascribed to which factor in the game. For the observer, however, this reﬂ  ection according to Flusser’s 
is laid out, along with many other possibilities, and can connect with an—in-tentional—comic experience.

167Friedrich W. Block   |  Humor — T echnology — Gender
III.  Hacking Gender 
An interesting aspect of  Dittmer’s Die Amme  is that the robot is implied to be 
female, i.e. it is gendered. Of  course, this is broken ironically since, as already 
mentioned, the historical role of  the wet nurse is forced and satirized. Once again, this aspect brings us back to Alan Turing’s imitation game which is fore-most a gender game, although this is rarely taken into consideration.
4 Initially 
the questioner is confronted with two answerers, a man and a woman not vis-ible to him/her, and has to determine their sex on the basis of  the answers given. This is made more dif ﬁ cult by the fact that the woman “truthfully” reveals 
her gender, while the man pretends to be a woman: an awkward “foreplay” on Turing’s homosexuality, perhaps? In the second phase the man is then replaced by the computer. So, the question of  identi ﬁ cation combines the distinctions 
of  man/machine and male/female. As the only possible answers are language statements, the symbolic and cultural nature of  the double problem is under-lined and not e.g. its substantial nature.
Thus, there is a second area linked with re ﬂ ections on technology, namely 
the “Analyse der ‘Technologien’ der Subjektkonstitution und der mit ihnen ver-bundenen ‘gesellschaftlichen Spielregeln’” (‘analysis of  the “technologies” of  subject constitution and the “social rules” relating to these’) (Rebentisch 29).
In science and art the theoretical debates on gender construction in the 
digital technology culture have revolved around two perspectives since the late eighties. These are: a possible reorientation beyond the positions of  the ﬁ rst and 
second phase of  feminism; and the analysis of  how gender roles de facto ap-pear within technological behavior. The post-feminist vision—following Donna Haraway’s cyborg concept (1991)—is to leave the classic hostility towards tech-
nology behind, and to make use of  the new possibilities, offensively, in the hope that gender difference, or existing order schemes, be deconstructed and newly deﬁ ned. Net technologies such as chatrooms or MUDs and MOOs, where roles 
and identities can be freely chosen and developed, are an opportunity to sepa-rate the gender difference from corporeality, or to form corporeality ﬁ ctitiously 
and variably, making feminist issues technologically relevant. This is a utopia, however. Complementary evidence shows that women are still highly under-represented
5 in participating in technology dispositives, especially in hardware 
and software development, and that the entertainment industry ﬂ ourishing in 
the Net reproduces glaring gender clichés—Lara Croft is a popular icon of  this criticism—not to mention the reality of  cybersex.
Both perspectives have been addressed artistically. Instead of “big theory” 
and “big stories”
6 however, artistic cyber feminism prefers deconstructive and, 
also, comic procedures. This shall be illustrated at this stage with a project by 
168Friedrich W. Block   |  Humor — T echnology — Gender
the concept/software artist Cornelia Sollfrank. This project both politically 
and aesthetically subverted the established system of gender and man/machine symbolism. For this, she provoked the art “operating system” with a type of hacker attack: In February 1997, the Hamburg Kunsthalle was the ﬁ rst museum 
in the world to announce a competition for net art, supported by Philips and the Spiegel  magazine (Spiegel Online ). The competition was entitled “Extension,” 
and the museum intended to extend into virtual space. (Digitized) art was not to be entered, but rather net art, i.e. work dealing conceptionally with internet technology. For Sollfrank the starting point was as follows:
The announcement of  EXTENSION met the Zeitgeist of  the year 1997. The established art world had started to become interested in this new art form and tried to deal with it more or less appropriately. Nobody wanted to miss the hype, everybody wanted to take advantage of  the potential publicity and—in the best case—be the discoverer and supporter of  a new art form. (Sollfrank)
The artist then exploited the relative inexperience of  the organizers and the jury, and registered 200 ﬁ ctitious female net artists for the competition. The names 
were assigned to seven different nations. Each was given a full address including phone number as well as an e-mail address which worked on various servers. These “avatars” were registered as real persons by the competition organizers and each received a password for the server, where the submitted projects were to be up-loaded. The high participation level, particularly of  women, was pub-licly celebrated (“280 applicants— two thirds are women”—so the Kunsthalle press release).
7
In a second step a corresponding number of  net art works had to be pro-
duced. The artist handed this over to a net art generator she had conceived herself  and programmed with the help of  several colleagues: using search ma-chines, arbitrary data (text and picture) was collected on the internet and auto-matically recombined
8 as new sites, according to key words. 127 net art projects 
were produced, assigned with the given names and submitted via the accessed passwords on the Kunsthalle server.
The organizers’ pleasure in the high level of  participation remained until 
the winners were announced. However, no one had known what to make of  the pile of  data, and three men were selected for the awards, despite the high level of  “female” participation. Sollfrank published a press release at the same time which uncovered her coup.
In this case the attack on the art business is satirical in the best sense. It 
plays with the gap between appearance and reality, as well as with a whole row 
169Friedrich W. Block   |  Humor — T echnology — Gender
of  more or less established conventions of  art communication. One is remind-
ed of  corresponding strategies in the established satire scene e.g. by the German Titanic magazine.
9 In particular, a similar scandal which took place a good ten 
years before comes to mind, where the two Austrian poets Franz Josef  Czernin and Ferdinand Schmatz—“gender swapping” in turn—invented a ﬁ ctitious fe-
male poet and attributed “stupid” poems to her, according to the established literature taste, which—after all—were then published under Czernin’s name by the renowned Residenz  publishers.
10 In the two cases, the difference between 
institutionalized (bound to museums, publishing houses, curators, copyreaders, juries, ﬁ  nances etc.) and innovative art production is exposed.
The net art project underlines the paradox of  putting everything “new” 
straight into a museum, with a diabolic use of  new technology. Above all else, the hacking deception is about the distinction between code and interface: Code is conceived in such a way as to foil the perception offers it controls and conveys via the interface (here: the visualization of  person data and “her” works in the net). Computer viruses
11 or other provocations of  net art, work in the same way. 
The very successful work by duo Jodi is another example: The users could watch their own “stupidity” (see above) in working with the new technology, particu-larly in the early phase of  the mass media World Wide Web.
Furthermore, automated art production provides a re ﬂ ection on the sub-
jectivity of  the creation process: Can machines create art? Actually, the question only arises, if  the ﬁ nal results are considered, instead of  concept, process and 
their aesthetics. Tristan Tzara ironically ventured that the manufacturing of  a dadaist poem by means of  newspaper, scissors and an algorithm secures origi-nality and a charming sensibility: The use of  an art generator whose ejectionsonly work as a parody of  “original works of  art” heightens the reference to the awkward subjectivity of  “making.” Florian Cramer aptly notes:
When Cornelia Sollfrank states that “a clever artist makes the machine do the work,” it still implies that the artist makes  it work in the ﬁ rst place. 
Poiesis, making, becomes a second-order poiesis of  making something that makes something else. So poetry, making, turns into poetics, the making of  making. When making turns into meta-making, subjectivity simply shifts to a second order position, residing in the formula instead of  the product. (87)
12
The subversive humor of the female masquerade which critically analyzes gen-der politics in the established art world as well as in the techno culture, works in the sense of re ﬂ exive subjectivity. Subversion works particularly well because 
the new technology of digital de/re-differentiation is utilized for the masquer-
170Friedrich W. Block   |  Humor — T echnology — Gender
ade, according to Haraway. Or, as Verena Kuni writes, such a masquerade is 
connected with the cognition “dass es hinter der Maske kein ‘wahres’ Gesicht—beziehungsweise kein ‘wahres’ Geschlecht zu entdecken gibt” (‘that there is no “real” face, and no “true” sex to be found behind the mask’) (Kuni)—nothing more than a history of  female masquerade between fear and laughter.
It would be wrong to assume that this strategy only aims at the established 
art world. The mentioned gender problematic, e.g. female under-representation, continues in the subculture of  the hackers. Cornelia Sollfrank has also demon-strated this with cyber feminist interventions or by “social  hacking,” following the pattern of  the ﬁ ctitious identity game: She invented a certain “Clara S0pht,” 
for example. Faked video interviews with these ﬁ gures were then presented at 
hacker meetings e.g. the Chaos Computer Club, to simulate female presence in the male dominant scene. Here, too, the deception went unnoticed, at ﬁ rst. Not 
even the pun on virtual pop icon Lara Croft was recognized. Sollfrank was actu-ally treated with hostility because she revealed the apparent identity of  hackers.
By afﬁ rming the male the test might also provoke the “enlightened” feminist 
scene: This was the case in 2005 when the “1. bachelor award for net literature” was announced by net artist Johannes Auer and the Literaturhaus Stuttgart. The announcement follows Dieter Daniels’ idea, in which the Turing machine corre-sponds to the concept of  Duchamp’s “bachelor machine”: Both explain gender issues technically and in a marked male, “celibate” and self-satisfying manner, i.e. without direct physical contact—a “short circuit on demand,” where the object of  desire, the opposite sex, is substituted by the machine (cf. Daniels 104ff.).
13
The intrinsic consequence was to bar “women” from participating in the 
bachelor award.14 In an according debate, female contributors to the mailing list 
Rohrpost, including Cornelia Sollfrank, were not amused, despite the option that the exaggeration towards a “man-machine” might actually offer the possibility “aktuelle strukturelle Transformationen der patriarchalen Matrix in den Blick zu bekommen” (‘of  getting a look at the current structural transformations of  the patriarchal matrix’) (Hunger 81): Obviously, this “simple” to and fro between male and female, as the analogy of  switching from 0 to 1 in primary digital code suggests, stands contrary to the way things technical are charged with estab-lished gender semantics—of  course, there is satiric/comic potential here.
171Friedrich W. Block   |  Humor — T echnology — Gender
IV.  Short Conclusion on Demand, or Seven Theses on Poetics 
1.  Poetics sets the diabolical alternation between differences in motion, it in-
trudes creatively on its own general autopoiesis, i.e. by presentation, re ﬂ ection, 
change. Here, poiesis/poetry is the medium in which this creative mechanics 
can be simulated and observed—if  every sense arises from distinctions, as requisites following prerequisites which are digitally coded with positive and negative values: human/mechanical, male/female, 1/0, stressed/unstressed, comic/serious, beautiful/ugly, good/bad, true/false etc.
2.  In this sense, poetics also self-referentially works as technology (poietike tech-
né). Particularly where it adapts itself  to the culture of  technology and re-
lates this to its own means and procedures. It experiments with experiences on how technology literally makes sense between restriction and freedom, stupidity and power of  judgement or, according to Peter Dittmer, between “switching and operating.” “Literally” means that poetry, as language art, raises the linguisticality of  the technology culture, as well as existing and new language techniques, and acts these out, condenses and recontextual-izes them—in short, contaminates them poetically.
3.  Poetry no longer progresses, instead, it constantly extends its possibilities. 
Attributes like net literature, e-poetry,  digital, visual , sound poetry etc. represent 
this. These are open concepts of  orientation with which art communica-tions organize themselves in factual, social and temporal ways. Genres, or object areas clearly, aesthetically outlined, can hardly be de ﬁ ned by these 
concepts, however. Even if  their especially academic use occasionally tries at standardization and institutionalization.
4. Poetry, as language art, is no longer a matter solely for the literature system, 
but extends throughout all of  art in its entirety. It is—in keeping with Um-berto Eco—art in movement, inspired by a (renewed) performative turn. With this performance, borders within art, as well as other communication and sense systems are constantly moved, and the works of  art and their protagonists are process orientated. In this sense poetry is “prozessive Uni-versalpoesie” (‘processive universal poetry’).
5. Humor is an important aspect of  contemporary art, particularly where it 
isn’t formed as an end in itself, but in a concert of  mutually qualifying pos-sibilities of  effect. Hereby humor and poetics converge in their diabolic potential—being subversive and deconstructive, as well as constructive and afﬁ rmative, inclusive and exclusive, in a “constant ambivalence.” In fact, all 
art in movement tends towards humor. On the other hand, art which lacks a sense of  humor frequently seems to be rigid and suspected of  ideology.
172Friedrich W. Block   |  Humor — T echnology — Gender
6.  Humor also ambivalently complements art: It emphasizes conceptuality, i.e. 
it underlines ideas, re ﬂ ections, programs, the creative “spark.” At the same 
time, according to Freud, it increases pleasure and desire, i.e. to some extent 
humor meets hedonist needs. The poetic connection between conceptuality and desire which is found in humor, communicatively marks the individual according to a reﬂ  exive subjectivity, relating to the culture of  technology 
and to gender culture. 
7.  Thus, forms of  comic self-observation, as poetic self-observation within 
the world society, could be understood to be “self  concern”—re ﬂ ected 
experience, an individual development, assessment and arrangement of  choices, and pure relish. Perhaps the connection between “art and life” can be found here, not in Henri Bergson’s vitalistic sense, nor according to Peter Bürger’s avant-garde theory, but in the art of  living (cf. Schmid 71ff.), or the technologies of  self.
Translated by Helen MacCormac
Notes
1. For detailed project information cf. <http://www.dieamme.de>.2. In works such as Bodybuiling or Rollstuhl,  similar to Dittmer’s milk glass, 
Frank Fietzek has enriched his hardware with unexpected objects from the real world (butter ﬂ y machine as interface, wheelchair and model racing set 
as I/O device ) which can be seen as ironic comments on the hype of  the technology debate; on cyborg phantasms in the case of  Bodybuilding ; on 
acceleration of  information processing in Rollstuhl. Cf. Block, “Diabolische 
Vermittlung,” and Block, “vom code zum interface.”
3. This is indicated not only by the installation’s technical raf ﬁ nesse, but also 
by the theoretical and practical concentration with which Dittmer has pur-sued his sole project since 1992.
4. Different to Rebentisch and Daniels.5. Compare with Frances Grundy’s exposition and Francis Hunger’s differen-
tiated historical depiction. 
6. Jutta Weber discussed the strategy of  cyber feminism in more detail.7. Details taken from Cornelia Sollfrank’s commentary Female Extension .
8. This and other generators to be found and tried out under <http://obn.
org/generator/>.
173Friedrich W. Block   |  Humor — T echnology — Gender
9. A prominent example, which was noticed in the international press, was the 
successful staging of  a supposed bribe scandal in connection with Germa-
ny’s application to hold the Football World Cup 2006.
10. Cf. Czernin’s and Schmatz’s Die Reise.  The Spiegel which had extensively 
covered this case, should have been prepared. The poets’ coup did more than to reveal the tastes and market conventions of  the literary scene, it also explored contemporary and historical forms of  poetry. Soon after this, the pair developed the computer program POE (‘Poetic Oriented Evalu-ations’ referring to Edgar Allan Poes’s analysis of  verse): a poem genera-tor intended to support the mentioned research (cf. Czernin and Schmatz, “Anmerkungen”). It is more than likely that this generator—corresponding to Sollfrank’s net art generator—could have done the rhyming for the two poets in their staged scandal.
11. A relatively harmless but quite poetic example—poetic because of  its tech-
nological elegance and visual appearance—is given as follows: The 13 char-acters :(){ :|:& };: (including blanks) which initially remind us of  “emoti-cons” in chat and email communications, are actually the total program code of  a neat little virus, which when entered into the command line of  a Unix system, rapidly brings it down, because the program repeatedly doubly executes itself  and so exhausts the system resources within seconds.
12. This connection between “poiesis” as artistic meta-observation and re-
ﬂ exive subjectivity was systematically developed by Block, Beobachtung des 
“ICH,” esp. 124ff. and 283ff.
13. The appropriate formula “short circuit on demand” (Daniels 115) is taken 
from Duchamp.
14. Cf. <http://www.junggesellenpreis.de>.
Works Cited
 Bense, Max. Literaturmetaphysik: Der Schriftsteller in der technischen Welt . Stuttgart: 
DVA, 1950.
Block, Friedrich W . Beobachtung des “ICH” : Zum Zusammenhang von Subjektivität und 
Medien am Beispiel experimenteller Poesie. Bielefeld: Aisthesis, 1999.
———. “Diabolische Vermittlung: Zur Konzeption von Bewußtsein und Kör-
perlichkeit in interaktiver Medienpoesie.” Beobachtungen des Unbeobachtbaren: Konz-
epte radikaler Theoriebildung in den Geisteswissenschaften . Ed. Oliver Jahraus and Nina 
Ort. Weilerswist: Velbrück, 2000. 148-168. 
174Friedrich W. Block   |  Humor — T echnology — Gender
Block, Friedrich W . “vom code zum interface—und zurück: zur orientierung im 
diskurs digitaler poesie zwischen konzept und wahrnehmung.” $wurm = ($ap-
fel>0) ? 1 : =;. experimentelle literatur und internet: memoscript für reinhard döhl.  Ed. 
Johannes Auer. Zurich: update, 2004. 76-86.
Cramer, Florian. Words Made Flesh: Code, Culture, Imagination. 2005. 26 May 2006.  
<http://pzwart.wdka.hro.nl/mdr/research/fcramer/wordsmadeﬂ  esh/words 
madeﬂ  eshpdf>.
Czernin, Franz J., and Ferdinand Schmatz. Die Reise: In 80 ﬂ achen Hunden in die 
ganze tiefe Grube. Graz: Droschl, 1987. 
———. “Anmerkungen zum Dichtungs-Programm POE.” IMBUCHSTA-
BENFELD. die zukunft der literatur . Ed. Peter Weibel. Graz: Droschl, 2001. 99-
112. Daniels, Dieter. “Duchamps:Interface:Turing. Eine hypothetische Begegnung 
von Junggesellenmaschine und universeller Maschine.” Vom Readymade zum Cy-
berspace: Kunst/Medien Interferenzen.  Ostﬁ ldern-Ruit: Cantz, 2003. 92-123. 
Dittmer, Peter. Schalten und Walten (Die Amme): Gespräche mit einem milchverschüt-
tenden Computer. 2003. 26 May 2006. <http://dieamme.de/amme5/dokumente/dieamme.pdf>.
Flusser, Vilém. Die Schrift: Hat Schreiben Zukunft? 1987. Göttingen: European 
Photography, 1990.Grundy, Frances. “Computer Software: A Clue to De-Gendering Technology?” 
Wie natürlich ist Geschlecht? Gender und die Konstruktion von Natur und Technik. Ed. Ursula Pasero and Anja Gottburgsen. Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag, 2002. 229-239.
Haraway, Donna J. “A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, Technology, and Socialist-
Feminism in the Late Twentieth Century.” Simians, Cyborgs and Women: The Rein-
vention of  Nature. Ed. Donna J. Har away. New York: Routledge, 1991. 149-181. 
Hunger, Francis. Computer als Männermaschine: Computer in einem patriarchalen 
und kapitalistischen Kontext.  2003. 26 May 2006 <http://www.hgb-leipzig.de/
~francis/irmielin/writings/comamama/>.
175Friedrich W. Block   |  Humor — T echnology — Gender
Kuni, Verena. Mythische Körper: Cyborg-Con ﬁ gurationen als Formationen der (Selbst-) 
Schöpfung im Imaginationsraum technologischer Kreation: Alte und neue Mythologien von 
“künstlichen Menschen.” 2004. 26 May 2006 <http:/ /www.medienkunstnetz.de/
themen/cyborg_bodies/mythische-koerper_I/>.
Rebentisch, Juliane. “Sex, Crime & Computers: Alan Turing und die Logik der 
Imitation.” Ästhetik & Kommunikation 26.96 (March 1997): 27-30.
Schmid, Wilhelm. Philosophie der Lebenskunst: Eine Grundlegung.  Frankfurt am 
Main: Suhrkamp, 1998.Sollfrank, Cornelia. Female Extension.  1997. 26 May 2006 <http://obn.org/fe 
mext/ext_engl.htm>.Turing, Alan. “Computing Machinery and Intelligence.” MIND 59.236 (1950): 
433-460.Weber, Jutta. “Ironie, Erotik und Techno-Politik: Cyberfeminismus als Virus 
in der neuen Weltunordnung?” Die Philosophin. Forum für feministische Theorie und 
Philosophie 12.24 (2001): 81-97. 26 May 2006 <http://www.obn.org/reading_
room/writings/html/ironie.html>.
Wirth, Uwe. Diskursive Dummheit: Abduktion und Komik als Grenzphänomene des 
Verstehens. Heidelberg: Winter, 1999.
 
Playable Literature
179Markku Eskelinen
Six Problems in Search of a Solution
The Challenge of Cybertext Theory and Ludology 
to Literary Theory
Abstract:
In this essay I’ll be playing with cybertext theory and ludology while addressing six more or less intertwined problems. First, the most current and worn-out one: how to expand literary narratology beyond its print heritage without falling into the trap of pan-narrativism? Second and third, in addition to various new narrative and would-be-narrative constellations and devices the relations between texts and the text’s relation to itself have also changed. Fourthly, all these changes have their bearing on the role of the reader in situations where the lack of conventions is well matched with outdated expectations concerning narratives, texts and transtextuality. Fifthly, enter playability and the fear of variety when readers and scholars should perhaps be willing to give up the idea of literary wholes and try to pursue happiness in the form of parts, phases and playthings or, to put it in more Oulipian terms, in objects and operations. Sixthly, we’ll try to shed some light into the recent trend of building textual instruments and instrumental texts. 
1.  Introduction
The power of cybertext theory1 in this context stems from the fact that even 
the state-of-the-art literary theories of today are ultimately based on literary 
objects that are static, determinate, intransient and random access with im-personal perspective, no links and utilizing only the interpretative user func-tion. To this one special type of object cybertext theory adds 575 rather fresh alternatives capable of undermining and shaking many basic assumptions and presuppositions derived from the print era.
2  
Ludology gives us a perspective and a paradigm from which to approach 
the interactivity or ergodicity of literary works without any hype of the new versus the old, as interactivity has always been dominant in games. In short, in literature we may have to con ﬁ gure in order to be able to interpret, but in 
games we have to interpret in order to be able to con ﬁ gure and proceed from 
the beginning to the winning or some other situation (cf. Eskelinen, “The Gaming Situation”). This ludological double vision is all we need to situate 
180Markku Eskelinen  |  Six Problems in Search of a Solution
the continuously expanding ﬁ eld of ergodic literature between linear literature 
and computer games. 
It’s time to formulate the ﬁ rst of my six challenges; let’s call it the logic 
of expansion. There are many other ﬁ  elds where the current media plurality 
seems to pose problems, but the easiest way to show what I mean is by and 
through narratology. Narratives are supposed to be transmedial, or to put it in Seymour Chatman’s terms: “The transposability of the story is the strongest reason for arguing that narratives are indeed structures independent of any medium” ( Story and Discourse  20). So, let’s see what happens if we try to expand 
formal literary narratology from its traditional one media position to those few hundreds offered by cybertext theory. 
2.  From Expanded Narratology to the Lack of Conventions
Aarseth contrasts the ergodic mode with the narrative mode for various good reasons I fully agree with. Still, from the outset Aarseth’s concept of ergodic literature seems to concern differences only within one of the seven dimen-sions, the main dividing line separating the interpretative user function from the three other user functions. Therefore we could begin our investigation by focusing on the other six parameters of his typology of textual commu-nication, as in principle they could all be combined to the interpretative user function within the realm of non-ergodic narrative literature. We’ll have eight major shifts to deal with: from static to intratextual and textual dynamics, from determinate to indeterminate texts, from intransient to transient time, from random to controlled access, from impersonal to personal perspective, and from no links to links and conditional links. 
To warm you up, let’s take two stock examples of narrative power: the 
concepts of unreliable narration and dramatic irony. The former makes sense only if there’s a completely accessible and static textual whole against which background the reader can ﬁ  nally understand and verify how the narrator was 
positioned in relation to possible other narrators and the narrated events and existents in general and how reliable he actually was. The case is pretty much the same with dramatic irony. The reader can by all means believe she knows more than certain characters and narrators do, but in the end this can be veri-ﬁ ed only in the context of the whole text and nothing but the whole text. Of 
course these things are always already actively interpreted and hypothesized on a more local level one way or the other, but the possibility that one is being misled remains until the whole text is read. Both in print ﬁ  ction and classic 
hypertexts the whole text, that is, every single texton, is there to be read, but in 
181Markku Eskelinen  |  Six Problems in Search of a Solution
more dynamic works that doesn’t have to be the case. To misquote Radiohead, 
just because you read it doesn’t mean it is there.  
Genette’s formal narratology ( Narrative Discourse; Narrative Discourse Revis-
ited) will serve as my point of  departure, as it gives us access to a wide variety of  already well recognized thoroughly studied and therefore quite uncontroversial and conventional narrative devices.
3 Genette’s model is a fairly simple and reli-
able system of  narrating, narrative, and story. The ﬁ rst of  these terms is used for 
the producing narrative action, the second for the signi ﬁ er, statement, discourse 
or narrative text itself, and the third for the signi ﬁ ed or narrative content. Gen-
ette divides his basic parameters into three groups: tense, mood, and voice. 
Tense concerns temporal relations and possible distortions between story 
time and narrative time. They are studied in three registers: order, frequency, and duration. It’s now time to add some cybertextual ingredients to this simplicity. As we all know textonically dynamic texts like William Gibson’s Agrippa  or Noah 
Wardrip-Fruin’s The Impermanence Agent  are capable of  reducing the number of  
their original textons and scriptons to zero and thus either disappearing or re-placing themselves completely within a limited period of  time. Transient texts set temporal limitations to their reading; in Stuart Moulthrop’s Hegirascope  it is 
30 seconds max per node per visit. This means we may have to add two new temporal categories to the classic two: system time to account for the varying degrees of  the text’s permanence, in short the appearances, disappearances and possible reappearances of  its parts and phases, and reading time for the text’s potentially limited temporal availability to the reader. 
For the sake of  simplicity and time we browse through these two new tem-
poral layers without inventing too many new categories, as those of  frequency, order, duration and speed will do for our limited purposes. Accordingly, reading time could be conceptualized to be either unlimited or limited in all these cat-egories, as in principle reading constitutes an event like any other. These limita-tions could be applied both locally and globally. Hegirascope , for example, limits 
only the duration of  its reading on the local level of  its nodes. There are count-less other alternatives. Imagine your favorite classic that could be read only once or only for two hours, or in night time or outside ofﬁ  ce hours only, or of  which 
you are allowed to read only two chapters in a decade or in a lifetime, tempting you to collaborate with other readers or leave it and your vague memories of  it as an inheritance to the next generation of  readers. 
If  the text disappears gradually and not at once, we will have to be prepared 
to attach different temporal values to each of  its dynamic parts. In principle, the text is permanent, partially permanent or ephemeral. And if  the text or some parts of  it are of  the vanishing kind then we could study this process in the aforementioned temporal registers. As I think it is trivially easy to invent or 
182Markku Eskelinen  |  Six Problems in Search of a Solution
discover useful examples, I won’t bother you with them now. To sum up these 
extra dimensions, suf ﬁ ce it to say that if  we combine the possible limitations 
regarding levels (global and local) and the four temporal registers (order, speed, frequency and duration) we’ll have at our disposal a system of  256 basic ways of  constraining reading time only one of  which, the one containing no restrictions whatsoever, is compatible with classic narratology ( ﬁ g. 1). 
 
Level            Local                    Global                                                    unlimited        limited           unlimited                 limited     Frequency           Reagan       Reagan Library                                Agrippa                       
            Library
4 
(How many times the work can be visited?)                                    Duration        Hegirascope    Agrippa                          (For how long the work can be visited?)                                         Speed        The  Impermanence  Agent                     
(Possible limitations of  the reading speed such as mandatory pauses)                  Order
5               Hypertext ﬁ ction 
(Freedom of  movement within a part and between parts)                                                                                  
Fig. 1. Reading time.
All these limitations complicating reading and rereading may seem to run counter to our cultural conventions and therefore to be an exercise in futility. Still, if  one of  the main attractions of  narratives is the challenge to construct and reconstruct a set of  temporal relations on one level from various explicit and implicit cues and hints embedded in another temporal level, then it may not be totally out of  the question to add more temporal levels to that challenge. Reading time and system time can be used equally well in non-narrative texts and for non-narrative purposes, which means they are not narrative categories in themselves.        
Mood, Genette’s second group, with its categories of  distance and focal-
ization, deals with various techniques of  regulating the quantity and quality of  narrative information. The effects of  this regulation constitute another standard attraction of  narratives, as it challenges the reader to work his way through these limitations and hypothesize the bigger picture so to speak. Focalization is not about who narrates, but who perceives or where the perceptual focus of  the nar-rative is situated. In other words, it is a delivery channel for narrative information, and its functioning as a narrative device is ultimately based on uneven distribution of  knowledge. It seems that many kinds of  bots, non-playing characters, avatars and voices have already expanded the notion of  the channel and its behavioral Level Local Global  
unlimited limited unlimited limited
Frequency
(How many times the work can be 
visited?)Reagan Library4Reagan LibraryAgrippa
Duration
(For how long the work can be vis-ited?)Hegi-rascopeAgrippa
Speed
(Possible limitations of  the reading speed such as mandatory pauses)The  Im-permanence  Agent
Order5
(Freedom of  movement within a part and between parts)Hyper-textﬁ ction
183Markku Eskelinen  |  Six Problems in Search of a Solution
variety, as we can sometimes discuss with these entities, or even operate them to 
a certain degree, which is all very different from what we can do with characters and focalizations in print literature. Confusingly, the current careless and indis-criminate use of  the word character doesn’t tell us whether characters are used as delivery channels for narrative purposes or as strategic tokens for interaction ( ﬁ g. 
2 for basic distinctions). 
Control          Existents not controlled                    Existents controlled
                      by the player/reader/viewer             by the player/reader/viewer
                                                                   
Communication  Subject (2-way)    Object (1-way)       Subject      Object                               Behavior 
Static               Characters in literature 
                  
                                and ﬁ lm
Dynamic            
Fig. 2. Existents and characters.6
It is also clear that the amount of  possible additional ﬁ lters will know no limit 
once we move from random to controlled access. All these shifts point to new 
textual communication structures and it is a mystery to me why they should be reduced to or labeled as narratives (cf. also Aarseth,  Cybertext, ch.5). Therefore, 
and before getting into the heart of  our ﬁ rst challenge, we’ll try yet another strat-
egy to expand narratology with the help of  cybertext theory.  
Because in cybertexts narrators and characters and other traditional narrative 
elements and devices we are familiar with are just potentially alterable strings of  signs, we should make a fundamental distinction between textonic and scriptonic entities. On a slightly more practical level this means that there might be a pool or an archive of  possible narrators, and every time the (cyber)text reorganizes itself  a certain number of  these narrators are ﬁ  rst selected and then distributed to their 
temporary positions inside the narrative text that is presented to the reader. It’s easy to imagine possible operations of  these dynamic ﬁ ctive entities: They can 
turn more covert or overt, trade places with each other, split up or unite, extend or reduce their territories, move between narrative levels and homodiegetic, het-erodiegetic, and mere character positions, alter the degrees of  their intrusiveness, self-consciousness, reliability and distance, and so on ( ﬁ g. 3). Control   Existents not controlled by the
player/reader/viewerExistents controlled by the 
player/reader/viewer
Communication Subject 
(2-way)Object 
(1-way)Subject
 Object
Static 
behaviorCharacters in
literature and 
ﬁ lm
Dynamicbehavior
184Markku Eskelinen  |  Six Problems in Search of a Solution
Object/                    Narrator                   Character                   Narratee
Level/          textonic/scriptonic     textonic/scriptonic       textonic/scriptonic
Operation:
Addition:Substitution:Subtraction:Multiplication:Division:Increased presence:Decreased presence:Increased territory:Decreased territory etc. (changes in intrusiveness, self-consciousness, reliability and distance)
Fig. 3. Rotation scheme for narrative entities.
The same idea could be applied to more abstract narrative devices as well. If  we choose to do it to narrative levels, in some ﬁ ctional world the story of  Shahrazad 
may very well turn out to be framed by the story of  Sindbad the Sailor. In addi-tion to the traditional options of  either hierarchic (A embeds B) or heterarchic (A embeds B and B embeds A) arrangement of  narrative levels, there are two novelties ( ﬁ g. 4): dynamic relations between narrative levels based on how the 
text is being read, and rotating levels (let’s say only ﬁ ve out of  seven narrative 
levels are available during any one reading session).  
Number of  narrative levels in the text: n 
Number of narrative levels available for the reader during any one reading: n / <n Mutual relations of  available narrative levels: static/dynamic
Type of  framing: hierarchic/ heterarchic 
Fig. 4. Narrative levels and metalevels. 
It might be helpful to make at least one more distinction: the one between three different sides or dimensions of  narrators, that is, their position or positioning, their identities, and their qualities or characteristics. In print ﬁ ction these three 
dimensions are glued together but in cybertext ﬁ ction that no longer needs to Object
LevelNarrator
textonic/scriptonicCharacter
textonic/scriptonicNarratee
textonic/scriptonic
Operation:
Addition:Substitution:Subtraction:Multiplication:Division:Decreased presence:Increased territory:Decreased territory:etc. (changes in intrusiveness, self-consciousness, reliability and distance)Object
LevelNarrator Character Narratee
textonic/scriptonic textonic/scriptonic textonic/scriptonic
Addition
SubstitutionSubtractionMultiplicationDivisionIncreased presenceDecreased presenceIncreased territoryDecreased territoryetc. (changes in in-
trusiveness, self-con-sciousness, reliability and distance)
185Markku Eskelinen  |  Six Problems in Search of a Solution
be the case. We can separate them, not without consequences of  course. Once 
again, on a more practical level, this may lead to narrators exchanging pasts, or competing with each other for the key positions (in terms of  time, space and credibility) inside cybertext ﬁ ction, and also, as a result of  these transformations 
or for other reasons, changing the number and identity of  possible narrators in the following phase or version of  the narrative on the run. Working out the ways to rewrite narratology with these possibilities of  playing with yet another attrac-tion of  narratives, the promised discovery of  narrators’ relations to and posi-tions in the narrative text, will de ﬁ nitely offer lots of  fun, but as I have already 
done it elsewhere (cf. Kybertekstien narratologia) I will not dwell on that here.
Whichever way we choose, adding strange new behaviors to easily recogniz-
able narrative devices or new categories barely justi ﬁ ed by loosely de ﬁ ned attrac-
tions, we’ll end up in trouble sooner or later. Firstly, every well-established and sophisticated narratological theory, regardless of  whether it puts its emphasis on communicative (Chatman, Genette, Prince) or cognitive models (Bordwell, Bra-nigan, Sternberg), is ultimately a theory of  interpretative reconstruction based on the narrative text that is presented to its readers or viewers. In other words, reading a narrative is a construction process where based on what’s presented to us we are supposed to ﬁ gure out what really happened and what the relations 
between events and existents were. It seems to me there’s no justi ﬁ cation to 
expand the de ﬁ nitions of  narrative beyond this economy of  presentation and 
interpretation. Secondly, many of  these new and hypothetical narrative devices and techniques will exceed the cognitive capabilities of  the readers and in some cases humanly possible attention spans as well. Thirdly, there are no broad cul-tural agreements, shared conventions or readymade expectations to help read-ers in their encounters with these would-be-narrative oddities, such as rotating narrators and characters and playing with time and temporal change in four registers instead of  the standard two. 
Consequently, our second problem or challenge has to do with conventions, 
but before getting there let me conclude with four possible solutions to our ﬁ rst 
challenge of  how to expand narratology to meet the multiple media positions offered by cybertext theory:  
1. Not to do it at all beyond its one media position, and believe it is too in-
timately tied to it, just like ﬁ lm narratology is tied to its one position, the 
difference between these two well-established narratologies residing in the 
transient time and temporally controlled access of  the ﬁ lm medium. 
2. Try to expand it to accommodate all the 144 non-ergodic positions and 
ﬁ nd out there’s a lack of  conventions for producing and consuming such 
artifacts even if  the role of  the reader as an interpreter has not changed.
186Markku Eskelinen  |  Six Problems in Search of a Solution
3. Try to expand it to accommodate the 432 ergodic positions as well if  certa-
in other conditions are met, most importantly that the ergodic mode will be 
in the service of  the narrative mode.
4. Try to expand it to absolutely anything the way the pan-narrativists do in the 
context of  games. While you can take your chances and try to ﬁ ll the blank 
spots in the charts, my choice is to focus next on conventions, the supposed lack of  which will form the second challenge. 
3.  Y ou Can’t Always Get What Y ou Want
As we move from narratological problems to those of  reception, we need to clarify something, and in order to do this we have to adapt a standard deconstruc-tive position for a moment or two. It could be shown that there always already exist both thematic and formal over ﬂ ow capable of  overturning and shaking 
whatever structural constellations or thematic interpretations our reading tries to posit. In the context of  narratology, expanded or not, this means ﬁ rst of  all 
that we should acknowledge the endless interplay between narrative and other textual designs. There’s nothing extraordinary in this; we can take any decent half-experimental 20
th century ﬁ ction and show a recognizable narrative organization 
to exist side-by-side or intermingled with other, anti-, non-, or counter-narrative organizations. From this perspective also the ergodic and narrative modes could easily co-exist in the same cybertext and either serve or undermine each other, and it’s up to the reader-user to ﬁ gure out which is the case.   
The more or less hypothetical narrative devices we drafted earlier could eas-
ily be used to complicate and defamiliarize the text to every extreme, but that’s not the only and probably not the best use of  these relative novelties. While it is true that these techniques set new demands and challenges for the reader, it is also true that just like in an ordinary work of  print ﬁ ction they must be motivated 
to the reader at least to a minimal degree. To reach that noble goal we can thema-tize, conventionalize or trivialize the functioning of  the cybertext or try to make its ergodic side more playable.  
Probably the easiest way to do it is to ground the behavior of  the textual 
machinery in themes. If  the protagonist is under a lot of  stress and has to make more or less dif ﬁ cult and fatal decisions in a hurry then why not boost this theme 
by extending it to the reader’s experience as well by setting limits for the time the text stays available without changing itself. Likewise, the text that changes itself  could be described as hiding or destroying the evidence it contains making it therefore very likely to suit the well-known formats and clichés of  thrillers and detective stories. If  the text, or more likely certain key parts of  it, is materially dif-
187Markku Eskelinen  |  Six Problems in Search of a Solution
ferent in every rereading, it would be very easy to connect this quality to themes 
of  memory and remembrance, as well as to countless others, from Alzheimer’s disease and traumatic experiences to resistances and defenses in psychoanalytic sessions. 
We could say that the three classic hypertexts, Michael Joyce’s Afternoon, Stu-
art Moulthrop’s Victory Garden , and Shelley Jackson’s Patchwork Girl  all did what 
they could to make the reader more receptive to the marvels of  their labyrinths: by using hidden and conditional links to highlight and parallel the defenses and self-denials of  the protagonist in Afternoon , his general unwillingness to know, 
evoking and concretizing the familiar literary tradition of  forking paths of  Borg-es, Coover and Pynchon in Victory Garden; and foregrounding Frankensteinian 
bodily metaphors to ease the postmodernist butchery work of  connecting parts and wholes in Patchwork Girl.  
Secondly, we could banalize. It is important to bear in mind that every cy-
bertextual media position seems to have its trivial counterpart in everyday life. Textonic dynamics can be found in discontinuous textual ﬂ ows in blogs and 
online discussions, and variable responses characteristic of  intratextonic dynam-ics can be found in our everyday experiences with so-called intelligent machines. Humans are not (always) predictable; hence, indeterminability is at the core of  our social life. Film subtitles are transient; even the simplest board games make you assume strategic responsibility for something, footnotes and encyclopedias fork the text and turn it to a system of  fragments and connections, passwords control your access, etc. These familiar experiences offer countless possibilities for taming the cybertextual machinery.  
The third way to make the functioning of  a cybertext familiar or at least 
more familiar to its user is to borrow conventions, but not necessarily from lit-erature or even art in general. In Cybertext  Aarseth devotes separate chapters to 
four different specimen of  ergodic literature: hypertext ﬁ ction, story generators, 
textual adventure games, and MUDs. The latter two use ordinary game and quest elements along with common communication structures like dialogue and poly-logue to make it easier and more meaningful for the reader-user to deal with the textual constructs and constellations she encounters. Story generators will prob-ably remain fundable because of  their tight connections to AI research, and need neither familiarizing nor defamiliarizing touches. 
This leaves us with hypertext ﬁ ction and its somewhat twilightish status as a 
relatively recent branch in the networked traditions of  experimental literature. To condense what was said earlier about classic hypertext ﬁ ction, we could wonder 
whether it was quite enough after all to borrow the convention of  the jigsaw puzzle and force or challenge the reader to complete it. A puzzle is a puzzle is a puzzle, a monologic experience if  any. 
188Markku Eskelinen  |  Six Problems in Search of a Solution
Cybertext theory has already shown experimentalists a fresh way out in the form 
of  new targets, those shared strongholds of  both print and hypertext ﬁ ction: 
static scriptons and intransient time. Still, cognitively speaking I can’t be optimis-tic: If  the simple hypertextual distortions of  the presentation order were able to generate such a commotion and conceptual mess, it is unlikely that the much more dynamic distortions will be recognized, understood and conventionalized in any time soon.    
Conventions don’t appear or disappear overnight or in a decade. The big 
question then is whether to wait for their emergence without knowing if  they’ll ever arrive or to apply the already well-known conventions, not from literature, but from elsewhere: especially from games and computer games. The justi ﬁ ca-
tion would be that the minute there’s a recognizable cultural divide between in-terpretative and operational sides of  literature, the latter will be measured against the already existing and well-formed activities and operational practices and if  no matches are found then the case is what it still is today: the bits and pieces of  ergodic literature without explicit play- or game-like attractions are viewed as elitist and experimental oddities (which is ﬁ ne by me). This last possibility refers 
to concrete relations and borrowings between sign-producing machines, which is a fairly decent way to introduce our third challenge: What happens when transtextual relations cease to be merely interpretative?
4.  Transtextuality Meets Cybertextuality
Before taking a quick tour through Genette’s ﬁ ve forms of  transtextuality ( Pa-
limpsests  1-8), it should be clear that from the cybertextual perspective there’s a 
basic distinction to be made between interpretative and ergodic relations between texts. The latter are concrete and programmable; the former are those of  tradi-tional print transtextuality, expanded or not by the variety of  new possibilities opened up by the digital media. The material basis of  interpretative relations be-tween texts can be (at least potentially) altered in ergodically dynamic cybertexts (by adding, removing or otherwise manipulating scriptons) in contrast to print texts and ergodically static hypertexts. Within the latter group there’s a crucial difference between web and stand-alone hypertexts. In the former environment some links and transclusions could be said to function as explorative forms of  transtextual relations (that is, we can concretely and seamlessly move from one text to another). Similarly, nothing, except maybe deep-seated conventions, pre-vents authors from designing con ﬁ gurative and textonic relations between and 
among texts. This may sound familiar and it is intended to sound that way since it might be tempting to ﬁ nd an analogue between the ways scriptons are revealed 
189Markku Eskelinen  |  Six Problems in Search of a Solution
and generated from textons, and the ways these textons could be generated from 
other textons. However, the analogue is far from complete, and we shall postpone discussing it until much later. For now it may be useful to keep an open mind to the possibility that in addition to interpretative relations there also are explorative connections, con ﬁ gurative affects and textonic impacts between texts. 
In order to see the bigger picture of  changed relationships between and 
within texts we should free ourselves from the metaphysics of  links, that is, from the famous convergence or embodiment hypothesis. Obviously, links can be used to make explicit references and transclusions will work as direct quotations, if  for some obscure reason we wish merely to emphasize, foreground or boost the traditional notions of  intertextuality. However, it should be equally obvious that although links have been too often confused with intertextuality, there are both intertextual relations that cannot be shown by links, and various uses of  links that have nothing whatsoever to do with traditional intertextuality. Every traditional notion of  intertextuality is ultimately dependent on the unpredictably varying interpretative and transpositional skills of  the readers and this dimension can nei-ther be reduced to links nor fully expressed in them. On the other hand, already the links forming concrete connections (instead of  mere references) between online hypertexts are potentially very different from their distant print relatives, as unlike the latter they are not merely interpretative and they could also be timed, changed, conditioned, chained, concealed, randomized and layered for complex effects the tradition knows nothing about.
Architextuality. Genette means by architextuality “the entire set of  general 
or transcendental categories—types of  discourse, modes of  enunciation, liter-ary genres—from which emerges a singular text” ( Palimpsests  1). Here cybertext 
theory adds another dimension and taxonomy to the already muddled project of  Western poetics and aesthetics: the 576 textonomical genres or media positions describing the functional or behavioral side of  any literary work. At stake here is the whole necessary and unmanageable project of  Western poetics: a cluster of  modal, generic, formal and thematic categories, combinations and consid-erations. It is safe to say dynamically ergodic texts will have long-lasting uneasy relations with them. One needs only to imagine ﬁ ctions the genre or the mode 
of  which will change based on how the text is being read—let’s say the faster you read a detective story the faster it becomes a horror story to slow you down with gruesome details or that only the dialogue will remain to be reread while the rest of  the text once read, hopefully, stays in someone’s memory.   
Paratextuality.  Paratexts are heterogeneous elements that lie on the threshold 
of  the text and which help to direct and guide the reception of  a text by its read-ers (Genette, Paratexts). In digital cybertexts this dimension should be discussed 
in relation to various interface issues as well as to user’s manuals, help- ﬁ les, web 
190Markku Eskelinen  |  Six Problems in Search of a Solution
sites and etiquette given to users and readers to consult while approaching, inter-
preting and learning how to operate ergodic works. In some cases, the text may explicitly comment upon the way it has been read and offer genuine or mocking assistance, which nicely blurs the traditional difference between guiding para-texts and self-referential commentaries—yet another distinction inherited from the golden age when literary works didn’t react to their reading.  
Metatextuality is “the relationship most often labeled commentary” (Gen-
ette, Palimpsests
 4). In certain encounters with indeterminate cybertexts, com-
mentaries may turn out to be commentaries on one’s own singular experience of  ephemeral constellations of  signs never to be repeated again or to be seen by any other user. There are at least three types of  new challenges. Firstly, in addition to the usual interpretative skills the critic needs ergodic skills to use the textual system in an appropriate way. Secondly, the continuous and potentially never-ending variation and supplementation may well exceed any humanly pos-sible attention span. Thirdly, an ergodic work may be very sensitive to how it is used and this may result in unique textual responses to the critic’s efforts. I can almost hear the boring me-my-mine rhetoric this may well lead to, so it’s better to move on to the next transtextual relation.
Intertextuality. According to Genette’s rather restricted de ﬁ nition intertextu-
ality is “a relationship of  co-presence between two texts or among several texts” (Palimpsests
 1). This includes the practices of  quotation, allusion and plagiarism. 
In principle, it is just a matter of  recognition. But in these days just because you read it doesn’t mean it is there and vice versa. The invisible, hidden, and inacces-sible parts of  the text will deny the reader the comfort of  knowing for certain what exactly is there in the text. To make matters more complicated it’s not only the dialectic between visible and invisible parts of  the text that counts, but also the relations between what’s visible now and what, if  anything, will be visible later. Also the threshold between what’s inside and what’s outside the text is get-ting blurrier, as it’s so easy to supplement and replace the original text from the outside (as certain famous software agents have already shown). In some ways, all this may lead to the decreasing importance of  intertextuality in dynamically ergodic works, or at least to more drastic ways of  foregrounding intertextuality. In any case we’d be better prepared to understand the widely varying degrees of  co-presence at work. 
We could perhaps take one step further in order to follow the concept of  
co-presence to its logical end, and add yet another category of  relations, the one between textual wholes (or entities) potentially capable of  annihilating and incorporating other textual wholes, or arresting and releasing them, in short making other texts (and parts of  other texts) appear, disappear, and reappear. In other words, I suggest we distinguish between independent, dependent, domi-
191Markku Eskelinen  |  Six Problems in Search of a Solution
nant and co-dependent works of  art. This may very well be the end of  intertex-
tuality as we know it, but I feel ﬁ ne. 
Hypertextuality in the Genettean sense deals with systematic grafting of  a text 
(a hypertext) upon an earlier text (a hypotext) in a way that is not commentary (Palimpsests  5). These imitations and transformations are formal and thematic, 
and it is safe to say that cybertexts add a third option, the functional one, as well as transform the previous two. There are at least three separate aspects to that situation. Firstly, there’s a new possibility of  gradual and serial transformation where the text goes through several different phases and quite possibly loses contact with its ﬁ rst or previous hypotext in the process; just imagine some 
banal desert island story that ﬁ rst models itself  after Ibn Tufayl and then after 
Grimmelshausen, Saikaku, Defoe, Tournier, and Eco. To get to know the serial-ized nature of  these hypotexts you just have to keep on rereading. Secondly, this transformation may be purely functional; let’s say we ﬁ rst turn a detective story 
into a hypertext and boost its epistemological structures with conditional links, hiding the evidence so to speak, and then turn this ergodically static hypertext into an ergodically dynamic cybertext that after a certain time starts playing with both its own and its users’ time and begins to destroy its static scriptons, that is, its very evidence. 
Virtually every text generator can show us the transformation of  textons 
into changing scripton combinations in a way that is challenging enough to ev-ery traditional notion of  inter- and hypertextuality. The words waste and land may or may not be combined to constitute a reference to Eliot. You’ll never know until it happens, and when it does you might not be there to witness this intratextonic nihilogue. Another case that comes to mind is the emergent growth of  textual systems. Let’s say there are two such systems connected to each other over the net continuously affecting the organization and reorganiza-tion processes of  each other. The host and the parasite, the hypotext and the hypertext reprogrammed n times, until the one completely consumes or deadly inﬂ icts the other. Scholars are very welcome to attach their favorite meanings to 
every morph, or forced to change their approach as there’s no way to slow down the rotational speed (rpm) of  the hermeneutic circle under such circumstances.
Users are an obvious source for altering inter- and hypertextual relations, 
but what happens or should happen when a Shakespeare snob meets a Shake-speare bot in some programmable textual environment? Is there any reason we should trace the connections whatever they are, or should we ﬁ nally let the 
sleeping traditions lay and concentrate on more interesting issues if  there are any? When users bring their transtextual ﬁ elds and priorities into conversation 
and consumption, they may have a carefully calculated chance to convert the process to certain inter- or hypertextual directions (as in John Cayley’s Book Un-
192Markku Eskelinen  |  Six Problems in Search of a Solution
bound ). There’s also room for an interesting inversion: The cybertextual machine 
may turn critical or even allergic to such civilizing processes and may begin to 
defend its own priorities against the invading ﬂ ow of  the user’s cultural capital. 
Imagine a text that needs to be regularly fed by other texts from the outside: a textual tamagotchi, a vicious little cybertext using, say, Kafka as a catalyst to induce series of  transformations in its incorporated textual nourishments and their relations to each other thereby producing the next generation of  minor literature. 
To conclude, any notion of  digital transtextuality has to take into account 
at least three basic things or changes. Firstly, the relations between texts have ceased to be a mere matter of  interpretation; dynamically ergodic cybertexts may concretely affect each other’s form, content, behavior and very existence. Secondly, the relations of  such texts to themselves has to be taken into account, as they may now consist of  several more or less autonomous parts and phases imitating and transforming each other and having their own transtextual speci ﬁ -
cations in all ﬁ  ve dimensions. Let’s call this new opening a ﬁ eld of  dynamic au-
totextuality. Thirdly, the reader-users armed with con ﬁ gurative and textonic user 
functions can have fundamental impact on the text, a possibility not even on the horizon of  Genette’s work in the early 1980’s. To take one concrete example: How should we conceptualize the personalized differences in ergodic works like Book Unbound or The Impermanence Agent , as the different ways their readers use 
them will make the versions of  them very different from each other? 
After this brief  exercise in the ﬂ uidity of  textual relationships, we might 
want to stop for a while to ﬁ nd out whether we need the traditional notion of  
the textual whole any more, and if  not, how to get rid of  it and what to replace it with? Enter the fourth challenge, dynamic intratextual relations. 
5.  The Whole and Nothing but the Whole
I will be following Brian Eno’s maxim about going ﬁ  rst into an extreme position 
in order to be able to shift into a more useful position. So let’s take the seven cy-bertextual dimensions as far as possible from the behavior of  the print works of  our shared cultural heritage. This may sound like an exercise in futility, and maybe it is if  futility is just another name for our unrecognized presuppositions. So: Imagine a textual process continuously supplementing itself  by outside sources, unpredictably varying its response to the activities of  the reader which it also constraints temporally and by denying complete and random access to its parts and phases, using conditional linking and demanding not only explorative but also conﬁ  gurative and textonic activity from the reader in order to overcome the 
193Markku Eskelinen  |  Six Problems in Search of a Solution
obstacles she’s bound to through her personal perspective on the consequences 
of  her very own strategic choices. 
After this condensed glimpse at the almost non-existent extremities we could 
perhaps ﬁ nally ask what will happen when there simply are no more expectations 
left to be manipulated or crashed. The seven parameters of  cybertext theory will serve to illustrate the ways the textual whole may vanish or disappear from the reader’s grasp if  not from his aspirations or work ethics. 
Before going into that it is important to remember that this assumed literary 
whole or totality can be described at least in interplaying perceptual, behavioral, structural (or intratextual), cultural (or transtextual), temporal, spatial, causal, and functional terms. Needless to say it is not reducible to any of  these dimensions. 
Dynamics. Our traditional concept of  the textual whole is tied to the unchang-
ing amount and material content of  signi ﬁ ers, and it is not well suited to deal with 
potentially endless variation or supplementation. There are two rather effective ways to naturalize variation: dialogue structure as in Joseph Weizenbaum’s Eliza , 
a granddad of  many if  not all subsequent bots and artiﬁ  cial characters, and ana-
morphic game or puzzle schemes where the variation is crafted as a challenge which promises a solution thus putting an end to variation (at least until next time if  there’ll ever be one). This is common to textual adventure games and interac-tive ﬁ ction in general. In these cases variation is tied to its rather immediate use 
value and it is not given the high status as literary expression to be contemplated; in other words the user is given a prior permission to actively ignore and dismiss certain variations. 
With textonic dynamics the challenges to traditional notions of  the whole 
get even more complicated. In principle, the source of  supplements, changes and additions can be either the user himself, other users, or the text can supplement itself  from the outside as in The Impermanence Agent  or John Cayley’s idea of  us-
ing a Reuter’s news-feed as a real-time material for one of  his Speaking Clocks . All 
these open up a potential for never-ending metamorphoses that don’t have to be balanced by personalization, social interaction or conceptual clarity, although these three are the best candidates for achieving that goal.  
Determinability. Indeterminability is usually associated with randomness or 
chance, but that’s only one side to it, and perhaps not the most interesting one. In Aarseth’s model it is about the stability of  the traversal function. In practical terms indeterminability means that if  I react or act the same way in the same situation the system doesn’t respond the way it did the last time. The crucial ques-tion is then how do I know it is the same situation after all; is it even possible to be in the same situation twice? Here too, the traditional wisdom related to the textual whole doesn’t get us very far, as it is bound to the notions of  repeatability (controlled by the user). 
194Markku Eskelinen  |  Six Problems in Search of a Solution
Transience.  Transient texts don’t allow the reader to control the time of 
their reading. Texts are available for limited periods of time, sometimes only 
once as was the case with William Gibson’s Agrippa , or more precisely with its 
unhacked copies. Here we are dealing with cycles of appearances, disappear-ances and potential reappearances in the context where the text, and not the reader, controls the pace. We are asked to prioritize our ﬂ eeting perceptions 
and to decide what to read and see when it is impossible to read and see it all. According to Janez Strehovec (“The Moving Word” 104), in the context of digital web poetry this easily leads to foregrounding kinetic and visual affects, effects and constellations at the expense of the usual syntactic and semantic complexities. 
Access.  If we don’t have random and complete access to every part of the 
text, our potential mastery is once again denied by constraining our traditional right to traverse and to skip the text any way we please. Controlled access con-tains the very real possibility that some parts of the text will remain hidden and out of reach despite the best efforts of the reader.
Links  have the potential to undermine the relation between parts and 
wholes allowing different degrees of local and global wholeness, but that po-tential should not be overestimated, as the average hypertext ﬁ ction shares 
many stabilizing qualities with its print predecessors (from static dynamics and determinability to intransient time and impersonal perspective). 
Personal perspective  forces the reader to assume strategic responsibility and 
then face the consequences of her actions. This is a very game-like feature, but it is also possible that the required strategic choices have to be made in the absence of explicit rules, goals and manipulative procedures.
Finally, the user functions.  While I save studying their mutual relations until 
a little later, it is safe to say that whereas the explorative user function brings in the rhetoric of choice, navigation and labyrinth, the con ﬁ gurative and textonic 
user functions give us the chance and necessity to affect the text and therefore to use or conceive it as a playground, an obstacle, or more or less malleable raw material to build upon. These latter two user functions clearly foreground the user’s own extranoematic activity without which there would be no experience of wholeness whatsoever. 
All these shifts away from the  traditional media position (static, determi-
nate, intransient, impersonal perspective, random access, no links and inter-pretative user function) seem to suggest a certain reversal and exhaustion in the reader’s role. The “new” cybertextual media positions may constrain and limit the reader’s freedom of movement and his control over reading time, undermine and even deny such traditional luxuries of reading as guaranteed repeatability, possibility to re-read, complete access and strategic passivity, and 
195Markku Eskelinen  |  Six Problems in Search of a Solution
open up the ﬁ  nality of the literary work to potentially endless metamorphic 
processes,7 setting new demands for the reader’s attention span8 while requir-
ing much more than interpretative involvement from her. As the text sets 
conditions for its reading, it doesn’t make much sense to keep clinging on to traditional values and habits of reading for much longer.
Traditionally, the work of art or literature can exhaust even the best at-
tempts of its reader by using extensive duration or variation. Computers can be of great help in this, but they are not necessary in creating such effects as Queneau’s 100,000 billion poems  have already shown. To counter this we could 
say that Queneau’s work is easily exhaustible, because all its textons are readily available and the sonnet form is already automated to boredom and beyond. In any case, these examples have been rather marginal and have left no traces on ordinary horizons of expectations, which still take it for granted that a work is (and should be) materially exhaustible. 
In hypertext theory, Jim Rosenberg did propose a concept of session as a 
new unit of reception (and attention) to account for the dif ﬁ culties in travers-
ing the text and variations in the reading order the hypertext reader is or was supposed to struggle with. Despite that common sense effort, the paradigm of reading it all still reigns, probably because at least the well-informed readers know that it is possible to read every single unchanging lexia of Afternoon , Vic-
tory Garden  and Patchwork Girl . The case is a bit different in the later works of 
Stuart Moulthrop, especially in Reagan Library  and Pax . The paratextual intro 
to the latter even tries to convince the reader-user of the impossibility of read-ing and experiencing it all (Moulthrop, “About Pax”). More than two decades before Rosenberg Roland Barthes drafted four pleasurable ways of how the readers combine their reading neurosis with the hallucinated form of the text. Let me quote: 
The fetishist would be matched with the divided-up text, the singling out of quotations, formulae, turns of phrase, with the pleasure of the word. The obsessive would experience the voluptuous release of the letter, of secondary, disconnected languages; of metalanguages. . . .A paranoiac would consume or produce complicated texts, stories de-veloped like arguments, constructions posited like games, like secret constraints. As for the hysteric . . . he would be the one who takes the text for ready money, who joins in the bottomless, truthless comedy of language, who is no longer the subject of any critical scrutiny and throws himself across the text (which is quite different from project-ing himself into it). ( The Pleasure of the Text
 63) 
196Markku Eskelinen  |  Six Problems in Search of a Solution
In short, if  you read for your pleasure, you don’t have to read it all. 
To sum up: It is trivially easy to use cybertextual machinery to undermine 
traditional notions of  the textual whole. We simply can’t read it all in Book Un-
bound  or The Speaking Clock , and our own activity is always already there in the 
beginning to replace and contaminate the original text in The Impermanence Agent.  
Still, these three works are far from chaotic or strenuously dif ﬁ cult; in Book Un-
bound  the process and chance of  inevitable personalization gives a ﬁ rm enough 
teleology to the work’s potentially endless mutability, and if  we adjust our at-
tention spans and kick our reception habits we can now and then take a relaxed look at the workings of  the Agent and the Clock. 
Even if  the textual whole might have vanished or be under erasure, the ex-
pectations may remain the same. Cybertexts are machines for producing variety of  expression, and at the moment we can discern at least four degrees in the deep-rooted humanistic fear of  variety: 
You can read for the plot and look for exaggerated rather than moderate or 
minimal forms of  coherence and closure. The typical result is hypertext whin-ing, the contradictory and hype-ridden practice where critics keep disappointing themselves by projecting their mainstream expectations onto works that con-tinue the long and winding tradition of  experimental literature. 
Secondly, you can read for pleasure and stay happy within your very own 
hallucinated form. It’s more than likely that Barthes’ ideas about the reading neurosis could be extended to psychoses, borderline cases, and perversions, and not only in literature, but in games as well. 
Thirdly, one can read for metareading as the connoisseurs of  experimental 
literature do and cherish intertwining epistemological, ontological and ergodic challenges to the doxa of  the day or the literature as we used to know it. Some-times it may even be advisable to read literature the way the OuLiPo used to write it—as combinations of  objects and operations.  
And fourthly, one might consider balancing reading with playing. There’s a 
long and binding aesthetic and trans-aesthetic convention that you are not sup-posed to exhaust the potentials of  an instrument of  any kind. Or if  you do, it is not much of  an instrument—or much of  a game either. 
Generally speaking, it would be good to give up the idea that interpretative 
user function will and should always be on top, and the most important one. When the textual whole has gone, interpretative mastery should follow its ma-ster as well, especially when we are entering our ﬁ nal challenge that situates itself  
ﬁ rmly on the no-man’s land between the last two stages in the following chart:
197Markku Eskelinen  |  Six Problems in Search of a Solution
           User function(s)                                                 Aesthetic realm 
             Interpretative                                                 Linear literature Interpretative served by other     Mainstream ergodic literature          user functions              
Interpretative undermined by other     Experimental ergodic literature
 user functions     
Interpretative serving other functions   Play, games, toys, instruments     
Fig. 5. User functions and corresponding aesthetic realms.
It’s time to move on to our two ﬁ nal challenges, which are implicitly tied to 
two almost mutually exclusive attitudes and approaches to play, games and 
literature(s).
6.  Against the Fear of Variety
When the safe and somehow manageable totality, be it coherent or not, vanishes from sight, the spectators and readers have to try different strategies of  com-prehension, which may seem complicated if  and when the users do not know the limits and the functional principles of  whatever they are encountering in the disguise of  an artwork. There’s no guarantee that the work works as it seems to work, or continues to work as it has worked so far, not to mention that it would work as its manual or other paratext claims it works. 
From this perspective computer games are interesting, as they domesticate 
the excess looming large in both ordinary and avant-garde products and pro-cesses, and the fundamental potential for change and unreliability inherent in new media objects. It would be tempting to generalize and argue that for as long as we have systems where there are either one material level or several material levels with trivial mutual relations, narrative is the most powerful (and certainly the most popular) arrangement that can be used in them—but whenever the rela-tion of  levels turns out to be arbitrary the concepts of  gaming and simulation will be more and more attractive and popular. Despite the fact that computers can support, emulate and modify whatever aesthetic tradition and convention there is, the most satisfying way of  pacifying consumers facing potential insecurity and lack of  motivation caused by endless variation will be computer games. They User function(s) Aesthetic realm
 Interpretative Linear literature
Interpretative served by other
user functionsMainstream ergodic literature
Interpretative undermined by other
user functionsExperimental ergodic literature
Interpretative serving 
other functionsPlay, games, toys, instruments
198Markku Eskelinen  |  Six Problems in Search of a Solution
promise fun and pleasure in exchange for following and applying the rules in 
order to reach the (given, chosen or created) goal. 
A few words about ludology might be in order before I take my favorite pick 
of  the challenges it provides. The very idea of  ludology is to study games and especially computer games as games, and not as a derivative of  something else like narratives, drama or ﬁ lm or their interactive and/or remediated offshoots. 
In short, games should be studied as their own transmedial discursive mode. It is important to understand what this doesn’t mean. It does not mean there can’t be hybrids, as no-one in his right mind working with computers, these famous universal machines, could deny the possibility of  hybrids. It sounds trivial, but it isn’t. 
In a poorly de ﬁ ned opposition to ludologists there have been three major 
camps of  narrativists: ﬁ rstly, those who do not even de ﬁ ne the contested con-
cepts they try to compare (stories, narratives, games); secondly, pan-narrativists who try to stretch their de ﬁ nitions of  stories and narratives to the extreme where 
everything we cognitively construct from whatever is presented to us will result in a story; and thirdly those who care to de ﬁ ne their concepts, but focus on just 
hoping and predicting that some day, maybe, a useful de ﬁ nition will arrive to 
combine games and stories, but don’t seem to have the brains to do the concep-tual work themselves. No wonder the ludologists won that debate, the particular-ities of  which don’t need to concern us here, as we are talking about our six more or less literary challenges. 
It would be trivially easy to point out the differences between games and 
narratives: the former an economy of  means and ends with rules, goals and ne-cessary manipulation of  an equipment; the latter an economy of  presentation and interpretation with story and discourse. Of  course one could still try to re-write narratologies to extend to the realm of  games, but as we speak, such theo-ries have not emerged and the burden of  proof  lies with those who continue to make narrativist claims. It’d be much easier to do the opposite and rede ﬁ ne 
narratives as games of  interpretation if  one really wants to have a uni ﬁ ed ﬁ eld, 
where literary knowledge will still be of  some use. 
However, our real issue is elsewhere. If  we wish to build hybrids called in-
strumental texts or textual instruments,
9 we need to get rid of  silly and worn-out 
prescriptive ideas of  how to do it, one variation of  which can be read from count-less futile proposals for civilizing games by adding narrative must-haves such asplot, themes, coherence or ﬁ ctional worlds. Here’s a schematic chart of  dominant 
features and differences between interpretative and con ﬁ gurative practices:
199Markku Eskelinen  |  Six Problems in Search of a Solution
              Interpretative practice                                   Conﬁ  gurative practice  
     Interpretation                      Action   
         Economy of  representation                      Economy of  means and ends      Conventions         Rules   Meaning guaranteed by minimal                          Variation paci ﬁ ed by rules 
                     coherence                                                    and goals       Reception          Play          Fiction                    Simulation          Work and text                                           Model and system   Spatiotemporal                                           Causal-functional 
Fig. 6. Basic differences between interpretative and con ﬁ gurative practices.
The above list is not meant to cause blindness and irritation in purist anti-binar-ists; the right hand side merely highlights game-related characteristics that are perhaps more important to take into account in the process of  building textual instruments than their traditional and thoroughly studied counterparts on the left. In short, I propose we focus on the expressive potential of  the former terms instead of  constraining playability by the latter. Before viewing this chal-lenge from the perspective of  game studies in the next section, I’ll try to ﬁ gure 
out what literary theories and traditions could offer.  
As we saw in the previous section, the “new” cybertextual media positions 
are typically used to diminish the reader’s autonomy over his reading time and habits. The idea of  building instrumental texts and textual instruments could be seen as a countermeasure giving the reader the chance to exercise his precious freedom in the form of  play. It is still too early to say whether this recent shift of  focus from the functioning of  the cybertext to the actions and activities of  its user-player is more than a minor trend caused by the accumulating pressure and attraction of  computer game studies. From the perspective of  David Rokeby’s decade-old insights it’s not very odd that also in literature navigable structures exist side by side with transforming mirrors and automatons.   
In any case an instrument is supposed to shape and frame the player’s action 
and to produce interesting variation. This is a challenge that goes far beyond the overly hyped problems of  non-linear presentation. As in any economy of  means and ends, it is important to ﬁ  nd suitable goals and patterns of  change and varia-
tion in the functional and causal framework. The questions of  how to use one’s resources and for what purpose haven’t been the bread and butter of  literary theorists except maybe in the author-centric context, most explicitly so in the Oulipian tables of  operations changing the order, length, number or nature of  linguistic objects from phonemes and letters to paragraphs and beyond.
10 Only Interpretative practice                                     
Interpretation
Economy of  representation                      
Conventions
Meaning guaranteed by minimal                          
coherence   
Reception
Fiction                  
Work and text                                       
Spatiotemporal    Conﬁ gurative practice                                    
Action
Economy of  means and ends                   
Rules
Variation paci ﬁ ed by rules 
and goals
Play
Simulation                  
Model and system                                      
Causal-functional 
200Markku Eskelinen  |  Six Problems in Search of a Solution
if  we remove a major implicit constraint from these schemes, the idea that these 
operations should be used by an author in order to produce a ﬁ  nal and ﬁ xed 
literary object, could we get something to play and build an instrument with.    
Literary tradition contains at least ﬁ ve easy dialectics that could be adapted 
as ﬂ exible frames for the necessary variation: the text as an object and a process, 
the work and the oeuvre, the text and the intertext, the reader’s and the text’s control over reading, and the maintenance and destruction of  the text. The task and the pleasure of  the reader-player-instrumentalist would be to maintain, break or (re)create the balance between these oppositional poles. 
The instruments could be tuned by theories that are precise enough; in 
addition to the Oulipian corpus there are many other almost ready-made can-didates ranging from Freud’s case history of  Schreber
11 to the particularities 
of  the traversal function in cybertext theory. All these theories are more useful or instrumental in building textual instruments than instrumental texts, as the former should in principle be able to handle any given text and not just the one particular text that comes with the system.   
Wardrip-Fruin’s attempt to build a 3-gram instrument (“From Instrumental 
Texts”) relies on syntagmatic substitution. It would be interesting to see it com-plemented by similar but somewhat fuzzier paradigmatic capabilities (maybe by using self-organizing maps). 
In many cases an instrument gives us information we couldn’t otherwise 
have. It’d be rather unproblematic to build instruments that detect constella-tions and statistical features that the readers can’t or won’t. The way people use instruments is also unpredictable to a certain degree. These emergent patterns could be boosted, paralleled or countered if  the text and its behavior were at least partly organized by a-life applications.  
The already existing multitude of  instruments is just waiting to be exploit-
ed, especially those cheap everyday ones already capable of  communicating with other smart objects. We are just one step away from the texts for the alcometer or other such devices detecting meaningful ﬂ uctuations in the physical condition 
of  the player (allowing the player to play also with herself).
7 .  Games and T extual Instruments
We could perhaps begin to see the rise of  concretely (and not metaphorically) playable literature if  we imagine works that shape their ergodic side by taking their cues from Aarseth’s recent game typology (Aarseth, Smedstad and Sun-nanå). This system has 15 dimensions resulting in more than 220,000 functional game genres, circumscribing yet another neglected area of  research. The reasons 
201Markku Eskelinen  |  Six Problems in Search of a Solution
for choosing this typology for closer inspection are rather self-evident: If  this 
model is any good it gives us an overview of  the most important features of  game structures and their basic variations. It is also clear that game structures affect and shape game-play. So, if  we were to follow John Cayley, Stuart Moult-hrop (“About Pax”) and Noah Wardrip-Fruin’s (“From Instrumental Texts”) recent suggestions and build literary instruments we could do a lot worse than see what Aarseth’s typology has to offer.
Let’s begin with the categories of  space: “The perspective of  the player can 
be either omnipresent allowing the player to examine the entire arena or ﬁ eld 
at will or vagrant where the perspective follows a main player-token or avatar” (Aarseth, Smedstad and Sunnanå 49). At ﬁ rst glance this is reminiscent of  the 
category of  access in cybertext typology. Still, this game category is more direct-ly connected to the user’s perception, and that allows us to imagine literary prac-tices playing with access and perspective, examples ranging from Eduardo Kac’s holopoetry where the user’s physical movement changes her perspective on the work as well as the work’s visible content to hypothetical hypertexts where the node starts to destroy itself  from the invisible end at the very second the reader begins to read it from the other end. As noted before the more fundamental question is whether it makes any sense to build instruments that could detect and analyze textual features, constellations and statistical frequencies humans ei-ther can’t or won’t—or could but only with great dif ﬁ culty (like chart the ﬁ eld of  
possible multilingual anagrams in Hexentexte  or Finnegans Wake ) and reorganize 
either themselves or the playtexts using this non-human information.     
The second category is topography: “A game’s topography can be either 
geometrical with continuous freedom of  movement, or topological, giving the player only discrete, non-overlapping positions to move between” (Aarseth, Smedstad and Sunnanå 49-50). In this respect classic hypertexts seem like badly designed board games allowing the reader to navigate between discrete reading positions (in contrast to such kinetic texts as David Knoebel’s Wheels ). This 
could be made more obvious and challenging by adding a chess-like interface to a 64-node hypertext and allowing the reader to traverse it from the positions of  different pieces and according to their possible moves. In a turn-based two-player mode, you could lose your piece if  your fellow reader’s piece enters the same node, making it harder or impossible to traverse the whole text. This game could be made more challenging if  the players didn’t see each others’ positions until it was too late and they overlapped with fatal consequences. In this arrange-ment the game and the literary text would be each other’s by-products. 
Thirdly, the game environment is either static remaining unchanged for the 
duration of  the game or dynamic letting itself  to be modi ﬁ ed by the player. Obvi-
ously, MUDs are often dynamic in that sense, but there are other environments, 
202Markku Eskelinen  |  Six Problems in Search of a Solution
including our physical surroundings, which we can now or soon tag and populate 
with miniature literary devices producing variety of  expression.  
Aarseth’s game typology contains three parameters of  time: pace, repre-
sentation, and teleology. The category of  pace divides games into real-time and turn-based ones, which is almost but not quite the same as the category of  tran-sience in cybertext theory. We already have boring turn-based collaborative writ-ing practices, but since we seek to build instruments they won’t do. Hegirascope  
comes close to being a real-time instrument, as its 30-second constraint feels like a challenge or an obstacle, which is the ﬁ rst step away from passive “timeless” 
hypertexts towards more complex real-time adversary structures.   
The representation of  time is either mimetic or arbitrary depending on 
whether the time of  the actions in the game mimics the time of  corresponding actions in the real world. It would be rather easy to build adaptations of  literary classics and instruments for playing them that use strictly mimetic reading time freezing the reader’s movement or progress. In a more competitive setting the reader-players could block each other’s ways and navigation options inside an online hypertext using mimetic time.    
The third temporal category relates to the ﬁ nal goal of  the game. The games 
with clearly de ﬁ ned successful outcomes for one or more players are teleological-
ly ﬁ nite, and those without such outcomes are teleologically in ﬁ nite, and could in 
principle go on endlessly. Book Unbound  is clearly inﬁ  nite while hypertext ﬁ ctions 
as we know them are all teleologically ﬁ nite, successful conventional outcome 
requiring that every node has been read at least once. More complicated goals could be crafted after Brian McHale’s studies of  postmodernism: The reader should maintain, restore or destroy the delicate balance between ontological and epistemological problems. 
The next provisional subcategory, player structure, reminds us once more 
about certain fundamental differences between literature and games. We are giv-en six options: single-player-, two-player-, multiplayer-, single-team-, two-team- and multiteam-games. It’s a combination of  adversary-structure (none, one or multiple) and team-structure (individual or team-based). In a quick comparison it is obvious that contemporary literature is single-reader, that is, the combination of  individual interpretative effort and no adversaries. Super ﬁ cial imitations would 
give rise to literary texts that could be read only as a team effort, and to readers interfering with each other’s reading positions and possibilities, obstructing them to the best they can. On the more positive side, these kinds of  practices would counterbalance the fuss about collaborative writing, which is such a banality. 
The category of  player structure contains also two categories currently best 
suited to mobile games, the question being whether the proximity of  the play-ers to each other and the physical location of  the players matter. Probably, these 
203Markku Eskelinen  |  Six Problems in Search of a Solution
possibilities will multiply with various WLAN technologies and cheap Bluetooth 
chips added to appliances of  every kind, shape and size. Literary ﬁ ctions tracking 
down your everyday routines, habits and movement and analyzing them in order to make the text more suitable to you and your blood pressure (or other prob-lems) would not be to everybody’s liking—if  in addition to the physical location also the physical condition of  the player-reader counts. Other obvious applica-tions would require you to be at an intimate distance with someone to access a love story or pornography connected to sexual sensors and paraphernalia.   
Aarseth’s next grouping of  fundamental game categories addresses control 
in terms of  mutability, saveability, and determinism. Mutability refers to reward-ing the player by strengthening her player-character or player position. In literary contexts such rewards might include gaining better access to or having more effect in the ﬁ ctive world, or acquiring more resources like agents to help you 
scout the as-yet-unread territories, perhaps their style or genre. One form of  saveability is already available and at work in Book Unbound,  where the user can 
save her favorite extracts from generated text before the next generation takes place. This type of  collected work saved by the reader is yet another solution that could be expanded to certain other contexts and practices as well (to chal-lenge copyright laws for one). Obviously, the way the text is used could be used to determine how much of  it could be saved until the next reading. The category of  determinism is about unpredictability and random functions that are always already there if  two or more humans play against (or with) each other. An in-strument with multiple degrees and criteria of  determinability would be ideal for games of  increasing and decreasing coherence or certain kinds of  preferred coherence; playing de Sade with Christian tunings or the Bible with libertine lardings
12 could be fun.  
Finally, there are rules and three simple meta-rule dimensions: the presence 
or absence of  topological, time-based or objective-based rules. As a concluding inversion to our topic, this meta-dimension could be further analyzed by run-ning Aarseth’s game typology through his cybertext typology, or vice versa. In any case, we’d have to make a fundamental distinction between textonic and scriptonic game structures, that is, game structures as they exist in the game and game structures as they appear to the players.
13 This distinction would open 
up the possibility of  meta-games where one plays both by the rules and about them, and where different teams play the same game by different rules without knowing it (at least for a while). Here, ﬁ nally, literary knowledge might have 
some value, as in the case we wish to build unfair and unequal games, we don’t need to go any further than 20
th century ﬁ ction for great ideas.     
204Markku Eskelinen  |  Six Problems in Search of a Solution
Notes
1. Here’s a crash course for those who are not familiar with the former: In 
cybertext theory the elementary idea is to see a text or a work of  art as a con-
crete (and not metaphorical) machine for the production and consumption of  signs, and consisting of  the medium, the operator and the strings of  signs. The latter are divided into textons  (strings of  signs as they are in the text) and 
scriptons (strings of  signs as they appear to readers/users). The mechanism by which scriptons are generated or revealed from textons is called a traversal function, which can be described as the combination of  seven variables (dynamics, determinability, transience, perspective, links, access, and user function), and their possible values. This combinatory approach gives us a heuristic map of  576 different media positions into which every text could be situated based on how its medium functions, but independently of  what that medium is. It is important to notice that the relation between textons and scriptons is arbitrary in digital media: That’s the “essence” of  its unique dual materiality—which stems from the separation of  the storage medium from the interface medium. Aarseth’s Cybertext (1997) focuses on ergodic 
literature, where the user has to do non-trivial work or effort to traverse the text, that is, ergodic literature requires more than interpretative activity from its user.  
2. I made a somewhat similar point in an earlier article (“Cybertext Theory”). 
In her response to it N. Katherine Hayles (“What Cybertext Theory Can’t Do”) manages to confuse the tasks of  theory with those of  criticism and chooses to ignore the fact that in C ybertext functional differences are 
deducted from material ones (cf. Aarseth,  Cybertext, ch.3). She also claims 
that “A third limitation of  cybertext theory, especially as interpreted by Eskelinen, is mistaking numerosity for analytical power. . . . Simply because cybertext theory predicts 576 different combinations, using Aarseth’s scheme for parsing the semiotic components of  cybertexts, does not mean that all 576 combinations will be equally interesting or worthwhile. Nor does this number alone indicate the value of  the theory, beyond setting up so many pigeonholes to be ﬁ lled” (“What Cybertext Theory Can’t Do”). Here she 
attacks only her own fabrications, as she turns a blind eye to every single example I give of  the theoretical power of  cybertext theory and its already empirically existing ingredients in the context of  modifying, transforming and expanding hypertext theory, narratology, and theories of  postmodernism and new media (etc.)—and not in the context of  analyzing an individual text or ﬁ  lling pigeonholes. Hayles’ blindness to theoretical matters (and 
consequences) is well in synch with the embarrassing theoretical blunders 
205Markku Eskelinen  |  Six Problems in Search of a Solution
she makes in her How We Became Posthuman . I discussed some of  them in 
my article, but for some reason Hayles didn’t defend her shortcomings in 
her response. In retrospect, the funniest part of  Hayles’ reply is her ﬁ rm 
belief  that she’s capable of  setting the record straight “about what cybertext theory cannot do, as well as what it can do.” If  that’s the professional appearance Hayles wants to keep up, then she should know a lot better than to confuse textons and scriptons with surface and depth (for further details cf. “Responses to ‘Narr@tive: Digital Storytelling 1/2’”).
3. At least they should be as Genette’s study is also a reading of  Marcel Proust’s 
Remembrance of  Things Past , and a lot has happened in narrative ﬁ ction since 
the 1920s.
4. Stuart Moulthrop’s Reagan Library  rewards the persistent reader by adding 
more text to its nodes in the ﬁ rst three revisits. In our terminology, the 
frequency is limited during these revisits and unlimited after the text does not change anymore.     
5. Here we could make a further distinction between static and dynamic 
architecture based on the stability of  basic conditions. In Joyce’s Afternoon, 
as the result of  its guard ﬁ elds, the number of  possible links to follow 
will vary at the level of  nodes, that is, locally. In this scenario Afternoon 
is not dynamic as a whole (globally), as there are no changes in its basic architecture of  nodes, links and guard ﬁ elds.
6. Characters in literature and ﬁ  lm are said to be independent as the readers 
and viewers can’t inﬂ  uence them. The behavior of  these characters is static 
as it remains exactly the same regardless of  how many times the book or ﬁ lm is read or seen. They are objects as there’s no direct communication or 
dialogue between the user and the ﬁ ctional character. This simple chart with 
three basic parameters gives seven other positions for the possible existents, and I see no valid reason why all of  these should be called characters too, as that practice would only help to mask the crucial functional differences in the control, communication and behavior of  the existents. In live drama the characters are minimally in ﬂ uenced by the spectators (by applause and 
other feedback conventions), and they may also become dynamic if  an actor is given the freedom to change certain attributes or personality traits of  the character between performances.
7. These processes can be both teleologically and temporally indeterminate 
and in ﬁ nite.  
8. In books the continuity and discontinuity of  the attention span is up to the 
reader. That’s not the situation with works like The Impermanence Agent  or 
The Speaking Clock . We should perhaps introduce two conceptual divisions 
to meet the demands set by the behavior of  programmable texts. First, 
206Markku Eskelinen  |  Six Problems in Search of a Solution
the possible and necessary attention spans and their mutual relations, and 
second, the relation of  the text’s duration and speed to the reader’s attention span (the former can either exceed or match the latter).        
9. Cf. Wardrip-Fruin, “From Instrumental Texts to Textual Instruments.” 
Instrumental texts are texts that can be played with a system that is inseparable from them; textual instruments are systems that can play many different “outside” texts.    
10. Cf. Bénabou, as well as Mathews and Brotchie 213-14 (Queneleyev’s table) 
and 227-28 (systematization). 
11. “Delusions of  jealousy contradict the subject, delusions of  persecution 
contradict the verb, and erotomania contradicts the object. But in fact a fourth kind of  contradiction is possible—namely, one which rejects the proposition as a whole” (Freud 203). Needless to say this systematization and mechanism could be situated or embedded as a parergon in all four great scenes and schemes of  writing and textual production: sender/receiver, signi ﬁ er/signiﬁ  ed, text/intertext, and textons/scriptons.     
12. Cf. Mathews and Brotchie 163. 13. I’m not referring to the player’s always possible non-understanding or non-
knowledge of  the rules and goals, but about potential game structures that vary in time and during the game depending on how the game is played.  
Works Cited
Aarseth, Espen. Cybertext: Perspectives on Ergodic Literature.  Baltimore: Johns Hop-
kins UP , 1997. 
Aarseth, Espen, Solveig M. Smedstad, and Lise Sunnanå. “A Multi-Dimensional 
Typology of  Games.” Level Up: Digital Games Research Conference Proceedings . Ed. 
Marinka Copier and Joost Raessens. Utrecht: Utrecht UP , 2003. 48-53.
Barthes, Roland. The Pleasure of  the Text . New York: Hill and Wang, 1975. 
Bénabou, Marcel. “Rule and Constraint.” OuLiPo: A Primer of  Potential Literature. 
Ed. and trans. Warren J. Motte, Jr. Lincoln, NE: U of  Nebraska P , 1986. 40-47.Bordwell, David. Narration in the Fiction Film. Madison, WI: U of  Wisconsin P , 
1985.Branigan, Edward. Narrative Comprehension and Film. London: Routledge, 1992.
207Markku Eskelinen  |  Six Problems in Search of a Solution
Cayley, John. Book Unbound. London: Wellsweep P , 1995. 
———. The Speaking Clock . London: Wellsweep P , 1996.
Chatman, Seymour. Story and Discourse. Ithaca, NY: Cornell UP , 1978.———. Coming to Terms. Ithaca, NY: Cornell UP , 1990.Eskelinen, Markku. “The Gaming Situation” Game Studies 1.1 (2001). 4 July 2006 
<http://www.gamestudies.org/0101/eskelinen>. ———. Kybertekstien narratologia (Cybertext narratology). Saarijärvi: Research 
Centre for Contemporary Culture, 2001.———. “Cybertext Theory and Literary Studies, A User’s Manual.” The Elec-
tronic Book Review  12 (2001). 4 July 2006 <http://www.altx.com/ebr/ebr12/
eskel.htm>.Frasca, Gonzalo. “Ephemeral Games: Is It Barbaric to Design Videogames Af-
ter Auschwitz?” Cybertext Yearbook 2000. Ed. Markku Eskelinen and Raine Kos-
kimaa. Saarijärvi: Research Centre for Contemporary Culture, 2001. 172-82. 
Freud, Sigmund. “Psychoanalytic Notes on an Autobiographical Account of  a 
Case of  Paranoia.” 1911. The Pelican Freud Library, Vol. 9. Ed. Angela Richards. 
London: Penguin, 1981. 138-223.
Genette, Gérard. Narrative Discourse: An Essay in Method . 1972. Trans. Jane E. 
Lewin. Ithaca, NY: Cornell UP , 1980. ———. Narrative Discourse Revisited . 1983. Trans. Jane E. Lewin. Ithaca, NY: 
Cornell UP , 1988. ———. The Architext: An Introduction. 1979. Trans. Jane E. Lewin. Berkeley, CA: 
U of  California  P , 1992.———. Paratexts. 1987. Trans. Jane E. Lewin. Cambridge: Cambridge UP , 
1997.———. Palimpsests: Literature in the Second Degree . 1982. Trans. Channa Newman 
and Claude Doubinsky. Lincoln, NE: U of  Nebraska P , 1997.
208Markku Eskelinen  |  Six Problems in Search of a Solution
Gibson, William. Agrippa: A Book of  Dead. New York: Begos, 1992.
Hayles, N. Katherine. How We Became Posthuman: Virtual Bodies in Cybernetics, Lit-
erature and Informatics. Chicago: U of  Chicago P , 1999.———. “What Cybertext Theory Can’t Do.” The Electronic Book Review 12 (2001). 
4 July 2006 <http://www.altx.com/ebr/rip12/rip12hay.htm>.Kac, Eduardo. “Key Concepts of  Holopoetry.” Experimental-Concrete-Visual: 
Avant-Garde Poetry Since the 1960s.  Ed. K. David Jackson, Eric Vos, and Johanna 
Drucker. Atlanta: Rodopi, 1996. 247-257. Knoebel, David. Wheels.  1996. 4 July 2006 <http://home.ptd.net/~clkpoet/
wheels>.Jackson, Shelley. The Patchwork Girl . Cambridge, MA: Eastgate, 1995.
Joyce, Michael. Afternoon, a story. 1987. Cambridge, MA: Eastgate, 1990.
Mathews, Harry, and Alastair Brotchie, eds. OuLiPo Compendium . London: Atlas 
P , 1998.McHale, Brian. Postmodernist Fiction. New York: Methuen, 1987.———. Constructing Postmodernism. London: Routledge, 1992.
Moulthrop, Stuart. Victory Garden . Cambridge, MA: Eastgate, 1991.
———. Hegirascope . 1995. 4 July 2006 <http://iat.ubalt.edu/moulthrop/
hypertexts/hgs>. ———. Reagan Library . 1999. 4 July 2006 <http://iat.ubalt.edu/moulthrop/
hypertexts/rl>.———. Pax. An Instrument. 2003. 4 July 2006 <http://iat.ubalt.edu/
moulthrop/hypertexts/pax>.———. “About Pax.” 2003. 4 July 2006 <http://iat.ubalt.edu/moulthrop/
hypertexts/pax/about.htm>.  
209Markku Eskelinen  |  Six Problems in Search of a Solution
Prince, Gerald. Narratology . Berlin: De Gruyter, 1981.
———. The Dictionary of  Narratology. Lincoln, NE: U of  Nebraska P , 1987.
Queneau, Raymond. C ent Mille Milliards de Poémes . Paris: Gallimard, 1962.
“Responses to ‘Narr@tive: Digital Storytelling 1/2’.” Grand Text Auto.  23 Apr. 
2004. 4 July 2006 <http://grandtextauto.gatech.edu/2004/04/23/narrtive-
digital-storytelling-12/#comments>.
Rosenberg, Jim. “The Structure of  Hypertext Activity.”  Hypertext ‘96.  New 
York: ACM, 1996. 22-30.  Rokeby, David. “Transforming Mirrors: Subjectivity and Control in Interactive 
Media.” Critical Issues in Digital Media . Ed. Simon Penny. Albany, NY: Suny, 1995. 
133-58.
Sternberg, Meir. Expositional Modes and Temporal Ordering in Fiction. Baltimore: 
Johns Hopkins UP , 1978.
Strehovec, Janez. “The Moving Word.” Cybertext Yearbook 2000.  Ed. Markku 
Eskelinen and Raine Koskimaa. Saarijärvi: Research Centre for Contemporary 
Culture, 2001. 100-116.
Wardrip-Fruin, Noah. The Impermanence Agent . 1999. 4 July 2006 <http://www.
impermanenceagent.com/agent/>.———.  “From Instrumental Texts to Textual Instruments.” 2003. 4 July 2006 
<http://hypertext.rmit.edu.au/dac/papers/Wardrip-Fruin.pdf>.
Wardrip-Fruin, Noah, and Brion Moss. “The Impermanence Agent: Project and 
Context.” Cybertext Yearbook 2001.  Ed. Markku Eskelinen and Raine Koskimaa. 
Saarijärvi: Research Centre for Contemporary Culture, 2002. 14-59.
211Noah Wardrip-Fruin
Playable Media and T extual Instruments 
Abstract:
The statement that “this is not a game” has been employed in many ways—for example, to distinguish between high and low culture electronic texts, to market an immersive game meant to break the “magic circle” that separates games from the rest of  life, to de-marcate play experiences (digital or otherwise) that fall outside formal game de ﬁ nitions, 
and to distinguish between computer games and other forms of  digital entertainment. This essay does not seek to praise some uses of  this maneuver and condemn others. Rather, it simply points out that we are attempting to discuss a number of  things that we play (and create for play) but that are arguably not games. Calling our experiences “in-teractive” would perhaps be accurate, but overly broad. An alternative—“playable”—is proposed, considered less as a category than as a quality that manifests in different ways. “Playable media” may be an appropriate way to discuss both games and the “not games” mentioned earlier.
The impetus for coming to this term was not a love of  terminology, but the author’s 
need as an artist to situate a set of  experiments in creating “instrumental texts” and “textual instruments” within an appropriate context. While it doesn’t make sense to dis-cuss all of  these experiments as games, what distinguishes them from other electronic texts is their playability—both that they can be usefully considered as playable, and their particular structures of  play. This essay discusses, particularly, two “textual instruments” recently constructed by the author in collaboration with David Durand, Brion Moss, and Elaine Froehlich. While both of  these instruments operate according to the logic of  n-grams (as ﬁ  rst used in textual play by Claude Shannon), one instrument is designed to 
play with known local texts while the other is designed to employ the contents of  net-work RSS feeds and web pages. One composition for each of  these instruments— Regime 
Change  and News Reader,  respectively—is considered. 
1.  This is Not a Game
I’m writing this in the ﬁ rst person. For clarity’s sake. Because, while I am writ-
ing about terminology, the terms I discuss are simply those that I use to think 
through my work as an artist and its relationships with the work of  others. If  employed for different purposes, as we say online, “your mileage may vary.”
The ﬁ rst term I need to consider is “game,” but from an oblique direction. 
Because I need to consider some things that are “not games.”
212Noah Wardrip-Fruin  |  Playable Media and T extual Instruments
1.a.  Artists against Infocom
Fig. 1. Hypertext ﬁ ction is not a game. A Storyspace map view of Bill Bly’s We Descend .
“This is not a game” was a slogan, at one time, embraced by a group of  hyper-
text writers and theorists. While it is often traced back to a 1988 hypermedia writing workshop run by Rob Swigart, the slogan’s most visible proponent was John McDaid. McDaid is  may be best known as the author of  the “artifactual” 
ﬁ ction Uncle Buddy’s Phantom Funhouse (published by Eastgate in 1993). Other 
proponents of  the slogan included high-proﬁ  le members of  the hypertext com-
munity such as Stuart Moulthrop and Michael Joyce (Moulthrop, Interview).
Swigart has written for computer games and published traditional novels—
at the time of  the workshop he’d recently published the “computer novel” Portal 
through game developer Activision. And, in fact, we can see the proto-slogan in use in discussions of  Portal from before the convening of  the workshop:
Emerging from the mists of  the “Vaporware” list in PC Letter, Portal 
has at last been published by Activision. Having thus established that Portal is not vapor, its creator, novelist Rob Swigart, has some further observations about what Portal is and is not.“It’s not a game,” says Swigart. Nor, apparently, is it interactive ﬁ ction 
as we have come to know it. “There is no parsing language in Portal,” 
he adds, “no puzzles to solve.”

213Noah Wardrip-Fruin  |  Playable Media and T extual Instruments
Then what is it?
“It’s a computer novel.”And that is  . . . ?“A novel that can be told only through the medium of  the computer.” (Infocom 9)
McDaid writes the following of the workshop group’s enthusiasm for “this is not a game” as a phrase: “We thought this so important that we put it on the t-shirt, in real  big letters.” Why was it so important? In part, McDaid tells us, it 
was practical. There was no way to compete with games, especially graphically (ﬁ g. 1), so it was better to stay off that turf. But he also writes of what he calls a 
“larger, ﬁ ctional issue.” An issue connected to the structure of game play:
The payoff for “correct” play [is] usually to win; to play “incorrectly” is to lose. This is very much at odds with what one might loosely call goals of ﬁ  ction: exploration, insight, and the renewal of the perceived 
world through alterneity. (Infocom 9)
But McDaid then goes on to say, in the next sentence, “though it is true that in my own ﬁ  ction, Uncle Buddy’s Phantom Funhouse,  there is in fact a puzzle. . . .” 
Faced with this, I’m a bit puzzled myself. Certainly I wouldn’t want to elide the very real structural differences between ﬁ ctions like McDaid’s and those 
for which Infocom is best known. At the same time, however, there are also signiﬁ cant differences between McDaid’s and Swigart’s—not the least that one 
has “no puzzles to solve” while in the other “there is in fact a puzzle.” Why, in these circumstances, would these writers have chosen such a primary focus on the term “game”?
When I interviewed Stuart Moulthrop, I asked him about this focus, about 
the hypertext community’s version of “this is not a game.” He pointed out that the implied comparison between the works on each side of the phrase wasn’t neutral:
There was an element of rank professional jealousy, for sure. [Info-com] had a market, after all. We were stuck in the garage. In retrospect our allergy to games looks incredibly foolish, both because Infocom’s market experience didn’t end all that happily, and more important because there was so much good work coming out of [the interactive ﬁ ction] community, and still is.
214Noah Wardrip-Fruin  |  Playable Media and T extual Instruments
I suppose what really changed my mind on this was [the] reception hy-
pertext has sometimes got from the literary community: “How dare you? You have no place at this club.” The notion that we could have gotten similarly clubby, trying to exclude someone else’s work in new media, now seems repulsive. (Moulthrop, Interview)
Here we see “this is not a game” functioning as a distinction between mere text games and work worthy of consideration by the literary community. Be-tween low and high culture. Between trivial play and serious writing. 
Interestingly, those on the other end of this distinction seem to have cho-
sen a different approach. As it happens, the piece quoted above discussing Swigart’s Portal  was published in Infocom’s house publication, The Status Line  
(previously The New Zork Times) .  I t  c o n c l u d e s :  “ C a n  i n t e r a c ti v e  s t o ry t e lli n g  
work without challenging puzzles or con ﬂ ict resolution? Portal  proves it can.” 
This is not an endorsement of a competitor’s product (Infocom had recently been purchased by Activision) but, unless motivated entirely by command of their new corporate owners, it is a somewhat surprising endorsement of an artistic project that the “other side” came to see as sharply incompatible with Infocom’s. 
Personally, I’m interested in the ongoing work of both of these communi-
ties, and I’m looking for terminology that can help me see the common ground that the authors of The Status Line  recognized.
1.b. Smudging the Magic Circle
“This is not a game” has also served as material for an in ﬂ uential game, and 
from there become a slogan for the players and developers of a certain group 
of games. 
The promotional game for the movie A.I.  had no of ﬁ cial name, but here 
I’ll use its nickname: “ The Beast ” (Stewart). Just as the game had no of ﬁ cial 
name, it also had no marketing (in fact, was unavailable for purchase), and no ofﬁ cial beginning. Or, to put it another way, it began when and how people be-
gan to play it. For many it began with the second A.I.  trailer, in which “Jeanine 
Salla” is credited as “Sentient machine therapist” (Hon). Players’ web searches for these terms revealed the beginnings of a trail that threaded through texts, images, and movies across the internet—as well as phone calls, faxes, US Post-al Service deliveries, bathroom walls, and live events. 
215Noah Wardrip-Fruin  |  Playable Media and T extual Instruments
Fig. 2. Stills from A.I.  television commercial. 
“THIS IS NOT” and “ A GAME ” appear in red near the 
center of the ﬁ rst and second still, respectively.
The game was a huge success—not only in the estimation of  its players, but also 
in the surrounding media attention (which helped generate interest in A.I.). As 
the hype reached its height, in May 2001, a television commercial for A.I. was 
released that contained the words “ THIS IS NOT / A GAME ” (ﬁ g. 2).
As Jane McGonigal writes:
This message has since become the mantra for both players and deve-
lopers of immersive entertainment. To “TING” a game now means to explicitly deny and purposefully obscure its nature as a game, a task that has become increasingly dif ﬁ cult as immersive players grow more 
savvy about TING techniques. (4)

216Noah Wardrip-Fruin  |  Playable Media and T extual Instruments
Here “this is not a game” has a different feel to it. Still a slogan of  sorts, but 
a game’s slogan. And as McGonigal points out, TING is now a game design technique—one that helps support players in their performance of  belief  in the game’s reality, a feature identi ﬁ ed as key to enjoyment of  the “alternate reality” 
gaming genre that The Beast  helped launch. This denial of  the game’s apartness 
from reality may seem to refuse the “magic circle” that has been part of  our discussion of  games since Johan Huizinga’s Homo Ludens. But rather than an era-
sure or breakage of  the circle, it’s probably more of  a smearing or smudging—a deliberate extension of  the border between a game and the rest of  life, in order to create space for performance and play. 
“This is not a game” could also be seen as a more formal characterization 
of  The Beast.  After all, it had no rules, no points, and only ill-deﬁ  ned outcomes 
toward which the players could work (locating what might be a puzzle, trying to solve it, hoping to ﬁ nd larger patterns leading toward the solution of  the emerg-
ing murder mystery). But more on this sort of  consideration is to come. 
1.c. Don’t T oy With Me
Some people are under the impression that The Sims  (ﬁ g. 3) is the best-selling 
PC game of  all time (Adams 2004). In fact, as of  this writing the publisher of  
The Sims,  Electronic Arts, on its website leaves all quali ﬁ ers aside to call The Sims  
“The #1 best selling game of  all time.” But others would say that, while The 
Sims may have sold well, it is not a game. Rather, they say, The Sims  is a “toy” or 
“simulation.” 
One source of  such arguments is formal game de ﬁ nitions. For example, 
Rules of  Play, a game design text from MIT Press, de ﬁ nes games as “a system in 
which players engage in an arti ﬁ cial conﬂ  ict, de ﬁ ned by rules, that results in a 
quantiﬁ  able outcome” (Salen and Zimmerman 80). The focus on quanti ﬁ able 
outcomes (which The Sims  may not suf ﬁ ciently possess) makes non-games, or 
borderline cases, of  many experiences that we commonly call games, includ-ing simulation games and role-playing games. The closest these experiences get to meeting the de ﬁ nition is when considered in terms of  interim quanti ﬁ able 
goals the players set for themselves. As Salen and Zimmerman put it, “As with other open-ended game-like experiences such as Sim City, RPGs have emergent 
quantiﬁ  able goals but usually no single overriding outcome” (Zimmerman 83). 
And these authors are far from alone in proposing formal game de ﬁ nitions that 
systems such as The Sims  fail to meet. 
217Noah Wardrip-Fruin  |  Playable Media and T extual Instruments
Fig. 3. The Sims , in its original form, doesn’t have a quanti ﬁ able 
outcome, or even clearly-de ﬁ ned goals for players to work toward. 
Is the best-selling PC game of  all time also “not a game”?
But more “popular” publications also question the status of  The Sims  as a game. 
For example, several game publications’ reviews of  later installments (console 
versions of  The Sims,  or The Sims 2 ) note this attitude toward the ﬁ rst installment, 
for example:
With the ﬁ  rst game, people complained that The Sims  was more like a 
toy than a game. (Bub)
In the PC versions of  the series, gameplay was typically thought of  as a 
toy—something for players to pick up and enjoy for however long they want with no clear end in sight. (Lewis and Boulding)
Sometimes the difference is split:
The original Sims was as much a toy as it was a game. (Kosak)
Even the Wikipedia entry on The Sims  also (as of  this writing) notes that “It has 
been described as more like a toy than a game” (Wikipedia).

218Noah Wardrip-Fruin  |  Playable Media and T extual Instruments
Taking a different tack, some have sought to more clearly describe how The Sims  
deviates from the usual de ﬁ nitions of  games and then describe this as an altera-
tion of  their game model (rather than a lack). Jesper Juul, for example, writes:
Open-ended simulation games such as The Sims  change the classic game 
model by removing the goals, or more speci ﬁ cally, by not describing 
some possible outcomes as better than others. (30-45)
This could result in us changing our game de ﬁ nitions or, as Juul does, classifying 
The Sims  as a borderline game. 
I don’t mean, by this, to seem to be arguing against formal game de ﬁ nitions 
(or popular perceptions). It may well be that The Sims  is not a game. At this 
point I’m simply intending to add “doesn’t meet my (in)formal de ﬁ nition” to 
the senses in which people have meant “this is not a game.”
1.d. Overtly dramatic
Toys and simulations aren’t the only types of  entertainment software that “aren’t 
games.” In their 2002 SIGGRAPH presentation Michael Mateas and Andrew Stern put up a slide that read, in part, “It’s a story, not a game” (Mateas and Stern). The two were referring to their jointly-developed project, Façade ( ﬁ g. 
4), which provides a ﬁ rst-person dramatic experience for the interactor. There 
are no puzzles, no points to score, and no quanti ﬁ able outcomes. Instead, the 
interactor plays a character, interacts with other characters through language and movement, and has an experience shaped by Façade’s software “drama manager.” 
The experience, of  a couple breaking up, has caused Façade to be described as 
“an interactive Who’s Afraid of  Virginia Woolf.”
Mateas and Stern’s project is part of  a genre of  entertainment/art software 
that has been called “interactive drama” or “cyberdrama”—popular knowledge of  which has been spread by books such as Janet Murray’s Hamlet on the Holodeck . 
While interactive dramatic experiences may fail to meet many of  the criteria of  formal game deﬁ  nitions, this isn’t what Mateas and Stern were arguing in their 
SIGGRAPH slides. Rather, they were seeking to draw attention to the different structures of  play, and goals of  play, in this genre. Here, there is no winning or losing, and the point of  interaction is not to accomplish a game goal. The inter-actor certainly forms opportunistic short-term goals, but usually in terms of  the dramatic situation. In this case, to be “not a game” is to be a different kind of  playable digital media, calling for a different type of  engagement, than usually comes to mind when the term “game” is used.
219Noah Wardrip-Fruin  |  Playable Media and T extual Instruments
Fig. 4. Façade’s main characters, Grace and Trip, hold painful secrets and witty quips. 
Exploring the dramatic experiences possible with them, rather than achieving 
a higher score, is the motivation for replaying. 
The assertion that interactive dramas are not games is relatively well accepted 
among game scholars. But it is not universally accepted, either within or outside such circles. And it seems that one place it is less accepted is within the game development community itself. Façade was chosen as a ﬁ nalist for the 2004 Inde-
pendent Game Festival awards, which must on some level be seen as acceptance of  its status as a game by the jurors of  that competition. Further, the IGF is held in conjunction with the yearly Game Developer’s Conference—and, therefore, in 2004 Façade was on display in the main exhibition hall for the length of  the 
U.S.’s primary gathering of  game developers. I spent time at Façade’s kiosk regu-
larly during the conference and observed the people gathered around, watching others interact and waiting for their turn. I didn’t hear a single one say that it was “not a game.”
And neither Stern nor Mateas would have uttered the phrase then, either. 
By 2004 Façade’s development had progressed further, and their presentation of  
the relationship between Façade and the term “game” had evolved considerably. 
While “it’s a story, not a game” had helped shock some out of  the “how do I win?” mindset, there is much in Façade that is usefully considered with the term 
“game.” As Stern described it to me in an e-mail:

220Noah Wardrip-Fruin  |  Playable Media and T extual Instruments
In fact, one of  the underlying interaction mechanics of  the ﬁ rst half  
of  Façade we call the “af ﬁ nity game,” where Grace and Trip interpret 
everything you do as a zero-sum taking sides “game”; the second half  
of  Façade we call the “therapy game,” where the player is (purposefully 
or not) potentially increasing each character’s degree of  self-realization about their own problems. (E-mail)
Stern and Mateas here are making an interesting maneuver, introducing “game” in the interpersonal sense (as in Games People Play). As Stern explains in a post 
on the collaborative blog Grand Text Auto  titled “Head Games,”  this isn’t a way 
of  trying to shift the ground away from discussion of  computer games, but to 
imagine a new area of  the computer game ﬁ eld which focuses on interaction 
with richly realized characters. Stern writes that, in such games:
The gameplay will literally need to be about the characters themselves. The “state space” the player manipulates—the variables you affect, the values you change—need to be the feelings, emotions and thoughts of  the characters, not just external counters, scores, levels and objects.Rather than just ﬁ ring a gun to cause an enemy’s health to decrease, or 
a crate to explode or a door to open, you’ll ﬁ  re off  discourse acts  such as 
praise, criticism, expressions of  feeling, requests and ideas; the other characters’ attitudes will immediately change, emotions will get genera-ted, and new actions will become motivated and get performed.What kind of  game would that be? It could be the game of  persuasion, or negotiation, seduction, or communication, for example. The kinds of  games we play with each other all the time, really. (“Head Games”) 
Just as Façade attempts to integrate such games into an overall dramatic structure, more traditional game developers could integrate them with mainstream game genres involving human characters—from role-playing games such as Knights of  
the Old Republic  to simulation games such as The Sims.  Of  course, for this to be 
successful, more research of  the sort being undertaken by Mateas and Stern will be necessary.
221Noah Wardrip-Fruin  |  Playable Media and T extual Instruments
2.  Playable Media
All of  the above uses of  “this is not a game” are potentially fruitful. But the dis-
tinctions they make are not the ones I’m after. I’m not looking to separate high from low, well-demarcated from immersive, or the formally de ﬁ ned from border 
cases. I’m looking for a way to discuss all these examples together, in a manner that highlights a set of  features that are of  interest to me, and without throwing so broad a net that the weight of  what I’m trying to pull in capsizes my vessel.
Taking this point of  view, I have a series of  thoughts: It may be that none 
of  the examples in the preceding section are games, or some of  them may be—and that’s ﬁ  ne. Some of  what I create as an artist may be games, or not—and 
that’s ﬁ ne, too. But thinking about how these may or may not be games has led 
me to identify something that is interesting about all the preceding examples, and hopefully also about some of  what I’m creating as an artist—how they are played.
And this is what has led me to talk about “playable media.” For me, this 
phrase shifts my thinking from a question I’ve found only temporarily useful (“Is this a game?”) to one I have found rewards sustained attention (“How is this played?”). “Playable media” also encompasses a body of  work that I want to consider—including the examples above, as well as many other products of  the commercial game industry, and also the body of  what might be called “playable art.” By “playable art” I primarily mean projects from the digital art community such as Camille Utterback and Romy Achituv’s Text Rain ( ﬁ g. 5), which invite 
and structure play.
Of  course, I could also talk about all of  these things by using an already-
popular umbrella term such as “interactive.” But these terms are often overly broad even for my purposes, and the impetus that allows them to attain their breadth may shape their meanings in a way that isn’t helpful. For example, while it’s easy to imagine an argument about whether a love letter is more “interactive” than a computer game, it’s unlikely that we would spend long arguing which is more fruitfully considered in terms of  its playability. And while playability is a useful way to look at agreed-upon games (such as football) it’s also appropriate when considering certain types of  related play (such as hackey-sack) without encompassing too much (it leaves aside sports commentators, the symbolism of  team logos and names, the economy of  sporting goods, etc.).
And a focus on the playable also attracts me for another reason—because 
we play more than games and “not a” games. We also play instruments, and compositions. And it is at the juncture of  these senses of  play—that for games, and that for music—that a thought-provoking discussion about playable texts has been taking place in the electronic literature community.
222Noah Wardrip-Fruin  |  Playable Media and T extual Instruments
Fig. 5. Text Rain  shows interactors a video image of  themselves in an alternate reality. 
The letters of  lines of  poetry fall from above, coming to rest on anything darker than 
the background—inviting creative play with this language made physical. 
3.  Instrumental T exts
There are two types of  playable texts that interest me here. The ﬁ rst type, “in-
strumental texts,” has (as noted above) been the focus of  some discussion in 
the electronic literature community. The second, “textual instruments,” began as a personal thought experiment—a perhaps contrarian inversion of  some of  the assumptions of  the ﬁ rst category. But then this thought experiment evolved 
into my ﬁ rst set of  collaborative projects, perhaps the ﬁ rst of  many, with textual 
instruments.
Let’s begin with the ﬁ rst type. In electronic literature circles—those in which 
experimental writing for digital media is a common topic—the last few years have seen increasing discussion of  the concept I’m calling “instrumental texts.” (Within this phrase I’m subsuming a discussion, around texts with instrumental qualities, that has used a variety of  loose terminology.) These are texts meant to be played. As John Cayley put it in an interview with Brian Kim Stefans:

223Noah Wardrip-Fruin  |  Playable Media and T extual Instruments
My point is that we are currently writers trying to build relatively simple 
textual instruments that are intuitive and, hopefully, both affective and signiﬁ  cant when they are played. I mean played as musical instruments 
or sequencers or mixers are played. This is ergodic indeed, but still distinguishable from (hard) work or from the type of  play in games which is rewarded by winning, by other forms of  “success” or simply by “playability.” (“From Byte to Inscription”) 
With the term “ergodic” Cayley is referencing the work of  Espen Aarseth, whose Cybertext: Perspectives on Ergodic Literature  (1997) is a touchstone in the electronic 
literature community. Aarseth de ﬁ nes the term by stating, “In ergodic literature, 
nontrivial effort is required to allow the reader to traverse the text” (1). More recently Aarseth has become one of  the leading ﬁ gures in the emerging ﬁ eld 
of  game studies, helping found the ﬁ eld’s ﬁ rst journal as well as the Center for 
Computer Games Research at the IT University of  Copenhagen. In referencing Aarseth’s work, Cayley brings to the fore a focus on play as “nontrivial effort” in music, games, and instrumental texts. 
In my interview with Stuart Moulthrop cited above, I had the opportunity 
to ask him about instrumental texts. He, too, discussed some of  the poten-tial challenges of  the reader/player’s nontrivial engagement, but also some of  what authors of  instrumental texts might learn from the designs of  folk instru-ments:
Maybe some instruments will be hard to play. They may require practi-ce. Or not. As a teacher once said to me about the guitar, “After ﬁ ve 
or ten minutes you’ll make sounds that are almost musical. That’s what the frets are for.” And that’s a great virtue of  folk instruments. They do allow you to get in touch with a productive vocabulary very quickly. I think a good instrument would do that. It would stimulate engagement. It should make people want to get in there and interact, and to repeat the experience. (Moulthrop, Interview)
But for Moulthrop, perhaps unlike Cayley, musical and literary ﬁ gures are not 
the only ones brought together in this discussion. For Moulthrop musical ﬁ g-
ures are a vocabulary that can help one imagine projects that occupy a space between two other types of  work at play in discussions of  instrumental texts. As Moulthrop puts it:
What I’m particularly taken with is the notion of  a middle space between literary texts and ludic texts—between interactive ﬁ ction, or hypertext 
224Noah Wardrip-Fruin  |  Playable Media and T extual Instruments
ﬁ ction, and games. You have, with instruments, a text with behavior 
and temporal dimensions that in some ways maps onto the temporal 
experience and interactive possibilities in game design. (Moulthrop, In-terview) 
In focusing on games, Moulthrop has likely chosen the stronger of  the two comparisons. For the examples usually given of  instrumental texts, unlike musi-cal instruments, only “play one tune.” Their structures of  play and material for play are designed and delivered together, much as those of  games. But this is not to say that the musical ﬁ gure is unimportant. Rather, I think it helps indicate 
the sort of  engagement that authors of  instrumental texts hope audiences will have with their work—again, as with Façade and The Sims,  something that is not 
about winning or losing, or perhaps about quanti ﬁ able outcomes of  any sort. 
But, unlike Façade and The Sims, this engagement is a physical discipline, sensitive 
to differences in movement and able to be learned at a muscular level.
Cayley’s interview statement about instrumental texts actually came in the 
context of  an answer to a question about his piece riverIsland ( ﬁ g. 6). The occa-
sion of  my interview with Moulthrop was the release of  his piece Pax (ﬁ g. 7). 
Looking at these may help ground our discussion, as well as help us understand what other work might be brought into this category.
 
3.a.  riverIsland
John Cayley’s work often employs a technique he calls “transliteral morphing.” 
This is a letter-by-letter morphing that transitions from one text to another, much as graphical morphing moves points in space so as to transition from one image to another. In transliteral morphing the in-between letters are de-termined by movement along a loop on which Cayley has arranged Roman characters according to their sounds, as he explains:
If texts are laid out in a regular grid, as a table of letters, one table for the source and one table for the target, to morph transliterally from one text (one table of letters) to another, is to work out, letter-by-let-ter, how the source letters will become the target ones. Assume your alphabet (including “space” and apostrophe, 28 letters in all) is arran-ged in a special loop where letters considered to be similar in sound are clustered together. The aim is to work out the shortest distance round the loop (clockwise or anti-clockwise) from each source to each target. ( riverIsland )
225Noah Wardrip-Fruin  |  Playable Media and T extual Instruments
Once the movement for each letter is worked out, the text then moves through 
fourteen steps (the largest number that might be necessary for any one let-ter—movement to the opposite side of  the 28-character loop). Some letters go through many more transitions than others. Changes are “reluctant” at the beginning of  the process and then “anxious” for completion at the end—so that both the early and ﬁ  nal stages are close to readable texts.
A number of  Cayley’s pieces, such as his well-known windsound  (1999), em-
ploy transliteral morphing in a manner that is performative on the part of  the program. Texts morph into other texts under the gaze of  the reader/audience, using the computational capabilities of  the computer on which they are dis-played. And yet these morphs could be, like most of  the graphical morphs we see, pre-rendered and displayed as moving images (without any computation at the time of  reading). The only visible loss would be the small changes in tim-ing from reading to reading on the same computer, and the occasionally larger changes when moving from computer to computer. 
Cayley’s riverIsland, on the other hand, is not only performative on the part 
of  the system, but also performative in a manner controlled in part by the read-er. One of  the types of  performance made available to the reader is relatively straightforward: riverIsland is composed of  two loops of  poems, one horizontal 
and one vertical, and the reader can use on-screen arrows in order to trigger movement along these loops. When the reader indicates that a move should be made from one poem to another, the appropriate transliteral morph is per-formed by the computer.
There is another type of  reader performance in riverIsland,  however, that 
feels quite different to me. And I believe that this is part of  what Cayley was get-ting at in his talk of  instruments during his interview with Stefans. In this type of  performance, the reader can click and drag on the screen’s vertical and horizon-tal Quicktime movies. The vertical movie is an “object” movie that graphically transitions between images of  paths through the woods. The horizontal movie is a panorama of  a riverside scene. A reader experienced with riverIsland can use 
these movies to navigate to any point within the work’s two loops. A transliteral morph is then performed between the text that was being displayed before the navigation process began (which might, itself, be an in-process morph) and the destination selected by the manipulation of  a movie. This creates an experience for which pre-rendered morphs could not effectively substitute—like Cayley’s ﬁ gure of  the sequencer, it harnesses real-time computational processes to create 
a performance based on high-level user direction that requires knowledge of  its materials and control space.
226Noah Wardrip-Fruin  |  Playable Media and T extual Instruments
Fig. 6. riverIsland enables traditional, step navigation through its textual morphs 
via the arrows on the lower-middle right—or, for those with knowledge 
and practice, more free-form selection of  destination texts through the 
horizontal panorama and/or vertical object movie. 
3.b. Pax
The instrumental text of  Stuart Moulthrop’s that I will consider here, Pax, pres-
ents an experience of  reading and performance that differs from riverIsland. Its 
differences in some ways map onto two of  the different musical instruments 
Cayley and Moulthrop chose for their examples when discussing instrumental texts—while Cayley mentioned the sequencer, Moulthrop mentioned the guitar.
A sequencer might play itself  for some time after being given instructions, 
but a guitar demands interaction for each note sounded. Similarly, Pax is struc-
tured for near-continual interaction. The larger area of  the piece, on the left, shows characters ﬂ oating up (in the ﬁ  rst half  of  the piece’s duration) or falling 
down (in the second). Unless the reader interacts with these characters, almost no text appears. Readers interact by “catching” ﬂ oating characters with the mouse 
pointer. Characters can be released by moving the mouse away, or clicked (either 
by active clicking, or by holding them caught for 20 seconds). Clicking elicits text from that character, which appears in the area on the right (this becomes a scrolling text area once there is enough text to scroll). The fourteen characters 

227Noah Wardrip-Fruin  |  Playable Media and T extual Instruments
ﬂ oat by in different orders, but those recently clicked tend to reappear, making 
it possible to consistently evoke text from two or three characters as the piece’s 
time passes. Each reading lasts from noon to midnight (the characters’ time) and is divided into six thematic movements: “Shaken Out of  Time,” “American Flyers,” “Home Land,” “Evil Ones,” “Falling,” and “Total Information.” The text elicited from a character is determined, in part, by the number of  times the character has been caught and clicked, as well as the current movement of  the piece. The character texts evoke two situations: being caught in some version of  a terminal at the Dallas airport (shut down for security reasons in an even-more-irrational “war on terror” than that which now grips us) and being caught in the space and structure of  Pax itself  (naked, ﬂ  oating, caught and prodded by 
the interactor).
While it would be impossible to manipulate the Quicktime movies of  river-
Island toward particular effects without relatively strong knowledge of  the piece, Pax provides obvious places to click and quickly-understood effects even for 
the ﬁ rst time reader. However, because of  its random elements and the strong 
impact of  time’s passage, it would be more dif ﬁ cult to exactly reproduce the 
same reading (after learning to play) than with riverIsland. To put it in terms of  
the musical analogy, Pax may provide frets, but for an instrument that adjusts its 
tunings over the course of  each playing. 
And, this, again, points to the strength of  computer gaming as a ﬁ gure 
for understanding instrumental texts. In the gaming context there is nothing surprising about behavior that changes over the course of  time. There is also nothing surprising about the skills of  physical manipulation and memorization that would be required to elicit particular readings from riverIsland and Pax. And 
the fact that these “instruments” come packaged with only one composition, from which they cannot be easily decoupled, also makes sense in the context of  computer games. And yet they are clearly not games in the manner that play is approached. Perhaps what the musical analogy helps with most is the fact that these projects seek a lyric engagement—not easily formulated in terms of  con-test or quanti ﬁ able outcome.
228Noah Wardrip-Fruin  |  Playable Media and T extual Instruments
Fig. 7. Pax produces texts when the reader catches and clicks on characters that ﬂ oat 
by—and is otherwise silent. Rather than a narrative “told” to the reader, or one 
“played through” as in (for example) the levels of  a narrative ﬁ rst-person 
shooter, Pax  is an exploration of  character and situation. 
3.c. New Word Order
With a better sense of  what we mean by “instrumental texts” it may now be pos-
sible to adopt into the category a number of  computational textual projects not described by their authors in such terms. In fact, I’d like to propose a perhaps radical move—adopting as an instrumental text a project that uses a method of  interaction not even designed for text, but repurposed through use of  an exist-ing game engine. I believe the adoption is appropriate once we look at it, and this foregrounds the game-like structures of  interaction for instrumental texts, as well as the different—more musical or performative—position of  engage-ment with these structures.
The piece I propose adopting for these purposes is New Word Order  by Sandy 
Baldwin (as reported by Chris Funkhouser). In this, the second part of  Baldwin’s Black Mesa  project, poetry is presented mapped onto objects in a simple Half-Life 
level. The poetry is that of  Billy Collins, the ﬁ rst U.S. poet laureate (2001-2003) 
appointed during the presidency of  George W . Bush. Placing Collins’s poetry within Half-Life subjects it to destruction and recon ﬁ guration with an arsenal 
ranging from automatic weaponry to the famous crowbar ( ﬁ g. 8). 

229Noah Wardrip-Fruin  |  Playable Media and T extual Instruments
Fig. 8. New Word Order  invites the reader to reduce and recon ﬁ gure poetry 
using the interaction structures of the ﬁ  rst-person shooter.
New Word Order  takes an interaction structure invented for competitive play 
with quanti ﬁ able outcomes—for gameplay—and repurposes it as play that re-
contextualizes and explores the potential of poetic language.
3.d. Screen
Wh en in terviewing M o ul thro p , i t s truck m e tha t o n e o f m y in-proces s co l-
laborative projects, Screen,  might also be usefully considered as an instrumental 
text. Screen  combines familiar game mechanics with virtual reality technology 
to create an experience of bodily interaction with text. At the same time, the language of the text, together with the uncanny experience of touching words, creates an experience that doesn’t settle easily into the usual ways of thinking about gameplay or VR.
Screen is a collaboration with Andrew McClain, Shawn Greenlee, Robert 
Coover, Josh Carroll, and Sascha Becker that was created in the Brown Uni-versity immersive virtual reality chamber (Cave), as part of a research project in spatial hypertext writing (Carroll et al.). Brown’s VR chamber is similar to the University of Illinois’s CAVE—a virtual environment that shows three-dimension images while allowing users to continue to see their own bodies, and that does not require users to wear encumbering equipment (unlike head-mounted displays, which are essentially blindfolds with televisions inside) (Sandin et al.). Brown’s Cave is an eight foot cube, missing its top and one side, and its walls and ﬂ oor are projection screens. Projectors are pointed at 
each screen, and they alternately project streams of images meant for the user’s left and right eyes. The user wears shutter glasses that alternately occlude the left and right eyes, in synchronization with the projectors. The result is stereo

230Noah Wardrip-Fruin  |  Playable Media and T extual Instruments
VR—3D vision of computer-generated imagery—combined with the physical 
presence of the people and objects in the Cave.
The initial experience of  Screen  can be disorienting for those familiar with 
VR. Rather than make the walls “disappear,” we project ﬂ at images onto the 
same plane as the walls, reinforcing their presence. And the images we project are not of  colorful shapes, but of  white text on a black background. This text at ﬁ rst appears in an introduction that fades in and out on the walls—and then 
forms three traditional paragraphs, each nearly ﬁ lling one of  the walls. Each 
of  these paragraphs is a character’s moment of  memory that gives rise to the virtual experience of  touch. Each wall appears, and then is read aloud. After the last has been read there is a pause, and then a word peels from one of  the walls, is spoken aloud, and ﬂ ies toward the reader. If  the reader does nothing, 
the word circles near her. Soon another word peels, and then another, at an increasing pace, ﬂ ocking around the reader. The reader can intervene in this 
process by batting at words with her hand. When a word is hit a sound is heard, and the word ﬂ  ies back toward a wall, perhaps breaking apart in the process. If  
a hit word is the only word off  the walls it will return to the space it left empty. However, if  more than one word is off  the walls then a hit word may return to a different space.
Once the number of  words off  the walls passes a certain threshold—some-
thing which, with the increasing pace of  peeling, only very active engagement can long delay—all the remaining words come free of  the walls, swirl around the reader, and then collapse into the center of  the Cave ( ﬁ g. 9). A ﬁ nal “clos-
ing” text is then heard. In addition to creating a new form of  bodily interaction with text, Screen  creates three reading experiences—beginning with the familiar, 
stable, page-like text on the walls; followed by the word-by-word reading of  peeling and hitting (where attention is focused); and with, simultaneously, more peripheral awareness of  the arrangements of  ﬂ  ocking words and the new (often 
neologistic) text being assembled on the walls. Screen  was ﬁ rst presented in 2003 
as part of  the Boston Cyberarts Festival, and in 2004 it was included in Alt+Ctrl: A 
Festival of  Independent and Alternative Games at University of  California, Irvine.
Given its presentation at Alt+Ctrl, we might simply discuss Screen as a game, 
rather than with the more unusual term “instrumental text.” And, in fact, the ﬁ -
nal moments of  Screen  feature a scattering of  words (and parts of  words) on the 
walls—which caused one young visitor to the Cave to ask, “Is that my score?” But while the play of  Screen  is reminiscent of  classic games from Whack-a-Mole 
to Breakout, and some players may at moments be driven purely by the game-like 
goal of  hitting words as quickly as possible, there is no contest or quanti ﬁ able 
outcome. Even approached purely physically, without any attention to the lin-guistic nature of  the words being played, Screen  is more like hackey-sack than
231Noah Wardrip-Fruin  |  Playable Media and T extual Instruments
 Fig. 9. Words collapsing in Screen .
soccer/football. And, in my observations, players don’t approach Screen  without 
attention to its words as words. Rather, interactors oscillate between reading and 
playing, with the objects of  both coming faster and coming apart, until both experiences can no longer be sustained and the piece ends. As with riverIsland 
and Pax, reader/players can get better at Screen,  though the fact that interactors 
do not control the ripping of  words alters what is possible via virtuoso perfor-mance. Perhaps the most impressive performance of  Screen  I have seen is that of  
Michelle Higa, who both edited the video documentation of  Screen  and played 
the role of  the interactor within it (“Screen”). In order to videotape Screen  we 
had to turn off  the ﬂ  ickering alternation between left- and right-eye images. 
Higa had become adept enough at the experience of  Screen  that she was able to 
play it relatively successfully even without stereo cues.
4. T extual Instruments
I ﬁ rst discussed the idea of  “textual instruments” in a short paper for 
Digital Arts and Culture 2003 (“From Instrumental Texts”). The idea grew from questions about the limits of  instrumental texts. If  instru-mental texts are odd instruments in that they only play one tune, how might we imagine tools for textual performance designed to play a va-riety of  compositions? What would it mean to have textual instru-ments that one might learn to play pro ﬁ ciently, for which one might 

232Noah Wardrip-Fruin  |  Playable Media and T extual Instruments
write and perform a number of  compositions, and that could eventually 
be made available to play the compositions of  others? 
In my DAC paper I described textual instruments as follows:
A textual instrument is a tool for textual performance which may be 
used to play a variety of  compositions. In this sense it is evocative of  Thalia Field’s ﬁ gure of  the “language piano”—something that one 
learns to play, and which may produce a much wider variety of  texts than is the case for those projects normally discussed as instrumental texts. However, a textual instrument need not be like a prepared piano. The direct selection of  text, rather than the manipulation of  a non-lingui-stic device, can be its interface. And the relationship between a textual instrument’s interface affordances and the possible textual outcomes need not be one-to-one at all levels (as it must be with a piano’s keys, though they may be played in many combinations). Understanding at a gut level how a textual instrument’s probability spaces function for a given composition is part of  learning to play that piece. Compositions, here, consist of  a body of  text (and/or a means of  ac-quiring text) and a set of  “tunings” for the instrument(s) used. (“From Instrumental Texts” 3)
 
While I don’t know of  any projects, other than those I have been involved with, that are described by their creators in these terms, in the next section I’ll adopt a potential example into the category. I’ll then touch on a couple of  related issues before discussing my ﬁ rst two collaborative projects in this area—the composi-
tions Regime Change and News Reader,  and the instruments for which they were 
composed.
4.a. Arteroids
Most who approach the arts as writers are quite attached to their own words, 
and this holds true among writers for digital media. In the digital ﬁ eld, Jim 
Andrews is one of  the exceptions, having undertaken a number of  interest-ing projects that involve him arranging a system for language to inhabit and then (rather than including only his own writing) inviting other writers to provide text. Arteroids (Andrews 2001-04) is one of  these systems ( ﬁ g. 10). 
Arteroids is, on the interaction level, simply the repurposing of  an existing 
game—and, in that way, quite similar to projects such as New Word Order.  The 
major difference, in fact, is that while Baldwin’s piece seems created as a context
233Noah Wardrip-Fruin  |  Playable Media and T extual Instruments
 Fig. 10.  Arteroids uses the interaction structures of  a modi ﬁ ed version of   the arcade 
classic Asteroids , but replaces the images of  a spaceship and rocks with images of  text.
for Collins’s work, Andrews appears to view Arteroids as an instrument for
which many texts could be composed (and then used as materials for play). 
Andrews created a “Word for Weirdos” to allow others to compose for Ar-
teroids  and has included texts from others in presentations of  the work—such as 
the texts by Christina McPhee and Helen Thorington included when Arteroids 
was shown in the “page_space” exhibition ( Superbunker ). While on some level 
it may appear that learning to play Arteroids is no different than learning to play Asteroids,  one can imagine the desire to create particular linguistic experiences 
changing this. With each textual composition as a different starting place, even after the Asteroids- derived parts of  Arteroids have been mastered there might yet 
be much to learn about creating an evocative experience from the play with any one text.
And yet I don’t enjoy Arteroids very much, even when it uses texts by writers 
whose work I have appreciated in other contexts, and even after gaining some experience with playing it. Considering why this is the case has led me to de ﬁ ne 
further the work I want to pursue in textual instruments.

234Noah Wardrip-Fruin  |  Playable Media and T extual Instruments
Fig. 11. Spacewar! was the ﬁ rst modern video game, combining 
logics of  graphical play still in wide use today. 
4.b. Graphical and Linguistic Logics
Not all playable computational media is graphical. In fact, some of  the most 
popular early computer games were entirely textual. Games like Adventure and 
Zork were even at times played on teletypes, with the interaction recorded on scrolling reams of  paper, rather than on terminals with screens. An excellent tracing of  the history of  this textual interactive ﬁ ction, which is still being cre-
ated today, can be found in Nick Montfort’s Twisty Little Passages . 
But when we think of  playing with computers, we generally think of  graphi-
cal experiences, those that follow in the tradition of  Spacewar! ( ﬁ g. 11) rather than 
Adventure. Created on the PDP-1 at MIT in the early years of  the 1960s, Spacewar! 
was the ﬁ rst modern video game. Two players each had a custom-made control-
ler, which they used to control the ﬂ ight of  a virtual spacecraft on the PDP-1’s 
CRT. The spacecraft were pulled toward the star at the center of  the screen by simulated gravity, and could ﬁ re projectiles at one another. A spacecraft hit 
by the central star or a projectile would be damaged. These are still among the central logics of  graphical gaming today—the ability to move graphical objects that on some level represent the player, the ability to ﬁ re projectiles, a simulation 
of  some form of  physics, and “collision detection” when one thing runs into another. These logics aren’t only the basis for play in experiences such as Half-
Life, but also (leaving aside projectiles) in pieces such as Text Rain.
We’re accustomed to seeing successful combinations of  graphical logics 
and game rules repackaged repeatedly. Games such as Pac-Man  and Tetris have 

235Noah Wardrip-Fruin  |  Playable Media and T extual Instruments
had many authorized and unauthorized versions “skinned” with different sur-
face graphics and different graphical arrangements, but with the essential log-ics of  graphical movement and gameplay preserved. Such combinations, within a larger range of  variation, are also the basis for our identi ﬁ cations of  game 
genres such as “side-scrollers” and “ ﬁ rst-person shooters.” 
I bring all this up in order to make a point about the instrumental texts dis-
cussed above—about how they are played. While each of  these pieces contains a textual component, they are all played along graphical logics. For riverIsland 
play is primarily through the graphical/physical manipulation of  the Quicktime movies; in Pax it is the collision detection as characters are caught and clicked; 
in New Word Order  the movement of  the ﬁ rst-person perspective and collision 
detection (in ﬁ ring of  weapons and use of  the crowbar); and in Screen  it is the 
movement of  the interactor’s body and the collision detection of  hitting words. What these projects do, in each case, is package together logics of  graphical play and methods of  response with textual and graphical material. 
What Arteroids does differently is take a set of  logics of  graphical play and 
methods of  response and then open them to many different sets of  textual ma-terial. This might be seen as the same as taking the formula of  Pac-Man  or Tetris 
and opening it up to many variations in graphical representation. But, for me, it doesn’t feel the same. Somehow it feels arbitrary, no different than if  the graph-ics in Pong or Spacewar! were opened to replacement by arbitrary text. 
I’ve been thinking about what would feel less arbitrary. It seems to me that, 
if  the same graphical logic can be skinned with many different surface graph-ics successfully, perhaps those seeking to create textual instruments will need to consider forms of  play that proceed via linguistic or textual logics. Before the computer became part of  everyday life, textual forms of  play such as the crossword (or games of  the Surrealists or Oulipo, or Madlibs, and so on) suc-cessfully accommodated many different texts by structuring play around the features speci ﬁ c to textuality. Perhaps the true challenge of  creating textual in-
struments involves ﬁ nding such structures that bene ﬁ t from the computational 
environment.
1 
If  such structures can be found I also suspect that the result will feel, at least 
to me, in some ways like a deeper engagement with text than is possible with projects (like Screen ) that proceed along graphical logics—projects that could still 
be played, though perhaps not as rewardingly, if  their words were all converted into colorful boxes.
Of  course, the next question is where one might begin to explore such tex-
tual or linguistic logics. Though perhaps this work has already begun, with those creating computer-based versions of  crosswords, Surrealist games, Oulipian games, and so on. And Fields of  Dream , by Nick Montfort and Rachel Stevens, 
236Noah Wardrip-Fruin  |  Playable Media and T extual Instruments
goes further—bringing the basic ﬁ ll-in-the-blank logic of  Madlibs into a project 
speciﬁ c to the networked computer. 
But there is also another territory to explore. This is that of linguistic 
and textual logics previously employed in text processing and generation—in 
contexts ranging from the computer science sub ﬁ eld of natural language pro-
cessing (NLP) to the artistic contexts of John Cage, William S. Burroughs, or Jackson Mac Low. Whether considered scienti ﬁ c or artistic, these methods 
have generally been operated in batch mode—either generating chunks of lan-guage or analyzing chunks of language. But there is nothing to prevent them from being run interactively, or to prevent the interaction with them from being structured as play. 
4.c.  Claude Shannon’s T extual Play
In fact, a number of  the logics used broadly in NLP have already been used in 
play, if  not necessarily computational play. Claude Shannon, sometimes referred to as the “Newton of  the Information Age,” even introduced one of  these log-ics by describing a textual exercise quite similar in tone to Oulipian play struc-tures such as “N+7.” 
Shannon’s nickname comes from the fact that he was one of  the major 
ﬁ gures in formulating the mathematics of  communication—what he called “the 
fundamental problem of  . . . reproducing at one point either exactly or approxi-mately a message selected at another point” (379). This quotation comes from a paper that was a milestone in the ﬁ eld, both when published on its own (as 
A Mathematical Theory of  Communication ) and when repackaged as a book with an 
introduction by Warren Weaver (as The Mathematical Theory of  Communication). While a milestone, Shannon’s paper certainly doesn’t have to be approached as a millstone. Rather, it can be approached playfully, an approach to the products of  science and technology practiced by Shannon himself. (His famous projects of  this sort include a mechanical rat for solving mazes, ﬁ gure 12, as well as a 
machine that, when turned on, performs only one action: causing a mechani-cal hand to reach out from a box and turn the machine off.) One aspect of  the paper amenable to a playful approach is Shannon’s description of  stochastic approximations of  English.
Shannon’s discussion includes a number of  sample messages. One is purely 
random. But the others have contents that are shaped by the frequencies of  particular letters or words in the English language. This shaping is of  two sorts. In one type of  shaping, individual letters or words are selected in a manner weighted by their frequency in English. In the second type of  shaping, letters or words are selected in a manner shaped by the frequency with which they appear
237Noah Wardrip-Fruin  |  Playable Media and T extual Instruments
Fig. 12. Shannon with his mechanical mouse.
in groupings of  letters or words in English. So, for example, “E” is a more 
common letter than “U” in English. However, if  there is a pair of  letters 
that begins with “Q” it is much more likely that the complete pair will be “QU” than “QE.” Taking the frequencies of  pairs into account in this manner means paying attention to the frequencies of  “digrams.” Paying attention to sets of  three is attention to “trigrams.” And, more generally, paying attention to the frequencies of  groups of  symbols (rather than only individual symbols) is the use of  “n-grams.”
Shannon provides six sample messages. In the ﬁ rst, each of  the 26 letters 
and the space appear with equal probability (388): 
XFOML RXKHRJFFJUJ ZLPWCFWKCYJ FFJEYVKCQSGHYD QPAAMKBZAACIBZLHJQD.
In the next, the symbols appear with frequencies weighted by how commonly they appear in English text (i.e., “E” is more likely than “W”):
OCRO HLI RGWR NMIELWIS EU LL NBNESEBYA TH EEI AL-HENHTTPA OOBTTVA NAH BRL.
In the third, symbols appear based on the frequencies with which sets of  two of  the symbols in English. That is to say, after one letter is recorded, the next is chosen in a manner weighted by how commonly different letters follow the just-recorded letter. The sample message created in this way is:

238Noah Wardrip-Fruin  |  Playable Media and T extual Instruments
ON IE ANTSOUTINYS ARE T INCTORE ST BE S DEAMY 
ACHIN D ILONASIVE TUCOOWE AT TEASONARE FUSO TI-ZIN ANDY TOBE SEACE CTISBE.
In the fourth, symbols appear based on the frequencies with which sets of  three of  the symbols appear in English. This, again, is called a “trigram”—with each choice of  the next letter being weighted by the frequencies with which various letters follow the set of  two just recorded. This sample message is:
IN NO IST LAT WHEY CRATICT FROURE BIRS GROCID PON-DENOME OF DEMONSTURES OF THE REPTAGIN IS RE-GOACTIONA OF CRE. 
In the ﬁ  fth, the unit is moved from letters to words. In this message, words ap-
pear in a manner weighted by their frequency in English, but without attention to the prior word:
REPRESENTING AND SPEEDILY IS AN GOOD APT OR COME CAN DIFFERENT NATURAL HERE HE THE A IN CAME THE TO OF TO EXPERT GRAY COME TO FURNISHES THE LINE MESSAGE HAD BE THESE.
Finally, in the seventh sample message, words are chosen based on the frequency with which pairs of  words appear in English. This, again, like the technique of  choosing based on pairs of  letters, is called a “digram” technique. The ﬁ nal 
message is:
THE HEAD AND IN FRONTAL ATTACK ON AN ENGLISH WRITER THAT THE CHARACTER OF THIS POINT IS THERE-FORE ANOTHER METHOD FOR THE LETTERS THAT THE TIME OF WHO EVER TOLD THE PROBLEM FOR AN UNEX-PECTED.
These messages are interesting in part because of  how they are generated. The ﬁ rst two were created using a book of  random numbers, with the addition of  a 
table of  letter frequencies when creating the second. But the rest of  the samples were constructed by using ordinary books (making the assumption that ordinary books appropriately re ﬂ ect the frequencies of  letters and words in English). 
Shannon explains the process as follows:
239Noah Wardrip-Fruin  |  Playable Media and T extual Instruments
To construct (3) for example, one opens a book at random and selects 
a letter at random on the page. This letter is recorded. The book is then opened to another page and one reads until this letter is encountered. The succeeding letter is then recorded. Turning to another page this second letter is searched for and the succeeding letter recorded, etc. A similar process was used for (4), (5) and (6). It would be interesting if  further approximations could be constructed, but the labor involved becomes enormous at the next stage. (389)
That is to say that the last sample message (which begins with a sequence that sounds surprisingly coherent) was created by opening a book to a random page, writing down a random word, opening the book again, reading until the just-recorded word was found, writing down the following word, opening the book again, reading until that second word was found, writing down the following word, and so on. This is a method that sounds remarkably like some of  the kinds of  textual play engaged in by experimental artists and writers. It certainly sounds like a technique that could be brought into an explicitly playful context. 
The surprising coherence of  the last sample is also of  interest. It shows that 
processes of  the sort being used by Shannon have potential as a form of  logic that can be made operational with linguistic material. Of  course, the sample is quite rough, in part because only one previous word is being taken into ac-count at any time. What Shannon calls “further approximations”—for example, taking two, three, or more previous words into account—certainly gives more English-like results. Shannon pointed out correctly that, using the method of  ﬂ ipping through a book, the labor involved in creating such further approxima-
tions would be enormous. But the modern availability of  computing power has made carrying out such calculations automatically a near-trivial task for reason-ably-sized bodies of  sample text. As Shannon also pointed out, the stochastic processes he described are commonly considered in terms of  Markov models. And, interestingly, the ﬁ rst application of  Markov models was also linguistic and 
literary—modeling letter sequences in Pushkin’s poem “Eugene Onegin” (Mar-kov). But Shannon was the ﬁ rst to bring this mathematics to bear meaningfully 
on communication, and also the ﬁ  rst to use it to perform text-generation play.
This model (whether called n-grams or Markov chains) is now widely used 
in natural language processing and generation, often in combination with other techniques. It has also been used in electronic literature, perhaps most exten-sively by John Cayley. At least seven of  Cayley’s works employ “collocational” word-level digram procedures, including Book Unbound as discussed by Aarseth. 
Last but not least, this approach has also been the primary basis of  textual toys
240Noah Wardrip-Fruin  |  Playable Media and T extual Instruments
such as the DOS program Babble!,  the emacs “Dissociated Press” command, 
Hugh Kenner and Joseph P . O’Rourke’s Travesty, Andrew Plotkin’s chan.c,  and 
Brion Moss’s prate—which have themselves at times been used in the generation 
processes for (non-playable) literature. However, as noted above, both the elit and toys based on n-grams have operated entirely in “batch mode.” That is to say, the interactor requests a body of  text, and then that text is produced—fol-lowing which the text can be read and another text can be requested, but no interaction with the texts (or interaction during generation) is possible. Given this limited nature of  play with n-gram texts, there is also limited context for play—usually a blank text buffer for the program to write text into. After talking with Moss (with whom I’d collaborated on The Impermanence Agent ) about these 
issues, we began to imagine possibilities for n-gram play that was less batch-ori-ented and took place within a textual context. 
4.d. Two n-gram Instruments
Moss and I approached Turbulence, an organization that supports digital me-
dia art, and they commissioned us to create two pieces. These pieces would be inspired by the idea of  textual instruments and operate using the logic of  n-grams. After a false start with different collaborators, Moss and I connected with document researcher David Durand (best known for his work in formulat-ing a number of  document markup standards, including XML) and designer Elaine Froehlich (principal of  Active Surface Design). From there, the project’s conceptualization and execution were a team effort, with the initial technical work happening on top of  Moss’s Java prate, and later development built on top 
of  work done by David Durand in Tcl/Tk.
Two major design decisions were made early on. The ﬁ rst was that, rather 
than build an n-gram text into an empty text buffer, play would always begin within the context of  a pre-created document and consist of  progressive altera-tion of  that document. This was motivated, in part, by the fact that, while the text produced by n-gram algorithms has microstructures that are recognizable from its source texts, the larger structures of  n-gram texts tend to be very similar regardless of  the starting material. Some have tried to address this by looking at larger structures in the source texts statistically, but unless the texts in question have been marked up by a human author or editor, this process involves a series of  assumptions about the text (e.g., that a period marks that end of  a sentence, as it does not in the case of  “e.g.”) that are both sometimes inaccurate and on some level aesthetically displeasing. These assumptions are displeasing because they depart from the purity of  the simple n-gram algorithm, which in its basic form would work with starting texts in Japanese or Braille or musical notation as 
241Noah Wardrip-Fruin  |  Playable Media and T extual Instruments
easily as English-language ones. However, there was also another motivation. In 
many n-gram texts, especially those based on short chains, part of  the pleasure is based on play between coherence and incoherence—and we found something more interesting, and potentially more meaningful, in such borderline coherence occurring within the context of  traditionally-created texts.
The second design decision was the identi ﬁ cation of  our basic method for 
making n-gram generation playably interactive, rather than oriented toward large batches. We decided that, in addition to the starting document (within which play takes place) we would have a body of  text used for producing the altera-tions to the starting document. (We call this second body of  text the “alteration text” or “alteration corpus.”) When the starting document is displayed, certain words are highlighted. We chose this as a convention familiar from hyperlinks on web pages, letting interactors know that a click will elicit a response. Howev-er, these words are not highlighted as the result of  author-speci ﬁ ed links. Rather, 
they are highlighted because a string of  n-gram text (of  a length speci ﬁ ed by the 
piece’s author) appears in both the starting document and the alteration text. We decided that such “bridges” between the two bodies of  text would offer interac-tors the opportunity to open up the starting document and insert text generated from the alteration corpus. More than one generated text would be offered for possible insertion, allowing the interactor to choose one or none (this last leav-ing the text unaltered). The texts offered would, themselves, be generated from the alteration text through the use of  n-gram techniques. The number of  texts offered and the n-gram length used in their production would, again, be deter-mined by the piece’s author.
Once these decisions were made, we sketched, mocked up, and eventually 
tried to make operational a number of  interaction designs. Some didn’t give the kinds of  results we’d hoped for, and others were too computationally expensive to work, but we eventually settled on one that—for us—is satisfying in terms of  the feel of  interaction and the shape of  the attention to text it creates. We’re still discussing some potential variations on the visual/spatial aspects of  the in-terface, but for the ﬁ rst compositions ( Regime Change and News Reader ) a simple, 
web-style series of  windows seemed both appropriate and easy to implement. 
More information on the details of  interaction will appear below, in the 
context of  the discussions of  these two compositions. But ﬁ rst it’s worth noting 
what differentiates the two instruments we constructed. Our ﬁ rst instrument 
was the simpler of  the two. It depended on both the starting document and alteration text existing on the local drive, with known ﬁ le names. The second 
instrument adds a number of  features, including the request, processing, and display of  network RSS feeds and HTML ﬁ les. As a result, the ﬁ rst instrument 
is better suited to compositions involving longer chain lengths (and therefore 
242Noah Wardrip-Fruin  |  Playable Media and T extual Instruments
greater coherence) because it doesn’t have to take time for network ﬁ le requests 
or for processing the wide variety of  network html ﬁ les into text that the sys-
tem can use. The second instrument is, of  course, more suited to compositions 
involving dynamic network data sources—in fact, we regard it as a type of  al-ternative browser.
While some of  this discussion may have been a bit dif ﬁ cult to follow in the 
abstract, hopefully the following two examples will make things clearer.
4.e. Regime Change
Regime Change  begins with a news article from April 2003, following the bom-
bardment that began the U.S. invasion of  Iraq. George W . Bush cites “eyewit-
ness” intelligence that Saddam Hussein was assassinated by targeted U.S. bomb-ing, and clings to the contention that the Iraqi president was hiding “weapons of  mass destruction.” Playing Regime Change  brings forth texts generated from a 
document that records a different U.S. attitude toward presidential assassination and eyewitness intelligence—the report of  the Warren Commission.
Once the window with Regime Change ’s starting text is opened, words in that 
text, pair by pair, become highlighted. Clicking on words opens a new window (ﬁ g. 13a). Interacting with new windows produces new texts that will take the 
place of  the clicked words.
Fig. 12. Regime Change  displaying its starting text.

243Noah Wardrip-Fruin  |  Playable Media and T extual Instruments
New windows contain texts that begin with the words clicked in the previous 
window. Each paragraph in the new window is an alternative text—beginning with the same words but potentially (though not necessarily) following many different paths from there. These texts are generated by connecting chains of  words (3-grams and 4-grams) that may have appeared originally in very different parts of  the source document.
A new window’s texts, once displayed, also begin to have words highlighted 
within them. Clicking highlighted words will open another new window, con-taining generated texts that can take the place of  the clicked words ( ﬁ g. 13b-
c). Opening several generations of  windows opens wider possibility spaces for the texts that will be created (and that will replace the clicked words in earlier-generation windows). Windows alternate between generation from the Warren Commission text and the original news story.
Fig. 13a-c.  Regime Change  opening multiple layers of  windows.

244Noah Wardrip-Fruin  |  Playable Media and T extual Instruments
In any window with generated text, clicking a non-highlighted word is also a 
means of  interaction. Such a click will close the window—and select a text. The selected text will run from the beginning of  the clicked paragraph to the clicked word. That selected text will then take the place of  the words clicked to open the window ( ﬁ g. 14a-b). This creates a kind of  stretchtext—the pair of  words 
clicked to open a window are replaced with the words selected in the open win-dow (usually more than a pair).
After opening several layers of  windows, part of  play is keeping track of  
where each window came from—so that it can be collapsed by selecting a word that will make a pleasing segue at the point where it will join the text to which the player intends to connect it. (This may be more than one layer down.) Keep-ing track of  context is made easier by the title bar of  each generated window—which displays the two words that will be replaced by the generated text, fol-lowed by the two words that appear after them in the text clicked.
I ﬁ nd that, when I’m playing, this cycle of  activities—reading, remembering 
context, selecting a place to click, reading again—consumes my entire atten-tion. I’ve found it impossible to “give a reading” of  Regime Change  as I might 
with other writing projects. My most successful presentation so far, instead of  a traditional reading, was a performance in which I played the text and Popahna Brandes read the results aloud.
Fig. 14a-b. Word replacement in Regime Change.

245Noah Wardrip-Fruin  |  Playable Media and T extual Instruments
Most of  the interactions I’ve described are those that I would consider part of  
the instrument. I consider the composition to consist of  the selection of  texts, the basic settings made for the instrument (n-gram chain lengths, number of  alternative texts generated, various selections of  colors and fonts, and the ways that different windows open into different texts), as well as the ways that settings change over the course of  interaction with the piece (including a “surprise” third text that becomes part of  Regime Change ’s material after a certain number 
of  third-level windows have been opened). 
Of  course, I’m aware that this particular set of  terms is not the only reason-
able way to understand Regime Change.  Rather than a focus on concepts such as 
instrument, composition, and play, it would also be reasonable to view the piece in terms of  something like Nick Montfort’s “human-computer co-authorship” (“The Coding and Execution”). Such a focus would seek to make more explicit the moves made by system and interactor during the creation of  the ﬁ nal textual 
output from a session with Regime Change.  Employing Montfort’s framework, 
we would say that the initial move is: Computer – G  (the computer provides the 
initial text). Then: Interactor – I (the interactor provides “some instructions or 
intermediate text” by clicking). Followed by Computer – G (the computer gener-
ates texts based on where the click was placed). Finally, Interactor – I, which can 
lead to A by extension or Computer—G (the interactor clicks, which may result in alteration of  text or the generation of  further text). Then these ﬁ nal stages 
are repeated, inde ﬁ nitely, until the concluding text is reached. This enumera-
tion may seem an odd exercise, but it does help us formalize how the texts of  Regime Change  differ from those created in other situations of  human-computer 
co-authorship. For example, while human participants certainly shape the texts created during interaction with  Regime Change,  Montfort’s model makes it clear 
that interactors at no point generate text.
4.f. News Reader
News Reader  is software for reading the news, and for re-forming it. It is a spe-
cialized browser—displaying a selected RSS feed, as well as the news stories to 
which the feed links. Unlike a normal browser, News Reader  also downloads an-
other set of  texts in the background—and uses this material to open each page it displays to textual play. Through this play the concerns and language patterns of  the hidden documents, as shaped by the movements and passages selected by the player, are introduced into the original news stories. News Reader  provides 
a different way to encounter the daily news, making its patterns of  repeated phrases into opportunities for disruption, and producing results that range from humorous to disturbing.
246Noah Wardrip-Fruin  |  Playable Media and T extual Instruments
When News Reader launches it displays a window containing the current 
headlines from the Yahoo! News  RSS feed ( ﬁ g. 15). Clicking the headline or pre-
view text opens another News Reader  window, displaying the story.
Fig. 15. News Reader  showing Yahoo! News  RSS feed.
A link below the text preview copies the address of the story to the system clip-
board, so that it can then (if this is desired) be opened in a traditional browser of the reader/player’s choice ( ﬁ g. 16).
Fig. 16. Opening a traditional browser with a link from News Reader .

247Noah Wardrip-Fruin  |  Playable Media and T extual Instruments
If a story is displayed in a News Reader  window, links appear within it ( ﬁ g. 17a). 
As with Regime Change, these links don’t lead to other web pages, but rather 
generate texts out of a statistical text model (in this case, trigrams of the al-teration corpus and their relative frequency). These generated texts appear in a new News Reader  window ( ﬁ g. 17b). The alteration corpus is created from the 
texts of alternative news stories (found at Common Dreams ) downloaded in the 
background when News Reader  is launched. As with Regime Change,  windows 
of generated text contain several paragraphs, each of which is a continuation of an n-gram that begins with the words in the clicked window just prior to that word clicked. And, again as with Regime Change,  clicking a non-highlight-
ed word will close a window of generated text, replacing the words clicked to open that window ( ﬁ g. 17c). The words used to perform this replacement 
will be those between the clicked word and the opening of the alternate text (“paragraph”) it was within.
4.g. Play and Variety
Playing Regime Change  can produce a wide variety of texts, especially if one 
opens and collapses many layers of windows. The potential variety of texts 
created by News Reader  dwarfs this. In fact, given that News Reader  employs ma-
terials that change several times an hour, it may be more sensible to discuss the fact that no text created with it is likely to ever be repeated, rather than the fact that it can create a great variety of texts. But variety is still worth mentioning because, as Markku Eskelinen points out in “Six Problems in Search of a Solu-tion,” we struggle with a “deep rooted humanistic fear of variety” (196).
Eskelinen observes that this fear of variety, coupled with our need to grap-
ple with digital objects that produce great variety, may be part of the attraction of computer game studies for some scholars. In computer games variation is paciﬁ ed by rules and goals. Expanding this, Eskelinen writes that when we 
have lost “the safe and somehow manageable totality, be it coherent or not” we reach a point where “computer games are interesting, as they domesticate the excess looming large in both ordinary and avant-garde products and pro-cesses, and the fundamental potential for change and unreliability inherent in new media objects” (197). Perhaps this is also the attraction of performance, of instruments, as a way of talking about digital objects that produce great variety. Performance, and especially improvisational performance, is different each time—and yet we understand that it is structured. Perhaps this is also the attraction of discussing work in terms of playability—in terms of the potential of, and structures for, play.
248Noah Wardrip-Fruin  |  Playable Media and T extual Instruments
Fig. 17a-c. A news story, a window of  generated text, 
and a textual replacement in News Reader .

249Noah Wardrip-Fruin  |  Playable Media and T extual Instruments
In a different section of  the essay Eskelinen puts his ﬁ nger directly on the chal-
lenges facing those interested in creating playable texts:
In any case an instrument is supposed to shape and frame the player’s 
action and to produce interesting variation. This is a challenge that goes far beyond the overly hyped problems of  non-linear presentation. As in any economy of  means and ends, it is important to ﬁ nd suitable 
goals and patterns of  change and variation in the functional and causal framework. (199)
It is my hope that Regime Change  and News Reader on some level accomplish 
this—providing suitable goals in the production of  interesting textual experi-ence, and simple patterns of  change and variation based on n-gram logic and interactor selection. It is my hope that they can serve as early steps toward the development of  a vibrant area of  playable textual experiences, operating along logics more linguistic than graphical.
Note 
1. It is also worth noting that other logics exist and can structure play. For ex-
ample, while  Façade includes both text and graphics, I would argue that the 
primary logics underlying play in Façade (that are encoded into the system’s structures for play) are neither textual nor graphical. In a January 2005 con-versation with Mateas, he and I came to the conclusion that  Façade might 
be described as interpreting both graphical actions and textual utterances as moves in play structured around discourse logics (and employing compu-tational techniques for understanding discourse developed outside of  play contexts). Similarly, one might understand Will Wright’s major contribution as making the logics of  simulation enjoyably playable, beginning with the urban planning simulations of  Jay Forrester which inspired SimCity.
250Noah Wardrip-Fruin  |  Playable Media and T extual Instruments
Works Cited
Aarseth, Espen. Cybertext: Perspectives on Ergodic Literature.  Baltimore: Johns Hop-
kins UP , 1997.
Adams, Dan. “The Sims 2 Review: How can a company improve on the best 
selling PC game of  all time?” ign.com: PC 10 Sept. 2004. 15 May 2006 <http://
pc.ign.com/articles/546/546893p1.html>.
Andrews, Jim. Arteroids. 15 May 2006 <http://www.vispo.com/arteroids/>.Bly, Bill. We Descend.  Vol. 1. Diskette. Watertown, MA: Eastgate, 1997.
Bub, Andrew S. “The Sims 2.” Yahoo! Games UK & Ireland.  16 Sept. 2004. 20 
June2006 <http://videogames.yahoo.com/gamereview?cid=1991249231>.Carroll, Joshua J., Robert Coover, Shawn Greenlee, Andrew McClain, and Noah 
Wardrip-Fruin. “Screen: Bodily Interaction with Text in Immersive VR.” Proceed-
ings of  the SIGGRAPH 2003 Conference on Sketches & Applications: in conjunction with the 30th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques . Ed. Ayln P . 
Rockwood. San Diego: ACM, 2003. 
Cayley, John. Interview with Brian Kim Stefans. “From Byte to Inscription.” The 
Iowa Review Web Feb. 2003. 16 May 2006 <http://www.uiowa.edu/~iareview/
tirweb/feature/cayley/>.
———. Book Unbound: Indra’s Net VI. London: Wellsweep P , 1995. 16 May 2006 
<http://www.shadoof.net/in/incat.html#BUNB>.———. windsound.  1999. 16 May 2006 <http://www.shadoof.net/in/wind 
sound.html>.———. riverIsland.  2002. 16 May 2006 <http://www.shadoof.net/in/riveris 
land.html>.Eskelinen, Markku. “Six Problems in Search of  a Solution: The Challenge of  
Cybertext Theory and Ludology to Literary Theory.” In this book. 179-209
251Noah Wardrip-Fruin  |  Playable Media and T extual Instruments
Funkhouser, Chris. “Digital Media and Cybertext Poetry.” Acta Media II: Simpósio 
Internacional de Artemídia e Cultura Digital, Auditório do MAC-USP , Cidade Uni-
versitária, São Paulo. 16 Aug. 2003.
Hon, Dan. “The Trail v.9.0.” Compilation of  knowledge of  The Beast  from the 
Cloudmakers group. 16 May 2006 <http://www.cloudmakers.org/trail/>.Infocom, inc. “Portal: Is this Interactive Fiction?” The Status Line 1987. 9.
Juul, Jesper. “The Game, the Player, the World: Looking for a Heart of  Game-
ness.” Level Up: Digital Games Research Conference Proceedings.  Ed. Marinka Copier 
and Joost Raessens. Utrecht: Universiteit Utrecht, 2003. 30-45.
Kosak, Dave. “ The Sims 2  (PC).” Rev. of  The Sims.  GameSpy PC 10 Sept. 2004. 16 
May 2006 <http://pc.gamespy.com/pc/the-sims-2/546697p1.html>.Lewis, Cory D., and Aaron Boulding. “The Sims Hands-on: We party with The 
Sims and come back with ﬁ rst GameCube impressions.” IGN. The Sims Pre-
view 13 Feb. 2003. 16 May 2006 <http://cube.ign.com/articles/386/386171p1.
html>.
Markov, Andrei A. “Primer statisticheskogo issledovanija nad tekstom ‘Evgeni-
ja Onegina’ illjustrirujuschij svjaz’ ispytanij v tsep” (“An example of  statistical study on the text of  ‘Eugene Onegin’ illustrating the linking of  events to a chain”). Izvestija Imp. Akademii nauk, serija  6.3 (1913): 153-162.
Mateas, Michael, and Andrew Stern. “ Façade: An Interactive Drama.” ACM SIG-
GRAPH 2002, San Antonio. 21-26 July 2002. 
McDaid, John. “Luddism, SF, and the Aesthetics of  Electronic Fiction.” The 
New York Review of  Science Fiction May 1994. 16 May 2006 <http://www.torvex.
com/jmcdaid/?q=node/10>.McGonigal, Jane. “This Is Not a Game: Immersive Aesthetics & Collective Play.” 
Proceedings of  Digital Arts and Culture 2003.  Melbourne, Australia, May 2003. 20 
June 2006 <http://www.seanstewart.org/beast/mcgonigal/notagame/paper.pdf>.
Montfort, Nick. Twisty Little Passages: An Approach to Interactive Fiction.  Cambridge, 
MA: MIT P , 2003.
252Noah Wardrip-Fruin  |  Playable Media and T extual Instruments
Montfort, Nick. “The Coding and Execution of  the Author.” The Cybertext Year-
book 2002-03.  Ed. Markku Eskelinen and Raine Koskimaa. Jyväskylä: Research 
Centre for Contemporary Culture, 2003. 201-217.
Montfort, Nick, and Rachel Stevens. “Fields of  Dream.” Poems that Go. Fall/
Winter 2003.Moulthrop, Stuart. Interview with Noah Wardrip-Fruin. The Iowa Review Web. 20 
June 2006 <http://www.uiowa.edu/~iareview/tirweb/feature/moulthrop/>.———. Pax. Sept. 2003. 16 May 2006 <http://iat.ubalt.edu/moulthrop/hy 
pertexts/pax>.Murray, Janet H. Hamlet on the Holodeck: The Future of  Narrative in Cyberspace.  New 
York: Free Press, 1997.Salen, Katie, and Eric Zimmerman. Rules of  Play: Game Design Fundamentals.  
Cambridge, MA: MIT P , 2003.Sandin, Daniel, Thomas DeFanti, and Carolina Cruz-Neira. “A ‘Room’ with a 
‘View.’” IEEE Spectrum  Oct. 1993: 30-33.
Shannon, Claude. “A Mathematical Theory of  Communication.” The Bell System 
Technical Journal 27 (1948): 379-423, 623-656.<http://cm.bell-labs.com/cm/ms/what/shannonday/shannon1948.pdf>.
Stern, Andrew. “Head Games.” Blog post on Grand Text Auto.  8 Dec. 2004. 16 
May 2006 <http://grandtextauto.gatech.edu/2004/12/08/head-games/>.———. E-mail to Noah Wardrip-Fruin. 5 January 2005.Stewart, Sean. “The A.I. Web Game.” 14 August 2003. 16 May 2006 <http://
www.seanstewart.org/beast/intro/>.
Superbunker, Machine Poetics Research Unit. page_space at Machine.  Online 
catalog, exhibition curated by Braxton Soderman and Jason Brown. 28 Feb-14 
March, 2004. 16 May 2006 <http://www.superbunker.com/machinepoetics/page_space/show_machine.html>.
Swigart, Rob. Portal. Activision. 1986.
253Noah Wardrip-Fruin  |  Playable Media and T extual Instruments
Utterback, Camille, and Romy Achituv. Text Rain. An Interactive Installation. 
1999.
Wardrip-Fruin, Noah. “From Instrumental Texts to Textual Instruments.” Pro-
ceedings of  Digital Arts and Culture 2003.  Melbourne, Australia, May 2003. <http://
hypertext.rmit.edu.au/dac/papers/Wardrip-Fruin.pdf>.Wardrip-Fruin, Noah, and Brion Moss. “The Impermanence Agent: Project and 
Context.” Cybertext Yearbook 2001. Ed. Markku Eskelinen and Raine Koskimaa. 
Jyväskylä: Research Center for Contemporary Culture , 2002. 
Wardrip-Fruin, Noah, Andrew McClain, Shawn Greenlee, Robert Coover, Josh-ua J Carroll, and documentation by Michelle Higa. “Screen.” Aspect: The Chronicle 
of  New Media Art. DVD. Vol. 4. 2004.
Wardrip-Fruin, Noah, David Durand, Brion Moss, and Elaine Froehlich. Regime 
Change.  7 Sept. 2004. 16 May 2006 <http://turbulence.org/Works/twotxt/rc-
index.htm>.Wardrip-Fruin et al. News Reader.  4 Oct. 2004. 16 May 2006 <http://turbulence.
org/Works/twotxt/nr-index.htm>.Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. “The Sims.” Version of  8 Jan. 2005. 16 May 
2006 <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Sims>.
Stories and Games
257Marie-Laure Ryan
Narrative and the Split Condition of Digital T extuality
Abstract: 
With computer games and avant-garde literary experiments, digital textuality has con-quered both mass audiences and academic readers interested in theorizing digital art, but it has not yet reached the middle of  the cultural spectrum, namely the educated public who reads primarily for pleasure, but is capable of  artistic discrimination. This essay explores the possibility of  curing this split condition by strengthening the narrativity of  digital texts. After examining the conception of  narrative that prevails at both ends of  the spectrum, I investigate three types of  interactive narrative that have been able to reach beyond the traditional audience of  computer games and experimental literature: embed-ded stories, represented by Myst and mystery-solving games, emergent stories, represen-
ted by The Sims , and texts with a somewhat prescripted, but variable story, represented 
by Façade, Michael Mateas and Andrew Stern’s project in interactive drama. For each type 
of  text, I suggest how to make the structure more appealing to a reader who engages with the text out of  narrative interest, and is more interested in paidia —free play—than 
in ludus—playing by strict rules for the sake of  winning or losing.
Let me begin by explaining my title: what is the split condition of  digital textual-
ity? This new form of  art and entertainment reaches both ends of  the cultural spectrum. One end is the avant-garde, those regarded as the cool intellectual elite. The other end is the masses of  computer game players. But digital texts have yet to reach the middle of  the spectrum, namely the educated public who consumes texts for pleasure, not pro ﬁ t, but is also capable of  artistic discrimina-
tion. In the domain of  print literature, this audience reads authors like Günter Grass, Gabriel García Márquez, Toni Morrison, Philip Roth, Umberto Eco or Michel Tournier, all brilliant storytellers, rather than feeding on a lean diet of  experimental postmodernism and l*a*n*g*u*a*g*e poetry, nor fattening itself  on bestsellers and genre ﬁ ction like thrillers, romances and detective stories. To 
avoid the political connotations of  “right wing” and “left wing” I will call the experimental end of  the spectrum the North Pole, because it is so “cool,” and also because it takes hardy explorers to venture into this territory, and the other end, the one frequented by the tourists of  mass entertainment will be the Trop-ics, because it is so hot. As for the still sparsely populated area situated halfway between the North Pole and the Tropics, I will call it the Temperate Zone. In digital textuality, the North Pole is represented by hypertext ﬁ ction, code 
258Marie-Laure Ryan   |  Narrative and the Split Condition of Digital Textuality
poetry, visual poetry,  experiments in computerized text generation, browser art, 
and theoretical ﬁ ction, while the Tropics are invaded by the millions of  people 
who spend a large part of  their lives playing computer games, especially ﬁ rst 
person shooters and MMORPGs. If  we look at the major artistic media, namely 
print literature, drama, and movies, as well as music and visual arts, they all cover the North Pole, the Tropics and the Temperate Zone.
1 To me an artistic medium 
only becomes truly signi ﬁ cant when it is able to conquer the center of  the spec-
trum. This does not mean that I reject experimentalism and popular culture; on the contrary, I believe that the three zones cross-fertilize each other: the North Pole borrows ideas from the Tropics, the Tropics occasionally borrows from the North Pole (but this is much less frequent), and the Temperate Zone is criss-crossed by currents originating at both ends of  the spectrum. 
In literature, drama, and movies, the magic formula for reaching the tour-
ists of  the Tropics has been traditional narrative structures, the magic formula for reaching those in love with the North Pole has often been the rejection, or what Alan Liu would call the creative destruction, of  these structures, and the magic formula for reaching the population of  the Temperate Zone has been the renewal of  narrative—a renewal that results from the successful incorporation of  ideas from the North into the narrative patterns of  the South. For instance, the automatic writing of  Surrealism did not produce stories, but it created fantastic meeting of  images that developed narratively into magical realism, perhaps the most important literary development of  the second half  of  the twentieth century. Or to take another example, the New Novel’s rejection of  most of  the immersive features of  narrative—interest for what comes next, emotional attachment to the characters—has turned it into a dead-end branch in the tree of  literary evolution, yet its self-re ﬂ exivity and metaleptic play with boundaries have invaded all levels 
of  culture, from advertisements to movies of  the middle ground. Narrative, with its universal human appeal, dominates the Tropical and Temperate Zones of  print literature, drama, and ﬁ lm. The question I would like to ask here, is whether 
it can cure the split condition of  digital textuality and create the audience that this new form of  artistic expression currently lacks. 
The concept of  narrative has been adopted in digital textuality by two schools 
with radically different goals and different interpretations of  the term. 
The Expansionist School
Members of  this school regard narrative as a mutable concept that differs from culture to culture and evolves through history, crucially affected by technologi-cal innovations. This position is epitomized by the title of  one of  the chapters 
259Marie-Laure Ryan   |  Narrative and the Split Condition of Digital Textuality
of  George Landow’s Hypertext 3.0 , “Recon ﬁ guring narrative.” In this chapter, 
Landow suggests that in the digital age narrative could become something en-
tirely different from what it has been in the oral, chirographic and print ages: “Hypertext, which challenges narrative and all literary form based on linearity, calls into question ideas of  plot and story current since Aristotle” (218). The Aristotelian ideas that hypertext challenges are:
(1) ﬁ xed sequence, (2) de ﬁ nite beginning and ending, (3) a story’s “cer-
tain deﬁ  nite magnitude,” and (4) the conception of  unity and whole-
ness associated with all these other concepts. In hypertext ﬁ ction, 
therefore, one can expect individual forms, such as plot, characterization, and 
setting, to change , as will genres or literary kinds produced by congeries 
of  these techniques. (218-9; my italics) 
This passage raises (at least) two questions, one particular and one general. The particular question is whether one can have a story without a ﬁ xed sequence. A 
story is a temporal chain of  events linked by relations of  causality. Both time and causality are unidirectional and irreversible. If  we alter the sequence, we get a different story, but within each story, the order of  events cannot be changed. Or alternatively, we can have a variable sequence on the level of  discourse, but as readers interpret the text narratively, they reconstruct a largely determinate sequence. (I say largely, because stories may include some temporally ﬂ oating 
events.) The general question is a semantic one: how much change can “forms” such as plot, character and setting tolerate, and still be recognized as plot, char-acter and setting. 
Judging by the use of  the term by some authors of  experimental digital 
texts, it seems that narrative can even do away with characters, plot and setting. For instance, the visual artist Pamela Jennings argues that the Aristotelian model of  plot is “inadequate to the creation of  computer-based interactive art” (349), and she proposes to replace it with other types of  so-called narrative structures, such as iteration, serialism, open structures, and fuzzy logic. She is basically right to point out that the linearity of  the Aristotelian plot model is dif ﬁ cult to 
reconcile with interactivity—this is indeed the number one problem of  digital narrativity—but if  iteration, serialism, open structures, and fuzzy logic are to be regarded as “narrative structures,” the term narrative no longer means any-thing. Other digital artists who present their work as narrative are Mark Amerika and Talan Memmott. Amerika describes the World Wide Web as a “public-do-main narrative environment” (9). By “narrative environment,” Amerika does not mean the countless stories posted on the Internet, but rather, the stream of  information that ﬂ  ows through cyberspace, waiting to be harnessed into a 
260Marie-Laure Ryan   |  Narrative and the Split Condition of Digital Textuality
“nomadic narrative that reinvents what it means to be an artist in a experientially 
designed cybernetic environment” (10). As for Talan Memmott, he sprinkles his “theoretical ﬁ ction” Lexia to Perplexia with the term bi-narrative, a phrase that he 
uses “to represent a degree of  reciprocity in the conductivity between agents” (Memmott, Interview), but these agents seem to be packets of  information, rather than individuated members of  a ﬁ ctional world that exists in time and 
space. Nothing really happens in the a-temporal webs of  symbols, metaphors and theoretical statements of  Lexia to Perplexia, and readers would be hard put to 
summarize the plot, describe the setting, and name the characters. For Jennings, Amerika and Memmott, “narrative” has become synonymous with avant-garde writing practice.
The Traditionalist School
This school conceives narrative as an invariant core of  meaning, a core that distinguishes narrative from other types of  discourse, and gives it a transcul-tural, transhistorical, and transmedial identity. Viewing interactivity as the most important of  the properties of  digital media,
2 representatives of  this approach 
conceive their goal as the creation of  narratives in which the user interacts inten-sively with a ﬁ ctional world, often by controlling a character. But most of  these 
scholars and developers are deeply conscious of  the dif ﬁ culty of  this project 
and of  the modesty of  the results obtained so far. Lev Manovich speaks of  in-teractive narrative as a “Holy Grail for new media” (blurb to Meadows), Brenda Laurel regards the “interactive story” as “a hypothetical beast in the mythology of  computing, an elusive unicorn we can imagine but have yet to capture” (72), and Chris Crawford laments: “To date, not a single interactive storyworld that commands wide respect has been created” (259). 
Many representatives of  the traditionalist approach (for instance Crawford 
and Laurel) are game designers who became tired of  the stereotyped plots and violent themes that dominate the videogame industry. Their dream is to develop games that people will play for the same reasons they read novels or attend mov-ies: games which will create a genuine interest in the story, rather than treating plot as a mere pretext for the exercise of  physical skills and for the adrenaline rush of  competitive action. The traditionalist approach is also represented by the OZ projects in Interactive Drama directed by Joe Bates at Carnegie Mellon University in the nineties; by Bates’s more recent Zoesis  project, and by the Nar-
rative Intelligence group led by Michel Mateas and Phoebe Sengers.
3 
The main danger of  the traditionalist school is a limitation of  its vision 
of  narrative to the models provided by the great classics of  literature, drama 
261Marie-Laure Ryan   |  Narrative and the Split Condition of Digital Textuality
and ﬁ lm. The temptation to regard digital narrative as a remediation of  other 
media ﬁ nds its expression in the title of  Janet Murray’s well-known book Hamlet 
on the Holodeck  and also in her blueprint (needless to say, never realized) of  an 
interactive version of  the movie Casablanca . There is an adage that says: if  it ain’t 
broke, don’t ﬁ  x it. Shakespeare’s Hamlet has nothing to gain by allowing the user 
to impersonate a character, just as Proust’s A la Recherche du Temps Perdu  cannot 
be improved by offering multiple choices to the user. Not all plots beneﬁ  t from 
active user participation, and it is imperative for the traditional approach to learn 
how to customize narrative patterns to the properties of  the medium. 
My preference goes to the traditionalist approach because I regard narrative 
as a cognitive construct with an invariant nucleus of  meaning. Here is my de ﬁ ni-
tion: A narrative is the use of  signs, or of  a medium, that evokes in the mind of  the recipient 
the image of  a concrete world that evolves in time, partly because of  random happenings, and partly because of  the intentional actions of  individuated intelligent agents.
The mental construct constitutive of  narrative—let’s call it a story, while 
the material signs are the discourse—can take a variety of  shapes, and it can manifest itself  in a variety of  ways. I call these different ways the modes of  nar-rativity. Here are some examples of  modes, some an established part of  literary theory and others relatively new to narratologists because they depend on media other than written language:
 
Diegetic mode :  telling somebody that something happened, usually in the  
 past. Novels, oral storytelling.
Mimetic mode :  enacting a story in the present by impersonating a 
 character and mimicking action. Drama, movies.
Participatory mode :  creating a story in real time by playing a role in the 
 story-world and selecting one’s behavior. Children’s games  
 of  make-believe, theater with audience participation.
Simulative mode :  creating a story in real time by designing (or using) an 
 engine that will implement a sequence of  events on the
 basis of  its internal rules and the input to the system. 
 Story-generating systems (i.e. Brutus by Selmer Bringsjord  
 and David Ferucci).
Some of  the modes listed above are mutually exclusive (i.e. diegetic and mi-metic), while others can be combined: for instance, a computer game is both simulative and participatory, while children’s games of  make-believe and improv theater are participatory and mimetic. 
262Marie-Laure Ryan   |  Narrative and the Split Condition of Digital Textuality
Narrative at the North Pole
The aesthetics of  the North Pole can be summarized by inverting the traditional 
slogan of  Graphic User Interface: WYSIWYG, What You See is What You Get. The only truly distinctive property of  the digital medium is the meta-property of  algorithmic operation, and for the explorers of  the North Pole, a digital lit-erature that truly understands its medium is consequently one that foregrounds the normally hidden layer of  the code. This means that literary, or artistic value does not reside in what appears on the screen, but in the virtuoso programming performance that underlies the text. 
Let me illustrate the anti-WYSIWYG aesthetics with an example from the 
visual arts. The artist Warren Neidich has produced a number of  abstract pic-tures which look like tangled lines of  various colors. If  the “paintings” had been produced by normal means, namely by brush applying color on canvas, they could have been done by a child of  three, and nobody would regard them as signiﬁ  cant artworks. But the pictures acquire an entirely new signi ﬁ cance when 
we learn how they were created: lights were attached to the ﬁ ngers and arms of  
people conversing in sign language, and the images, titled “conversation maps,” are the visual trace of  their gestures (Paul 51). 
The same aesthetic principle applies to computer-generated poetry: the art 
resides in the productive formula, and in the sophistication of  the program-ming, rather than in the output itself. As Jean-Pierre Balpe says of  his computer-generated novel Trajectoires, “the code is part of  the work.” But since code is 
invisible, the appreciation of  the work requires imagining what lies behind the screen. While the reader responses prompted by standard narrative texts range from “how moving,” “how dramatic,” to “I can’t wait to see how it ends,” or “what a surprise ending,” the ambition of  authors of  the North Pole is to elicit reactions such as are “how cleverly designed” or “what a cool idea.” These are the reactions typical of  conceptual art. 
Partly because of  aesthetic choice, but also partly because of  the aptitudes 
of  the computer, the texts of  the North Pole are much more adept at taking narrative apart than at telling coherent stories. Computers are still machines of  limited intelligence, and the principal mechanism of  automated text produc-tion is random combination. The shufﬂ  ing and free recombining of  fragments 
may work in poetry—think of  Raymond Queneau’s Cent Mille Milliards Poèmes —, 
because the meaning of  poetry is more spatial than linear, more symbolic than literal, more suggestive than explicit, and overwhelmingly metaphorical. The reader can always imagine semantic connections. But aleatory processes can-not produce narrative meaning, except by letting the legendary 10000 monkeys hammer long enough on keyboards, because narrative is the exact opposite of  
263Marie-Laure Ryan   |  Narrative and the Split Condition of Digital Textuality
chance: the subject matter of  stories is human experience, and human expe-
rience is a neverending attempt to neutralize the randomness of  life through meaningful actions. 
The mildest form of  narrative deconstruction in digital literature is found 
in classical hypertext. We cannot really speak here of  computerized, nor of  ran-domized creation, because the author writes all the lexia and places all the links, and the linking of  lexia should constitute a deliberate process of  meaning cre-ation. The ideal hypertext reader is one who constantly asks: why was this lexia linked to this other one? But when the textual network is densely connected, the designer loses control over the order of  reading. Since narrativity is based on the fundamentally linear chains of  temporal sequence and causal relations, the kaleidoscopic chunking of  the text into recombinant fragments constitutes a major obstacle to the construction of  narrative meaning. This chunking and shufﬂ ing prevents the author from controlling what information the reader pos-
sesses when he encounters a given fragment. Even if  the reader is capable of  mentally rearranging lexia into coherent narrative sequences, the very concept of  hypertext prevents the powerful narrative effects of  suspense, surprise and sudden turn, because these effects rely on a careful management of  the disclo-sure of  information over time. I am not saying that it is impossible to tell stories in hypertext format, but the construction of  a stable narrative meaning out of  elements presented in a variable order require a major cognitive investment, and this is the reason why hypertext ﬁ ction has not become mainstream. 
A much more radical subversion of  narrative coherence takes place when 
foreign elements are randomly inserted in a story. An example of  this process is The Newsreader  by Noah Wardrip-Fruin with David Durand, Brion Moss, and 
Elaine Froehlich. The Newsreader  is a very clever and often funny program that 
takes the news stories posted daily on Yahoo!, and blends them together, in a process reminiscent of  the cut-up technique of  William Burroughs.
4 When 
the reader clicks on a highlighted word, the program generates another text, by replacing part of  the text with words randomly borrowed from another story. It does so by preserving the grammaticality of  the text, but without concern for semantic coherence. Does this result in meaning? To some extent yes: the absurdity of  the resulting texts provides an ironic comment on current politics, the state of  the world, and the incessant churning out of  news by the media machine. By highlighting the juxtaposition of  the trivial and the tragic in the stories posted daily on Yahoo!, The Newsreader  also forces reﬂ  ection on what is 
considered newsworthy in contemporary culture. But if  the algorithm produces funny texts—its is an electronic version of  the mad-lib party game—these texts appeal through their non-sense, and the meaning of  the output resides on the metatextual much more than on the textual level.
264Marie-Laure Ryan   |  Narrative and the Split Condition of Digital Textuality
The creative destruction of narrative does not necessarily rely on aleatory 
mechanisms, as my last example, The Jew’s Daughter , by Judd Morrissey demon-
strates. The text presents itself at ﬁ rst sight as a standard hypertext ﬁ  ction, but 
there is only one link per screen. This means that the author retains strict con-
trol over the reading sequence. When the user mouses over a link, part of the screen replaces itself, but the new text is inserted without visible mark some-where in the middle of the screen, leaving the rest of the page unchanged.
5 
Only those gifted with perfect recall will be able to tell what is new and what is old. The only clue to the location of the new text is a nervous twitching of the affected area when the substitution takes place. Since it is impossible to return to the previous screen, the reader cannot compare the two fragments. This formula is designed to frustrate memory, and without memory, of course, the reader cannot construct a stable narrative world nor a consistent narrative action. To salvage some intelligibility, readers will interpret the replacement mechanism as an allegorical gesture. For instance, the text could signify the radical instability of meaning, the absence of a de ﬁ nitive story to tell, or it 
could be interpreted as a simulation of the dynamics of the writing process: the replacement could stand for false starts and for the technique of “cut-and-paste.” As was the case  with “The News Reader,” but for different  reasons, the 
text is only readable on the meta level. 
Narrative in the Tropics
The association of stories with computer games is a common practice among computer game designers—for instance Will Wright of The Sims, the Miller brothers of Myst, or Chris Crawford—, but it is a rather controversial position 
in the game-studies community. For the Scandinavian school of ludology (Es-pen Aarseth, Markku Eskelinen, Jesper Juul and Gonzalo Frasca), games are games and stories are stories and these two types of cultural artifacts cannot hybridize, because they present radically distinct essences. For me it is like say-ing that stories are stories and operas are music and therefore an opera cannot have a narrative libretto. I believe it is possible to speak of the narrativity of computer games without reducing them to a form of novel or movie, because novels, movies and games exemplify different narrative modes: the diegetic mode for novels, the mimetic mode for movies, and a combination of the sim-ulative and participatory mode for games. But I am not saying that all games, or all computer games, have a narrative basis. There are purely abstract games, such as chess, football, Go, and Tetris that do not ﬁ  ll the basic conditions 
of narrativity, namely offering an image of life by creating a concrete world 
265Marie-Laure Ryan   |  Narrative and the Split Condition of Digital Textuality
populated by intelligent agents whose actions make this world evolve. But this 
condition is obviously ful ﬁ lled by computer games such as Doom , Myst, The 
Sims, Morrowind , Max Payne  and EverQuest . I would term “narrative” any game 
that invites the player to engage in role-playing and make-believe, and to per-form, as part of this game of make-believe, actions that lead to practical and inherently desirable goals, like rescuing princesses and saving the earth from evil aliens, as opposed to goals made desirable by conventions, such as kicking a ball in a net or aligning three tokens in a row. The player of a narrative game engages in an act of imagination, while the player of an abstract game like football, Tetris or tic-tac-toe just follows the rules. For a long time, narrativity was restricted to children’s games of make-believe, such as playing house, cops and robbers or “who is afraid of the big bad wolf,”—games that were usually not played for the sake of winning. Roger Caillois, borrowing a term from Plato, calls these games paidia , as opposed to competitive games regulated by 
strict rules, which he called  ludus (48). In contrast to games of make-believe, 
games that were played in a competitive spirit, such as board games and sports games, required some strategic thinking, but no imaginative activity. But the computer changed all that. If there is one signi ﬁ cant contribution of digital 
technology to gaming, it is to have reconciled competition and make-believe, in short, to have introduced a narrative dimension that speaks to the imagina-tion into games of physical skills and strategic thinking.
But the narrative potential of computer games is generally underdevel-
oped. As Chris Crawford observes, narrative is generally treated by game de-signers as “just another tacked-on feature” (69), like animation, sound effects and music, instead of forming the de ﬁ ning aspect of games. This is particu-
larly true of ﬁ rst person shooters. Games like Quake  or Doom  are generally not 
played for the sake of the story, and the function of the narrative theme is to lure the player into the game, rather than to support gameplay in a strategic way. When hard-core players are engaged in the heat of the action, it does not really matter to them whether they play good guys or bad guys, humans pro-tecting the earth or destroying angels trying to turn the world into apocalyptic chaos. Game designers—with of course some notable exceptions—have had so far little incentive to vary the narrative design of games, because suf ﬁ cient 
novelty could be achieved in the domain of technology to sell their new prod-ucts: better graphics, larger worlds, faster action, more realistic game physics, and the development of built-in cameras that make it possible to record the player’s actions. As Andrew Darley has observed, narrative usually takes sec-ond seat to the spectacle of technology. But hardware improvement will even-tually reach a ceiling, and the game industry will have to pay more attention to what Henry Jenkins calls “narrative architecture” (128) because it allows 
266Marie-Laure Ryan   |  Narrative and the Split Condition of Digital Textuality
far greater variety than strategic gameplay and the spectacle of technology. 
“Narrative architecture” is the design of a ﬁ ctional world with a diversi ﬁ ed 
geography composed of various locations. Each of these locations offers its own opportunities for experiences, adventures, discoveries, and meaningful action. As the player explores this geography, she meets different characters, receives different missions, forms different goals, and faces different dangers. If by narrative experience one means the pleasure of immersing oneself in a virtual world, of writing through one’s actions the lifestory of ﬁ ctional charac-
ters, and of participating in the collective history of the virtual world, then this experience is fully compatible with the ambition of game designers, which is to create rich worlds that offer players extensive opportunies to exercise their agency. We may see in the future complex characters that arouse emotions, clever dialogue that brings out laughter, situations that create ethical dilem-mas, surprising turns in the plot, and we already have games with stunning visual settings that create artistic pleasure. When this happens, narrative will no longer be subordinated to gameplay,—the game will be played for the sake of experiencing its narrative design. 
Narrative in the T emperate Zone
If we want to extend digital textuality to a new audience, it is imperative to have a clear idea of the likes and dislikes of our targeted users. At the risk of creating these users in my own image, here is how I envision their preferences. 
The users of the Temperate Zone do not endorse a philosophy that seems 
to reign at both the North Pole and the Tropics: “No pain, no gain.” For the players of the tropics, this philosophy means having to solve dif ﬁ cult prob-
lems, while for the explorers of the North Pole, this means having to struggle with texts that require tremendous mental effort, because they reject the tradi-tional ways of making meaning. At the risk of being called intellectually lazy, the users of the Temperate Zone do not believe that processing dif ﬁ culty is 
a guarantee of artistic value, and that what Barthes called “jouissance”—the intellectual thrill provided by avant-garde texts—is inherently superior to the pleasure of narrative. Yet the users of the Temperate Zone do share prefer-ences with the lovers of the North Pole and the Tropics. Like the player of games, they love being immersed in a virtual world, enjoy exploring its geog-raphy and inventory, want to play an active role in this world, and appreciates the graphic appeal of the display. They do not like to read on the screen, except for short passages of text on the objects that furnish the virtual world, and they prefer mimetically enacted to diegetically narrated stories. But unlike the 
267Marie-Laure Ryan   |  Narrative and the Split Condition of Digital Textuality
player of games, they do not want to spend over 60 hours with the text, do not 
want to have to solve dif ﬁ cult problems nor to do research on the Internet to 
ﬁ nd out how to progress in the story, and they prefer paidia —free play with 
the objects of the virtual world—to competitive ludus. The story, for them, 
is a focus of attention and not a mere wireframe support for another type of gratiﬁ cation. They care for the characters as human beings, enjoy conversing 
with them, experience emotions through them, and unlike the game player who regards characters as either helpers or enemies, they appreciates complex personalities. Like the amateur of experimental texts, they are sensitive to the mechanisms that produce the text, and they are able to appreciate what lies below the surface, but they do not endorse a radical anti-WYSIWYG aesthet-ics. The justi ﬁ cation for the code lies in the product on the screen, just like 
the justi ﬁ cation for the complex metric and sound patterns of poetry lies in 
the musical quality they impart to language, and not merely in the challenge they pose to the poet. In other words, readers of the Temperate Zone do not regard programming virtuosity as a self-ful ﬁ lling activity and as a guarantee 
of aesthetic merit. They value artistic innovation, but they do not think that innovation requires the dismantling of narrative meaning, because develop-ing stories that take advantage of the properties of the medium, especially of the property of interactivity, is in itself a major artistic innovation over print literature, drama and movies. 
How can the user of the Temperate Zone be wooed? We can approach 
the issue from two sides: ask how texts of the North Pole can be made more user-friendly, and ask how games of the Tropics can be made more interest-ing from a narrative point of view. Here I will focus on the second possibility, by looking at some games that have been able to reach beyond the traditional audience of their genre. 
The Embedded Story
My ﬁ rst case is a game structure that Henry Jenkins calls the embedded nar-
rative. This structure covers any attempt by the player to reconstitute events that took place in the past. It connects two narrative levels: the story to be dis-covered, and the story of their discovery. The prime example of this design is the detective story. The story of the murder follows a ﬁ xed internal sequence, 
while the story of the investigation is “written” by the actions of the detective, who may discover the facts in a wide variety of different orders, as he wanders across the virtual world in search for clues. 
268Marie-Laure Ryan   |  Narrative and the Split Condition of Digital Textuality
The best known example of this structure is Myst, one of the greatest hits 
in the history of video games. In Myst there is a hidden story to discover, the 
saga of the wizard Atrus and his evil sons Sirrus and Achenar, and this story 
reveals itself progressively, as the player visits the various regions of a richly diversi ﬁ ed geography. 
But the structure is not free of problems. In a traditional mystery story, 
the detective performs dif ﬁ cult tasks of problem-solving, but the reader does 
not have to put the story of the murder back together, though he can of course try to guess the solution. Since the actions of the detective are scripted by the author, this makes it possible for the author to control the process of discovery, and to manage effects of suspense, of which the reader is the bene ﬁ ciary. But 
in an interactive environment, the user becomes the detective, and it falls to him to reconstruct the embedded story. If the user is granted too much free-dom of movement, there is the danger that he may discover clues in a less than optimal order, and suspense will be lost. For instance, he could stumble right away on a tell-tale clue that gives away the solution. Or he may discover bits and pieces of the embedded story in a hopelessly scrambled order, a problem typical of hypertext ﬁ ction. To avoid these pitfalls, games can control the order 
in which the player discovers the embedded story, by imposing a more or less rigid linear progression through the space of the game world: you must visit area a, where you will ﬁ  nd a certain clue; then you must visit area b, where you 
will ﬁ nd another clue. In Myst, for instance, the gameworld consists of a series 
of subworlds, and the user must solve often very dif ﬁ cult problems to pass 
from one subworld to the next and discover more of the story. This design is good for the dedicated game-player who plays for the satisfaction of problem-solving, but it is rather exasperating for our hypothetical user from the Tem-perate Zone, who plays for the story. The player of Myst  spends hours in front 
of closed doors, turning dials, pulling levers, and looking for hidden buttons in the hope of being admitted into the next space. For the player of the Tem-perate Zone, who would rather read a novel than solve a cross-word puzzle, this is highly aggravating. The game critic Steven Poole eloquently captures this frustration: “It is as if you were reading a novel and being forced by some jocund imp at the end of each chapter to go and win a game of table tennis be-fore being allowed to get back to the story” (109). Chris Crawford has an even better description for this interleaving of puzzle-solving and narrative: he calls it a “constipated story” (130) because it consists of a series of bottlenecks. How can we give a laxative to the constipated story? I suggest creating a design that invests in the player’s interest in the embedded story, but does not throw “un-necessary obstacles” in the way of its discovery. Movement in the virtual world should be relatively free, discovery fairly easy, and the non-playing characters 
269Marie-Laure Ryan   |  Narrative and the Split Condition of Digital Textuality
should spontaneously provide useful information or tell parts of the story. 
Most importantly, the ﬁ ctional world should be adaptable, so that when the 
player returns to a site he has already visited, something will have changed, and different narrative possibilities will open themselves. In other words, he will not encounter the same character who says the same things every time he visits the same spot, as is too often the case in computer games. If progression in the ﬁ ctional world requires the solving of puzzles, the system should take pity on 
the player after a number of unsuccessful attempts, and send a helper character who gives hints or takes the player through the roadblock.
This design would no longer be a game in the ludus sense of the term, be-
cause, if we accept the de ﬁ nition of Bernard Suits, unnecessary obstacles are 
a constitutive features of games, and it would therefore lose all the hard-core players, but it could offer a rewarding interactive experience that taps into two time-tested sources of narrative pleasure: spatial immersion in a ﬁ ctional 
world, and curiosity for its past history.
The Emergent Story
In contrast to the embedded story, the emergent story is not preplanned by the designer, but takes shape dynamically as a result of the interaction between the user and the system. The best-known example of an emergent system is The 
Sims, a game which has achieved reasonable success with users of the Temper-
ate Zone because it relies on the quintessentially narrative theme of human re-lations. In an emergent system such as The Sims, the designer populates a world 
with agents and objects capable of diverse behaviors, also known as affordanc-es, and the user creates stories by activating these behaviors, which affect other agents, alter the total state of the system, and through a feed-back loop, open new possibilities of action and reaction. The Sims  is played by creating a family 
(or alternatively, by adopting a family with a past history) and by controlling its members. Every signi ﬁ cant object and every character in the virtual world is 
a source of affordances; for instance, with a TV you can watch soaps or work out; with a computer you can play games or look for a job, and with another character you can ﬂ irt, argue, or try to have a baby. The possibilities of action 
evolve during the run of the program, as the members of the family acquire more commodities, as new characters enter the stage—for instance, visiting neighbors—and as affective relations change over time, both in the short run, as a result of the immediate effect of individual actions, and in the long run, as the result of the cumulative effect of behavioral patterns. 
270Marie-Laure Ryan   |  Narrative and the Split Condition of Digital Textuality
As is the case with any narrative, the motor that moves the lifestory of  the 
Sims forward is the satisfaction of  personal desires. The original version of  The 
Sims offered two types of  goals to the characters, and consequently to the player 
who controls them: the implicit long term or life goal of  climbing the social 
ladder and of  acquiring more and more commodities, and the short-term, day-to-day goals of  satisfying social and emotional needs, as well as physical needs such as hunger, hygiene, bladder, sleep and comfort. While the long-term goal is an implicit motivation for the player, the short-term goals are explicitely repre-sented on the menu of  the character’s desires by a bar showing their degree of  satisfaction. This bar oscillates with time, since the short term goals must be ful-ﬁ lled on a daily basis. The newest version of  the game, The Sims 2 , adds medium 
term goals of  a more individual and discrete nature, such as writing a novel, seducing a neighbor, or getting a certain job. These goals give the game greater narrative texture than the permanent life goal of  acquiring more wealth and the repetitive daily goals, because they are fully and de ﬁ nitely satis ﬁ able. They con-
sequently divide the ongoing lifestory of  the characters into distinct episodes. When a medium-range goal is achieved, the system replaces it with another, and since every Sim character has many goals, the player can choose which one to pursue actively. Narrative interest is further enhanced in The Sims 2  through 
a more complex inner world than in the original version: characters now have memories, fears, and personalized life goals (“aspirations”), but except for the aspirations, which are selected by the player at character creation time out of  a ﬁ xed menu, these aspects of  mental life are all determined by the system. The 
only thing that the player can do to affect the content of  the characters’ minds is to take physical actions that lead to certain mental and emotional states. For instance, kissing or arguing have obvious effects on the degree of  love of  the patient for the agent. The player’s control over the evolution of  the ﬁ ctional 
world is further limited by events randomly thrown in by the system, such as the house catching ﬁ re, Death taking a character away, or neighbors dropping 
by unexpectedly, and the player must learn how to respond to these events. This combination of  goal-fulﬁ  lling actions and random events makes The Sims  into a 
believable simulation of  life and a powerful story-generating system. 
The macro-level goal of  climbing the social ladder makes the player’s score 
relatively computable, as it must be in classic ludus games: for instance, it is always 
possible to compare the relative wealth of  different Sims families. But this goal can be easily subverted into play for its own sake. The Sims is indeed the best example of  paidia  in the video game industry. While the ludus player will accept 
the macro-goal implicit to the game, and choose the most ef ﬁ cient solutions 
to progress toward this goal, the paidia  player will set her own goals, and will 
often select impractical behaviors for their potential to lead to more interesting 
271Marie-Laure Ryan   |  Narrative and the Split Condition of Digital Textuality
dramatic situations.6 Most people play The Sims  out of  genuine narrative interest, 
whether they are trying to create speci ﬁ c scenarios, or are simply curious to ﬁ nd 
out how things will turn out for their characters. The game design exploits this 
narrative interest by offering the option of  a “story mode,” through which play-ers create comic strips by taking snapshot of  the screen and adding their own text. The stories created in this way are not the same as the stories created during the game, but players have been known to manipulate the game, in order to get the snapshots that will ﬁ t into the plot they have in mind.
All in all, The Sims  may be the closest we have to a remedy for the split 
condition. But it is far from providing a general and deﬁ  nitive cure. There is a 
prejudice against computer games in the educated public that will prevent many people from using the system. But even if  this prejudice did not exist, there are also internal reasons why texts patterned after The Sims  will not instantly 
conquer the Temperate Zone. Here are some of  the problems with the current design.
First of  all,  The Sims  and its putative successors are very good at producing 
comedy, and this is no small achievement, but I don’t see how such a system could be used to produce serious drama, because drama require a control of  emotions which can only be achieved through a top-down design. The repertory of  neighborhoods of  The Sims 2  includes one town, Veronaville, that is divided 
by the same type of  family feuds that underlies the tragic love story of  Romeo and Juliet, but the effect is one of  parody and comic detachment, not of  empa-thy for the characters. To put it bluntly: most players ﬁ nd it fun to make their 
Sims suffer and they don’t feel empathy for them. We will need other algorithms to cover the full range of  human experience. 
Second, a large portion of  the time spent with The Sims  consists of  perform-
ing the chores of  daily life, such as taking a shower, eating snacks out of  the fridge, or going to the bathroom. This may be fun for a while, but the novelty quickly wears out. Narrative is about the extraordinary, not about routine events. Many novels describe repetitive or trivial gestures, but they only do so to ﬁ x the 
setting and create an atmosphere. When the story starts developing, there is no need to describe these gestures over and over again. In The Sims , by contrast, 
you cannot escape the routine. Imagine that one of  your Sims falls in love with the neighbor and invite her to a party the next day. Rather than fast forwarding to the party, as a novel would do, the player will have to make the character live his life minute by tedious minute, eating snacks, taking showers and going to bed. There is admittedly a “fast” mode, but even this fast mode is painfully slow for the player eager to ﬁ nd out “how things turned out” in the courting of  the 
neighbor. To increase narrative interest, the game should enable the player to manipulate the clock, in order to jump to the more dramatic moments.
272Marie-Laure Ryan   |  Narrative and the Split Condition of Digital Textuality
More generally, I think that the user does not have enough control over the 
plot. She cannot, for instance, put new desires into her Sims: she must wait until 
the system does it for her. Nor can she construct elaborate plans to ful ﬁ ll these 
desires—for instance plans involving lie and deceit, which are one of  the main ingredients of  well-plotted stories. The reasoning power of  the fox of  the fable, who satis ﬁ es his hunger by ﬂ attering a crow and getting her to sing and drop a 
cheese, is presently far beyond the intelligence of  any Sim character. 
The most important problem to resolve for emergent systems of  the future 
is to ﬁ  nd the right balance between computer-generated and user-controlled 
events. With too many computer-generated events interactivity is reduced to trivial detail, such as sending your Sims to the bathroom before an accident happens; but with too much user control over the plot, users will be deprived of  some of  the main sources of  narrative pleasure, namely suspense, curiosity and surprise. Some users want to be authors, others prefer to be readers, and the best solution may be to make the balance of  control adjustable. The users who want lots of  control over the plot would be able to hold the strings of  several characters, and to program both their actions and states of  mind, for instance by freely selecting their fears and desires, while the users who prefer to watch the plot unfold would manipulate only one character, and this manipulation would be restricted to physical actions, leaving it to the system to compute the physical and mental effects of  these actions.
The Pre-Scripted, but Variable Story: Interactive Drama
What would it take for an interactive narrative to produce drama rather than com-edy, this is to say, to create an emotional involvement of  the user in the fate of  the characters, rather than curiosity and ironic detachment? Aristotle associated tragedy with a ﬁ xed plot pattern made of  an exposition, complication, crisis and 
denouement, and all the texts that reach a truly dramatic intensity follow this pat-tern to some extent, because it allows a strict control of  the spectator’s emotions. Aristotelian dramaturgy has indeed become something of  a Bible among Hol-lywood scriptwriters. This means that digital texts aiming at a dramatic effect will have to rely on a pre-scripted, top-down design. But in order to take advantage of  the interactive nature of  the medium, they should allow the bottom-up input of  the user to introduce variations in the script. This combination of  top-down design and bottom-up emergence is the most dif ﬁ cult problem to solve for inter-
active narrative. 
In interactive drama, the user impersonates a member of  the ﬁ ctional 
world, and she interacts with system-controlled characters through an AI-based
273Marie-Laure Ryan   |  Narrative and the Split Condition of Digital Textuality
Fig. 1. Screenshots from Façade.
dialogue system. To allow the plot to develop according to a relatively pre-de-
ﬁ ned script, the user should play the role of  an active observer, rather than be-
ing cast as the main protagonist. Since a top-down design allows only a limited number of  variations, interactive drama will be exhausted after a small number of  visits. This limited replayability places the genre halfway between the two types of  design discussed above. A text relying on an embedded story is not re-playable, because the user’s motivation is the discovery of  a ﬁ xed scenario, while 
an emergent systems should be almost in ﬁ nitely replayable, because stories are 
created in real time, by activating a rich repertory of  possible behaviors that al-low numerous, but not random combinations. 
I will conclude this chapter with a discussion of  what could very well be 
the only working example of  Interactive Drama in existence today, Façade by 
Michael Mateas and Andrew Stern. Façade was explicitly designed by its authors to close the digital gap. As the authors write, “We are interested in interactive experiences that appeal to the adult, non-computer-geek, movie-and-theater-going public” (“ Façade: An Experiment” 29). Here is how Mateas and Stern 
described the text: 

274Marie-Laure Ryan   |  Narrative and the Split Condition of Digital Textuality
In Façade , you, the player, using your own name and gender, play the 
character of a long-time friend of Grace and Trip, an attractive and 
materially successful couple in their early thirties. During an evening get-together at their apartment that quickly turns ugly, you become entangled in the high-con ﬂ ict dissolution of Grace and Trip’s mar-
riage. No one is safe as the accusations ﬂ y, sides are taken and ir-
reversible decisions are forced to be made. By the end of this intense one-act play you will have changed the course of Grace and Trip’s lives—motivating you to replay the drama to ﬁ  nd out how your inter-
action could make things turn out differently the next time. (3)
Combining serious subject matter and cartoon-style images (cf. screen shots in ﬁ g. 1), Façade brings Grace and Trip to life through spoken dialogue, facial ex-
pressions, and body language. The principal mode of  interaction is typing text, but the player can also use the arrow keys and the mouse to perform actions such as moving around the apartment, inspecting the scene from various angles and from various distances, picking up or dropping objects, and even kissing Grace or Trip on the lips. 
While the text permits many variations, it is not a plot with clearly distinct 
and predeﬁ  ned endings, but rather a compromise between a ﬁ xed story and an 
emergent system. Different runs enact different conversational events in com-binations far too numerous to be foreseen by the authors, but all of  the runs follow the same basic pattern: 
Exposition:  Grace and Trip welcome the visitor to their apartment, and 
 engage in small talk with their guest.
Crisis :  The small talk degenerates into an argument between Grace 
 and Trip that exposes the disastrous state of  their marriage. 
Denouement :  The visitor is asked to leave.
 
Variation takes place less on the level of  external events than on the level of  the interactor’s assessment of  the situation: who, between Grace and Trip, is the most responsible for the deterioration of  their marriage, and what will hap-pen after the visitor leaves? In some runs Grace and Trip tell the visitor that “everything will be all right” as they ask her to leave, while in other runs the visitor leaves under the impression that the marriage has been irremediably bro-ken. Each run actualizes 30% of  the total material available, and each selection proposes a slightly different portrait of  Grace and Trip, depending on what is revealed of  their past life, and on who tells the story. For instance, in some runs Grace presents herself  as a frustrated artist who was forced by Trip to give up 
275Marie-Laure Ryan   |  Narrative and the Split Condition of Digital Textuality
painting for a lucrative career as a magazine designer; in other runs, Trip de-
scribes her as a careerist who poses as an artist but possessed neither the neces-sary talent nor the dedication to become a painter.
The system uses pre-written dialogue modules which vary depending on 
the user’s input. For each situation, the system maintains a list of  “discourse acts” that constitute appropriate conversational responses: acts such as agree, disagree, thank, criticize, hug, comfort, or judge. The input of  the user is parsed by the system and mapped onto one of  the currently available discourse acts. For instance, if  Grace asks the user “How are you,” and the user replies “I feel terrible,” the system understands that the user expressed unhappiness, and it will make Grace respond with commiserating words and a sad expression. When the system cannot parse the text, it ignores the input and selects one of  the discourse acts appropriate to the current situation. The user cannot derail the smooth run of  the system, but because the AI module that drives the text is rather limited, the system will often respond incoherently to her input.
A major problem for the user is placing a word in the conversation. At the 
beginning Grace and Trip try to be polite, and ask many questions that give the visitor a chance to express herself. The system pauses until the player responds. But as the story develops, Trip and Grace become more and more focused on each other, and less and less on the visitor. They exchange their barbs in such rapid ﬁ re that by the time the visitor has ﬁ nished typing a line and hit the return 
key (at which point the input can be processed by the system), Grace and Trip have produced three or four lines of  dialogue, and the user’s line is no longer relevant. But this incoherence does not lead to a serious loss of  credibility, be-cause the problem is minimized by the narrative theme and by the personalities of  Grace and Trip. Thematically, Façade is about a conversation that degenerates 
into an argument. In a ﬁ  ght, you feel free to interrupt your opponent, ignore 
his arguments, make false accusations, or leave questions unanswered. If  Grace and Trip fail to respond adequately to the user’s input, it is because they are so blinded by their own anger at each other that they become unable to carry a normal conversation. Here we can say that the narrative theme has been master-fully selected to cover up the limitations of  the system. This is known among computer programmers as “graceful degradation.” 
One way of  giving the visitor more initiative without overburdening the 
parser would be to extend the possibilities of  physical actions, and make the system more responsive to them. Physical actions are much less ambiguous than verbal input because the user can perform them with a mouse click, rather than using a phrase that the parser can understand. For instance, if  you want to leave, it is much more ef ﬁ cient to do so by walking to the door and clicking on the 
handle (provided a behavior is associated with it) than by saying “Good bye,” 
276Marie-Laure Ryan   |  Narrative and the Split Condition of Digital Textuality
“I want to go,” or “I’ve had enough,” all phrases that may not be in the parser’s 
repertory. In the current version of  Façade, the possibilities of  physical action 
are still underdeveloped. For instance, kissing Grace or Trip on the lips elicits no more than a pleasantly surprised or offended look, and the ejection of  the visitor if  the action is repeated. Here the program is missing some interesting opportunities for narrative development: the kiss could for instance introduce a whispering between the user and the other character, the hinting of  an affair; or the system could respond differently, depending on whether the kiss involves same-sex or different sex partners. 
It would be wrong to say: “But a system like Façade could not be used to 
produce the story of Oedipus Rex  or Hamlet or Little Red Riding Hood .” The art 
of interactive narrative consists of thinking with the medium, which means adapting the plot to the features of the system. Mateas and Stern have hit the right plot with their story of a domestic ﬁ  ght that tolerates incoherence and 
often ignores the player’s contributions. But some features are more restrictive than others, and the viability of a system of interactive narrative will conse-quently depend on the variety of plots that it can accommodate. What remains to be seen is how much diversity the idea of interactive drama tolerates.
*
I have presented three tentative, and partial ways to refocus interest on the story in an interactive environment. Can these three designs be combined for a fuller narrative experience? In a sense no, because each of them presupposes a different type of user involvement. In the embedded story, the user is cast as a member of the virtual world, but he has no impact on the story. I call this involvement internal-exploratory (“Beyond Myth and Metaphor”). In the emer-gent system, the user is not a member of the virtual world, but by manipulating the characters she has an enormous in ﬂ uence on the story. Her participation is 
external-ontological. In the dialogue system of interactive drama, ﬁ nally, the 
user plays a role within the ﬁ ctional world, and she has limited in ﬂ uence on 
the story. Her involvement is internal and mildly ontological. It would be a very poor design strategy for a digital text to switch midway from one of these mode of participation to another. Still, some combination of the features of the three types of design is not entirely impossible. For instance, a game could combine the emergent character of The Sims  with an internal participation. In this type 
of game, the user would identify with a single character, rather than holding the strings of an entire family. The idea of the embedded story could be reconciled with a more ﬂ exible script. Take the case of Façade : there is a ﬁ xed embedded 
story to discover, namely the private life of Grace and Trip before the arrival of the visitor; but this story, rather than being investigated for its own sake, spills 
277Marie-Laure Ryan   |  Narrative and the Split Condition of Digital Textuality
into the present and determines the current behavior of the couple. Or take the 
idea of a dialogue system controlled by an AI module. It would not be feasible in a God game like The Sims, because the player is not a member of the ﬁ ctional 
world, but it is very compatible with a design based on an embedded story if the conversation is limited to the characters of the embedding story. And ﬁ nally, 
as Façade  demonstrate, interactive drama can easily integrate the kind of inter-
action that we ﬁ nd in The Sims : clicking on an object to activate its behaviors. 
The full potential of interactive drama will only be reached when it combines dialogue with simulated physical actions.
There is no simple cure for the split condition. I can write a prescription, 
but like most doctors I don’t know how to manufacture the medicine, and therefore I cannot guarantee that the Temperate Zone will some day be con-quered. Here’s my prescription:
1. The user should participate and interact out of  interest for the story, not for 
the sake of  solving problems or beating opponents. In contrast to the stan-
dard game player, she will prefer a less ef ﬁ cient action over a more practical 
way to achieve a goal, when this action leads to more interesting narrative possibilites. 
2. Narrative development should not be entirely dependent on non-interactive 
cut scenes. The user’s activities should be part of  the story, and move the plot forward, rather than being nothing more than means to get more of  the story. 
3. The actions available to the user should be more diverse than the standard 
repertory of  computer games: moving through the ﬁ ctional world, solving 
problems to get past roadblocks, and ﬁ  ghting enemies. 
4. At least some actions should be dependent on the user’s construction of  
the mind of  other characters. Decisions should be based in part on such factors as who knows what and who wants what, who likes whom and who does not. Stories are about people, people are scheming social animals, and to attract the population of  the Temperate Zone into an interactive digital environment it will take a mode of  participation that involves a network of  human relations.
Notes
1. The coverage of drama is perhaps the least extensive because the cinema 
has taken over the Tropics, but in Shakespeare’s day it did reach all types of audiences.
278Marie-Laure Ryan   |  Narrative and the Split Condition of Digital Textuality
2.  As opposed to expansionists and authors of the North Pole, who have 
produced many non-interactive texts: Flash poetry that plays like a ﬁ lm, 
or computer-generated texts that limit the role of the user to clicking the 
button that activates the generative process.
3. One of  the ﬂ agship Web sites of  the traditionalist approach is the Web site 
maintained by Mateas and Stern: “Façade: An Experiment.”
4. Another digital work that uses the computer to produce textual blends in-
spired by Burroughs’ technique of  the cut-up is Jim Andrews’ and Pauline Masurel’s Blue Hyacinth. 
5. This technique is also used by Loss Pequeño Glazier in White Faced Bromeli-
ands on 20 Hectars  and by Andrews and Masurel in the above mentioned Blue 
Hyacinth. In Blue Hyacinth, however, the replaced text is color coded, so that the reader can follow the transformation generated by mouse-over. 
6. The standard example of  a less ef ﬁ cient problem-solving action leading 
to a more interesting plot is the decision by the wolf, in “Little Red Riding Hood,” to wait until the heroine reaches the house of  the grandmother to eat her, rather than doing so during their ﬁ  rst meeting in the forest. From 
the point of  view of  the wolf  this decision makes no sense, because he is ta-king the risk that Little Red Riding Hood will never ﬁ nd the grandmother’s 
house, or that another wolf  will eat her in the meantime, but the plan is certainly motivated from a narrative point of  view. A ludus player would eat the little girl in the forest, while a paidia player would go for the masquerade of  the wolf  at the grandmother’s house.
Works Cited
Andrews, Jim, and Pauline Masurel. Blue Hyacinth. 2002. 16 June 2006 <http://vispo.com/StirFryTexts/bluehyacinth3.html>. 
Amerika, Mark. “Expanding the Concept of  Writing: Notes on Net Art, Digital 
Narrative and Viral Ethics.” Leonardo 37.1 (2004): 9-13. 
Balpe, Jean-Pierre. Trajectoires. 16 June 2006 <http://trajectoires.univ-paris8.
fr/>.
Bringsjord, Selmer, and David Ferrucci. Artiﬁ cial Intelligence and Literary Creativity: 
Inside the Mind of  Brutus, a Storytelling Machine . Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 
1999.
279Marie-Laure Ryan   |  Narrative and the Split Condition of Digital Textuality
Caillois, Roger. Les Jeux et les hommes . Paris: Gallimard, 1958.
Crawford, Chris. “Interactive Storytelling.” The Video Game Theory Reader. Ed. 
Mark J.P . Wolf  and Bernard Perron. New York: Routledge, 2003. 259-73.
Crawford, Chris. Chris Crawford on Interactive Storytelling. Berkeley: New Riders P , 
2004.
Darley, Andrew. Visual Digital Culture: Surface Play and Spectacle in New Media 
Genres.  London: Routledge, 2000.
Glazier, Loss Pequeño. White Faced Bromeliands on 20 Hectars.  16 June 2006 
<http://epc.buffalo.edu/authors/glazier/java/costa1/00.html>.Jenkins, Henry. “Game Design as Narrative Architecture.” First Person: New Me-
dia as Story, Performance, and Game . Ed. Noah Wardrip-Fruin and Pat Harrigan. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT P , 2004. 118-30.Jennings, Pamela. “Narrative Structures for New Media: Towards a New De ﬁ ni-
tion.” Leonardo  29.5 (1996): 345-50. 
Landow, George P . Hypertext 3.0: Critical Theory and New Media in an Era of  
Globalization. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UP , 2006.Laurel, Brenda. Utopian Entrepreneur. Cambridge, MA: MIT P , 2001.
Liu, Alan. The Laws of  Cool. Knowledge Work and the Culture of  Information . Chicago: 
U of  Chicago P , 2004.Manovich, Lev. The Language of  New Media . Cambridge, MA: MIT P , 2001.
Mateas, Michael, Brenda Laurel, and Gonzalo Frasca. “A Preliminary Poetics 
for Interactive Drama and Games.” First Person: New Media as Story, Performance, 
and Game . Ed. Noah Wardrip-Fruin and Pat Harrigan. Cambridge, MA: MIT P , 
2004. 19-33.
Mateas, Michael, and Phoebe Sengers, eds. Narrative Intelligence . Amsterdam: 
John Benjamins, 2003.Mateas, Michael, and Andrew Stern. Façade. Interactive CD ROM under devel-
opment.
280Marie-Laure Ryan   |  Narrative and the Split Condition of Digital Textuality
Mateas, Michael, and Andrew Stern. “ Façade: An Experiment in Building 
a Fully-Realized Interactive Drama.” 2003. 16 June 2006 <http://www.quvu.
net/interactivestory.net/papers/MateasSternGDC03.pdf>. 
Meadows, Mark S. Pause and Effect: The Art of  Interactive Narrative. Indianapolis: 
New Riders, 2003.
Memmott, Talan. Interview with Mark Amerika. Active/onBlur. 16 June 2006 
<http://trace.ntu.ac.uk/newmedia/interview.cfm>.Morrissey, Judd. The Jew’s Daughter . 2000. 16 June 2006 <http://www.thejews 
daughter.com/>.Murray, Janet. Hamlet on the Holodeck: The Future of  Narrative in Cyberspace . New 
York: Free Press, 1997.Paul, Christiane. Digital Art. London: Thames and Hudson, 2003.
Poole, Steven. Trigger Happy: Videogames and the Entertainment Revolution. New 
York: Arcade Publishing, 2000.Ryan, Marie-Laure. “Beyond Myth and Metaphor: Narrative in Digital Media.” 
Gamestudies 1.1 (2001). 16 June 2006 <http://www.gamestudies.org/0101/
ryan/>.
Suits, Bernard. The Grasshopper: Games, Life and Utopia. Toronto: U of  Toronto 
P , 1978.Wardrip-Fruin, Noah, David Durand, Brion Moss, and Elaine Froehlich. 
The Newsreader . 16 June 2006 <http://turbulence.org/Works/twotxt/nr-down-
load.htm>.
281Fotis Jannidis
Event-Sequences, Plots and Narration 
in Computer Games
Abstract:
Opening with the debate between ludologists and narratologists this essay tries to show that there is a narrative aspect in computer games that has nothing to do with background stories and cut scenes. A closer analysis of  two sequences, taken from the MMORPG Everquest II  and the adventure game Black Mirror, is the basis for a distinction between 
three aspects of  this kind of  narrative in computer games: the sequence of  activities of  the player, the sequence of  events as it is determined by the mechanics of  the game and the sequence of  events understood as a plot, that is as a sequence of  (chronologically) ordered and causally linked events. This kind of  narrative is quite remote from the proto-typical narrative serving as a source for most narratological considerations. All media and not only computer games therefore actually need their own narratology.
I. 
Within the past eight years an intense discussion has been going on between 
two positions that usually are termed ludologist  and narratologist, even though this 
discussion has not always been productive.1 One point of  departure was a paper 
by Gonzalo Frasca suggesting that outside of  other viewpoints and especially beyond narratology computer games should also be seen as games. His goal was to complement existing viewpoints. However, an important part of  the pa-per dealt with the question of  the difference  between game and narrative. Frasca 
introduced the term ludology “to refer to the yet non-existent ‘discipline that studies game and play activities.’ Just like narratology, ludology should also be 
independent from the medium that supports the activity” (“Ludology Meets Narratology” 2).
However, it was the strategy of  replacement implied in his argumentation 
that caught on rather than his suggestion to see ludology as an alternative to nar-
ratological perspectives. In his view computer games in principle are something else than narratives. If  you want to analyze them you have to choose intellectual tools adapted to the special characteristics of  games and these tools can only be provided by a type of  scholarship that sees them ﬁ rst of  all as games and 
that therefore resorts to game-theory for their analysis.
2 To quote Eskelinen’s 
282Fotis Jannidis  |  Event-Sequences, Plots and Narration in Computer Games
unequivocal manner of  speaking: “there is a crucial difference separating these 
practices from each other: in art we may have to con ﬁ gure in order to be able to 
interpret, whereas in games we have to interpret in order to be able to con ﬁ gure, 
and proceed from the beginning to the winning or some other situation” (197).3
Especially on the part of  the ludologists the debate was held with unusual 
stridency and polemics. Thus their representatives were accused to have mainly political reasons, i.e. trying to safeguard their exclusive claim for the newly created jobs analyzing computer games.
Narratologists have tried to describe computer games from the point of 
view of narrativity. One of their most astute representatives, Marie-Laure Ryan, has formulated the possibilities and limits of such an approach in the following way: 
Are we then entitled to say that a computer game is, or can be a narra-tive? To parody former President Clinton, it all depends on what the meaning of  “is” is. Those who deny narrativity to games on the ground that the point is to play, not to hear stories nor to produce a trace read-able as narrative adhere to a narrow interpretation of  the word “is,” an interpretation that reduces the possible modes of  participation of  a text in a narrative representation to the traditional modes of  literary narrativity. The inability of  literary narratology to account for the expe-rience of  games does not mean that we should throw away the concept of  narrative in ludology; it rather means that we need to expand the catalog of  narrative modalities beyond the diegetic and the dramatic, by adding a phenomenological category tailor-made for games. (“Beyond Myth and Metaphor”)
However, Ryan’s position does not convince me for reasons that I will clarify immediately even though her suggestion regarding the challenge of  narratology by computer games is decidedly worth some consideration.
One of  the basic problems of  her argument is not only the vagueness of  
some of  the terminology used, as Frasca mentions quite correctly, but also the fact that the particular claims can hardly be negotiated rationally. Ludologists do not maintain that narratives do not play a role in computer games. They argue in particular, however, that the analysis of  narratological aspects is not productive, since it is not really compatible with the dominant characteristics of  computer games (cf. Eskelinen and Tronstad; Frasca, “Ludologists”).
 The com-
ments of  the ludologists regarding this general “nature” of  computer games are relatively imprecise; they are based on a wide-ranging phenomenology of  computer games. Obviously in the ludologists’ camp there is as much agreement
283Fotis Jannidis  |  Event-Sequences, Plots and Narration in Computer Games
about the fact what a computer game “is,” as there is agreement in the camp of  
narratologists what a narrative is.
To my mind, computer games have as much in common with conventional 
games as with narratives. In some aspects there are quite a lot of  similarities, but in others they clearly diverge.
4 Like games, computer games have rules and some 
of  them also de ﬁ ne the conditions of  winning and loosing. On the other hand 
it is unusual for games that the worlds of  the game are extensively formed or developed. The inventors of  games are also in no way interesting for the players, since they only de ﬁ ne the rules, whereas there are many computer games that to 
a large extent are attributed to a designer who can even have a cult status. The history of  traditional games also cannot be used as a foundation for a ﬁ  lm.
From these observations, however, we cannot necessarily deduct that com-
puter games have to be attributed to the category of  narration. As I will argue presently, quite a bit speaks against this conceptualization. I believe, however, that a perspective of  computer games that sees them predominantly as games 
loses sight of  some important aspects, as for example the mediality of  computer games or their communicativity.
On the other hand the suggestions of  the ludologists that narratives have 
a different function in games and that they are created differently than in tradi-tional narrative media is decidedly worth some consideration. A problem in the discussions seems to be the double meaning of  the term narration that is also mentioned by Ryan in her contribution. On the one hand narration signi ﬁ es the 
medial representation of  a self-contained storyline; on the other hand it means a sequence of  chronologically ordered and causally linked events. This second meaning of  narration in my opinion emerged in the process of  a displacement; it therefore seems more plausible to use the term plot instead. For reasons that I have elaborated upon elsewhere I would conceptualize the term narration in its ﬁ rst meaning as prototypical (“Narratology and the Narrative”).
 This proto-
type roughly means that somebody narrates to others a concluded sequence of  chronologically and causally connected events that have happened in the past. Related to this prototype of  oral narration, literate narration is already a variant, connected to a change of  medium. To my mind it is an advantage of  this termi-nology that thereby the dependency on the medium remains obvious. Since the point of  departure is a prototype in the case of  ﬁ lm one does not have to ask any 
more who the “narrator” is in the ﬁ lm, since it becomes clear how great the gap 
between this type of  narration and the prototype already has become.
5
Let us come back to computer games. In contrast to other scholars I don’t 
want to abandon the question of  narrativity and computer games, not the least because in discussing these questions we can learn some interesting les-sons for narratology as a whole. To borrow a phrase from Salen and Zimmer-
284Fotis Jannidis  |  Event-Sequences, Plots and Narration in Computer Games
man: “The question is not if games are narrative but how they are narrtive. The 
impressive diversity of  computer games” ( Rules and Play 379) clearly has the 
effect that general statements valid for all computer games are quite abstract 
and do not open up a path for the analysis of  individual works. Therefore in the following I would like to discuss the phenomena that interest me with the help of  two examples representing two genres: Black Mirror (Adventure) and 
Everquest II  (MMORPG).
 These games certainly contain plots, but unlike plots 
conforming to the prototype of  narrative these game plots are not completed at the moment of  playing the game. At least it is usually not communicated that the story ( histoire ) is ﬁ nished while in the prototypical narrative the narra-
tor knows the end of  the story because he is telling it after it has ended. This is obviously an effect of  the interactivity of  computer games because the activity of  the player is happening simultaneously with the action in the game world. On the other hand the players know that the sequence of  events in games is more or less prede ﬁ ned and constructed by a game designer.
The initial observation for the following ideas was an experience while play-
ing the ego-shooter Half-Life 2. In his ﬁ  ght against the invaders and while he is 
constantly running away from the security forces of  the Quisling government 
the hero led by the player ends up in a labyrinth of  courses of  rivers and chan-nels that he crosses with a speed boat. Times and again he is shot at from the air above or from the banks or has to dodge mines that just were planted. In this stressful situation we simply follow the course of  the rivers and channels, always hoping that the next place might be a bit calmer than the one we have just left. At the same time it is obvious that one always knows where to go. The route through the system of  channels is constructed in such a way that we can decide very quickly which is the correct way, since it is the continuing one that ﬁ nally 
leads us to the next level. Where do we know this from?
Expressed differently and more generally: I am interested in a series of  
questions that are connected:
1. How does the player of  a computer game know what to do next?
2. How are events in the game connected to an event-sequence that is relevant 
for the game?
3. How do these patterns and gameplay relate to each other?
6
4. How are these event-sequences embedded in the game?5. How do these event-sequences relate to “narrativity”?
The different questions are connected to different perspectives of  the game. In 
order to answer the ﬁ rst question the game has to be reconstructed from the 
perspective of  the player at a certain point in the game. In order to answer the 
285Fotis Jannidis  |  Event-Sequences, Plots and Narration in Computer Games
second question, we have to reconstruct the relevant mechanics of  the game as 
a whole. The third question, the embedding of  the event-sequences can be seen both in the context of  other possible patterns of  activity in the games and in the context of  the story that is constituted by it and its relation to other stories con-nected to the game. All these questions initially have to be answered differently for each game, while the last question is aimed at a more general problem. 
II.
Let us start with a simple example. In MMORPGs quests are tasks that the player receives from a quest giver and that are rewarded in the end. Games like Ever-
quest II  contain several thousands of  quests. There are especially simple quests 
(“Go to place X and speak with NPC Y”) and very complex series of  quests.
7 
Quests are simple examples insofar as some of  the above mentioned questions can be answered very quickly. Since in MMORPGs several thousand PCs (player characters) and NPCs (non-player characters) can exist in the same virtual world it is by now an established convention to mark the quest givers graphically; ac-cordingly the situation is unequivocal for the player before he even approaches a quest giver. Since quests in the games are tasks, which the player can take on if  he is interested in the indicated reward, there is no uncertainty about the question when he receives the option to act. Our example, the quest “The Missing”
8 is the 
ﬁ rst quest of  a lengthy series at the end of  which the player has activated a new 
“race” and now on his own can create characters of  this race. Within the world of  the game these ﬁ rst three quests are aimed at the player’s winning the trust of  
the quest giver.
The player gets the task of  a quest giver in the context of  a dialogue.
9 After 
he has accepted the quest it is entered into his quest-book that in a few sentences informs him about his task. If  we compare the two sources of  information in the present case we notice that in the quest-book only the name of  the character to be found is given, but not a description of  the place. The description of  the place by the quest giver in the dialogue on the other hand dispenses with the usual names of  the game, which are also visible on the map that each player has of  many zones: “I apologize, I do not know the names of  places here. T’was quite a ways south east of  here, however. There was a great forest situated on the banks above.” With some knowledge of  the place the player then nevertheless is able to recognize the intended place; at least he will recognize roughly the direction in which he has to search. These instructions however are in no way clear enough for him to get all the information. On the contrary, in many cases quite a bit of  knowledge about the game is necessary in order to interpret the clues correctly.
286Fotis Jannidis  |  Event-Sequences, Plots and Narration in Computer Games
  Fig. 1. Receiving a quest through a dialogue (in Everquest II).
The respective events of  the quests, often small tasks like “ ﬁ nd the place X” or 
“kill the monster Y” are rather independent and the connections between the 
events are quite loose so that the player of  a quest can interrupt his work on the quest at each point and can do something completely different. The player is in-formed about such a task in the quest through a clearly visible visual announce-ment, called a quest update in the jargon of  games; subsequently quite often the 
description of  the quest is changed in the diary. When the player is working on the quest “The Missing” after having received the command, he will search for the beach on which the missing Froglok was seen the last time. But at the beach he will not ﬁ nd the Froglok but tracks which he now has to follow. This pursuit 
in the game is staged in such a way that at the beginning he received a direc-tion, i.e. “The Froglok tracks continue back to the East.” This clue, however, is consciously vague and the player has to search in the indicated direction until he ﬁ nds an object that he can click on. In this case it is relatively unproblematic, 
since the player has many levels more than the animals or the aggressive inhabit-ants of  the area in which he has to search. In other quests it may be just this task to ﬁ nd ones way in a dangerous environment.
At the end of  the search for tracks the player has ﬁ nally found the missing 
Froglok and now has to lead him to the next watchtower. But this task cannot 

287Fotis Jannidis  |  Event-Sequences, Plots and Narration in Computer Games
be completed successfully since his charge always dies shortly before reaching 
the watchtower. Only the changed entry in his quest-book tells him at this point what he now has to do: to return to the Quest Giver. Actually the player has successfully completed his quest despite his failure in the narrative and now has the possibility to start the subsequent quest.
How are the quests embedded in the game? Probably in this case we have 
to differentiate between two aspects. After the player has accepted the quest, he has two possibilities to act. He instantly can work on the quest or do something completely different. Even though quests are possible sequences of  activity for a player they do not necessarily structure the game as a whole. In other words, quests may offer possibilities of  meaning to the player, but he can and will at the same time accept many other possibilities. By himself  or as a group he can collect experience points in order to reach the next level; he also can buy or sell things through the broker in order to make money or to improve his own equip-ment. He can also pursue a trade or he can harvest in order to sell his crop or use it in his trade. Quests, in other words, are relatively independent sequences of  events and this means that it is not important for the game whether one follows a quest or not. In Everquest II there seems to be a tendency to abolish all quests 
relevant for the game.
10 The only exceptions to this autonomy of  quests are con-
necting quests that are only cleared and activated after the preceding quest has been completed. In this manner relatively long chains of  quests can emerge.
Alongside this relatively tight embedding through a pattern of  events that is 
made possible only by completing the quest there are still other forms. Everquest 
II, for example, knows an intricate faction system . Faction means the status of  the 
player during a certain social unit of  the game. If  this status falls below a certain value the player is attacked by the members of  this group. Quite often the result of  quests is the fact that a player improves or worsens his status. Certain quests only are cleared or activated when the player has reached a very high status. In dialogues the player often gets clues that he has not yet acquired the “trust” of  the group to the extent to receive additional information.
Another form of  embedding is achieved by the narrative elements. Everquest 
II is surrounded by and contains numerous lore and legends. Everquest II is the 
successor of  the relatively successful game Everquest I.  The setting is the same 
world as in Everquest I,  but the time of  action is 500 years later. Before the game 
was published on a website, a series of  short prose texts were circulated that informed about the main events between Everquest I  and Everquest II (“Tome of  
Destiny”).
 The events of  this earlier frame narrative determine the game from 
several points of  view, starting with the political factions and including the ap-pearance of  the world as well as the fact that a series of  quests is even more or less closely related to events in this frame narrative.
288Fotis Jannidis  |  Event-Sequences, Plots and Narration in Computer Games
The quest “The Missing” analyzed above refers to the narrative of  the 
Frogloks. Only some years after Everquest I was on the market the Frogloks 
became a race that could be chosen by the players and they obtained their own 
city, Gukta. This was motivated by a frame story that narrated the eviction of  the trolls who had been the original—of  course “evil”—inhabitants of  the city. Between the two games a great battle of  the evil forces took place that among others also conquered Gukta. But some Frogloks managed to ﬂ ee, even though 
they lived in slavery for a long time and only lately a small community of free Frogloks was built. But the player does not receive this information at the be-ginning of this quest sequence but only after he has won the trust of the Quest Giver and when he has reached the secret subterranean city of the Frogloks. There he has to complete several additional quests in order to gain the trust of the Chief. One of these quests is ﬁ  nding the answers to a series of questions 
concerning a history lesson.
11 
The gameplay for the completion of quests mainly consists in moving the 
character through very dangerous environment, in ﬁ nding objects and in kill-
ing monsters. The latter can often be very dif ﬁ cult since it necessitates a group 
(6 persons in all) or even a raid (totaling 24 persons).
How important then is the embedding of the sequence of events into a 
meaningful structure of the narrative? We can complete most of the quests without paying attention to this narrative and according to my observations this is the manner in which most players are playing. The reason probably is that the quests do not change the world of the game. The only change that can be achieved by the player is receiving his reward,
12 which is his main interest 
anyway. There are some signs that quests can change the world of the game for a certain time or even lastingly. Everquest I for example contains a zone in 
which a continuous war with battles between three parties is taking place and it is part of the assignments of the player to help one of the parties to a tempo-rary victory. But it is clear that in this respect the design of the game con ﬂ icts 
with the story. From the point of view of design every player of a MMORPG is supposed to have the same possibilities, i.e. quests, as all the others. A story, however, put very simply, narrates—if it is worth telling at all—a fundamental alteration of the world. 
III.
Black Mirror: The Dark Side of the Soul  is a horror-adventure game that is not 
afraid of some strong splatter-effects. The player is leading the young noble-man Samuel Gordon who for the ﬁ  rst time in many years returns to his an-
289Fotis Jannidis  |  Event-Sequences, Plots and Narration in Computer Games
cestral castle. Samuel soon suspects that the alleged suicide of his grandfather 
was a murder. It seems to be somehow connected to a curse that William had investigated because it has haunted the family for many years: Every 200 years one of the family members goes insane. William had found out that this curse somehow is connected to ﬁ ve peculiar keys that are handed down in the fam-
ily. The greatest part of the activities of the player consists in getting back these ﬁ ve keys, mostly from the graves of the respective family members. During 
Samuel’s investigations a series of further murders occur which he is also try-ing to clear up. An added parallel plot concerns his uncle Robert who later is also murdered. He is the classical mad scientist who is using his position as the 
director of an insane asylum for lethal experiments on human beings. In the end Samuel ﬁ  nds out that he himself is the murderer. He succeeds in breaking 
the curse and commits suicide in order to atone for his sins.
13
The way in which this game is played as well as its technique makes it 
into a classical adventure game. The player receives a ﬁ  xed 2D-view of each 
setting and can only change from one view to the next. The mouse helps to explore the image and changes its color for all active objects. The player can investigate all these objects and can take over some of them into his inventory or use them. Objects in the inventory often have to be combined with other objects.
14
The section analyzed in the following is part of the narrative sequence 
in which Samuel receives the key from James, his unhappy uncle, whose mild insanity was reason enough for his brother Robert to put him into an insane asylum. As the player knows at this point in the game, James has hidden the key in the ancestral castle, in all probability in the intricate sewage system that could not be entered until now. 
The ﬁ rst image shows a turning wheel on a mechanism on its right hand 
side ( ﬁ g. 2).
15 The mechanism cannot be operated and at this point the player 
would not even know why he should operate it. On the other hand, half-broken mechanisms that have to be repaired belong to the conventions of the genre. The player then can rightfully assume that this mechanism will signi ﬁ cantly 
contribute in reaching his goal to collect all ﬁ ve keys. 
One of the active objects in this image is the gear wheel on the ﬂ oor. If 
you click on it, Samuel picks it up. The description of the gear wheel in the inventory: “Where could this ﬁ  t?” indicates that the player has to ﬁ  t it into 
something. The great similarity of the picked-up gear wheel with the one that is part of the mechanism provides a further clue to the player where he has to install it. After the installation, however, the mechanism still is not moveable. Another empty pin seems to imply that the player has to look for the third gear wheel in order to ﬁ  nally be able to get the mechanism going.
290Fotis Jannidis  |  Event-Sequences, Plots and Narration in Computer Games
  Fig. 2. Strange mechanism in Black Mirror as the next problem for the player.
The player then ﬁ nds what he is looking for on the second image of the sewage 
system, but he cannot reach it. This opens up another task that further delays 
the main task. In order to reach the gear wheel he ﬁ  rst has to change the level 
of water; for this he needs a lever. And in order to be able to use the rod he found as a lever he ﬁ rst has to grind it down, etc.
One of the characteristics of Adventure Games is to give the player only 
vague hints what has to be done next. However, the goal of his activities is quite clear.
16 It is only the way to the goal which is unclear. To ﬁ nd out which 
steps to take is one of  the basic repertoires of  the gameplay of  Adventure Games. Part of  these is the careful searching of  the image for active objects and the combination of  objects in the inventory with objects in the image as well as dialogues with characters and the solution of  independent puzzles. In the search for solutions, however, several aspects support the player. It is especially his knowledge about the conventions of  the genre and his knowledge of  everyday life that limit the free permutation of  all activity-options. The similarity of  the gear wheels with the free pin for example works in this manner so that it does not make much sense to use the map or a coin on the gear wheel swimming in the water. This, however, is a scaleable dimension to which reviews of  the game often refer with phrases like: “The riddles are logical.” It is of  prime importance 

291Fotis Jannidis  |  Event-Sequences, Plots and Narration in Computer Games
for the player to know that there is a solution at all and that his hunt will be 
deﬁ nitely successful at some point.
In many games not all objects are functional but exist only in order to en-
rich the world of  the game; to a certain extent then they belong to the category that Roland Barthes has called reality effects enlarging the seeming options of  activity for the player. The designers of  Black Mirror therefore have chosen a 
middle way. Many of  the non-functional objects cannot be activated any more after having been clicked on once or twice so that they are no longer activity-options.
The activities of  the player create a sequence of  events of  which some are 
relevant for the game in order to allow for further steps. Therefore, as in the case of  MMORPGs, we have to differentiate between the narrative sequence of  the player and that on which the game is dependent with a minimal amount of  steps for the solution. The one is accessible by means of  narratives of  play-ers like: “. . . and then I searched for a long time until I found out that. . . .” The other by studying the code or the suggestions for solutions, the so-called walkthroughs. 
The activities of  the player and the events in the world of  the game are 
more closely related than in a MMORPG. As I have already mentioned: Even though the gameplay mostly consists of  the combination of  objects, the type of  combination is made meaningful by referring the possible combinations sen-sibly to each other since its semantizations like “tie the hook to the string,” or “use the ﬁ shing rod to get the gear wheel out of  the water” contribute to limit-
ing the activity-options for the player. 
IV.
If  we look at these admittedly still very sketchy analyses of  narrative sequences in MMORPGs and Adventures it becomes clear that we have to distinguish between three types of  event-sequences, at least for these genres:
1. The sequence of  activities of  the player
2. The sequence of  events as it is determined by the mechanics of  the game, 
i.e. in quests, but also in the type of  setting and the arrangement of  objects in ego-shooters or the distribution of  mobs with certain levels in different zones.
3. This sequence of  events (as mentioned in point 2) is understood as a 
plot, that is as a sequence of  chronologically ordered and causally linked events.
17
292Fotis Jannidis  |  Event-Sequences, Plots and Narration in Computer Games
After what has been said so far, the ﬁ rst probably has been described clearly 
enough. In point 2 I am referring to sequences of  events that are de ﬁ ned in 
the mechanics of  the game. Depending on the genre and type of  action this 
can mean clearly de ﬁ ned events or also rather as possibilities. A quest for ex-
ample describes a clearly de ﬁ ned sequence of  events. Zones can be arranged 
as proposals to players bringing them to areas with mobs appropriate for their own level. The players can accept these propositions or decline them, thereby experiencing another sequence of  zones. Thereby greater sequences of  events emerge because there are players of  level 10-20 in zone A and some of  level 20-30 in zone B etc.
The difference between my points 2 and 3 will best become obvious from 
an example. If  the player in the quest-sequence in Everquest II that I analyzed 
has won the trust of  the quest giver he can travel into the hidden city. From the perspective of  the mechanics of  the game two ﬂ ags have been set in order to 
save the successful completion of  two quests. What from the point of  view of  the plot appears as a causally connected sequence of  events from the point of  view of  the mechanics of  the game materializes as the setting of  binary ﬂ ags. 
Why is this perspective of  the mechanics of  the game important at all? Because players know about it and behave accordingly. Indeed, the relation of  points 2 and 3 is a problem for each computer game and we can assume that the fact that many observers still claim an infant state of  computer games has to do with the slow progress of  their development. 
The more rigorous the sequence of  events is organized in the sense of  
the second point, the fewer event-sequences can be added that are considered meaningful. The more complex the worlds of  the game become the more in-dependent point 1 will become of  point 2. Certainly it is no coincidence that especially in MMORPGs the narratives of  players are so numerous.
Apart from these three event-sequences there are also those that are narra-
tive in a traditional sense: cut scenes informing the player about changes in the game world or texts (for example as narratives of  characters in the world of  the game that describe past events) or even in form of  narrative paratexts. As mentioned above, very often these forms have been called “narrative” and have been seen in contradistinction to the “interaction” of  the game.
 If  we treat these 
narratives as unimportant because for the gameplay they seem to be insigni ﬁ -
cant additions then we have constructed a strong opposition, which, however, is intellectually not very satisfying. I also believe that narration in this traditional sense is not a central element of  computer games but I do not feel that it is opposed to the organization of  event-sequences that are central for computer games or at least for the two genres analyzed here.
293Fotis Jannidis  |  Event-Sequences, Plots and Narration in Computer Games
But does it then make sense to treat all these different forms of  event-se-
quences in the same way? To my mind, yes: All of  them, point 1 excepted, result 
in the player’s awareness of  an intelligence that invents the events and their sequence and presents them to him, the main difference between the event-sequences lying in the way in which they are presented. In this perspective the comparison to simulation that sometimes is applied in order to replace the com-parison to narration
18 does not seem very productive since it is just this organiz-
ing intelligence as counterpart that does not ﬁ nd a place here, even though it 
is securely established in the world of  computer games and its cult of  author-designers or in the complaints about bad game-designers. The assumption that the world of  the game is an artifact that is intentionally related to the situation of  the player is a central element for the inferences of  the player to ﬁ nd out 
what he now can or should do. It is just this minimum assumption that is thefoundation for these inferences that lead to a move after having evaluated the possibilities of  action.
Let us summarize: In computer games event-sequences are organized and 
actualized by players. The sequences can be organized more or less rigidly ac-cording to the degrees of  liberty of  the game. From the perspective of  the player, at least two important event-sequences will emerge: On the one hand the one that is played by himself, and then the one that corresponds to the mechanics of  the game. And thirdly the meaningful organization of  event-se-quences in narratives comes into play. It seems to me that the narratology of  computer games has to be adapted to this multilayered “nature” of  the medium. If  we want to talk of  a narration in computer games at all—since regarding the prototype of  narrativity it seems to be a borderline phenomenon—it is mainly the organization of  event-sequences that we have to be concerned with and the different aspects of  these sequences that only in an interactive medium can drift apart to such an extent.
This does not mean that something important has been said about all com-
puter games. But maybe questions about the nature and especially that of  all 
computer games are not very productive anyway. 
Appendix
I. Everquest II
The following written record shows the dialogues and activities of a quest 
which is the beginning of a longer sequence of quests. The reward of this se-quence is opening up the frogloks, a froglike race, so that the player can choose a froglok as PC himself. Played on February 2, 2006.
19
294Fotis Jannidis  |  Event-Sequences, Plots and Narration in Computer Games
The ﬁ rst three quests could be entitled: “Winning the trust of the 
Frogloks.” Here one can win the trust of the Frogloks to the extent that one 
can travel to their village. There, one has to win the trust of their leader with the help of a sequence of further quests.
1
st Quest: The Missing
You say, “Hail, Frup Groaak”Frup Groaak says to you, “Any of  them at all? We were wandering 
through the vast green lands beyond these walls, when we were set upon by brigands!”
You say to Frup Groaak, “Wait a minute, I don’t think I’ve seen you 
around here before.”
Frup Groaak says to you, “Indeed, I should think not. I was very sur-
prised to see other of  our kind around here. I and my brothers managed to make our way here from far to the south.”
You say to Frup Groaak, “Far to the south?”Frup Groaak says to you, “In the depths of  the Feerrott. I cannot ex-
plain more now - trust is something which must be won, and our home cannot be revealed to those who might wish us harm.”
You say to Frup Groaak, “I’ve no wish to harm you.”Frup Groaak says to you, “Then perhaps you’ll wish to help.”You say to Frup Groaak, “I’d agree to that.”Frup Groaak says to you, “The other I came to these shores with, Gi-
idib, set out from the beach in the opposite direction as I.”
You say to Frup Groaak, “Which beach?”Frup Groaak says to you, “I apologize, I do not know the names of  
places here. T’was quite a ways south east of  here, however. There was a great forest situated on the banks above.”
You say to Frup Groaak, “I’m sure I can ﬁ nd that.”
Frup Groaak says to you, “I would like to see Giidib join me here in 
Qeynos while I plead our case to your illustrious Queen.”
You say to Frup Groaak, “I will set about ﬁ nding him.”
Description of  the quest (each player has a quest-book with all open quests with their description):
“A new froglok has washed up on the shores of  Qeynos. Frup Groaak bids meseek out [!] a lost compatriot of  his, Giidib. Very curiously, no one seems to have heard anything about frogloks outside of  Qeynos since the Age of  Cataclysms.”
295Fotis Jannidis  |  Event-Sequences, Plots and Narration in Computer Games
 In the zone Antonica at the beach we ﬁ nd the tracks of  Giidib as 
well as an indicator for a direction. If  we follow these tracks we come 
to a rock that is only active for those players who are on this level of  the quest. Option for activity: “Search around the rock.” Result: “Quest journal update! The froglok tracks continue back to the east.”After several such updates we ﬁ nally ﬁ nd Giidib in a pond and 
get the task to lead him to the next watchtower. Just before arrival Giidib dies without the player having any possibility to prevent that. All we can do is to let Frup Groaak know. 
You say, “Hail, Frup Groaak”Frup Groaak says to you, “I sense from the sadness that surrounds 
you that something has gone wrong. . . .”
You say to Frup Groaak, “I don’t know how to tell you this. . . .”Frup Groaak says to you, “. . . but he has gone to the embrace of 
Marr’s mighty arms. This is plainly written in your expression.”
You say to Frup Groaak, “He was ambushed before I found him.”Frup Groaak says to you, “W as he able to fend off his attackers at 
least?”
You say to Frup Groaak, “Yes. It was the poison that did him in.”F ru p  Gr o aak  s a ys  t o  y o u,  “P o is o n?  This  is  an  as s as s in ’ s  t o o l.  Wh y  
would he be hunted in such a fashion?”
You say to Frup Groaak, “I am unsure.”You gain experience!Frup Groaak says to you, “Allow me to think for a time, and I will 
commune with Marr. Perhaps he will grant me guidance.”
You say to Frup Groaak, “Very well, I shall seek you out later.”
From the history book of the Frogloks [The text is contained in a history book of the Frogloks that the player receives and about which he has to be able to answer questions during a quest]:
We are the children of  Mithaniel Marr, god of  valor. He has given unto us a greater share of  honor than was given to any other creature. We would rather die with honor than extend our lives through deception of  any kind.This can be challenging for others—the concept that laws are not meant for the breaking. While we try to be understanding that not everyone shares our belief, it is still distressing to see rules bent and broken. The laws of  the land are not simply suggestions, as some seem to think.
296Fotis Jannidis  |  Event-Sequences, Plots and Narration in Computer Games
Such is the way of the troll. After many attempts to peacefully coexist 
with them in the Innothule Swamp, their utter disregard for protocol ﬁ nally provoked us to battle. The blessing of Mithaniel Marr was with 
us as we drove them from their ﬁ  lthy city of Grobb. In His honor, we 
renamed it Gukta, Outpost of Marr.Some may wonder why we contented ourselves with a simple home like Gukta, when our obvious intelligence indicates we might pre-fer plush surroundings. That is not our way, you see. It seems those whose skin is laced with hair need warmth and softness in their sur-roundings. We are comforted in other ways.Others have said that we frogloks are too proud and that we deserve the challenges that have been our lot through the Ages. We do not deny the pride we feel in our heritage. We were created by Mithaniel Marr, after all. Through his grace, we have overcome many adversities that would have brought others to the brink of despair.When the ogres of Rallos Zek began their reign of terror, they tried to start with Gukta. They thought they knew all the deepest reaches of our territory, thinking that we had not changed or developed it after wresting the city from the trolls. The ogres fought without honor, to their own detriment.We are not taken unawares with ease. The foul ogres thought to de-stroy us, but we were guided by the Hand of Marr. Our eggs were carried deep into the tunnels, followed by elite forces to guard them. Deep beneath the marshes we went. We sent emissaries to Freeport to advise the Overlord of the rise of the Rallosians.The Overlord brushed our concerns aside and so, with barely three days’ rest, our emissaries headed to Qeynos to warn the Bayles. Though sympathetic, they chose only to increase their watches rather than ad-vancing to attack before the Rallosians expanded their reach. How we wished they had listened! The Rallosian Army grew in strength and power until the cities of Freeport and Qeynos were besieged. The blessings of Mithaniel Marr still protected the faithful. The hon-orless ogres broke faith with their own allies, de ﬁ ling the Temple of 
Cazic-Thule. And so, in the darkest hours when it appeared that the Rallosians would conquer all, the Green Mist covered the battleﬁ  elds, 
slaying our enemies. However, not all our enemies were destroyed.Though many of our adversaries perished in the time of the Green Mist, some escaped by continuing to pursue us. Deeper into the marshes we ﬂ ed, and still they followed. It was then that we felt the 
rage of the gods.
297Fotis Jannidis  |  Event-Sequences, Plots and Narration in Computer Games
By failing to stand our ground and hold back the tide of  the enemy, we 
disappointed the gods who had held us high in their trust and esteem. Punishment was both swift and severe.Though we had escaped the Rallosians, we could not escape the tor-ments to follow. The Rending kept those of  us who had scattered apart. Separated from any other honorable race, we drifted into oblivion.And yet, oblivion would have been more kind than that which we en-dured. For those of us who found our way to the Feerrott were taken prisoner by the Tae’Ew, who fed us to their god.Generation upon generation of froglok has been subjugated by the Al-liz Tae’Ew. They demanded service and, weakened by the calamities that had befallen us, we were in no position to rebel. Until now.In secret, several of our strongest broke free and are repeating the journey made so long ago when we ﬁ rst sent word to Freeport and 
Qeynos that the Rallosians were on the move. Surely we have atoned for our offenses against the gods and will be saved.
II. Black Mirror
The following written record somewhat simpli ﬁ es matters since the search for 
active points in the image is one of the main tasks in an Adventure.
If the player clicks on an active object for the ﬁ rst time, he usually receives 
a lengthy description. Some objects cannot be clicked on any more after the 
ﬁ rst or second time. Upon further clicking on the others the player only gets 
a short statement. In the following the number is marked directly after the description of the object.
The exact task is unknown to the player when he enters the sewage sys-
tem.
Upon entering: “James did not lie. The secret subterranean system of ducts 
exists. The air is very stuffy here.”
The room has two exits. “Upwards” into the normal basement and “Fur-
ther down.”
From left to right:
Sewer (1)
First: “This intricate sewage system was built by my ancestors.”
298Fotis Jannidis  |  Event-Sequences, Plots and Narration in Computer Games
Fig. 3. Strange mechanism in Black Mirror. Interactive objects are marked.
Well (3)
First: “What could a well in the basement serve? Maybe one could get water from down below, when the castle was besieged. The water here could not be drunk without problems. It is too brackish.”Description: 1) “There is not a drop of  water in it.” 2) “It is empty.”
Gear wheel (1)
First: Gear wheel → inventory.
Description (in the inventory): “Where could this ﬁ t?”
Mechanism ( ∞)
First: “This mechanism probably regulates the pumps in the basement. It certainly can’t have been standing here since antiquity.”Description: “It seems to be jammed.”
Activities:
“Combine gear wheel (inventory) with mechanism.” 

299Fotis Jannidis  |  Event-Sequences, Plots and Narration in Computer Games
Result:
The description of  the mechanism has not changed.2
nd Image:
Upon entering:“The air in here smells horribly. It smells stale. There hasn’t been any fresh air here for centuries.”
                            Fig. 4. The strange mechanism; 
             obviously one wheel is missing.
Banister (1)
First: “It’s rusty from the humidity. One of  the bars is loose.” Bar → 
inventory.
Fig. 5. “How do I get rid of  the water?”

300Fotis Jannidis  |  Event-Sequences, Plots and Narration in Computer Games
Sewage shaft (1)
First: “Probably that’s where the water runs out when it over ﬂ ows.
Dirty-cloudy water (1)First: “The water must have been sitting here for years. It is full of  algae and dirt.”
Opening a (∞)
First: “Some kind of  opening. Maybe something is missing here.”
Description: “Some kind of  opening. Maybe something is missing 
here.”Stairway (1)First: “The stairs can’t be used. They are completely under water.”Wheel (∞)
First: “I can’t turn it at all. It is blocked by chains that are secured with a padlock.”Description: 1) “It can’t be turned.” 2) “I can’t turn it at all.”Opening b (1)First: “I think this is where the water ﬂ ows. But this probably hasn’t 
happened for a long time.”Gear wheel: ( ∞)
First: “Part of  a machine. There are so many algae in the water it didn’t sink. How can I get it out of  there?”Description: 1) “From here I can’t reach it.” 2) “It is too far away.”
Activities
1. Try to combine the bar (in the inventory) with the opening a.
 “I will try to put the bar in there.”—”It doesn’t work. The bar is too fat.”2. Go into the basement above and grind the bar down to a point3. Combine the bar with the opening a. “With this it should be better. I will try using the bar as a lever.” (Hatch 
by opening b has opened.) “The hatch has opened, but the water isn’t running out.”
4. Combine the acid (from the inventory) with the wheel. “The acid has dissolved the padlock as if  it were made of  paper.”5. Turn the wheel. Water comes through opening b. Short blackout. New image “The water 
has risen to the edge of  the drain pipe.” 
301Fotis Jannidis  |  Event-Sequences, Plots and Narration in Computer Games
6. Combine hook (in inventory) with rope (in inventory). Combine rope 
with pointed rod. “A primitive ﬁ shing rod. It will have to do.”
7. Combine ﬁ shing rod with gear wheel, Samuel catches the wheel from the 
water. Gear wheel → inventory.
8. Combine the gear wheel with the mechanism from the ﬁ rst image. Now 
the wheel can be turned.
 “It has worked. The mechanism is functioning.”
 The water is ﬂ owing out. Upon entering the back part: “All of  the water 
has ﬂ own out to the subterranean sewage system. The road is clear.” At 
the end of  the stairway now lies a small case with the key.
Fig. 6. Problem solved.
Translated by Brigitte Pichon and Dorian Rudnytsky

302Fotis Jannidis  |  Event-Sequences, Plots and Narration in Computer Games
Notes
1. The debate was far-reaching and ﬁ erce. Cf. its summary in Frasca, 
“Ludologists.” Frasca’s seeming peace-offer primarily defends ludologists 
against a series of reproaches and a number of suggestions for additional literature are given as well. On the side of narratologists I would speci ﬁ -
cally mention the contributions by Marie-Laure Ryan and on the side of the ludologists the ones by Markku Eskelinen. A good discussion of the different approaches can be found in Hartmann (57ff.). An intellectual low point of the whole debate can be found in an essay by Mark Wallace whose contribution is full of anti-intellectual resentment. Cf. Mark Wal-lace: “The Play’s the Thing.” On the other hand a lot of research is taking place which is not interested in these kinds of questions, e.g. the histories of computer games, cf. Kent, Lischka or Mertens and Meißner. 
2. Aarseth, Eskelinen, Frasca, and Juul probably are the most well-known 
ludologists; cf. the literature in Frasca, “Ludologists.” 
3. A similar argument has been made by authors who are not concerned 
with game studies at all, like the journalist Steven Poole in his book Trig ger 
Happy  claiming that stories are only important as back-ground or as the 
non interactive parts of games. On the other hand, however, he assumes that these parts of games will become more important in the future; cf. Poole 103ff. or Walter. Wolf tries to reconcile his notion of narrative with the interactivity of computer games but states at the end that for many players the storyless game experience will become the prototypical one; cf. Wolf, chapter 5.
4. Some interesting observations relating to these differences can now be 
found in Juul.
5. In my opinion it is an interesting consequence of this approach that a gen-
eral narratology is quite impossible; rather, there exist only narratologies relating to particular media. 
6. The notion of gameplay is notoriously fuzzy. As I understand it in the fol-
lowing it is the type of choices and options or activities that a player has in order to reach his goal. This is often not differentiated from the experi-ence of the game but is seen as a central unit for the design of games. Cf. e.g. the statements of game-designers in “Spielspiel, Teil 2.”
7. E.g. the so-called Peacock or the Claymore quest lines in Everquest II.
8. Cf. the record in the appendix.9. In Everquest II,  like in most computer games today also one’s own contri-
butions to the dialogues are given by the game. However, at each move
303Fotis Jannidis  |  Event-Sequences, Plots and Narration in Computer Games
in the game the player has the possibility to continue the dialogue or to 
break it off. 
10. At the beginning only certain zones could be entered if  one had completed 
an entry-quest. This was abolished for all zones that were important for all players and it was retained only for special quest- and raid-zones. 
11. For the text of  this lesson cf. the appendix. 12. The reward always consists in experience points, but in addition can also be 
money, an improvement of  the faction or an object. 
13. Of  course we could ask why he takes the trouble to break the family curse 
since with his death as the last family-member the family is extinguished. 
14. A very detailed analysis of  the functioning of  adventure games can be 
found in Walter.
15. The basis of  the following analysis is the detailed summary in the appen-
dix. 
16. Therefore, in some Adventures there are quest-diaries that inform the play-
er about the current goals, Ankh for example. 
17. The conceptual difference between the game experience of  the player on 
the one hand and the game sequence as conceived by the game designer on the other is well established in games studies (cf. DeMarle 77f.). I am trying to show here that the second aspect can be viewed under two perspectives.
18. Cf. the above-mentioned contributions by Frasca.19. Since MMORPGs constantly change, it is necessary to note the date of 
playing. 
Works Cited
Black Mirror: The Dark Side of  Soul. Future Games, 2003. 
DeMarle, Mary. “Nonlinear Game Narrative.” Game Writing: Narrative Skills for Videogamers . Ed. Chris Bateman. Boston: Charles River Media, 2006. 71-84.
Eskelinen, Markku, and Ragnhild Tronstad. “Video Games and Con ﬁ gurative 
Performances.” The Video Game Theory Reader.  Ed. Mark J. Wolf  and Bernhard 
Perron. New York: Routledge, 2003. 195-220.
Everquest II. Sony Online Entertainment, 2005.
304Fotis Jannidis  |  Event-Sequences, Plots and Narration in Computer Games
Frasca, Gonzalo. “Ludologists Love Stories, too: Notes from a Debate that 
Never Took Place.” Level Up. Digital Games Research Conference 2003 Proceedings.  
Ed. Marinka Copier and Joost Raessens. Utrecht: Universiteit Utrecht UP , 2003. 92-99. 7 July 2006 <http://ludology.org/articles/Frasca_LevelUp2003.pdf>. 
———. “Ludology Meets Narratology: Similitude and differences between 
(video)games and narrative.” 7 July 2006 <http://www.ludology.org/articles/ludology.htm>.
Hartmann, Bernd. Literatur, Film und das Computerspiel. Münster: Lit Verlag, 
2004.
Jannidis, Fotis. “Narratology and the Narrative.” What is Narratology . Ed. Tom 
Kindt and Jan C. Meister. Berlin: de Gruyter, 2003. 35-54.Juul, Jesper. Half-Real: Video Games between Real Rules and Fictional Worlds.  Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press, 2005Kent, Steven L. The Ultimate History of  the Video Games . Roseville: Prima Publish-
ing, 2001.Lischka, Konrad. Spielplatz Computer: Kultur, Geschichte und Ästhetik des Computer-
spiels. Heidelberg: Heise, 2002.
Mertens, Mathias, and Tobias Meißner. Wir waren Space Invaders: Geschichten vom Computerspielen . Frankfurt am Main: Eichborn, 2002.
Poole, Steven. Trigger Happy: The Inner Life of  Videogames . London: Fourth Estate, 
2000.
Ryan, Marie-Laure. “Beyond Myth and Metaphor: The Case of  Narrative in 
Digital Media.” Game Studies 1.1 (2001). 7 July 2006 <http://gamestudies.org/0101/ryan/>.
Salen, Katie, and Eric Zimmerman. Rules of  Play: Game Design Fundementals. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press, 2004.“Spielspiel, Teil 2.” Games Entertainment Education, April 2006: 56-60. 7 July 2006 
<http://www.geemag.de/relaunch_storyseite.php?story=72&ausgabe=20>.
305Fotis Jannidis  |  Event-Sequences, Plots and Narration in Computer Games
“Tome of  Destiny.” Everquest II Online Gaming Network.  7 July 2006 <http://eq2.
ogaming.com/data/1862~TomeofDestiny.php>.
Wallace, Mark. “The Play’s the Thing.” The Escapist  36 (2006). 7 July 2006 
<http://www.escapistmagazine.com/issue/36/13>.Walter, Klaus. Grenzen spielerischen Erzählens: Spiel- und Erzählstrukturen in graphisch-
en Adventure Games. Siegen: Universi, 2002.Wolf, Mark J.P ., ed. The Medium of  the Video Game.  Austin, TX: U of  Texas P , 
2002. 
 
Writing and Programming
309Jean-Pierre Balpe 
Principles and Processes of Generative Literature
Questions to Literature1
Abstract:
Generative literature, de ﬁ ned as the production of  continuously changing literary texts 
by means of  a speci ﬁ c dictionary, some set of  rules and the use of  algorithms, is a very 
speciﬁ c form of  digital literature which is completely changing most of  the concepts of  
classical literature. Texts being produced by a computer and not written by an author require indeed a very special way of  engrammation and, in consequence, also point to a speci ﬁ c way of  reading, particularly concerning all the aspects of  the literary time. In 
my paper, I will try to present some of  the characteristics of  generative texts and their consequences for the conception of  literature itself.
I call “engrammation” the adaptation of  choices of  expression to the technical con-
straints of  the medium used for its mediatization. For instance, a book needs a ﬁ xed writ-
ing, and the mediatization by means of  a screen needs other modalities of  presentation.
I call “generative literature” a literature where the texts are produced through a 
computer by means of  a set of  formal rules, the use of  any kind of  algorithm, speciﬁ c dictionaries and eventually knowledge representations. That means a lit-
erature of  which the author does not write the ﬁ nal texts but which only works 
at the level of  the high rank components such as conceptual models, knowledge rules, dictionary entries and rhetoric de ﬁ nitions. A text without an author gener-
ally seems to be out of  question. Such a designation seems to describe an impos-sible literature because, despite the fact that we generally assume a very strong link between a text and its author, in this case the author is separated from the text. In generative literature, there certainly also is an author but one who has not really written the text which is being presented to a reader; his function is not the one we usually assign to an author. The difference is: this author is something like a meta-author trying to de ﬁ ne what literature is for him and how 
his literary conception can be formally described. The tools of  engrammation he uses are totally different. But at the end of  the process there are also texts.
310Jean-Pierre Balpe  |  Principles and Processes of Generative Literature
For example:
Text 1:
Poursuite du bonheur. . . . Peu de choses laissent des traces: pourtant il s’agit bien quelquefois de vivre; ses souvenirs brûlent Jeanne-la-voleuse comme des ﬂ ammes—le 
soleil cogne: les dieux passent par rafales; les carrefours sont des arbres de vie, la lumière dévaste les villas. . . . Les spirales des avenues trouent Montreuil: qu’a fait Jeanne du temps qui lui a été donné. . . . 
Text 2:
Pour la première fois de sa vie Léa se sent vivre vraiment; mais le temps dont dispose Léa est limité—la vie lui fait mal à petits bruits, à petits gorgées, par les interstices! Des haut-parleurs diffusent partout le nom du dieu du jour ! Les individus suivent leurs bannières. . . . Un vieillard fatigué, voûté, traverse l’avenue: voici ce que lui dit Montreuil: ‘la pénombre seule a le pouvoir d’ouvrir au monde le cœur d’un homme’. . . . Tout ce que Léa voit de sombre dans l’avenir est plus rassurant que son présent: ses souvenirs la brûlent comme des ﬂ ammes. . . .
These two texts were produced by the generator used in my Internet novel Fictions ( ﬁ ction) ( Fictions 2004) the title of  which has a double meaning: It both 
connotes that all ﬁ ction is a ﬁ  ction by itself  and that a ﬁ ction can be built by 
an inﬁ nite number of  ﬁ ctions, something like a “mise en abyme” of  the ﬁ ction 
itself.
2 Indeed none of  these texts will ever be presented to the reader for a 
second time and no reader will ever have the same set of  texts. Each text seems to be independent from the others. Such a situation seems to be rather natural for poetry. For example:
Poem 1:Le temps se remplissait de sable l’océanutilisait le ciel batterie de l’océan une crique en contrebasdu chemin je passais par la côte le paysage faisaitson philosophe quelque chose brillait au milieudu sentier il y avait un avant et un aprèsle jour venait de commencer le ciel était avec toila campagne jouait du violon le soleilpesait sur mes épaules le même soleil éclairaitl’océan et le ciel la campagne était élégiaque tute baignais de ciel la campagnedisait son évidence la mer se révulsaitl’océan paraissait tout en surface
311Jean-Pierre Balpe  |  Principles and Processes of Generative Literature
le paysage se répétait
la mer broutait les herbes sauvages de la côte 
Poem 2:
Nous nous sommes cherchéssur les côtes l’océan tendait sonbourdonnement l’océan utilisaitle ciel tout était banalementcharmant un calme s’installait du côté de l’océan je ne voyais plusque toi tu étais du côtéde la terre le ciel perdait ses dimensions les nuagesﬂ ottaient à l’envers tu faisais partie du décor
le paysage s’oubliait dans la mer quelque chose brillaitau milieu du sentier la campagne refusait de selaisser aller au drame l’horizon s’éloignait intarissablementje te disais: “une chose quisemble très claire peut ne pas l’être du tout” sentieret vent c’était ça la mer te faisait facela mer se prenait pour le ciel le ciel était avec toil’océan était impassible
3 
For poetry indeed, each text is something like an island isolated from the other ones even when they are published in the same book of  poetry. A poem is a text by itself; each poem is entirely closed and supported by itself. But none of  these texts will ever be read by any other reader unless, like here, they are printed as examples by way of  exception. However, generative texts usually do not require to be printed. And even in that case, the reception of  generative poetry is really different from the reception of  non-generative poetry.
But, in this paper, I will speak about generative narratives, not about 
generative poetry, the concepts and approaches of  which are undeniably rather different.
Everybody knows Gérard Genette’s classical de ﬁ nition of  narrative: A nar-
rative is a text built on a diegetic axis, i.e. diegesis (164-8, 246-50). That implies that any text has a beginning and an end. Whatever games would be played on the diegetic axis, it undeniably is the basic structure of  the narrative. All the episodes of  the narrative are organized along that structure. Such a situation is strongly underlined by the kind of  medium that has usually been used to mate-rialize the narrative: the book. A book always has a ﬁ  rst page and a last one and 
all the reading is done by taking into account this constraint. We all know that. This does not imply that a reader cannot read backwards, but we also know that 
312Jean-Pierre Balpe  |  Principles and Processes of Generative Literature
reading backwards is an exception from the rule and rather is an approach of  
researchers than one of  an ordinary reader. Hence it is the diegetic axis which structures all the conceptions of  novels or short stories and a reading cannot stop at any point of  that axis; more precisely, if  a reading does stop at some point it is to let the reader dream or think about what he has just read; it is like a halt during the reading process.
The generative conception of narrative completely transforms this situa-
tion. In a generative novel indeed at every point of the narrative we experience an equivalence principle that is dependent on generation. At these points, a t e x t  i s  o nl y  a  t e m p o r ary  s p e cim e n  o f  an  in ﬁ nite family of virtual texts. In 
concrete terms, this means that any point of the generative axis is the theoreti-cal point of an in ﬁ nity of texts and I propose to call that situation “alepsis” 
because at that point, the arrow of the diegetic axis is broken up for some time. In general, the diegesis includes all the events that allegedly have occurred, including actions and spaces not explicitly described; most of them are how-ever offered or suggested in the reading of the book. In generative ﬁ ction, on 
the contrary, most of the texts will never be offered in the reading: Most of the diegesis markers are latent ones. The two texts quoted above, for example, are not topologically situated on the diegetic axis one before the other but are produced at the same point of that axis. This signi ﬁ es that they are—from a 
narrative point of view—completely equivalent: One may be read in place of the other. Moreover, there is—at this point—an innumerable number of vir-tual texts each of which has a function within the narrative process: They can be read or not (depending on the possibility of generation) but if they are being read, they offer a new view onto the narrative; if they are not being read, then the reader does not miss them. One text can therefore be read as an alternative for all the others, while it can also be read before or after another. There is, at that point, no obligation.
I am not talking of prolepsis (anticipation) or analepsis (‘ ﬂ ashback’), which 
are the two main rhetorical tools used by a writer to build his story. Because prolepsis and analepsis can only be understood from the perspective of linear reading, there is neither prolepsis nor analepsis in the reading; the reading is linear and always backwards: Prolepsis and analepsis are only writing games, engrammation procedures, playing with the arrow of time. If so, then the clas-sical literary theory adopts the writer’s point of view and not the reader’s; it supposes that the diegetic axis can be cut into parts, which can be easily dis-placed. Hence each story appears to be a combination of smaller stories that have a kind of independence from each other except from the diegetic point of view. Indeed, these fragments may not change in their form and once they have been given to the reader, they are located on the arrow of time forever; 
313Jean-Pierre Balpe  |  Principles and Processes of Generative Literature
they can not be displaced and thus the game is very different for the writer and 
for the reader: The reception of the text is ﬁ xed whereas this was not the case 
during its production. 
The fact that in a generative narrative such a constraint was surrendered has 
introduced a great liberty. When a reader obtains a text, he obtains that text at a certain moment of  his reading but he has no idea of  what other text he could have obtained at the same moment of  another reading. He cannot tell if  the text is directly related to the previous or the next one (in terms of  reading time). The relation between one text and another can be a relation situated on the diegetic axis but it can also be any other kind of  relation. For example, that text can be another concretion of  the virtualities of  the same model of  text, i.e. an alepsis, a text not situated in a relation of  time to the previous one.
In that case—and this certainly is one of  the reasons why generative texts 
disturb our reading habits—the reader loses all the usual markers relating to the diegetic axis and has to ﬁ nd or invent other kinds of  references. The narrative 
is not totally built in advance but put together from a variety of  virtualities that are—or are not—actualizing themselves in the course of  reading. This reading is then fundamental and tends to substitute itself  to the diegetic axis. Each new reading—actualizing the narrative in a new way, built on what I call micro- ﬁ c-
tions—creates its own diegesis, which is not a predetermined but an undeter-mined diegetic axis. This really means: Any reader A needs to develop a unique hypothesis giving him an idea of  the narrative that is different from that of  any reader B. Maybe he could ascertain that his conception of  time in that narrative were true if  he could read all the virtual texts but that is completely impossible. The only indicators he may be able to use are those given by each micro- ﬁ ction: 
Each of  them seems to be built on the basis of  a local diegesis which then, for the reader, is necessarily related to a more general one. What is more important than the building of  a diegetic axis by one author then, are the various images the reader always builds of  a possible moving diegesis: The diegetic axis is totally virtual and can only be built by the reader’s strategy which is something like a translepsis, an inﬁ  nitely moving hypothesis of  diegetic relations. It is what I call 
the “hologrammatic principle”: Each text contains the entire time of  all pos-sible texts. There is no concrete diegetic axis but only a virtual one, much more related to the reading than to the writing. The narrative neither needs beginning nor end because the narration is entirely built by each reading of  each text: One novel can thus be constituted by one or an in ﬁ nite number of  texts and no 
reader reads the same number of  texts. There is no structure of  the narrative, only an idea of  a virtual one built by the reading itself.
For the author, that situation is very interesting because he is free from the 
necessity of  mainly conceiving a narrative in relation with time and he does not 
314Jean-Pierre Balpe  |  Principles and Processes of Generative Literature
have to respect a linear form of  engrammation. This opens up a new ﬁ eld of  
creativity: He has to think about and to work on all the virtualities implied by the 
generative ﬁ ction and time, even if  by tradition it is a very important element, is 
only one of  the virtualities. A narrative is not obliged to have one beginning and one end. Each generative narrative includes an in ﬁ nite number of  equal alepsis 
and it is not obligatory that time relations are initially stated between them. In Fictions (ﬁ  ction) for example, each text is totally independent from the others; in 
Trajectoires, the texts are quite independent apart from the fact that the interface design leads the reader to imagine a form of  diegesis by using a set of  symbolic numbers. In that case, the design interface is a procedure of  time engrammation. It is de ﬁ nitely suf ﬁ cient for the reader to know that he is reading a narrative be-
cause—due to his cultural concept of  narrative—he tries to ﬁ  nd diegesis mark-
ers. Hence a novel can be totally built on an in ﬁ nite present as in Fictions ( ﬁ ction); 
the reader builds a diegesis from its translepsis course himself. Thus generative literature demonstrates that the writer’s control of  the diegesis is not necessary because diegesis is a cognitive concept of  reception: We always imagine stories on a time axis and even if  a narrative has neither beginning nor end, we as read-ers always imagine them. Generative literature opens up a creative ﬁ eld for a 
renewal of  narration. 
Without a doubt, the book as a product of a dated technology using ﬁ xed 
engrammation procedures, has become a reductive matrix that we have to reform in order to liberate the text from the linearity and the determination of its pages, to allow text to reveal itself by other means and in other contexts with other possibilities of expression. Hence literature is not dependent on the medium of the book any longer but can also use other media such as any kind of screens, cellular phones or computer networks. Thus there is no more necessity of sticking to linear forms. T oday generative literature wants to af-ﬁ rm the vital and in ﬁ nite power of “literary” communication as a dynamic dif-
fraction of relations, in which the always-different text manifests its identities only through the in ﬁ nite repetitions of its generation of the same, i.e. rather 
through its in ﬁ nite changes than through its halts. What this process assumes 
is the fecundating power of language enriching itself within all the restraining particularities of any given context. It is this fecundating power of language upon which the receiving subject continually renews him- or herself.
At a ﬁ rst approach, the generative text indeed demolishes all the material 
references that are the basis of the reader’s “preparation,” for example the physical appearance of the book (volume, thickness, division into paragraphs and chapters, and so on). This radically new literature, putting the diegetic axis into the background, has to invent new forms of ﬁ ction, new forms of stories, 
new forms of narration when using other media than the book. A “generative 
315Jean-Pierre Balpe  |  Principles and Processes of Generative Literature
novel” is thus forced to invent all its codes. Generative literature wants ﬁ rst 
of all to be something like a “literarization” of technology, because what it 
demonstrates ﬁ rst and foremost in its multiplicities and its variations are its 
potentials and its changing states. Even if that situation is not absolutely new in literary history, where the eagerness to present texts with new technical apparatus has always existed at least in the margins, the digitalization of its technology has created a signi ﬁ cantly new situation for literature, since the im-
mediacy of its generation and its in ﬁ nitude stage the formalisms from which 
the texts come forth. The relation of the subject to his or her writing is thus a new relation to time, and the functional concept of authorship itself is to be entirely rede ﬁ ned, because what matters more than anything else is the “his-
torical” memory of forms and their displacement. There is no end to writing and reading: A generative text can be continued in ﬁ nitely. The person whom 
we can only call a “digital author” as long as there is a lack of a more accurate term does not need to deny tradition by means of a radical modernity but re-quires of it something like a new reading or, at least, an unheard one. Genera-tive literature’s only pretension is to enrich the text’s potentialities. It forsakes the ﬁ ction of ﬁ ction to be only interested in the subjective production and 
formalization of meaning. In that sense, it only exists through in ﬁ nite literary 
production. A generative text then rejects clotting, time’s dictatorial caricature: it presents a notion of eternity. But this eternity-whim truly differs from that of “classical” literature because it does not depend on the duration of its memory but on the in ﬁ nitude of its reproductions.
Out of the book displayed on screens or, by various technical processes, 
on any object henceforth used as a displaying surface, the text—now enabled to become time and space—completely changes its nature. It becomes pic-ture-text, sometimes even text-universe or performing-text. This old appeal, outlined in several historical attempts, now ﬁ nds its ful ﬁ llment thanks to the 
possibilities that computerization allows.
According to George Steiner, the comprehension of modern art requires 
the acceptance of the fading of any conception of “culture” as having an im-manent value, necessarily linked to hierarchical societies, and its replacement with a set of “cultures,” all regarded as equal (313). The computer culture, in that sense, is an absolutely new and absolutely up-to-date writing tool invent-ing new engrammation modalities.
Generative literature does not make any claim to the intangible and almost 
divine universality of pre-generative literature, in which the only active role left lies in the production of new glosses; it merely wants to be the ephemeral and temporary moment of a common literarity, revealing itself only in the in-stant of the creative stimulus. 
316Jean-Pierre Balpe  |  Principles and Processes of Generative Literature
More than ever before, nowadays a text is more dependent on its media 
contexts. Every surface may be used as medium for texts, not only sheets of 
paper but also all sorts of “screens” which can be a mountain, a building, a screen of a cellular phone, a person’s body etc. Classical culture originates from gambling on transcendence: “Art and mind looks toward what is not yet here, at the accepted risk of being ignored by the living” (Steiner 102). Classical culture is produced only for museums, for “conservation,” and thus is opposed to ephemeral consummation. The classical production of writings is aimed entirely at archives. To this way of thinking, the slightest “loss” is considered a cultural tragedy. Any destroyed manuscript is a burning library; the oblitera-tion of any draft scribbled on a tabletop seems a disaster. Against that museum art, that library-and-dust art, generative writing is an art of consummation that refuses to look back on its tracks, which it regards as nothing more than signs headed for something else.
The real-time generative text, which exists only by its instantaneity, ﬁ rst of 
all ﬁ ghts against all this: “Everywhere the virus of potentiality prevails. Carry-
ing us away toward a rapture which is also that of unresponsiveness” (Baudril-lard 315). But the unresponsiveness that Baudrillard fears is, in fact, a positive one because it is unresponsive to an external hierarchy of values, to a culture of reverence. “The public is no longer the wise echo of talent, something like a referee and relay in transmission of an atypical attempt; it associates itself to the artistic elaboration inside of a set of sometimes uninhibited energies” (Steiner 106).
The text, no longer regarded as “literary,” now has to annihilate all rever-
ence because a generative text can always be substituted by another one. Hence it is not the singular display that is at the heart of generative literature but rather the movement, the series of ever-changing displays of text. The com-puter culture is close to spreading, to dispersion. It introduces a new relation to memory, no longer “reminding” but—because a text, read at a given moment, is nothing other than an image of another text read at another moment with which it maintains links of dependence and independence, at once diffracted and refractory—rebuilding remembrance: Active participation by the reader lies in its elaboration. Displaying on its screens the vanishing of the master, of eternity’s claims, generative literature engages the reader as a culture in itself.
Like all new literary approaches, generative literature must ﬁ rst struggle 
with resistance within itself, to ﬁ nd the ways that are peculiar to it by reject-
ing—even sometimes at the cost of provocation and error, at the risk of be-coming illegible —what is inside it, enclosing itself within the sticky thickness of its moments of arrest.
317Jean-Pierre Balpe  |  Principles and Processes of Generative Literature
While strongly individualist, the contemporary spirit is also gregarious, tak-
ing pleasure in the instantaneity of  shared time, where the contemporary spirit 
formerly was collective inside the unchangeable cultural spiritual union. Gen-erative literature tries to be on the side of  the effusive super ﬁ ciality of  show. It 
wants to reconcile the literary activity with that of  play and game: To separate literature from the sphere of  reverential and deadly seriousness in which the whole classical tradition locks it. Not merely about a particular text, it questions itself  in ﬁ nitely about the aesthetic working of  the human spirit. 
Notes
1. An extract of  the last paragraphs of  this paper has been previously pub-
lished, with some important differences, in Jean-Pierre Balpe, “Toward a Diffracted Literature.”
2. Cf. my other generative novel Trajectoires <http://trajectoires.univ-paris8.fr>.
3. Texts by the text generator La nuit de Cerisy created for a performance in 
Cerisy-la-Salle in August 2004.
Works Cited
Balpe, Jean-Pierre. Fictions (ﬁ  ction). 2004. 11 Apr. 2006 <http:// ﬁ ction.maison 
pop.com>.
———. “Toward a Diffracted Literature.” Leonardo  37 (2004): 385-390.
———. Trajectoires. 2001. 11 Apr. 2006 <http://trajectoires.univ-paris8.fr>. Baudrillard, Jean. Cool Memories . Paris: Éd. Galilée, 1990.
Genette, Gérard. Figures, III.  Paris: Seuil, 1972.
Steiner, George. Dans le château de Barbe-Bleue: Notes pour une redé ﬁ nition de la culture. 
Paris: Gallimard, 1971.
319Loss Pequeño Glazier
Code, Cod, Ode
Poetic Language & Programming
or Pequeño Lector/Klein Leser: Es gibt (See)lachsﬁ  let?
Abstract:
Mutation or modulation of  words manifest orthographic relations between variants but 
also sometimes suggest more elusive relations. Much  importance can be seen in the spe-
ciﬁ city of  language, especially  considering the sum of  variations of  a single word in dif-
ferent  languages. The word itself  is a solid object at the center of  such a set  of  permuta-
tions. The meaning of  a sum of  such variants can be likened to  an array in programming. 
An array object can be greater than the sum of  its parts, a concept that ties into Cubism 
as well as to poetry where  languages mix. Other array poetry suggests geometric structure; 
this is poetry that creates meaning from empty space as much as from its solid  textual 
areas. This is similar to the way that architecture creates  meaning from empty spaces, as 
seen notably in uses of  the arch. The  structural strength of  empty space can also be seen 
in a number of  postmodern poems, where such space is integral to their expressiveness. 
These poems also use array concepts to inform the poem. It is useful to  look at examples 
of  code in my own work, which uses arrays and empty  space as solid material in strings. 
What is of  use in this method is the  concept of  precise poetic analysis, of  the relevance of  
position, location, and structure as crucially important in reading code as poetic  material.
Deep in the mechanismof  the smallest zonethe drunken waltzersthe elephants tango . . .
   Charles Stein
Released from inexplicable code.
   Steve Benson
Somehow I ﬁ  nd the words “code,” “cod,” and “ode” to be an excellent start-
ing place for a consideration of  poetic language and programming. There is 
a way the three words are not only related, but suggested movement through mutation, or modulation. Of  course the mind knows this relation is merely an accident, as the relation is only through orthography, not meaning, but the poet in one cannot help but try to ﬁ nd a more elusive relation.
320Loss Pequeño Glazier   |  Code, Cod, Ode
The modularity and mutability of  language was especially noticeable at the 
cafeteria of  the University of  Siegen on November 26, 2004, when the feature 
of  the day, Seelachs ﬁ let, which is pollack (a ﬁ sh related to cod) was listed on 
a poster menu. Apparently, the pollack ran out and they decided to substitute salmon ﬁ let instead. So instead of  making a new poster they simply crossed out 
the “See” portion of  the word, converting “Seelachs ﬁ let” to “Lachs ﬁ let” and 
thus “pollack” to “salmon.” This was a more meaningful mutation, also ortho-graphic, and one that gives a better sense of  movement through changes in, or loss of, letters.
The topic of  poetic language and programming always raises some interest-
ing issues. On the one hand are programmers who insist that programming is a skill and simply a less-than-compelling means to an end. On the other hand are programmers who are skilled and who have poetic intentions but who ﬁ nd 
such skill to be not quite enough on their own. Once you know how to invent procedure, write code, and create programs, what do you want to say? One pro-grammer I know has said of  code, all he sees is structure, or the architecture of  the statements. Where does the connection between the code and the poetry of  the coded object lie? 
Speci ﬁ cally, as to language, how does programming “make it new?” How is 
it language? What speci ﬁ cally do we mean by “language” and how is language 
speciﬁ c?
To look at how language is speci ﬁ c, I’d ﬁ rst like to consider a single word, 
say “mother,” and look at how it appears in different languages.
mother  English mamă  Rumanian  
mam  Welsh nënë  Albanianmáthair  Gaelic meter  Greek
mère  French mat’  Russianmadre  Spanish motina  Lithuanianmãe  Portuguese mayr  Armenianmadre  Italian mādar  Persian
mater  Latin matar  Sanskrit
Mutter  German ama  Basquemoeder  Dutch mare  Catalan
móoir  Icelandic äiti  Finnishmoder  Swedish anya  Hungarianmatka  Polish anne  Turkish
matka  Czech
321Loss Pequeño Glazier   |  Code, Cod, Ode
There are similarities, of  course, due to historical reasons and because of  af ﬁ ni-
ties between language families. But I would like to ponder for just a moment, 
in languages that are so different, how a single word can appear so similar. I would suggest that a single word can have many modulations, variations across languages, without losing meaning. That is to say these words form a set or se-ries of  variants of  a lexical unit. For humans, the concept of  “mother” is, rather than its spelling in one language, the sum of  the variations across all languages, remarkably motile and supple in meaning, mother is the sum of  the differences of  its ﬁ xed form.
“Mother” is a ﬁ  xed object. As solid an object as Ezra Pound describes:
AN OBJECT
This thing, that hath a code and not a core,
Hath set acquaintance where might be affections,And nothing now              Disturbeth his re ﬂ ections. (18)
Or an object as Joan-Elies Adell writes in “For Every Object”:
I hold them,/invisible to my eyes, and play with them unafraid,/feeling the pointed tips, the sharp edges,/like fragments of  language, hiding behind life/ready to cut. (17)
Or otherwise, it is like a moment in motion frozen in time. As Pound sketches:
IN A STATION OF THE METRO
The apparition of  these faces in the crowd;
Petals on a wet, black bough. (35)
Such a language object is solid and ﬁ xed but at the same time it captures mo-
tion. It is a speci ﬁ c language item consisting of a number of permutations. It 
is and is not all of the permutations, depending from where you are looking in language. In programming terms, this would be called an array. An array is a collection of objects that share a single variable name, differentiated only by where they are located in the collection, a collection of parts whose sum is greater than the whole.
322Loss Pequeño Glazier   |  Code, Cod, Ode
A Structure of Parts
Such a vision of  the sum of  the parts being greater than the whole is, coinciden-
tally, not unlike Cubism. If  we look, for example, at a work like Pablo Picasso’s Cubist collage Guitar  (1913), we see the following.
Fig. 1. Pablo Picasso. Guitar . Museum of  Modern Art, New York.
Here, fragments of  “guitar” material, frets, neck, halves of  guitar bodies, and other related images, lie scattered on a mostly blue background. There is a sense to which the different parts of  a guitar can be shown and it is the collection of  these parts, the “guitar array,” one could say, which better de ﬁ nes a guitar than 
a photo-realistic image. (This is, perhaps, because a photo realistic image must always suffer from the subjectivity, or tyranny, of  perspective. It can only be viewed from one viewpoint. The array solves this by providing a multitude of  viewpoints in one plane.)
At the core of  these collections of  variants, I would like to look at how 
language mixes in a given work.
For example, observe how languages mix in the following poem extract. By 
using more than one language, for example, the expression “Cuban sol,” which is “sun” but also carries the suggestions of  “soul,” one sees a work, by using multiple languages, where the sum of  the parts is greater than the whole.

323Loss Pequeño Glazier   |  Code, Cod, Ode
ON YOUR MARX. “She is tropical, a Caribbean
breeze, Cuban sol.” The radiant birds exist in cagesin two’s—parakeets, lovebirds, and sulfur-crestedcockatoos. The corner for birds, amor. Half-shellfountain, miniature orange trees form walkways,immensely pleasing to the self  sense even as thereare sones o salsa in waiting rooms. An effusivelytiled Sevilla. Socialist radio of  the Revolución. (Glazier, Anatman  50)
A similar sense of  the parts being greater than the whole occurs in Gertrude Stein’s famous utterance:
Rose is a rose is a rose is a rose. (395)
Here, the parts that are greater than the whole are all the same, “rose,” and yet placing them as an array seems to almost geometrically increase the overall meaning of  them.
As an array, this would appear as something like:
// This is where the array is created.
      a1 = new makeArray(4);
            a1[0] = “rose”            a1[1] = “rose”            a1[2] = “rose”             a1[3] = “rose”
In this case, though I am referring to this utterance as an array, we cannot strictly 
consider the phrase an array since the elements (“rose”) are all identical. This is a good opportunity for us to see how such elements can begin to take on geometric value. In other words, the instances of  the word “rose” are like pillars in a colonnade where “rose” is the anchor for each pillar and the intervening explanation is empty. (“Rose” is never de ﬁ ned other than being “rose.”)
How then is language capable of  suggesting a structure? How is it geomet-
ric, structural? How does the visual produce meaning? 
To answer this, I would like to look at Gomringer’s “o,” a poem which like 
the arches suggested by “a rose,” creates meaning from empty space as much as from its solid textual areas. 
324Loss Pequeño Glazier   |  Code, Cod, Ode
Fig. 2. Eugen Gomringer. Untitled  (Solt 94).
In this poem, we see a similar empty space of  meaning which, like the arches 
suggested in the Stein poem create a situation where “nothing” is actually stron-ger than textual content.
Architecture as Meaning
“There is nothing!”
         William Carlos Williams
Arches express the ultimate in a play between structure and empty space, as if  
the architectural were paradigmatic of  a kind of  structural view of  textual con-struction. With arches as well, one sees not a single item but a totality, a struc-ture of  parts. Here are some arches, examples of  Havana’s marvelous colonial architecture.

325Loss Pequeño Glazier   |  Code, Cod, Ode
Fig. 3. Representative Arches, La Habana Vieja.
The rounded arcs of  white space one sees in Gomringer‘s poem are present 
in the arches between the columns. Indeed, such ﬁ gurations create structural 
strength in order to allow spaces to exist. In this context, the spaces could be seen as the point, the solid matter of  the architectural conversation.
We see a similar engagement of  the structural strength of  empty space in 
Hannah Weiner’s “Little Book 107”:
I SEE W OR      DSI SEE OKs ISEE OK
s      (8) 
Here, the linebreak after the ﬁ rst “W” and the space between “OR” and “DS,” 
as examples, create an archway, opening, or structural frame in which the simple “I see words” takes on much more meaning in its altered form than in its poetic representation.
A similar solidity of  empty space is evident in “I Can’t Resist the Craving 
for Another Inhalation” by Bruce Andrews:

326Loss Pequeño Glazier   |  Code, Cod, Ode
     below
     pterodactyl-like       fannie             bay               sparks  !consolably             adulteryless                                            troubling         sweet                                                              puce         skids  . . .    leaped    rule      ﬁ nal    spire
 conditions as goodbye lattice unaware
For instance bazzam
       luckier  sparrow (19)
Here we see an example of  a text where the empty spaces are as important as the words themselves, the spaces offering pauses, timing, and a real counterpoint to the signi ﬁ cation of  the words. This poem would not be the same if  the words 
were all compressed; the spaces give the poem its expressiveness. 
In “Fidel” by Andrews, the words seem to form an arch by virtue of  their 
placement on the page. This combines the best of  the Moorish arch with the sensibility of  Gomringer:
 
327Loss Pequeño Glazier   |  Code, Cod, Ode
                                                                         pee axe eel map sex am
                                                                       case ape pal lax                                                                    pal leap lax ease                                                                 ale leap seam                                                            alm amp ease sax lamp lax eel                                                       amp alm pax eel sex                                                  pax peel map pea ma am ale same amp                                         sex amp seam leap sax pee ape alm                                     lap lamp pal ale ma pee alm axe                                  ma lax pal ape ease am amp sax lap                     pax peel lamp sax lap amp alm seam                       leap lax                         ale lamp leap                             lamp eel alm                                sex peel ape am map axe                                  ale pal ease am eel pee seam                                   sax peel pea axe map sex ape amp                                   lax leap alm lpa lamp pax ma ale ape                                   am axe pea lamp amp leap                                  amp alm leap axe pea lamp                                 pal ale am                                   sex sax                                     alm am map eel sex axe                                         sex alm am ale lamp pal (Andrews 35)
Empty space is crucial in this poem, of  course, since its tight shape would not 
exist if  it weren’t juxtaposed against the white space to the left. But also, this poem is also an example of  permutation, since it solely employs a ﬁ nite number 
of  letters in different combinations, with only one letter, “e,” used more than once in a word.
328Loss Pequeño Glazier   |  Code, Cod, Ode
Fig. 4. Screenshot from White-Faced Bromeliads on 20 Hectares.
At this point, I would like to look at two examples of  code in my own work. 
One from White-Faced Bromeliads on 20 Hectares  and the other from Io Sono At 
Swoons, both of  which are available on my Electronic P oetry Center (EPC) 
Author Page.
In Bromeliads  variant line possibilities are used to produce alternate readings 
of  the text. These are technically arranged in arrays as follows:
// This is where the array is created.
      a1 = new makeArray(2);
              a1[0] = “‘Three simple words: crack dot com.’ Ambience or                        confrontation.”               a1[1] = “I’m sure there is a white house hand in there somewhere.                        ‘Colonia’”
I would like to note the structural and visual shape of  this two-element array, and to suggest that the array here is not only content-based but also a visual writing technique. The structural arrangement is a means to organize the possibilities  of  
the onscreen event and as such, the holes here are solid and meaningful, ways of  arranging such possibilities. These are possibilities which exist as manifest in the code but can only be realized in the onscreen event of  the code’s execution.
329Loss Pequeño Glazier   |  Code, Cod, Ode
Fig. 5. Screenshot from Io Sono At Swoons.
I would compare this to another poem, Io Sono At Swoons, a work that assembles 
texts from a collection of  strings, or data elements. The aesthetic contours of  Io Sono was created by adding spaces, tangible nothing, or holes, into the strings. The result of  adding such numbers of  spaces into strings could not be antici-pated. Thus the only way to work was to insert spaces, compile, then observe the displayed results of  the spaces in the onscreen event. Working with the holes, or empty space, became a means to work with the poem.
What is of  use in this method is the concept of  precise poetic analysis, of  
the relevance of  position, location, and structure. The arrangement of  words in a poem or in a program have intense value. Like the empty space beneath arches in a colonnade, writing and programming is a dance around the architectural spaces of  the poem’s parts.
Words themselves are modular and programmable. As smoothly as “code” 
ﬂ ows to “cod” and then to “ode,” poetic language is always engaged in the play 
of  its parts.
Works Cited
Adell, Joan-Elies. Poemes, Pesmi, Poems.  Barcelona: Poetry Reading Series, 2004.
Andrews, Bruce. Wobbling. New York: Roof  Books, 1981.
Glazier, Loss Pequeño. Anatman, Pumpkin Seed, Algorithm . Cambridge, UK: Salt, 
2003.

330Loss Pequeño Glazier   |  Code, Cod, Ode
Glazier, Loss Pequeño. White-Faced Bromeliads on 20 Hectares.  1999. 4 Aug. 2006 
<http://epc.buffalo.edu/authors/glazier/java/costa1/00.html>.
———. Io Sono At Swoons. 2002. 4 Aug. 2006 <http://epc.buffalo.edu/authors/
glazier/java/iowa/index.html>.———. Electronic Poetry Center Author Page. 4 August 2006 <http://epc.
buffalo.edu/authors/glazier>.
Pound, Ezra. Selected Poems of  Ezra Pound . New York: New Directions, 1957.
Solt, Mary Ellen, ed. Concrete Poetry: A World View. Bloomington: Indiana UP , 
1968.Stein, Gertrude. Writings 1903-1932 . New York: Library of  America, 1998.
Weiner, Hannah. Little Books/Indians . New York: Roof  Books, 1980.
Practical Examples
333Laura Borràs Castanyer
E-Learning and Literary Studies 
T owards a New Culture of T eaching?
Abstract:
The introduction of  digital technologies into the learning processes has meant the creation of  new educational spaces that, when they take place on the Internet and are founded in non-presence and asynchrony, are known as “Virtual Learning Environ-ments” (VLE). VLE constitute new pedagogic realities that must answer to the users’ needs, their educational purposes, the curricula with which they work and, speci ﬁ cally, 
the formative needs for the people that integrate them. But the key to de ﬁ ne “virtual” in 
terms of  human experience and not in terms of  technological hardware is the concept of  “presence,” which is crucial in our pedagogical model and our way of  being comparative literature lecturers in a virtual university.
Technologies are tools capable of  building a learning frame, although it is necessary 
to endow them with contents and humanity. Different voices have warned of  the sterility of  a technological environment that does not have any pedagogic or didactic speci ﬁ city 
(different from the traditional models). After all, learning is learning whether it has an ex-tra “e” or not, and so VLE are only as good or as bad as the ways they are used. Thus, the revolutionary point of  their use would not be the technological aspect whether they really offer new ways of  teaching. We will show the example of  a completely virtual university, the Universitat Oberta de Catalunya (UOC), where the learning process takes place in a virtual campus, and we will focus on a speci ﬁ c subject: Universal Literary Topics. 
Introduction:
The Irruption of Digital T echnologies in the Learning Process
E-learning is probably no more than a manifestation of  e-living. Perhaps today 
circumstances allow us using the correlation between the appearance of  e-learn-ing as a tool and the need to modify our traditional model of  education, at least at the university. At all events, we must insist on the fact that the main revolu-tion is not found in the preﬁ  x e, because quite often traditional monodirectional 
learning has been hidden under the appearance of  technological sophistication. What seems interesting to us is to rethink the concept of  learning in modern so-cieties taking into account that we have more and more digitally literate students, who are, of  course, using the Internet as a source of  resources to be explored. 
334Laura Borràs Castanyer | E-Learning and Literary Studies
The European program of  action “eLearning 2001” deﬁ  nes electronic 
learning as the use of  multimedia technologies and of  the Internet to improve 
the quality of  learning. However, we ﬁ rmly believe that e-learning is an excellent 
opportunity for a real improvement of  quality if  these multimedia technologies lead us to a more humanized teaching process. The possibility to use complex systems on a virtual campus allows and stimulates exchange and collaboration, with remarkable effects in the students’ success and satisfaction. So the aim of  this work is showing how good e-learning results are achieved when there’s a good e-teaching method behind them. To do that, we will give the example of  a completely virtual university, Universitat Oberta de Catalunya (UOC), where the learning process takes place on a virtual campus and we will focus on one speciﬁ c subject: that of  comparative literature. If  there were—and there still 
are—some risks, I hope that we’ll be able to see that, ﬁ nally, the key to de ﬁ ne 
“virtual” in terms of  human experience and not in terms of  technological hard-ware is the concept of  “presence,” which is crucial in our pedagogical model and our way of  teaching comparative literature at a virtual university.
The Challenging Experience of T eaching Literature through the Net
Taking as an example the course Universal Literary Topics (Borràs Castanyer), I’ll 
try to show the way in which we have organized this course taking as a starting point a series of  texts connected by the fact that they deal with some of  the basic topics of  universal literature. We use hypertext material combining linear reading with sequential or fragmentary reading inherent to hypertext, as well as video or audio resources organized around the topics of  “desire,” “journey,” “identity/otherness.” During the process, our intention was to analyze the text from a dual perspective, both towards the present and the future but also, simul-taneously, within a paradigm formed by other texts that precede and in ﬂ uence 
it. The course intends then to contribute to a transversal reading of  universal literature in a virtual environment of  learning, and at the same time it provides guidelines to students for a practical exercise of  comparative literature. It also suggests reading itineraries that cross periods and literary traditions that are far from each other in time and space. Following intertextual connections that guide us within the hypertextual corpus, some of  the reading routes are described as randomized and subjective and they show the broadcast and the articulation of  such a topic in the literary tradition. Students, after familiarizing themselves with the texts presented in the materials and with the navigating tools offered by the materials, have to select some other topics and to build up their own (hyper)textual corpus which will constitute their ﬁ nal project. And there is a 
335Laura Borràs Castanyer  |  E-Learning and Literary Studies
constant dialogue between the teacher and the students so that, although we are 
a distance university—or without distances, as our motto has it—the concepts of  presence and accompaniment of  the students are fundamental. This is what provides a true added value to the teaching and studying of  literature at the UOC and it ensures out success.
Our task in the day-by-day work as virtual lecturers combines electronic 
didactic materials, on-line resources, digital libraries, web sites of  reference, vir-tual exhibitions, etc. It is necessary to seriously consider that on-line teaching using these digital resources implies becoming detached from acquired habits and transforming the discourse of  communicative techniques. The ﬂ uidity of  
hypertext obliged us to rethink one of  the main preoccupations of  a writer: the possibility to exert control over the way a reader reads. Indeed the author-lec-turer’s creative act requires, on the part of  the user-student, an interpretative act and also aims at making the students wander around the text. Hypertext shows a new form of  “textuality” based on the capacity of  “penetration” of  a text marked with links that open doors to new horizons. In hypertexts, any illusion of  control vanishes: seduction is the only motivation we wanted in order to lead towards hypertextual wandering. So, we must react to the transfer of  knowledge by accompanying students in their process of  intellectual maturation, contrib-uting to the virtual blackboard or inciting the debate in the virtual forum, cor-recting exercises in a very personalized way, answering doubts, considering new questions, etc. After all, it is a holistic and bene ﬁ cial task for the students, since 
it obliges them to read, to compare, to listen to their colleagues, as well as to the lecturer, to deeply participate in the course, to organize their ideas in a logi-cal form and to present them coherently. In other words: to organize and build their learning process in a radically subjective way, using their own initiative and capacities. 
The History of an Experiment
We started to design the course in 2001, just at the time when we were trying to see if  the students at the UOC were capable of  dealing substantially with their new environment through its own language: that of  hypertext. This was the challenge, but at the same time we had to consider whether we, the teachers, were prepared for our role of  imparting contents in the speci ﬁ c circumstances 
of  a digital environment. We were thus not only talking about a campus that allowed interaction with, and tutoring and monitoring of, students but we were also facing the risk of  replacing our linear discourse with a fragmented discourse which the students would approach in ways that we could not control. What 
336Laura Borràs Castanyer | E-Learning and Literary Studies
does all this mean? Well, in lectures/classes to my students at the traditional 
University of  Barcelona, I control the situation to the extent that the discourse is linear and is delivered in a linear way. That is to say, for the students to under-stand what is to come, I have ﬁ rst to explain other things in order to maintain a 
narrative coherence that has to be complete to allow information transfer to be effective. But now it was not simply a question of  having webs or other virtual spaces to complement my teaching act in the lecture hall, nor of  producing paper materials such as manuals on a particular topic plus activities for distance students. No. This time we had to make a double leap into the unknown to see if  we could be replaced or at least transported to the opaque limbo of  a hypertext. This challenged us to check whether we knew how to “disorganize” our aca-demic discourse that looked so “organized” on the surface. Obviously we used this peculiar textual form that hypertext imposes on the works that we read and interpret, a form that at ﬁ  rst appears fragmentary. Fragmentary, because to prac-
tice the art of  screen writing or a certain topographical script necessarily takes us to a certain spatial arrangement of  the contents. This arrangement is not only a discursively linear one in the sense that the discourse is broken down into items  —the individual words—that constitute blocks of  text linked through contents, but also fragmentary from the point of  view of  accessibility of  the texts, since only text extracts were selected and not whole works. I have thus to confess that we acted inversely to the way which, according to Chateaubriand, the moralist Joseph Joubert did things. When he read, he ripped out the pages that he didn’t like and in this way he collected a personal library made of  stripped volumes. A collection of  fragments, then, which is the consequence of  a certain teaching strategy, but which also re ﬂ ects changes in the mentality and perception of  the 
reality that affects reading and writing as well as cultural production as a whole. I suppose that we found support in the principle enunciated by Seamus Heaney in a poem from Electric Light  which is signi ﬁ cantly entitled “The Fragment.” The 
last lines read like this:
            “Since when,” he asked,“Are the ﬁ  rst and the last line of  any poem
Where the poem begins and ends?” (57)  
I do not know if  we succeeded in our attempt, but the fact is that there were three different proposals for the use of  hypertext or for the diverse presenta-tion of  information. The difference, far from being seen as a lack of  structure, was upheld even in the face of  contrary recommendations from technicians and experts. As a sign of  the diversity of  proposed adaptations to the aims of  the course, the main one was to promote critical perspectives that reconstruct 
337Laura Borràs Castanyer  |  E-Learning and Literary Studies
the history of  literature according to deeply personal routes and canons. And 
to achieve this we had to forge a close alliance between the two methodologies employed for the purpose: the principle of  intertextuality (in the production of  the materials) and the conversational interaction in the forum debates. In fact the course aimed at inverting the conventional relationship between the author-critics on the one hand and the literary text on the other by transforming the former into the agents of  an exploration that passed freely from one work to another, discerning their own thematic thread. The hypertext form of  the mate-rials corresponds, then, to this type of  discontinuous reading that moves from one work to another without a pre-established thread instead of  the reading of  each text in its entirety. In this way, the three blocks into which the material is di-vided represent three personal anthologies of  extracts—literary or otherwise—selected for their intertextual relationship with an initial text that is particularly typical of  the topic that each author has chosen and with comments based on this relationship. In other words, they are series of  readings that are not sequen-tial—one text after another—but rather intertextual—one text within another. Those of  us who have worked on its design have thought about the new ways of  reading that the Internet and digitalization have created, where texts are now not self-enclosed but open up an in ﬁ nite set of  rewritings and interpretations. 
The course is to be seen as an example of  reading and a particular literary 
hermeneutics in which three teachers, who here act as “model readers,” offer our reading itineraries through the vast corpus of  the world’s literature based around three speci ﬁ c themes. Subsequently, when the students have surfed and 
discussed, reasoned and argued over these three themes and the debates that they generate, we ask them to do the same as we have done and produce their own hypertext of  readings.
Travel, Desire and Identity/Otherness
The theme in which I developed the idea of  travel led me to the image of  the Western traveler par excellence , Ulysses. The eponymous Odyssey includes a text 
serving as a base camp in which Ulysses appears con ﬁ ned in hell, burning in a 
tongue of  ﬂ ames beside Diomedes. The Odyssey allowed me to make a leap to 
canto XXVI of  the Inferno in Dante’s Divine Comedy, but passing via Virgil’s 
Aeneid, which provided the opportunity for an exercise in the ideological read-ing that Dante makes of  it, with his clear underlying political stance. But the journey did not end here, for I also took a trip through the medieval romance so that, in the end, I could transfer my discourse to a more theoretical re ﬂ ection 
on the concept of  “borrowing” and “adaptation.” In a ﬁ  nal twist, this brings us 
338Laura Borràs Castanyer | E-Learning and Literary Studies
once again to a practical application and to the reading and decoding of  icono-
graphical discourse by analyzing the diverse interpretations that are to be found in miniatures and certain modern and recent paintings illustrating the passage where Dante condemns Ulysses to the ﬂ ames.
I wanted to show that writing implies initiating a dense and complex skein 
of  references and allusions, thus making written works into networks of  inter-laced textual paths. In the same way, reading always implies associations, and in order to understand we must interpret and achieve a profound reading of  a text. At times, this process can sometimes depend on interesting and attractive detective work, where we pull the threads to unravel the complex and therefore fascinating skein of  relations among texts, which is known as intertextuality. At bottom, the striking similarities between hypertext and text that we ﬁ nd in 
Poststructuralism and the recurrent position that “texts refer to other texts end-lessly” are especially pertinent in this sort of  teaching approach, because it is in hypertextuality that intertextuality recovers its ideal form of  existence to the extent that the formal properties of  an educational hypertext encourage the readers-students to reach their own conclusions regarding the contents. From an intellectual point of  view the students become more active and therefore also interactive, also to the extent that the students feel encouraged to make conjectures, compare opinions and consult sources easily and directly, meditate on the proposed itineraries, search through them, even perhaps to spot possible textual continuations. 
So what did the hypertext format offer me? I have to begin by admitting 
that what I felt most keenly was fear. I was frightened that I did not control my students’ access to the discourse and to the arrangement that I set down in order for it to become intelligible. Fear too at not knowing how to give a lecture on the basis of  interruptions, fragmentation, discontinuity, and thus condemn the hypertextual arrangement of  my discourse to be seen as lacking coherence. Fear, obviously, of  making the students feel totally lost so that they would be unable to achieve the goals I had set. In short, what I experimented with was the fear and the disarray of  making truly ours the critical discourse that we apply to literary works. These latter are expected to accomplish clari ﬁ cation in a course 
without knowing how extensive it is, how many pages there are, how much there is left to read, where the students are unable to see where to glean the knowledge that they are expected to ﬁ nd, and therefore whether there are also missing parts 
of  the course which will appear in the ﬁ nal exam. I think that basically the fear is 
understandable to the extent that this initiative was in fact a new way of  teaching literature. An experiment, obviously, whose success depends exclusively on the students’ acceptance of  the method that has inspired it. So I tried to overcome my fear by designing diagrams, conceptual maps and hierarchies within the links 
339Laura Borràs Castanyer  |  E-Learning and Literary Studies
and pages so as to organize as far as possible, not to say “direct,” the discourse 
that I wanted to get across. At the same time, I tried to make the maximum use of  the potentialities of  the environment to complement my expertise as a teacher and the persuasive force of  my oral discourse with audiovisual informa-tion that almost forces an interpretation. In the conventional classroom I can start with an introduction and then read the text, making brief  parentheses for clariﬁ  cation, which I then sum up in the end. Yet, here they received the original 
text or the Catalan translation with the possibility of  a recital/interpretation by Vittorio Gassman; they could follow the text on their screens, with explanatory links, illustrations, complementary webs, additional references, etc.
However, the procedure that I adopted was not the same as that of my 
colleagues. Professor Raffaele Pinto wanted to bring out the intertextuality in a fundamentally physical way, with juxtaposed texts, with texts that referred to other texts from a viewpoint that was strictly textual. He wanted to explore desire by diving into the moral roots of the liberty of the individual imma-nently and lay roots arising from an experience which was at the heart of the inspiration of medieval literature. So in order to talk about desire, he selected the preface from Boccaccio’s Decameron , a text which, in its dense brevity, ex-
plicitly sets out a synthesis of the signi ﬁ cance that desire had come to acquire 
in medieval literature and of the modern values, which, starting with Boccac-cio, would have a cultural horizon that was lay and secularized. Pinto draws from him a whole series of textual associations that allow him to survey the appearance of troubadour poetry in Romance languages and to establish tex-tual links to Catalan and Spanish poetry of the 15
th and 16th centuries. For the 
third topic, Joan Elies Adell shows how identity is born out of the disturbing encounter with otherness, and the extent to which the other has been utilized to construct the sense of self, the sense of centrality of the world itself. The other has been a central ﬁ gure in the formation of modernity, a modernity 
which at the same time demonstrates the impossibility of reducing the world to one unique point of view. Joan Elies Adell’s extremely exploratory hypertext forces the students to re-think Western history starting from the role that the other has assumed. This act of revision takes literary shape here through a reading of Joseph Conrad’s Heart of Darkness . With the background of postcolo-
nial literatures, the aim is to get across the function of imperialism as a politi-cal and ideological system. To this end his hypertext analyzes the ﬁ rst chapter 
of the book and weaves a dense network of links that annotate, interrupt and relate the text to others (in other literary genres: poetry, essays, etc., and also other media like cinematography). Instead of serving as buoys in the midst of the navigation, they tend to generate a loss, which is revealed as necessary and inevitable in the reading process and in literary criticism.
340Laura Borràs Castanyer | E-Learning and Literary Studies
The Rules of this Particular Game
The course is arranged around three activities for continuous assessment and 
a ﬁ nal project, as well as participation in the debates.1 The ﬁ  rst task is for the 
students to describe their view of  the structure of  the materials and the conse-quences that this has for their studies: familiarization with the articulation cri-teria, main texts, secondary texts, reading list, the search function in hypertext. In tasks 2, 3 and 4 they have to produce ideas of  their own based on each of  the three themes related to the paradigm of  modernity in literature. Finally, they have to present a justi ﬁ cation of  the selected themes and this takes the form of  
the ﬁ nal project. Each one of  these tasks is accompanied by a series of  conver-
sations in the forum in which the contents are gradually separated out. There is a debate about four basic issues: ﬁ rst, the course materials, and then each of  the 
three thematic blocks and their critical evaluations in relation to them. At the same time there appears a whole range of  satellite topics which are keenly taken up by the students: for instance, the relationship between language and identity, between gender and language, the subject, the role of  women in history and in literature, anorexia, and so on. Finally, there is a collective debate on the choice of  a critical category, and the justi ﬁ cations and anthologies proposed by all of  
those taking part, as well as a veri ﬁ cation of  the presence of  the theme chosen 
in the course materials or of  close or relatable categories.
The Results
This course has only been offered for three consecutive years. The growth of  students taking the course is exponential, going from 7 to 29 and then to 53 in these ﬁ rst three years. We have to compare this growth considering that for an 
optative subject there’s an average of  15 to 20 students per class and from 5 to 10 in the ﬁ rst semester.
This extraordinary increase, which has not been observed in any of  the oth-
er subjects in the degree, would seem to indicate the level of  success attained. The level which is not only seen quantitatively in the percentage of  good results but also qualitatively in the feeling of  satisfaction expressed by the students who have done the course, as well as their sense of  having worked well, with great intensity, and very bene ﬁ cially, and have shown a high degree of  reliance on, and 
positive gleanings from, the classroom debates.
Even so, it has not been easy. And this is so, paradoxically, because our 
initial warnings in the ﬁ  rst semester that the course was offered were greeted 
with enthusiasm and understanding by the students. They understood perfectly 
341Laura Borràs Castanyer  |  E-Learning and Literary Studies
well the reasoning behind the “shape” of  their literature manual and they were 
relatively happy with it, although they expressed the view that their knowledge was slight when faced with a hypertext that seemed so rich. Let us have a look at some of  their impressions. We can observe that the students saw the approach as innovative
2:
. . . As far as I can see, the material is fascinating, although it looks difﬁ cult. I’ve read Laura Borràs’s introduction, “Re-reading as a liber-
ating act,” and her point of  view strikes me as very interesting. I had never considered this approach but I ﬁ nd it extremely appropriate and 
it opens new ways for me to relate to literature. 
M. Àngels Monte Ochoa de Aspuru, “Diversos,” 14/03/2002
I am truly overwhelmed by the quantity and quality of  the material in the course hypertext; it brings me face to face with my own ignorance and in fact with myself  because it’s incredible how many things there are that I haven’t read. . . . We can turn to the saying ars longa, vita brevis , 
in other words, there are masses of  written works to be read in just one lifetime. Perhaps this is enough to calm us down if, as Laura Borràs says in her introduction, re-reading is the supreme liberating act which allows us multiple journeys into literature; we cannot lose sight of  the fact that literary tradition is made up not only of  reading material, but also of  the interpretations of  others. . . . 
Miquel Àngel Arasa Favà, 15/03/2002
One feels foolish and become aware of  the fact how small you are when faced with the in ﬁ nite transversal lines—vertical, horizontal and 
oblique—in the material, which a quick glance hardly takes in. It is a mixed feeling: on the one hand, you feel hurt by the reminder, which you consider unnecessary, of  your limitations; on the other hand, grate-ful because you see that you are invited, with a large dose of  freedom, to initiate the creative task of  designing one of  your small possible canons, some original but inevitably miniscule thematic collection, or even to plunge into the moving search and discovery of  intertextual connections . . . express the wish to share the bliss and joy deriving from the quality of  the contents of  the course web.
Josep Maria Àlvarez, 15/03/2002
We are faced with excellent material expressing innovative ideas. It does this through a wide range of  readings which, above all, bear the cultural 
342Laura Borràs Castanyer | E-Learning and Literary Studies
and literary imprint of  their authors. Material whose structure, in my 
opinion, corresponds to a rather loose interpretation of  intertextuality and which in fact is quite close to the functioning of  our brains, which undoubtedly work through the association of  ideas, sometimes very subtle ones, derived from our existential background. . . . With this premise, taking part in our journey might be a fascinating adventure, an adventure that leads us to open the container of  our readings and our most hidden knowledge, to appreciate passages, authors and concepts and to see how far we are capable of  reaching . . . and this makes me ask myself: is my intellectual baggage suf ﬁ cient to construct an attrac-
tive trajectory, to create a canon of  intertexts in which the analogies appear to have a minimal coherence? I’m afraid of  losing the intention into a puerile dead-end or a maze where each text is a wall shut off  by my own ignorance. These are some of  the doubts which strike me but they coexist alongside the curiosity and interest that the course arouses in me.
Josep Maria Roquer, 16/03/2002
We have here some very good material. At last we are doing a subject truly from within, exploiting the possibilities offered by digital tech-nologies. The hypertext format allows one to delve in much deeper and more rapidly with regard to informational and relational possibilities. However, I’m afraid to lose my way in this sea of  texts and images. . . . From the prior consideration that the possibility of  a transversal reading is undoubtedly a fascinating adventure, I feel at the same time that this methodology also runs the risk of  an excessive fragmentation of  the readings. . . . My state of  mind at the beginning of  the course and when faced with the materials is one of  total insecurity; everything that I don’t know suddenly appears before me, and with the possibility that it will grow bigger and bigger. I also feel overwhelmed like Miquel Àngel and foolish like Àlvarez. I also have my doubts about whether my intellectual baggage is enough as the starting point for the prepara-tion of  my own text corpus. . . . I must also say that I very much like the treatment given to the non-literary materials related to the texts, especially the pictorial ones. I have spent quite a time nosing through them. Many thanks.
M. Àngels Monte, 17/03/2002
These feelings of  anxiety, of  shortcomings, of  being overwhelmed, contrast with the excellent results that the group achieved; they were of  an extraordinary 
343Laura Borràs Castanyer  |  E-Learning and Literary Studies
quality. However, these re ﬂ ections from the pilot course contrast signi ﬁ cantly 
with the lack of  sensitivity towards the materials demonstrated by the second 
set of  students. To begin with there was an initial moment of  perplexity over a manual that was not a book, but a web. They could download the web onto their hard disks, but they refused to do this and asked for the course on a CD. Subse-quently, their attitude changed when they had seen the learning possibilities of  a teaching approach based on the students’ self-determination in relation to the route and the contents. Let’s look at this through some of  their comments:
1. Complete perplexity over the lack of  materials. It seems that the 
web by itself  was not considered synonymous with materials.
 Dear fellow students: I’m another one who has not received any 
materials for this course. I have sent a message to the of ﬁ ce but I 
still haven’t got an answer. Have you others received any type of  print material?
Cristina Gallego Jiménez, 27/02/2003
2. Mystery that stems from the physical structure of  the material, of  the 
medium.
 Although it is very interesting, this course is somewhat mysterious.
Laia Morral Plans, 27/02/2003
3. There were also students who looked beyond the form: The approach to the course strikes me as very interesting and I 
believe that together we can make real discoveries.
Josep Maria Agustí Julià, 04/03/2003
4. In the light of  this bewilderment, authentical textual versions of  the 
materials began to appear:
 Given the lack of  a print version of  the contents, I have tried to 
make one, at least of  the journey part, although of  course I have not included either the images or the links.
Lídia Jiménez Comas, 05/03/2003
5. Three weeks into the semester panic took hold: I urgently need help. I can see that people are making contributions 
and I still haven’t received the CD, nor have I been able to down-load the material that we have to read. Can anyone tell me what I’m supposed to do?
Teresa Alsina Batí, 11/03/2003
344Laura Borràs Castanyer | E-Learning and Literary Studies
6. And when the CD ﬁ nally arrived, it became clear that it was not 
what they had expected. I suppose they thought that the CD would 
be something like a book, not that it was just a physical support for the web. However, this also showed their limited technical skills. 
 At last I’ve received the CD but now I have the problem (like many 
of  you) that I can’t install it. I will try to do what Glòria suggests, to see if  I ﬁ nally can consult the materials. I have printed out the 
journey but it is not the same. As soon as possible I will make my personal evaluation of  the materials—I mean the ﬁ rst task. I can’t 
wait to see these materials which, from what I have read, are very interesting.
Teresa Alsina Batí, 16/03/2003
In effect, comprehension comes when they understand that “it is not the same” because there is a complete correlation between what we provide and what we demand. It is not a question of  us forcing them to the dif ﬁ cult task of  sur ﬁ ng 
to ﬁ nd academic contents with a view to study and memorization, which is 
probably where most of  the worries and fears come from. Instead we have pro-vided them with academic material in web or CD format so that they explore it, discuss it, comment on it, learn things from it and, at the end of  the semester, produce their own material.
Finally, I will present the total rejection of  the material format, which came 
from the third—and for the moment last—group of  students. 
The initial confusion:
I chose this subject because I thought it might be very interesting. What 
I didn’t realize was that all the material is in hypertext format, and the truth is that I’m afraid that it will tire me. To get home and open a book is not the same thing as to be stuck the whole time in front of  the computer. Well, I hope everything goes OK. 
Fina Roldán Cobo, 02/03/2004
It’s the ﬁ rst time that I’ve seen a course in which hypertext is used. 
I ﬁ nd this materials format very interesting because each of  us can 
choose the link which seems most attractive in order to go deeper into the text and relate to other information. One might say that it’s like a re-alization of  the associative organization of  our memory. This does not mean that I agree with using materials of  this type because, although you can choose the path you want to follow, the paths are limited. By
345Laura Borràs Castanyer  |  E-Learning and Literary Studies
contrast, when we read a book, our memory and imagination are un-
limited and we can relate to any ideas that we want.
Teresa Alsina Butí, 03/03/2004
I will see how I get on with the hypertext material, since I’ve already had to drop out of  one course because of  it. I’m sorry but it upsets me. I prefer a system with books where I can make my own notes un-disturbed and not go backwards and forwards making notes from the screen. In spite of  all this, I will make the attempt.
Àngela Murillo, 03/03/2004
In this course, I am surprised at the type of  material that we have to use but I still can’t give my opinion about it because I haven’t really delved into it. I admit though that my ﬁ rst thought was to print out the lot.
Rosa Maria Navarro Fernández, 06/03/2004
However, something was beginning to change:
I was quite surprised that all of  the material related to the course was in digital format. Perhaps this is because I’m technologically a bit old-fashioned, or perhaps it is because I have a great passion for the traditional format on paper. So, full of  skepticism and reservations, I started to wander virtually through the course content, and, in doing so, I discovered that the format was not all that bad. It is obvious that hypertext has many interesting aspects. To move around the CD is like taking a walk, a trip that is interesting because of  the topics of  this course, a trip where you are constantly on new paths, paths that take you forwards and backwards as if  you were walking through a maze. It has its pleasant side, but in spite of  that I recognize that for a reader accustomed to conventional linear reading, it will be a problem, as one constantly gets lost among the words. Perhaps it’s all just a question of  getting used to it, of  stopping to see as unknown and strange a way of  learning that seems interesting. And this topic really could turn out to be interesting because the CD is of  a very high quality. I can only talk about its strengths: visually attractive, ﬁ lled with things that could 
help us in our research—I’ve even found fragments from Francis Ford Coppola’s clever ﬁ  lm Apocalypse Now , which, as you know, takes as its 
model Conrad’s Heart of  Darkness. Deﬁ  nitively an interesting ﬁ nd.
Oriol Grau i Mas, 07/03/2004
346Laura Borràs Castanyer | E-Learning and Literary Studies
My ﬁ rst impression when I saw the material was that I felt a bit un-
comfortable not having a printed version and not being accustomed 
to a format with a sea of  fragmented contents. It was certainly my lack of  experience that caused this sense of  disorientation—I didn’t know what order to follow or whether it was the right one. On the other hand, if  there is no paper version, it is also a way of  saving ink and paper. I suppose it’s a matter of  getting used to it.
Rosa Teixidor, 08/03/2004
The initial contact results in rejection and, in consequence, the defense of  books and paper. We also ﬁ nd thoughts about the contradiction be-
tween studying at a virtual university and rejecting materials that are in line with the times. This perhaps is evidence that some of  our students choose the UOC because it is a distance university rather than due to the conviction of  the value of  its media, but this is also surprising.I am one of  those who prefer the paper format (although it’s odd for a UOC student to say this.) I like the contact with paper; I like to un-derline with those ﬂ uorescent marker pens in various colors and make 
my own notes in pencil. However, I appreciate that the subject requires something more that the linear format that a book allows. The most serious problem for me, though, is not the question of  one medium or another. For me the real problem is that you might get lost among all these hypertext windows that we can open. We know where to start but we don’t know what our destination is or whether it’s the right one, whether we have left something behind or whether we still have to go further. Take heart, this is the future.
Gerard Cortès, 03/03/2004
I have been reading your contributions and I really agree with most of  you. The advantages of  the electronic format are already well known to us: sound, image, unlimited copies, free edition of  a text, links to the Internet, etc. However, reading from a computer screen is exhausting and hinders concentration. Long texts need to be in the traditional for-mat of  book or print. As a fellow student has said, it is odd to say this at the UOC, which is virtual par excellence , but I feel that reading from 
the screen is physically very tiring—your eyes, your body posture. And clearly, there’s nothing like a book.
Ana Luisa Campo, 03/03/2004
347Laura Borràs Castanyer  |  E-Learning and Literary Studies
I’m sorry to have to say that I prefer paper. I spend all day in an of ﬁ ce 
facing a computer. Now I have to repeat the headaches and the bad 
posture when I get home in order to study at the UOC. Personally, I don’t think it will ever be possible to replace a paper book with one in electronic format. I’m another one who uses the basic techniques of  pencil notes in the margins, underlining, circling, etc. Up to now most of  the courses that I have studied have supplemented the paper version with an electronic edition—for me this option is ideal—and those that use only the electronic format are tiring and heavy, and I believe that in the end the student does not perform as well.
Fina Roldán, 03/03/2004
Slowly there began to appear defenders of paper and books who nev-ertheless started to be sensitive to the speci ﬁ c features of the medium 
and we now see messages that attempt to ﬁ nd a compromise between 
the two media.From the start, I personally had reservations about the hypertext for-mat due to the fear of not being able to cover all the information that it provides. However, as I progressed into the material, investigating the different windows and links . . . it is like an adventure—I have to admit that I was completely seduced. And I have only covered a small part. I feel that the advantages of this system are remarkable. Like David, I believe that the transversality makes the course even more interesting, facilitating the task of relating one text to another, of re-lating works and authors, etc. All this, bearing in mind that although I use virtual communication, I still write letters, and I believe that there is nothing like reading a good book, and that a screen will never have the charm of some old yellowed pages. I hope that we enjoy this hypertext adventure.
Alex Ogier, 03/03/2004
There’s nothing like paper. Take my word for it, reading a book, even if  it is only a part or a page, sitting in front of  the computer is not the same as sitting on the sofa or lying down in bed, with the freedom of  movement that the computer denies us, because who has read a book that you can’t put down without changing your posture while you read? Everybody does so. You make yourself  as comfortable as you like or that the situation (of  the book) allows. On the other hand, I also recall that we are in a virtual university, and society is changing, so the way to teach and the materials used in education also have to change. I’m tell-
348Laura Borràs Castanyer | E-Learning and Literary Studies
ing you, in this case it seems to me appropriate given that you don’t have 
to go forwards and backwards between pages; instead the screens solve this problem for you. On the other hand, we must be ecological. This is also positive because there is a considerable saving in paper. Imagine the amount of  paper needed to print the materials for this course. So, for those of  us who are studying, for the moment a few trees have been saved. To be practical, we also have to think about space, since all we need is a computer and a little place for the CD. Books take up space, and there comes a time when there’s none left.
Montserrat Jou, 04/03/2004
. . . Regarding hypertext, I also believe that it is a wonderful system to extend and complement the information contained in a work. Person-ally, I have printed out a large part of  the links to give myself  an overall idea of  what the CD contains. Perhaps this is not the best way, because in the future if  we have to print out all the hypertexts, the house won’t be big enough to store all the paper, and hypertext, which is designed to save paper, will have the opposite effect. Perhaps one should only print out what is really interesting and leave the rest on the CD. Hypertext is like a great library at your ﬁ  ngertips.
Carles Amengual, 06/03/2004
Although it is dif ﬁ cult to believe, there were a few positive initial reactions, even 
though the wording expresses shock, confrontation and, above all, moderation. 
It is the ﬁ rst time that I happen upon a hypertext for my studies. But 
for the moment it strikes me as brilliant, although the organization and the system of  links that take you to more links might seem disturbing. I ﬁ nd that the horizontal invasion of  my desk that I used to cause when 
I was studying is now reduced to my PC and not much more: papers, set books, one or two reference titles. Previously it was: the set text, the text supplements, the sheets with the recommended reading list, the manual or encyclopedia to look up terms. Whew! For me the de ﬁ ning 
assessment would be that this occupancy has come to an end. For the moment, delighted; but we will see how I manage when I get stuck. I might start climbing up the walls. . . .
Montserrat Poveda, 02/03/2004
I have been sur ﬁ ng the course web and I ﬁ nd that the material is simply 
pleasant and enlightening. I think that in a subject like this one the idea 
349Laura Borràs Castanyer  |  E-Learning and Literary Studies
of  transversality with different texts is fantastic. How many times when 
we were reading a book have our thoughts turned to another? Well, here I ﬁ  nd the links to other literary works that can illustrate a particu-
lar topic very sensible. It is not a question of  whether the windows that open annoy you or not; it is rather than they simply take us deeper into the matter. I think that it is good material . . . it is instructive and, above all, user-friendly. And it strikes me as being just that. I can’t imagine this course in paper format. Well, I can imagine it, but with notes in the margin telling us to consult a web page or a book. In courses like this one I am completely in favor of  hypertext materials. At least this is my feeling at the moment and I hope that it stays that way.
David Font, 03/03/2004
I would like to say that I like these materials in hypertext format. Even so, the ﬁ rst time that I was faced with similar materials—I am thinking 
about medieval literature, which presented all the texts like this—I felt a bit nervous. I had the impression that I was missing something, that I hadn’t read everything. Subsequently, I learnt to read right through without interruptions (without opening windows) and get the gist of  the thing. The second reading served to go deeper, to take notes. . . . In the end I found it fantastic: I had a lot of  information available to me. So, the materials of  “Universal literary topics” has neither surprised nor worried me. I feel that one notes the clear imprint of  Laura Bor-ràs. I have already done a couple of  courses with Laura, and one of  the things that she has made me familiar with is the virtual workshop, a space where we ﬁ nd the reading list, the supplementary links and the 
students projects. Highly stimulating!
Assumpta Grabolosa, 04/03/2004
We note that the open dialogue in the forum clari ﬁ es standpoints as it does the 
opinions of  the other students.
I suppose that the fact that the materials are in a still new format en-riches the forum with opinions of  all sorts. Personally, my wandering through the course materials made me curious. . . . I understand that it is easier to use papers, scribbling on them, making them your own, but we must appreciate the great possibilities that hypertext offers. As read-ers, we’re free to decide how far we want to go in the hypertext journey that we have to undertake. In effect, in certain courses at the UOC hypertext offers us a way of  learning that is more agile, more pleasant 
350Laura Borràs Castanyer | E-Learning and Literary Studies
and more interactive. At the moment I recall the materials of  Medieval 
Catalan Literature. We have to consider that those made available to us pages and pages of  different books without having them on our desks and we could consult them one by one. And it allows us to do this while we weave our own way and it makes clear that literature is a liv-ing discipline. I will ﬁ nish with one last point: this course is also special 
with respect to its contents. Because to study world literature starting from desire, travel and identity/otherness rather than chronologically or starting from the most renowned authors—which is what tradition-ally happens—is truly innovative and interesting. And I feel that the formula of  transversal study is a ﬁ ne way to refer to themes and pres-
ent them because it often stimulates the students and spurs them on to broaden their knowledge. And for me this is authentic learning.
Rosa Clarena, 08/03/2004
Let me ﬁ nish by saying that I ﬁ nd it courageous to present a subject 
(and even more so literature, a concept that we always associate with books) in this format. I feel that it would have been half-baked if  the CD had just been of  supplementary material. Personally, I have no problem with the visual fatigue that the screen is supposed to cause or the fact that I can’t read in bed, as someone mentioned. For me these arguments are not very serious. The truth is that I work for hours in front of  a screen and I have never studied lying in bed or on the sofa. As for the contents, I feel that the authors of  the CD have produced a presentation that is ordered, pleasant and, as someone has said, quickly arouses your curiosity. For all these reasons I feel that we should get stuck in and see how it goes.
Joan Piqué, 08/03/2004
And with the euphoria of  those who up to now had been reticent, con ﬁ rmatory 
statements started to arrive:
In my presentation I was not too positive about studying with the format we had been given, and after the ﬁ rst week I would like to con-
ﬁ rm this. I am speaking absolutely personally, and I have total respect 
for those who are enthusiastic about the CD. My sincere congratula-tions. By contrast, for me, it is tedious to get home after a long day at work, to sit down facing the computer and not be sure where to begin. (Open and close windows, go from one side to another, nowhere con-venient to take notes, dif ﬁ culty to concentrate in the short study time 
351Laura Borràs Castanyer  |  E-Learning and Literary Studies
that I have.) It would be easier for me to have it on paper like other 
courses, and use the CD to refer to supplementary material and as a means of researching information and/or to accede to interesting web pages, as many of you have said. As a matter of fact, I have started to devote more time to the other subject that I am enrolled for. . . . The CD is all right; I grant you that it is well organized, but I don’t see it as the only material. And rather than ending up printing it out, I would prefer to have it on paper to start with and not waste paper and ink. I’m sorry; I’m afraid that more than one contribution is like a hankie with tears.
Ángela Murillo, 07 /03/2004
After reading my fellow students’ contributions and after a look at the CD which contains the course material, I have to align myself with those who are more or less against the materials being exclusively in this format. I have had the opportunity to study two courses with CD materials (the two medieval literature ones), but in both cases it was a matter of material that was supplementary to the basic course, which was on paper. I feel that it would have been more appropriate to provide the basic material in paper format. The other, as a fellow stu-dent has said, could present a sort of text that was longer and denser, providing all sorts of complementary material—links, illustrations, diagrams, etc.—in digital format. For me the computer represents my connection with the university, with the class as we might put it, but I still can’t see it as my study tool. Apart from visual fatigue and the difﬁ culty concentrating, I have to make the most of any brief period 
for my studies, making notes and revising, and at many of these mo-ments I don’t have the computer. I have to say that I ﬁ nd the mate-
rial on the CD well produced and very suitable and, although I have printed out a lot of the contents—basically the ones that I feel should have been provided on paper—I do not rule out a change of opinion during the course.
Marta Puiggarí, 07/03/2004
But let us not think that all is lost. In the end, there are some changes in their attitude:
I admit that before I delved into the study of the CD, I had my doubts about this new study method. Like many of you, I felt that it was suit-able only as a complement to the print material. Now, after having 
352Laura Borràs Castanyer | E-Learning and Literary Studies
gone a bit deeper, I am delighted with what I have seen, the quality 
of the images, the very original way to present the course, the links, as well as the freedom that hypertext gives you to create your own itinerary.
Rosa Maria Navarro, 08/03/2004
And the ﬁ  nal reward arrived after months of intensive work. 
Some Final Assessments
M y  main  as s es s m en t  o f  th e  c o urs e  is  tha t  i t  has  ta ugh t  m e  t o  read  from a more general, more transversal and more critical perspective. I have learnt to read a work not on its own, isolated from the world of literature, but rather by ﬁ tting it into the whole. It is a critical and 
generalist view that is highly enriching. . . . What is needed is precisely this capacity to think critically. As for the approach, I have found the use of hypertext very suitable, especially in this type of university. However, I suppose that the web could continue to grow. The debates have struck me as very interesting, and you feel motivated when you know that they are being closely followed. In sum, it has all been very positive and enriching.
M. Alba Serra, 13/06/2004
Right from the beginning, I felt that the goal of this course was that each of us, after a ﬁ rst reading guided by the hypertext, would come 
to their own reading, or re-reading, of the proposed theme. I really believe that this has been achieved. . . . What I mean is that all of us, through the experience of what we have read and our particular cultural interests, which obviously vary a great deal, have been able to imagine and ﬁ  nd new paths and itineraries. I very much appreciate the 
contributions to the forum because this has made the course dynamic, active and participatory. Even if it was only in a small way, many of us became involved. In a university like this one, where we in fact see each other very rarely, the contributions of our fellow students help us to “live” the subject in a different way, and to feel part of a goal and an experience. (I also say this because I have suffered courses in which the teacher and the students made not a single appearance in the forum. In these cases, I felt completely alone and it obviously af-fected my dedication.) . . . Well, nothing else. I’ve enjoyed this course 
353Laura Borràs Castanyer  |  E-Learning and Literary Studies
a lot. I’ve felt comfortable and perfectly free to choose and construct 
my own paths, to seek and ﬁ nd readings and, above all, to put into 
practice the series of ideas that the readings have suggested to me.
Assumpta Grabolosa, 20/06/2004
It seems that, at last, it has become clear that the mere virtual environment or even the materials that are a reservoir of  contents are not suf ﬁ cient. Practice 
shows us that with close accompaniment students ﬁ nally understand the phi-
losophy behind the course.
3 More than merely achieving the aims of  the course, 
students take an active part and show a very positive attitude to the subject hav-ing caused so much mistrust at the beginning.
Notes
1. So far we have covered the course materials, but there are also the tools 
that are common to all courses at the UOC: the study plan, which provides a clear temporal order for the contents and arranges them in a calendar of  tasks and guided readings, and the virtual spaces of  the noticeboard, forum and debate, as well as the link to documents and resources, the connection to the virtual library, etc.
2. The following student statements have been taken from the course’s online 
community forum.
3. You can consult some of our students’ work in the HERMENEIA web, 
some arising directly out of the course: Josep Maria Àlvarez (on porno-graphy,
 <http:/ /www.uoc.edu/in3/hermeneia/ exemples/pornotemes/in 
dex.htm>), Teresa Vilà (on adultery, <http:/ /www.terra.es/personal5/manelmarti/temeslit/>) and M. Alba Serra (on war, <http:/ /www.uoc.edu/in3/hermeneia/exemples/guerra_literatura/index.html>), and some out of their teaching: Josep Maria Roquer (web of poetic hermeneutics, <http:/ /www.uoc.edu/in3/hermeneia/ exemples/ROQUER_web/Home.htm>), Núria Casademunt (alienation in Kafka, <http:/ /www.uoc.edu/in3/hermeneia/exemples/kafka_alienacio/principal.htm>). Other exam-ples can be found among the “Didactic examples” of the HERMENIA web.
354Laura Borràs Castanyer | E-Learning and Literary Studies
Works Cited
Barràs Castanyer, Laura, ed. Universal Literary Topics. Barcelona: Ediuoc, 2001.
Heaney, Seamus. Electric Light. London: Faber and Faber, 2001.
355Susanne Berkenheger
i’m dying, honey
dramatized proceedings from super-space (2004)1
Abstract
The text i’m dying, honey originates in a chat room. Ninety percent of  it is original dia-
logue: digital whisper-friendships and babbling heartthrobs, pasted harangues and virtual shoulder shrugging. This is the background for my character, a provocatress who made herself  known only within her own rules of  speech, who played with snippets of  com-munication as if  she was a computer program. The chatters tried to crack her hermetic shield: they begged and ﬂ irted, they implored my character to speak with them in a nor-
mal language, they came up with the wildest ideas, they became impatient, they ranted and raved and thereby contributed to a dialogic piece which shall ﬁ nd its way back into 
the net after a theater performance.
yüksel:   AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA
  AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA
  AAAAA AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA AAA  AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA  AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA    AAAAAAAAAA AAAAAAAAAA 
ümit:   he cant take it :) yüksel:   AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA
  AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA  AAAAA AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA AAA  AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA  AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA    AAAAAAAAAA AAAAAAAAAA
ümit:   check out how hard hes working at it :) yüksel:   AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA
  AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA  AAAAA AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA AAA  AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA  AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA    AAAAAAAAAA AAAAAAAAAA
ümit:   he’ll smash keyboard in a minute haha 
356Susanne Berkenheger  |  i’m dying, honey
yüksel:   how am I supposed to  WRITE AGAINST 15 PEOPLE?
   AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA
  AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA  AAAAA AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA AAA  AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA  AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA    AAAAAAAAAA AAAAAAAAAA 
ümit:   ﬂ ooding is all he can do 
yüksel:   ÜMIT YOU ASSHOLE I GRADUATED! YOU DIDN’T  
  EVEN FINISH SCHOOL YOU BUM AROUND THE  STREETS YOU SONOFABITCH YOU CAN GO TO   ISTANBUL AND CLEAN SHOES YOU UGLY PARA-   SITE HA HA WITH YOUR LOOKS YOU’LL NEVER    HAVE A GIRLFRIEND PÜHAH
2 
This lively chat dialogue gives a small impression of  my workday. I lurk, I com-press recorded chat-log ﬁ les, until something like the above text emerges. Some-
times I’m astonished that all this is original. Sometimes I ask myself: how come I want to even spread such conversations?
Before, my workdays looked differently. I typed, I linked, I searched in 
scripts for forgotten semicolons for many beautiful hours, I tried to guess the hexadecimal codes of  monitor-colors for fun and was right more and more often. And now? Döners, bio-trash and sons-of-bitches?
What happened?Or better: What is constantly happening?Readers stubbornly try to print out my hypertexts—with poor results. Read-
ers want to know from me whether they have seen and read everything of  a certain text, and if  not, how they can control that. Readers ask for my preferred way of  reading of  the story. Readers ask for structural maps, for sketches, early versions, for secret information that must exist for which they would be forever grateful.
To be honest: I am suspicious of  them. These are not normal readers. They 
don’t sit in front of  the screen in the evening for a nice read. They have some-thing different in mind, much less naïve: they are reworking their own works. 
This leads me to three painful questions:
1. How many readers of  net literature do I know?2. How many of  them read without writing about it themselves?3. Are there something like normal readers in the net, i.e. people who are 
neither looking for contacts nor writing themselves, people for whom the 
357Susanne Berkenheger  |  i’m dying, honey
encounter with net literature is valuable in itself? In order not to have to 
answer I do what I always do in these cases, I google: In this case: “Death of  the Author” (in German)—3130 hits. “Death of  the Reader” (in Ger-man)—14 hits. I am pondering these numbers for a long time. Aren’t these two deaths connected with each other? Doesn’t the disappearance of  the author conclusively lead to the disappearance of  the reader? How humiliat-ing for the reader that only 14 people in the German net cry about his loss. If  there is talk about his disappearance at all, then rather in a Buddhist man-ner with the motto “liberation of  the reader.” (Google: “liberation of  the reader” (in German)—94 hits, “liberation of  the author” (in German)—15 hits, “liberation of  the reader”—72 hits, “liberation of  the author”—11 hits). As if  the traditional reader in his cozy wing chair had had such a lam-entable existence that he can be only too glad to disappear.
This is how I interpret the numbers: the common reader is not really appreciated in the net. And I am collecting more evidence: the net goads even those rare epicurean hypertext-readers whom I know into the urge to communicate and this craving shortens the actual reading time.
And I? If  I surf  without communicating I feel asocial. Shouldn’t I at least 
say “HI” if  I land on a non-commercial site? Is it rude to just look and read in the net? As rude maybe as reading at a party? 
Why am I thinking of  a party just now?One sits in front of  a computer. Or is one just hanging out at the computer? 
OK, but usually unlike going to a party one has a concrete goal in the net and then . . .  hmmm . . . one ends up with people with similar intentions, people who catch you with bizarre domains and breathtaking search words. There you hang out for a while. And then, after a while, their whole linked group of  friends arrives. An entertaining small group has found each other. The intention? Later. First now there is . . . oh well, somehow party, as always in the net. Some more guests come by with intentions and plans. They certainly all want to know ones opinion. There are thousands, millions, billions, trilli . . . gulp! How relaxing it would be now to meet a couple of  quiet readers. Who want nothing at all from you. Whom you just hear breathing and clicking on. Wouldn’t it be pleasant to feel part of  a big, silent community? Shouldn’t therefore as many people as pos-sible learn to continually remain silent in the net? So that we don’t feel rude if  we just look and read?
I swallow—once, twice, then I think about changing my profession. After 
all, the strengthening of  the reader’s role is of  a top-level interest for an author. I should be a good example and retrain as a net-reader.
358Susanne Berkenheger  |  i’m dying, honey
I am happy with this idea. Without further hesitation I am moving to the 
center of  the typing maniacs—a chat channel. Ending up at the following 
lines:
hüpfer:   are we alone here? rolli 
rT -rollitom:   nope. I think they are listening in. And laughing their heads  
  off  about me and you........... * gggggg ..................... gluttons   
  *llllloooooooooooollllllllll 
hüpfer:   oh come on, reading is always interesting here, don’t need to  
  read a novel? Laughs 
rT -rollitom:   book, paper, what’s that? I only read DD in certain places  
  *gfff  
I feel I’m on the right track and internally nod at the silent community of  read-ers. As I’m reading on, astonished, reading on, bored, I am pondering whether here a reader isn’t something like a listener and whether an author-reader should not be an especially good and professional reader and likewise listener as well, and whether the particularly good listeners whom I know do not also do other things than listen. On the contrary. Don’t the best of  the particularly good lis-teners help the speakers ﬁ nd their real reckless phrases with pointed provoca-
tions and weird behavior?
Yes. Then: I have to be provocative, much more provocative.A little later I’m chatting as a dumbwaitress. 
cloud ex_undea:  hey u hey   u yeah u   hey speak   no no   say something your proﬁ  le is crap as well 
dumbwaitress:  dumbwaitress bows cloud ex_undea:  oh   how old   hey u dumbwaitress:  dumbwaitress sizes up cloud   dumbwaitress frowns cloud ex_undea:  what kinda girl are u   wot u want dumbwaitress:   dumbwaitress raises a brow cloud ex_undea:  no no dumbwaitress:   dumbwaitress shakes head 
359Susanne Berkenheger  |  i’m dying, honey
cloud ex_undea:  well lets talk regular
   really   no no   -.-”       pleez   pleez           pleez   or shall i go
3
I continue my silence and in the meantime harbor more silent ideas. I could, for example, just simply repeat the phrases of  the previous speakers or change them a little stylistically or continue to grill them with a few words.
The more variations of  silence I can think of, the clearer it becomes to me 
that almost everything will work, provided I keep to my own strict rules. Namely that the stricter I keep to my ploys, the more attention I’ll get. It even seems to me more and more that the real work is to suppress every spontaneous idea, response, to reply in set phrases and to come across with the varied vocabulary of  a bot. That galls the public but gets me the most reading time.
I see myself  only as a kind of  language-machine in the chat, as a catalyst—
and I record the reactions. I read them. Because I want to uphold this deserted place of  the reader, the public therefore can plea, beg, implore as much as they want, they won’t get anything out of  me, I won’t answer any more questions. I’m reading.
The net-author who I once was and will be again, however, wants to bring 
back the read and collated, condensed and partly ﬁ ctitiously expanded text into 
the net—as an audio installation.
This is how it will look: an empty white screen will open. Behind it, invisible 
for the website visitor, are hidden six ﬁ elds of  different sizes, sensitive to the 
mouse. When the visitor is approaching one of  these ﬁ elds with his mouse, the 
hidden dialogue will be heard—at ﬁ rst low, getting louder the closer the pointer 
approaches the center of  the ﬁ eld, reversely softer as soon as one leaves the 
ﬁ eld. If  the ﬁ elds are visited several times the dialogue continues where it was 
interrupted. All texts run in loops. 
Thereby the listener samples his own “radio”-play. Like a silent, blind guest 
at a party he moves from one group to the next. In the best-case scenario he will recognize himself  in his own role as the silent protagonist and will enjoy being a politely silent reader.
360Susanne Berkenheger  |  i’m dying, honey
Notes
1. ich sterbe gleich, schatz.  Dir. Manfred Kerklau. Perf. Gabriele Brüning. Sound-
design Detlef  Piepke. Première: Theater im Pumpenhaus, Münster. 29 Oct. 
2004. 
2. i’m dying honey: continuation of  dialogue 1; chat room West coast: 
ümit:   ﬂ ooding is all he can do 
yüksel:   ÜMIT YOU SONOFABITCH YOU COPY SHORT   
  PHRASES YOURSELF THEN YOU PASTE 
   BUT YOU CANT FLOOD THATS WHY YOURE PIS 
  SED YOU ASS-FUCKED ASS-FACE YOU CANT RE   SIST ME YOU STEAL MY WORDS? AND MY SAYINGS?  SHAME ON YOU YOU UGLIN 
ümit:    looool yüksel, dont you know how to ﬁ ght? 
yüksel:   ÜMIT YOU ASSHOLE I GRADUATED! YOU DIDNT  
  EVEN FINISH SCHOOL YOU BUM 
   AROUND THE STREETS YOU SONOFABITCH YOU  
  CAN GO TO ISTANBUL AND CLEAN SHOES YOU    UGLY PARASITE HA HA WITH YOUR LOOK YOU    WILL NEVER HAVE A GIRLFRIEND PÜHAH 
ümit:    I talk normally with them yüksel:   ÜMIT YOU SONOFABITCH WITHOUT FATHER . . .  
  WHOSE FATHER I HAVE SOLD YOU 
   BASTARD CHILD WERE FOUND IN ORGANIC   
  WASTE AS MAGGOT AND YOU WERE BRED AS A    MONSTER YOU SONOFABITCH WITH YOUR DO   NER
ümit:    without ﬂ ooding 
   he can’t handle it, he makes a fool of  himself  yüksel:   I NEVER MAKE A FOOL OF MYSELF    because i have no friends here ümit:    im crying already.) yüksel:   I NEVER MAKE A FOOL OF MYSELF because I have no
  friends here 
ümit:    im superior to him in all things :)    he cant cope with that haha yüksel:   I NEVER MAKE A FOOL OF MYSELF because I have no
  friends here 
361Susanne Berkenheger  |  i’m dying, honey
jungguy13:  (whispers to she-lurker) hi mouse, do you want to chat press 
   press 5454545454545454545454554545545454444 
yüksel:   im gonna continue!!   BECAUSE I HAVE NO FRIENDS ON THE NET My86Salsa:   who has no friends press 555555555555555 yüksel:   I HAVE NO FRIENDS ON THE NET   NOT IN THIS CHANNEL   im only here TO DISS ÜMIT   BECAUSE HE JUST THINKS HE IS KING XxILHAN05xX:  FUCK YOURE ALL FUCKED UP ümit:   haha jungguy13:  hi My86Salsa:  yüksel? yüksel:   ÜMIT YOU ASSHOLE I GRADUATED! YOU DIDNT  
  EVEN FINISH SCHOOL YOU BUM AROUND THE  STREETS YOU SONOFABITCH YOU CAN GO TO    ISTANBUL AND CLEAN SHOES YOU UGLY PARA-   SITE HA HA WITH YOUR LOOK YOU WILL NEVER    HAVE A GIRLFRIEND PÜHAH 
ümit:   everybody knows how i look,   i dont hide like you   i look normal :)   not like pig :D yüksel:   FERHAT HAS FRIENDS   BUT DOESNT LIKE YOU   BECAUSE YOURE A LIAR ümit:   ferhat is also ugly, ferhat sucks up to you   because youre chat friends :) yüksel:   ﬂ ood! 
jungguy13:  who wants to chat 12-15 press 656565656565656565656565 ümit:   if  we had met for real, you would be an  outsider because  
  youre so ugly 
yüksel:   AAA AAAAAAAA AAAAAAAA AAAAAAA  
  AAAAAAAAA AAAAAAAA AAAAAAAAAA AAAAAAA  AAAAAAAAA AAAAAAAAAA AAAAAA   AAAAAAAAAAAAAA AAAAAAAAAAAAAAA  AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA    AAAAAAAAAAAAAA AAAAAAAAAAA 
ümit:   yüksel, nobody can stand next to you because your nose pu 
  shes them away, it is so crooked:) 
362Susanne Berkenheger  |  i’m dying, honey
yüksel:   ÜMIT YOU SONOFABITCH WITHOUT FATHER . . .  
  WHOSE FATHER I HAVE SOLD YOU BASTARD  
  CHILD WERE FOUND IN ORGANIC WASTE AS     MAGGOT AND YOU WERE BRED AS A MONSTER    YOU SONOFABITCH WITH YOUR DONER 
ümit:    you have gargamel nose 
3. i’m dying honey: continuation of  dialogue 3; chat room Dream-Island:
c4f-prinz:   hello
   how can i/we help you? cloud ex_undea:   hey prinz d u know her? c4f-prinz:   cloud whats ur prob cloud ex_undea:   she dont speak manc4f-prinz:   cloud . . . the monitoring is not an of ﬁ cial chat room, it only  
  serves the purpose to ﬁ nd the navigators faster. please leave  
  this room after having expressed your problem so that other    chatters get the opportunity to get help as well.
   dumbwaitress . . . as it seems you donot have a problem and  
  you do not leave the room, you will now be expelled from the  monitoring. 
dumbwaitress:   dumbwaitress tumbles   rubs eyes, nose   snifﬂ  es
   knocks operator:   Channel Erotic is full! Change not possible dumbwaitress:   dumbwaitress knocks operator:   Channel Erotic2 is full! Change not possible dumbwaitress:   dumbwaitress knocks operator:   You will enter the channel Dream-Island  dumbwaitress:   dumbwaitress smiles vaguely  wtüte:    go get me some coffee @waitress   gg printed matter:   what do we need a brain for? jelly ﬁ sh dont have one, dont  
  need one either. they just hover thru the sea, like heyyyyy,    hoooo . . . i used to live like that also . . . and then i left     school . . . *gg 
wtüte:    waitress . . . wheres that coffee??? confound@domestics! printed matter:   waitress? dumbwaitress:   dumbwaitress scurries towards cold coffee 
363Susanne Berkenheger  |  i’m dying, honey
wtüte:   why cold???
  want it warm . . . cheekwarm please 
schwester2000:  (whispers to dumbwaitress) where u from?? 
dumbwaitress:   dumbwaitress vaguely points into the distance operator:   you have been invited into tellmemore by schwester2000; to    get there enter /go tellmemore; or /sg 
dumbwaitress:   dumbwaitress lowers eyes printed matter:   ?????? confused is @really waitress wtüte:   i told u matter . . . u just have to listen right? schwester2000:  (whispers to dumbwaitress) sorry bout the attack 
printed matter:   is she some jeanny or gini or what that thing from the bottles  called 
wtüte:   dunno matter . . . wait i rub her. . . . ggg printed matter:   löööööl  do we have wishes??? 
  enthusiastically jumping  from one foot to the other 
wtüte:   yep matter . . . but u need your own waitress . . . remember . . .  like in (life of  brian) monty python . . . only one waitress  
  each . . . gg 
printed matter:   oahhhhh blast! . . . stonekick dumbwaitress:   dumbwaitress gets back with sludge in cup wtüte:   sludge? what sludge?  receives cup
  slurps@coffee . . .
dumbwaitress:   dumbwaitress watches curiously wtüte:   welllllllll@waitress . . . might be bit sweeter n bit less hot . . .    other hand u r still learning 
schwester2000:  (whispers to dumbwaitress) dont like to meet?? im a decent girl. 
  hello?? 
dumbwaitress:   dumbwaitress lifts eyebrow printed matter:   do u lend her out sometimewtüte:   nope printed matter:   come on . . .  only oooonce 
dumbwaitress:   dumbwaitress lifts eyebrow dangerously high schwester2000:   smiles printed matter:   waitress????? wtüte:   ahm . . . are u going to be rebellious waitress???  obey!!! talk with voice like thunder 
printed matter:   WAIIIIIII TREEEEEEESSSS 
364Susanne Berkenheger  |  i’m dying, honey
wtüte:   shes mine@matter . . . gg 
printed matter:   cooome chick chick chick wtüte:   away matter 
wtüte:  (whispers to dumbwaitress) smile . . . great you play along . . .
  hello i am WTüte 
printed matter:   you are too rude to her and besides you cant pay the non-   wage labor costs 
schwester2000:  (whispers to dumbwaitress) just 5 minutes 
wtüte:   hey . . . shes a waitress!! those are used@rude printed matter:   that right waitress? talks with lovely voice dumbwaitress:   dumbwaitress strides to and fro schwester2000:   try restart  @dumbwaitress 
operator:   you have been invited into thisismylastinvitation by schwe-  ster2000; to get there enter /go thisismylastinvitation; or /sg 
dumbwaitress:   dumbwaitress ﬁ ngers for napkin 
schwester2000:  (whispers to dumbwaitress) hmm . . . have we met before?? 
dumbwaitress:   dumbwaitress is horribly clumsy wtüte:   no prob waitress . . . we will learn that together . . . dumbwaitress:   dumbwaitress hits full cup with elbow wtüte:   aaaarghhh . . . dumbwaitress:   dumbwaitress looks like nothing happened schwester2000:   meditation . . . smiles printed matter:   did she take a vow of  silence . . . ?? then i will step on her foot . . .  like in life of  brian 
schwester2000:  (whispers to dumbwaitress) say something—smiles 
schwester2000:   if  i dont hear anything else from you wtüte:   loool@matter@steps on foot dumbwaitress:   dumbwaitress waves napkin wtüte:   hm hm hm . . . good domestics are so rare these days . . . dumbwaitress:   dumbwaitress wipes on printed matter printed matter:   on meaaaaaaaaa?  what are you wiping on me? 
dumbwaitress:   dumbwaitress looks skeptically at smeary printed matter printed matter:   looks skeptically back dumbwaitress:   dumbwaitress picks up printed matter gingerly  dumbwaitress shakes head 
printed matter:   eyyyyyyyy . . . let me down wtüte:   no . . . this is not my printed matter . . . throw him away
  gg 
365Susanne Berkenheger  |  i’m dying, honey
schwester2000:  (whispers to dumbwaitress) shall i invite us once more?? 
dumbwaitress:   dumbwaitress wraps boa constricta around her neck 
schwester2000:  (whispers to dumbwaitress) special girl u r or guy perhaps 
schwester2000:   smiles dumbwaitress:   dumbwaitress struggles for air. mpfffft schwester2000:   laughs printed matter:   you are all assholes . . .dumbwaitress:   dumbwaitress gathers up her skirts printed matter:   ill stay with u  vfg 
schwester2000:  (whispers to dumbwaitress) so . . . no chance??? 
wtüte:  (whispers to dumbwaitress) coffees all gone!! 
schwester2000:  (whispers to dumbwaitress) a pity, really . . . well . . .
  where u from?? 
dumbwaitress:   dumbwaitress waves goodbye with napkin printed matter:   you stay waitress schwester2000:  (whispers to dumbwaitress) stay here waitress
  just stay here waitress 
schwester2000:   hey schwester2000:  (whispers to dumbwaitress) just stay one minute or 2 hours
  i beg you loudly to whisper back at me for once 
dumbwaitress:   dumbwaitress whispers incomprehensibly and rustles  
  away 
schwester2000:   hey 
Translated by Brigitte Pichon and Dorian Rudnytsky
367Thomas Kamphusmann
Another ABC 
A Model for “Augmented Business-Communication”
Abstract:
Communication doubtlessly has become the major driving force in the development of  actual business. Without an ef ﬁ cient inner- and inter-organizational communication 
no knowledge-driven business can survive. In contrast to the traditional resources (raw material, capital, machines, manpower) communication is not yet considered as a re-source in its own right. The reason for this disparity between the importance of  and the attentiveness to the subject of  communication can be seen in the complexity of  the topic that hinders a straightforward modeling and optimization as it can be achieved e.g. in production processes. 
This essay brie ﬂ y sketches an approach to a comprehensive model of  business relat-
ed communication that lays the basis for methods to elicit, model, analyze and last but not least to design business communication on technical, procedural and structural levels. 
After suggesting some background thoughts this article introduces the setting and 
gives an overview over the relevant perspectives on business communication as well as over the signi ﬁ cant theories concerned with the subject. It then proposes a model by 
means of  delineating the central concepts of  that model. It closes with a prospect on the work that still has to be done in order to make use of  these fundamental concepts.
1.  Background
For the longest time communication has been a more or less unconscious means 
that human beings have used for purposes they considered as “outside” of  them-selves. Communication was considered identical to the transmission of  natural language and as such nothing more than a cluster of  sentences; communication thus could not be handled in the same way they handled tools. Language and thus communication was more likely part of  their brain, heart or body than part of  their tools, workshops or factories.
Changes occurred through a series of  “revolutionary” inventions—writ-
ing, book printing, synchronous transmission, or automated modi ﬁ cation. They 
were followed by appropriate and more-or-less scienti ﬁ c reﬂ ections like contem-
plation of  textual structures, intertextuality, cognitive processes etc. Nowadays they encompass individual, aesthetic and social impacts of  “literary machines.” 
368Thomas Kamphusmann  |  Another ABC
Literature and bibliographies on this subject ﬁ ll libraries. Just to mention a few 
examples, I want to name Leroi-Gourhan’s Gesture and Speech  for anthropological 
aspects, Goody’s The Logic of  Writing and the Organization of  Society for the stud-
ies on the formation of  early societies by means of  the written text, Giesecke’s 
Der Buchdruck in der frühen Neuzeit  for the “Gutenberg revolution,” an enormous 
amount of  semiotic studies like those by Eco (e.g. Il Segno)  as well as research of  
telecommunications based on Shannon’s The Mathematical Theory of  Communica-
tion and even including work on artiﬁ  cial intelligence, e.g. Hofstadter’s Gödel, 
Escher, Bach,  Kurzweil’s The Age of  Intelligent Machines  or, of  special importance 
for my considerations, Understanding Computers and Cognition by Winograd and Flores. This covers only a very small range of  the scholarly research into com-munication.
2.  Introduction, Motivation and Scenario
In my opinion this situation doesn’t justify neglecting the topic. With the ad-vent of the so-called “knowledge societies” individual and small-group com-munication has become one of the most productive “tools.” Parallel to the goods-oriented notion of value chains that addresses mainly the primary sec-tor and the activity-oriented notion of business processes addressing mainly the second and partly the third sector, we are in need of a communication-ori-ented notion of information- ﬂ ows covering the knowledge-intense parts of the 
services sector. Studies of IDC et al. prove this need clearly and quantitatively (Feldman). This missing notion does not only have to focus on “information supply” but has to take into account communicative processes as a whole. Otherwise the needed support (from the workers’ perspective) for improving quality of work by reducing error-prone tedious work while enhancing concen-tration on the central tasks can not be achieved; nor can the needed growth in efﬁ ciency (from the company’s perspective) be realized by coordinating and 
thus reducing redundant work thereby fostering a higher usage of given intel-lectual resources.
To achieve these two major aims a rational and open communication on 
communication has to be set in motion, especially in companies that increas-ingly depend on the use of their intellectual resources. This meta-communi-cation must involve the persons affected in a higher degree than every other enterprise-resource-planning; otherwise the necessary compliance is not likely to be achieved. It therefore must not only be an open communication implying that every aspect of business related aspects can be addressed, but also a trans-parent meta-communication. Transparency is primarily grounded on a com-
369Thomas Kamphusmann  |  Another ABC
mon understanding of the terms and concepts used and their relations to each 
other. This is not at all a trivial task. Such meta-communication thus needs a “model” of communication, whether explicitly or implicitly. This model nei-ther can be presupposed as “naturally given” nor does it have to be formal or mathematically proven. But in order to conduct such a meta-communication that supports the sketched goals the model has to consider business communi-cation in all facets that are relevant in relation to the goals.
This article will sketch and discuss such a model in section 4. Before that, 
in section 3, it will give a brief overview over the theoretical foundations, the questions that are to be answered by the model and its architecture. Yet prior to that a fabled example from ComPro Ltd. will show what this is all about. Let’s hear what Mr. Prolead says about the internal communication at ComPro:
Normally we meet for the regular meetings of our department on Monday at 9am at a conference room. Sometimes somebody from other departments such as marketing or from the IT attend the meet-ing or parts of it. First an agenda is set up but it’s no problem to add more points during the meeting. Sometimes this disturbs the meeting because the focus  of the discussion becomes unclear. The head of department normally conducts the meeting—even if there is nothing to conduct because he is the only one who speaks. Mostly the meeting gets minuted but mostly the quality of the minutes is very poor so that somebody who wouldn’t attend the meeting better asks a colleague. Well, normally the meeting is a “must” but there are two or three col-leagues that regularly don’t attend it.There is a wide variety of topics, ranging from administrative themes and resource planning over customers, projects to strategic issues. M o r e  p e r s o n al  t o p i c s  s u c h  a s  furth e r  e d u c a ti o n  o r  p e r s o n al  o b j e c -tives are rarely discussed there but in bilateral talks. Some of the top-ics are very constant such as projects and dates. But even the weekly reports on the projects are seldom interesting for the others. Some project-leaders just say “in-time’n’budget,” others torture with techni-cal details on the cable-infrastructure of the clients. And for the dates: Do you think that I can remember the weekly schedule for nearly 20 colleagues?The most interesting discussions in my opinion arise from problems within projects that lead to development of our competencies and of-fers. Often they arise from talks about projects or customers. These discussions sometimes extend to hours and result in new ideas that are sketched on ﬂ ip-charts. Some of them were framed and ended on 
370Thomas Kamphusmann  |  Another ABC
the “wall of fame,” if you’ve time left I can show you and tell more on 
some of them.Once a quarter of  a year one of  the Chief-Of ﬁ cers attend our regular 
meeting. Even if  the agenda doesn’t differ from the regular ones the atmosphere is completely different. The project reports are fairly pre-pared and even the dates are not only mentioned like “Wed, 10 to 12 at Customer A” but more like “Well prepared and promising meeting with the CEO of  Customer A, scheduled Wed, 10 to 12 but might extend in the afternoon.”
At this point we leave ﬁ ctitious Mr. Prolead’s report on regular meetings at 
ComPro Ltd. and return to more general thoughts. These are concerned with the appropriate theories for a systematic analysis of  the above scenario, the questions that employees and managers might have facing the described situa-tion and the layers on which analysis and support should be located. 
On the other side, but not going hand in hand with the scholarly research, is 
the commercial side of  communication. Today we are facing a ubiquitous trend towards a rationally planned and targeted usage of  communication for political and economic purposes. This not only addresses areas of  mass-communication like “public communication” or “marketing” but increasingly also the communi-cation of  individuals and small groups. In contrast to the former these attempts to support, guide or control communication touch or enter the private sphere of  workers, sometimes hidden and without their prior consent.
3.  Perspectives, Questions and Theories
To develop a comprising model for the description, analysis and design of sup-porting mechanisms of business related communication we start with a differ-entiation of relevant perspectives on the communication in question. Remem-bering the “interview” we can distinguish at least four of them:
1. A structural  perspective in which we can distinguish “regular meetings of 
our department” from “bilateral talks.” These structures for communica-
tion are not necessarily formalized but sometimes they occur in terms of standing orders. These determine, formalized or not, necessary and optio-nal roles, admitted types of utterances and other presentation forms, topics and often location, time, as well as necessary and optional attendees. 
2. A procedural  perspective discussing the necessary tasks before, during and 
after communication such as “setting up the agenda” and “taking down 
371Thomas Kamphusmann  |  Another ABC
and distributing the minutes.” In this perspective we will identify typical 
processes such as “presentation of project results” or “discussion and de-cision on alternative solutions.”
3. An individual  perspective in which the personal preferences, the prerequi-
sites and de ﬁ ciencies as well as the individual positioning within different 
environments can be addressed. Obviously the difference between “in-time’n’budget” and “details on the cable-infrastructure” within the same type of  communication (project-report) is strongly linked to the individua-lity of  the speaker in conjunction with the persons present.
4. A semiotic  perspective that deals with the content, its topics and their re-
lations as well as with its technical presentation and the transmission as messages. “Discussions on projects and customers” and the “sketching of  new ideas” as well as the notion of  “technical details” point directly to this perspective.
It is obvious that all four perspectives are heavily interdependent—which in other words says that an all-embracing model of  communication needs all of  them. Roughly speaking these interdependencies are determined by subordina-tion. As sketched in ﬁ g. 1 the structural perspective frames the other three, the 
procedural perspective guides the individual and the semiotic one, whereas the individual perspective uses the semiotic one in a speci ﬁ c way. It must be said 
that the lower levels, namely the semiotic one, of  course have a formative in ﬂ u-
ence on the higher ones but that these processes are far slower and belong to a diachronic point of  view.
Apart from the more theoretical justi ﬁ cation of  these perspectives they are 
useful to guide the process of  explication, modeling and analysis of  business communication. Only in very rare cases will all of  the perspectives be necessary for a targeted analysis. In most cases preliminary knowledge of  the problems to be considered can be assumed, leading the elicitation and analysis to one of  the perspectives as the primary access to further investigation. 
With the goal of  a systematic analysis of  business related communica-
tion—based on a guided elicitation and modeling and aiming toward designing efﬁ cient communication—and with the four perspectives in mind it is possible 
to denote some key questions that will be answered if  the elicitation, modeling and analysis succeed on all levels of  perspective.
372Thomas Kamphusmann  |  Another ABC
      Fig. 1. Interdependencies between the relevant perspectives 
                on business communication.
■ For the structural perspective questions concerning the appropriateness 
and the design of  established forms of  communication like different types 
of  meetings and talks as well as less formal norms and habits have to be answered. These communicative forms and norms are seldom subject to and rarely the result of  a systematic development. With the efforts in mind that are invested in regular meetings and all the other discussions and the complaints about ineffective, lengthy, useless, unfocused, redundant . . . meetings it is obvious that a systematic design of  these forms and habits of  communication would support existing resources more ef ﬁ ciently—and 
especially the highly paid ones.
■ Questions regarding the procedural  perspective on communication show sub-
stantial similarities to business process-modeling and -analysis. This is not surprising since business communication processes are by de ﬁ nition related 
to or even identical with business processes. This is highly true in service- and even more so in knowledge-oriented businesses. Thus the questions about used resources, latency, roles, dependencies and surplus value are in general relevant to communication processes as well. Differences occur when we take a closer look at the speci ﬁ c attributes that describe communi-
cation processes in contrast to business processes in general.Structures
Procedures
Individuals
Signs / Mediaframe
guide
forceformative
influence
373Thomas Kamphusmann  |  Another ABC
■ Questions concerning the individual  perspective on business communication 
clearly invade the privacy of  the employees. But, this does not necessarily 
hinder a rational discourse about efﬁ  cient practices. Questions concern-
ing the personal organization of  communicative work such as “answering e-mails in two blocks a day” or “preferring to read longer reports as print-outs” as well as support in ﬁ nding the relevant documents (relative to the 
personal knowledge) for preparing a discussion in time are examples for an individual but still rational perspective on communicative work. 
■ For the semiotic  perspective we will be confronted with questions about 
the internal and external structure of documents as well as with questions about the transmission of messages. Thus, this perspective covers the tex-tual form and the content side as well as the low-level, transmission ori-ented aspects of communication. Within this perspective questions about the segmentation and recombination of texts, the semantic clustering and relations as well as the appropriate media of storage, transmission and modi ﬁ cation have to be posed and answered. 
All these questions are not completely new and none of  them have less than a few answers. Therefore a look at relevant theories that can help answering these questions in this particular perspective regarding enhancing business communi-cation will conclude this section.
Looking at theories and methods that are relevant for the description 
and analysis of  business communication could ﬁ ll one’s (and others’) lifetime. 
Therefore the following selections are certainly not incomplete but sparse, they nevertheless serve as an overview for more detailed and future work. 
■ Judging the broad range of sociological  theories regarding their usability for 
our aim we ﬁ rstly ﬁ nd the differentiation between macro- and micro-
theories. Neither of them are suf ﬁ cient for the full explanation of busi-
ness related communication. The structural perspective on the one hand demands a view of social structures that is covered by macro-theory, while on the other hand sociological views that point to micro-theories are nec-essary when looking to the dependent individual activities. Despite the ba-sic work of Giddens (The Constitution of Society)  and Symbolic Interactionism 
(cf. Kim) we ﬁ nd few operational starting points for the modeling of tar-
geted communication. This criticism holds strongly for the macro-theo-ries, above all Luhmann and Habermas that don’t focus on the analysis of concrete parts of social subsystems. But also the descriptive and analytical power of micro-theories like Rational-Choice-Theory or Game-Theory is lacking regarding the phenomena sketched in the scenario. 
374Thomas Kamphusmann  |  Another ABC
■ A lot of work (e.g. Scheer, Rejswoud et al., Medina-Mora et al., Goldkuhl 
and many others) has been done to model business processes as well as their environments, dependencies and resources. These procedural models 
aim at optimizing internal value chains in minimizing the usage of re-sources of all kinds, reducing latency and improving quality especially of the so called core-processes. Yet none of these consider communication as a core process in its own right. On the other hand there are a few attempts at modeling all the facets of communication, resulting in unmanageable models (e.g. “KODA,” cf. Dämmig et al.), models that don’t show the rela-tion of communication and the other processes (“KSA,” cf. Krallmann) or in attempts that don’t show any practical relevance (Integrated Process- and Communication Modeling on top of the “transactive memory sys-tems” approach, cf. Remus). This variety of theories has led to approaches that integrate by designing meta-models and derive transformations from these. Kethers’ work is certainly inspiring in judging the selected theories (even though she left out some of the most powerful ones like DEMO and BAT) but it doesn’t extend the underlying methods of process-modeling to the needs of business communication (Kethers, Multi-Perspective Modeling 
and Analysis of Cooperation Processes) . 
■ For the individual  perspective psychological explanations wouldn’t help 
much in a setting where privacy is of high value and where violating pri-vacy would lead to seriously reduced commitment to any measures that try to change the way of communication within the company. Therefore we stay within the area of personal con ﬁ gurable settings (or “preferences”) 
supporting individual work. This can be achieved by a wide variety of measures like demand-driven information supply supported by text min-ing features (cf. Kamphusmann, “Anwendungen für Wissensarbeiter”; Text-Mining ) as well as by context-sensitive functionality of integrated op-
erational, informational and communicative software-systems. The latter point to current work in end-user development. Adopting these starting points to systems that have the potential to guide inter-human communi-cation will take a lot of attempts and empirical investigation.
■ For the semiotic  perspective we can and have to make use of  structuralist 
theories on all levels of  textual complexity as well as of  information stud-ies. Evidently this covers ﬁ ndings in intertextuality (e.g. Lachmann) as well 
as “core-semiotics” (e.g. Saussure), research on “syntactic structures” (e.g. Chomsky) and the use of  speech act theory (e.g. Searle) (and its applica-tions like Winograd and Flores) that give a sound base for analyzing ut-terances in their respective context. This (in a broad sense semiotic) base is accompanied by a technical counterpart that deals with the transmis-
375Thomas Kamphusmann  |  Another ABC
sion of  content that goes back to Shannon’s The Mathematical Theory of  
Communication and its applications like “Prediction and Entropy of  Print-
ed English.” It has to be stated a second time that this overview on rel-
evant theories and methods is sparse and has to be extended substantially into all directions. Some work has been launched at Fraunhofer ISST (e.g. in the “Interval” (= ‘Internet and Value Chains’) Project, founded by the German Ministry of  Science) as well as in the doctoral thesis of  Guy Vollmer (to appear in 2006) leading to ﬁ  rst practical results (e.g. Vollmer) 
and preliminary theoretical foundations (e.g. Kamphusmann, “Zeichen in Wissensmanagementsystemen”) as well as drafts on software architecture (e.g. Kamphusmann and Gerhard).
A mere combination of  theses approaches might lead to an encompassing model but will probably not be consistent enough to give a sound base for systematic elicitation, modeling and optimization of  business communication. Even if  en-hanced with a meta-model covering all the concepts of  the underlying models as in Kethers’s dissertation there will be redundancies as well as gaps, especially for the semiotic perspective. Therefore, in the following I will create a new model for the description and analysis of  business communication—of  course bearing the aforementioned models in mind.
4.  Entities, Concepts and Models
It would take far too much time and space to develop the whole communication model in detail. For this reason this chapter introduces only the main concepts for each perspective as well as their relations and their main attributes. Another reason is that the model is not totally developed yet: notably missing is suf ﬁ cient 
proof  in real world projects. But the consideration of  recent projects concerning a project (with a real estate company as well as another concerned with commu-nication in software engineering) suggests the suitability of  the following model.There are some design issues that should be mentioned in advance of  a more detailed view of  the model itself. For the sake of  practical relevance the devel-opment of  the model had to ensure a maximal proximity to real life situations. This was ensured by an iterative method switching back and forth between the conceptual level and the instance level. Some of  the minor important concepts are still lacking a precise de ﬁ nition and therefore are represented by a single term 
(on the conceptual level) that only has one attribute for the instance level: “de-scription,” which is a single term as well. In these cases common sense replaces the missing precise de ﬁ nition. The model is de ﬁ ned in terms of  ontology, using 
376Thomas Kamphusmann  |  Another ABC
Protégé as the modeling tool. According to the overall aim of  a communication 
model of  high practical relevance the central concepts should be operational to a high degree in order to contribute to an easily viable and precise elicitation. Therefore we prefer concepts that are of  low complexity and that resemble ev-eryday experience of  the workers in question.
The following paragraphs are headed by visualizations of  the central con-
cepts that are explained afterwards. For the sake of  readability these screenshots only show connections between the concepts and suppress types, attributes and other details.
  
        Fig. 2. “Communicative Norm.”
For the structural perspective we consider “communicative norms” as the cen-
tral concept. Such norms can be considered as obligations that—in certain situ-ations—bind certain persons (determined by their individuality or by their role within the given situation) or groups to a certain communicative behavior. The commitment thereby can arise from different sources. It can either be a personal commitment that is indifferent to the role or to the membership within a group. Such commitments may arise from history within the company or from person-al experience. There are two other sources of  such commitments: Firstly we can name adopted roles or memberships in a group that in turn plays a decisive role (such as being superiors who are not allowed to use information from personal ﬁ les in group discussions). Secondly there can be “anonymous” commitments 
stemming from a common understanding of  a relevant group of  arbitrary size and complexity, ranging from “western society” to department and below e.g. demanding to answer technical questions using an appropriate vocabulary. To model the requested or forbidden communicative behavior I am using the typol-ogy of  communicative acts as introduced in the paragraph on “communicative acts”; for the modeling of  situations see the respective paragraph below.Function
CommActType
SanctionCommNormGroup
Person
Role
Situation
377Thomas Kamphusmann  |  Another ABC
   Fig. 3. Communicative Act.
For the procedural perspective a “communicative act” as the smallest activ-
ity-oriented entity will serve as the central concept. This concept takes the 
transport of a single message (or “text”) by a (not necessarily technical) com-munication medium as its core. With this the transmission of a single message is chosen as the atomic entity. This is used to construct more complex com-municative processes by timely ordered and logically related sequences of such transmissions. Yet this purely technical view on communication is enhanced by some additional attributes characterizing the communicative act according to the needs of an encompassing analysis of business communication. In par-ticular, I am introducing a typology that resembles the illocutionary forces of Searle. But this typology differs methodologically from SAT in two important ways. First, the types are types of the speech itself and are not drawn from the intended activity of the addressee. Second, the typology is far less generic than Searle’s but is oriented towards common sense and common naming of com-municative acts on different levels of genericity. In short it is somewhere in-between Speech Act Theory, business process modeling and dialogue-gram-mars. Apart from this, I am introducing some basic roles as well as a simple concept of groups. With these we denote not only sender and receiver of some arbitrary text as with Shannon but also the differentiation between addressee and receiver as well as the creator of the transmitted text. In addition groups as potential senders, addressees and receivers of the transmitted data are estab-lished as well as introducing a “semantic” hook with the notion of the “theme” of a text. Together with the notion of references from one communicative act to others that it refers to and from one text to others we can build up sequences in time (chains of acts) and intertextual structures (nets of texts). It seems that these types of references are suf ﬁ cient to model the low-level structures of 
communication seen from the processing point of view.CommActType
CommAct Media
PointInTimeGroup
PersonText
378Thomas Kamphusmann  |  Another ABC
        Fig. 4. Situation.
For the individual  perspective “situation” will be the concept around which the 
secondary concepts are arranged. This choice is not a natural one since it in-
corporates not only personally bound attributes (that are often summarized as “preferences”) but also such descriptions as “taken roles” or “medial infrastruc-ture” etc. Yet these seemingly impersonal attributes determine largely the pos-sible activities of  the workers as well as their actual behavior. For this reason the seemingly over-individual concept “situation” is taken as the main concept for the individual perspective regarding communication. Modeling situations from a communication point of  view offers a wide range of  alternatives what to include and what to leave out. Admitting that this article is preliminary in many points we take the relation of  necessary, facultative and forbidden roles, the instantiation of  roles by certain people, the spatial and temporal as well as the thematic and technical characteristics as constitutive for a situation. Apparently the affected person(s), relevant documents and the activated communicative norms in most cases further specify situations. Examples from business situations are “regu-lar departmental meetings,” “project meetings” as well as “customer telephone calls,” “demonstration” etc. Thus from an individual point of  view situations are highly dynamic and characterized by necessary, facultative and forbidden relations to a wide variety of  instances. The less important parts consist of  the necessary relations (“attributes” and their values). This makes situations hard to deﬁ  ne in a traditional way and hard to recognize by automatic means—even 
if  the affected persons can name them precisely and spontaneously. This must be seen as a re ﬂ ection of  the fact that in practice this concept is rarely de ﬁ ned 
explicitly in existing models of  organizations and their processes. SituationTheme
Text Group
Person
RolePointInTime
Media
Location
379Thomas Kamphusmann  |  Another ABC
  
            
                       Fig. 5. Text.
For the semiotic  perspective the “text” is the primary concept—even if  it is a term 
that bears countless years of  discussions around its de ﬁ nition and use. Primarily 
we take every identi ﬁ able signiﬁ  cant as a possible text and introduce four main 
relations for our purposes. There should be a creator, let it be a single person or 
a group, who can be named. Secondly we only deal with texts “in action” that is to say we only regard texts used in communicative acts. Thereby we export the transport of  texts to the communicative act and reduce redundancy if  the text is used several times (as in forwarded e-mails or other copies). A generic relation to an arbitrary representation (let it be keywords, entries in a thesaurus or an ontology) of  its theme is necessary to enable testing the appropriateness on a semantic level. A recursive relation to other instances of  “text” allows building up intertextual networks. It is obvious that the latter two relations have to be at-tributed by themselves since there are different possible relations to themes (e.g. “introduction to something,” “overview on latest developments,” “canonical source”) and different types of  relations to other texts (e.g. “cites text,” “builds upon,” “contradicts”). Since the necessary types are speci ﬁ c to certain domains 
they are missing in the generic model presented here. It should be stated that the relations to communicative acts, themes and other texts loosely resemble the linguistic levels of  pragmatics, semantics and syntax.
5.  Prospect
Modeling business communication for its own sake might be interesting be-cause it foresees problems that are also potentially relevant to other areas of modeling, such as the question how to handle concepts that only have very few or even no necessary attributes. Yet this attempt as a whole aims at an analysis TextPerson
Group
CommActTheme Situation
380Thomas Kamphusmann  |  Another ABC
and augmentation of business communication, thus making the communica-
tion-model into the central concept for the elicitation, notation and analysis of business-related communication and its problems. Furthermore it should give us strong indications for the design of supporting computer systems. From this point to that end there are apparently several steps that are to be taken:
■ Enhancing the model to a version that has no “loose ends” (e.g. concepts 
that are represented only by its names), checking the theories more in depth for each concept and proving that the model is not self-contradic-tory.
■ Developing methods and supporting tools like questionnaires and log-ﬁ  le 
analysis for eliciting and acquiring descriptions of factual communica-tion.
■ Using these methods in pilot projects with potential users from industrial environments, checking the appropriateness of the model and the meth-ods and tools of elicitation as well as revising them.
■ Developing appropriate methods and tools for visualization and modeling the factual communication using the described model (which in fact is the meta-model for the factual models).
■ Analyzing the models of factual communication to derive typologies, best practices and constraints for the concepts and their relations and revising again the (meta-)model as well as the elicitation tools.
■ Evaluating common problems and needs from the analysis of the factual models that can serve as requirements for software systems that enhance business communication.
■ Constructing a software platform that serves as the base for all required functions concerned with business communications, especially for all rule-based analysis and modi ﬁ cation of inner- and inter-organizational 
communication.
■ Implementation of appropriate software systems using the platform and integration of these into standard communication systems like e-mail, computer-integrated telephony including voice-over-IP, fax and ERP-sys-tems.
This working program will take some time and effort, although some of the tasks should be performed parallel to each other. This is particularly true for the interdependency of the more theoretical work on the model, the method-ological work on elicitation, acquisition and notation and the practical work within the industrial pilot-projects.
381Thomas Kamphusmann  |  Another ABC
Works Cited
Andreas Abecker, Knut Hinkelmann, Heiko Maus and Heinz J. Müller, eds. 
Geschäftsprozessorientiertes Wissensmanagement . Berlin: Springer, 2002.
Chomsky, Noam. Syntactic Structures . ‘s-Gravenhage: Mouton, 1957.
Dämmig, Ingo, Uwe Hess, and Claudius Borgmann. “Kommunikationsdiagnose (KODA): Einstiegsmethode und -werkzeug in das praktische Wissensmanage-ment.” Geschäftsprozessorientiertes Wissensmanagement . Ed. Andreas Abecker, Knut 
Hinkelmann, Heiko Maus, and Heinz J. Müller. Berlin: Springer, 2002. 123-158.
Eco, Umberto. Il segno.  Milan: Istituto Editoriale Internazionale, 1973. 
Feldman, Susan. “Special IDC Report. Enterprise Search Technology: Informa-
tion Disasters and the High Cost of  Not Finding Information.” Portals Magazine.  
December 2003. 7 May 2006 <http://www.portalsmag.com/articles/default.asp?ArticleID=5286>.
Giddens, Anthony. The Constitution of  Society: Outline of  the Theory of  Structuration. 
Cambridge: Polity, 1984. Giese cke, Mic hael. Der Buchdruck in der frühen Neuzeit: Eine historische Fallstudie 
über die Durchsetzung neuer Informations- und Kommunikationstechnologien . Frankfurt 
am Main: Suhrkamp, 1991.Goldkuhl, Göran. “Generic Business Frameworks and Action Modelling.” 
Proceedings of  the First International Workshop on Communication Modeling: The Lan-guage/Action Perspectice . Ed. Frank Dignum, Jan Dietz, Egon Verharen, and Hans 
Weigand. Berlin: Springer, 1996. 8 Jun 2006 <http://ewic.bcs.org/conferenc es/1996/comms/papers/paper8.htm>. 
Goody, Jack. The Logic of  Writing and the Organization of  Society.  Cambridge: Cam-
bridge UP , 1986.Hofstadter, Douglas R.  Gödel, Escher, Bach: An Eternal Golden Braid. New York: 
Vintage Books, 1980.
382Thomas Kamphusmann  |  Another ABC
Kamphusmann, Thomas. “Anwendungen für Wissensarbeiter: Inhaltsbezogene 
Recherche und Informationsangebote.” Report Informationslogistik: Informationen 
just-in-time. Ed. Wolfgang Deiters and Carsten Lienemann. Düsseldorf: Sympo-sion, 2001. 82-93.
———. “Zeichen in Wissensmanagementsystemen.” Informatik 2001: Wirtschaft 
und Wissenschaft in der Network Economy—Visionen und Wirklichkeit.  Ed. Kurt 
Bauknecht, Wilfried Brauer, and Thomas Mück. Vienna: OCG, 2001. 743-747. ———. Text-Mining: Eine praktische Marktübersicht.  Düsseldorf: Symposion, 
2002.Kamphusmann, Thomas, and Michael Gerhard. “CommunicAID: Kommuni-
kationsunterstützende Systeme.” Zukünfte des Computers . Ed. Claus Pias. Berlin: 
diaphanes, 2005. 157-170.
Kethers, Stefanie. “Multi-Perspective Modeling and Analysis of  Cooperation 
Processes.” Diss. U of  Aachen, 2000. 8 Jun 2006 <http://deposit.ddb.de/cgi-bin/dokserv?idn=962847658>. 
Kim, Tae Won. G. Simmel, G.H. Mead und der symbolische Interaktionismus: Geistesge-
schichtliche Zusammenhänge, soziologische Systematik.  Würzburg: Ergon, 1999. 
Krallmann, Herrmann. “Die Kommunikationsstrukturanalyse—Voraussetzung 
für das papierarme Büro.” GI—16. Jahrestagung II, Berlin, 6.-10. Oktober 1986, 
Proceedings . Ed. Günter Hommel and Sigram Schindler. Berlin: Springer, 1986. 
Kurzweil, Raymond. The Age of  Intelligent Machines.  Cambridge, MA: MIT P , 
1990.
Lachmann, Renate. “Intertextualität als Sinnkonstitution: Andrej Belyjs ‘Peters-
burg’ und die fremden Texte.” Poetica 15 (1983): 66-107. 
Leroi-Gourhan, André. Gesture and Speech. Cambridge, MA: MIT P , 1993. 
Medina-Mora, Raul, Terry Winograd, Rodrigo Flores, and Fernando Flores. “The Action Workﬂ  ow Approach to Work ﬂ ow Management Technology.” Pro-
ceedings of  the 4th Conf. Computer-Supported Cooperative Work, 31. Oct.-4. Nov. 1992.  
Ed. Jon Turner and Robert Kraut. Toronto: ACM, 1992. 281-288.
383Thomas Kamphusmann  |  Another ABC
Remus, Ulrich. “Integrierte Prozess- und Kommunikationsmodellierung als 
Ausgangspunkt für die Verbesserung von wissensintensiven Geschäftsproz-essen .” Geschäftsprozessorientiertes Wissensmanagement . Ed. Andreas Abecker, Knut 
Hinkelmann, Heiko Maus, and Heinz J. Müller. Berlin: Springer, 2002. 91-122. 
Reijswoud, Victor E. van, Hans B. Mulder, and Jan L. Dietz. “Communica-
tive Action Based Business Process and Information Systems Modelling with DEMO.” Information Systems Journal 9.2 (1999): 117-138. 
Saussure, Ferdinand de. Course in General Linguistics. London: Peter Owen, 1959.
 
Scheer, August W . ARIS: Vom Geschäftsprozeß zum Anwendungssystem . 3rd ed. Ber-
lin: Springer, 1998.
Searle, John. Speech Acts: An Essay in the Philosophy of  Language.  London: Cam-
bridge UP , 1969. Shannon, Claude E. The Mathematical Theory of  Communication. Urbana, IL: U of  
Illinois P , 1949. ———. “Prediction and Entropy of  Printed English.” The Bell System Technical 
Journal 30 (1951): 50-64.Vollmer, Guy, and Katrin Gassner. “Quality improvement of  email communica-
tion in work groups and organizations by re ﬂ ection.” Proceedings of  the 2005 in-
ternational ACM SIGGROUP conference on Supporting group work. New York: ACM, 
2005. 124-127.
Winograd, Terry, and Carlos Fernando Flores. Understanding Computers and Cogni-
tion: A New Foundation for Design. Norwood, NJ: Ablex, 1985. 
385Contributors
Jean-Pierre Balpe  was Head of  the Hypermedia Department and of  the Paragraphe 
laboratory at the University Paris 8 until September 2005. He has published both 
scholarly and technical books. His most recent theoretical book is Contextes de 
l’art numérique (2000). Since 1985 he has created or participated in exhibitions of  art and new technologies. His last work Interdit au moins de seize ans  (2006) was a 
generative play. He now manages an international poetry festival near Paris.
Susanne Berkenheger  is a net artist and journalist. Her best known works are the 
hyperﬁ  ctions Zeit für die Bombe  (1997), Hilfe! (1999), Die Schwimmmeisterin (2002) 
and the English relaunch The Bubble Bath  (2005). Her most recent art work is the 
mobile art service www.zentralinstanz.de (in collaboration with Klaus Ungerer). For more information see <http://www.berkenheger.de>.
Friedrich W. Block  is Director of  the Brückner-Kühner-Foundation and the Kunst-
tempel in Kassel, Germany. He is the curator of  numerous exhibitions and has also worked as an artist. Since 1992 he has been responsible for the p0es1s  
project on digital poetry and since 2000 for the Kasseler Komik-Kolloquium. His 
research focuses on contemporary literature, language art and humor. Block is co-editor of  the Kulturen des Komischen  series. His books include Beobachtung des 
“ICH” (1999) and p0es1s: The Aesthetics of  Digital Poetry  (2004, co-editor). He has 
recently edited Komik—Medien—Gender (2006). 
Philippe Bootz  is Assistant Professor of  Information and Communication at the 
University of  Paris 8. He is also head of  publication of  the review Regards croi-
sés/Crossed looks and publisher of  the review of  e-poetry alire (since 1989). Most 
recent signi ﬁ cant papers in e-poetry in 2006 are contributions to the conference 
LUDOVIA and to the reviews Rilune, Formules, DOC(K)S. His next authored 
hyper-book Les Basiques: la littérature numérique is due to be published on-line in 
2006 by LEONARDO.
Laura Borràs Castanyer  is Professor of  Literature at the Languages & Cultures 
Department at the Universitat Oberta de Catalunya (UOC). She also teaches Comparative Literature and Literary Theory at the Universitat de Barcelona. She is Director of  the Hermeneia: Literary Studies and Digital Technologies  research group 
and leader of  the project Texto, cibertexto, hipertexto: literatura érgódica y práctica críti-
386ca en el paradigma digital  of  the Spanish Government. She is author of  several 
articles related to the subject and of  the books Textualidades electrónicas: Nuevos 
escenarios para la literatura (2005) and Testualità elettroniche (2006).
Markku Eskelinen  is an independent scholar and experimental writer of  ergodic 
prose and critical essays. According to The Review of  Contemporary Fiction  he is 
“easily the most iconoclastic ﬁ gure on the Finnish literary scene.” Currently he is 
writing a two-volume history of  Finnish literature due to be published in 2009. 
He is also one of  the editors of  Game Studies: The international journal of  computer 
game research, and with Raine Koskimaa, he edits Cybertext Yearbooks.  
Frank Furtwängler  is a physicist and scholar of  Literature, Media and Art; he is 
currently a fellow at the Ph.D. scholarship programme Bild—Körper—Medium: 
Eine anthropologische Perspektive  at the Hochschule für Gestaltung Karlsruhe. A 
selection of  recent publications include “Computerspiele am Rande des meta-kommunikativen Zusammenbruchs,” “Mensch-Maschine Computerspiel: Über eine notwendige Paartherapie in der Medienrealität” (both 2006) and several others on media and video games forthcoming in 2006 and 2007.
Peter Gendolla  is Professor of  Literature, Art, New Media and Technologies at 
the University of  Siegen. He also is Head of  the Human Collaborative Research Center Media Upheavals  and directs the sub-project Literature in Nets/Net Lite-
rature. With Georg Braungart and Fotis Jannidis he is editing the Jahrbuch für Computerphilologie and Forum Computerphilologie . He is currently completing a book 
on simulation and he is also co-editor of  Wissensprozesse in der Netzwerkgesell-schaft (2004), Formen interaktiver Medienkunst (2001) and Bildschirm-Medien-Theorien  
(2001). For more information see <http://www.likumed.uni-siegen.de>.
Loss Pequeño Glazier  is a poet, professor of  Media Study, and Founder and Direc-
tor of  the Electronic Poetry Center <http://epc.buffalo.edu>, Dept. of  Media Study, State University of  New York, Buffalo. He is the author of  the digitally informed poetry collection Anatman, Pumpkin Seed, Algorithm  (2003), the award-
winning Digital Poetics: The Making of  E-Poetries (2002), and other works. Recent 
performances of  “Baila,” his digital poem for dancers, have occurred in London and Buffalo. He is organizer and director of  E-Poetry: An International Digital Poetry Festival, the ﬁ rst and one of  the most celebrated digital poetry series in 
the ﬁ eld. His work has been shown at various museums and galleries, including 
the Kulturforum, Berlin, the Royal Festival Hall, London, and the Guggenheim, New York. Selected digital projects and other works are available on his EPC author page <http://epc.buffalo.edu/authors/glazier>.The Aesthetics of Net Literature
387Contributors
Fotis Jannidis  is Professor of  German Literature at the Technical University of  
Darmstadt. He is co-editor of  the Jahrbuch für Computerphilologie, the Journal of  
Literary Theory  and the series Narratologia  and Revisionen: Grundbegriffe der Lite-
raturtheorie. Main areas of  research: Narratology, especially character, and the 
history of  German narratives; concepts of  literary theory like that of  “author,” 
digital editions. He is working on a book on Computerphilologie  (due 2007), and 
is co-editing a volume on the concept “literature” (also due in 2007). For more information see <http://www.jannidis.de>.
Thomas Kamphusmann  is a Postdoctoral Research Fellow at the Fraunhofer In-
stitute for Software- and Systems Research. His focus lies on the technical and process-related support of  business communication. His most recent publication (together with Guy Vollmer) on that topic is “Erhebung, Modellierung, Analyse und Gestaltung innerbetrieblicher Kommunikation.” (2006). His recent books include Literatur auf  dem Rechner and Text-Mining (both 2002).
Mela Kocher  is a Postdoctoral Research Fellow at the Swiss Institute for Children’s 
and Youth Media in Zurich, Switzerland. She lectures on digital literature and popular culture at the German Department of  the University of  Zurich and at the Institute for Media Studies of  the University of  Basel. Her most recent book is Folge dem Pixelkaninchen! Ästhetik und Narrativität digitaler Spiele  (2007).
Marie-Laure Ryan, a native of  Geneva (Switzerland), is an independent scholar 
based in Colorado. She is the author of  Possible Worlds, Arti ﬁ cial Intelligence and 
Narrative Theory  (1991), of  Narrative as Virtual Reality: Immersion and Interactivity in 
Literature and Electronic Media (2001), and of  Avatars of  Story (2006). She is also 
the editor of  Cyberspace Textuality  (1999) and Narrative Across Media (2004), as 
well as the co-editor, with David Herman and Manfred Jahn, of  the Routledge 
Encyclopedia of  Narrative (2004). 
Jörgen Schäfer is a Postdoctoral Research Fellow at the Human Collaborative 
Research Center Media Upheavals  at the University of  Siegen. He is author and 
editor of  several books and articles on avant-garde and contemporary literature, net literature and media theory. His most recent books include Exquisite Dada: 
A Comprehensive Bibliography  (2005), Wissensprozesse in der Netzwerkgesellschaft  (2004, 
co-editor) and Pop-Literatur  (2003, co-editor). 
Roberto Simanowski  is Assistant Professor of  German Studies and Digital Ae-
sthetics at Brown University and editor of  dichtung-digital.org, an online journal 
for digital aesthetics. He is author and editor of  several books and articles on 
388literature and culture in the 18th century, nationalism, the literary salon, media 
theory and digital culture. His most recent books include Transmedialität: Studien 
zu paraliterarischen Verfahren  (2006, co-editor) and Interﬁ ctions: Vom Schreiben im 
Netz (2002). His forthcoming book Ästhetik des Spektakels will be published in 
2007. 
Noah Wardrip-Fruin  is a digital media writer, artist, and scholar. His writing/art 
has been presented by galleries, arts festivals, scienti ﬁ c conferences, DVD ma-
gazines, VR Caves, and the Whitney and Guggenheim museums. He is the aut-hor of  the forthcoming monograph  Expressive Processing  and has recently edited 
three books:  The New Media Reader  (2003, with Nick Montfort);  First Person: New 
Media as Story, Performance, and Game (2004, with Pat Harrigan); and  Second Person: 
Role-Playing and Story in Games and Playable Media  (2006, also with Harrigan), all 
published by the MIT Press. He is currently Assistant Professor in the Commu-nication Department at the University of  California, San Diego. The Aesthetics of Net Literature
Medienumbrüche
Sigrid Baringhorst,
Veronika Kneip,
Annegret März,Johanna  Niesyto (Hg.)
Politik mit dem
EinkaufswagenUnternehmen und Ko nsumen-
ten als Bürger in der globalenMediengesellschaft
Juni 2007, ca. 320 Seiten,
kart., ca. 27,80 €,ISBN: 978-3-89942-648-9
Rainer Leschke,Jochen Venus (Hg.)
Spielformen im SpielfilmZur Medienmorphologie desKinos nach der P ostmoderne
Mai 2007, ca. 300 Seiten,kart., ca. 29,80 €,ISBN: 978-3-89942-667-0
Albert Kümmel-Schnur,Jens Schröter (Hg.)
ÄtherEin Medium der Moderne
April 2007, ca. 350 Seiten,kart., ca. 31,80 €,ISBN: 978-3-89942-610-6
Isabel Maurer Queipo,Nanette Rißler- Pipka (Hg.)
Dalís MedienspieleFalsche Fährten und
paranoische Selbstinszenie-rungen in den Künsten
März 2007, ca. 360 Seiten,kart., ca. 29,80 €,ISBN: 978-3-89942-629-8
Leseproben und weitere Informationen finden Sie unter:
www.transcript-verlag.dePeter Gendolla,Jörgen Schäfer (eds.)The Aestheticsof Net LiteratureWriting, Reading and Playingin Programmable Media
Februar 2007, 390 Seiten,kart., 33,80 €,ISBN: 978-3-89942-493-5
Walburga Hülk,
Gregor Schuhen,Tanja Schwan (Hg.)
(Post-)GenderChoreographien / Schnitte
2006, 236 Seiten,kart., 24,80 €,ISBN: 978-3-89942-277-1
Ralf Schnell (Hg.)MedienRevolutionenBeiträge zur Mediengeschichteder W ahrnehmung
2006, 208 Seiten,kart., 23,80 €,ISBN: 978-3-89942-533-8
Rainer Geißler,Horst Pöttker (Hg.)Integration durchMassenmedien / MassMedia-IntegrationMedien und Migration iminternationalen V ergleich
Media and Migration:A Comparative Perspective
2006, 328 Seiten,kart., 27,80 €,ISBN: 978-3-89942-503-1
Medienumbrüche
Isabel Maurer Queipo,
Nanette Rißler -Pipka,
Volker Roloff (Hg.)
Die grausamen Spieledes »Minotaure«Intermediale Analyse einersurrealistischen Zeitschrift
2005, 206 Seiten,kart., 25,80 €,ISBN: 978-3-89942-345-7
Josef Fürnkäs, Masato Izumi,
K. Ludwig Pfeiffer,Ralf Schnell (Hg.)Medienanthropologieund MedienavantgardeOrtsbestimmungen undGrenzüberschreitungen
2005, 292 Seiten,kart., 25,80 €,ISBN: 978-3-89942-380-8
Rainer Geißler,Horst Pöttker (Hg.)Massenmedien und dieIntegration ethnischerMinderheiten in DeutschlandProblemaufriss –Forschungsstand –
Bibliographie
2005, 546 Seiten,kart., 32,80 €,ISBN: 978-3-89942-280-1
Nicola Glaubitz,Andreas Käuser,Hyunseon Lee (Hg.)Akira K urosawa
und seine Zeit
2005, 314 Seiten,kart., 27,80 €,ISBN: 978-3-89942-341-9
Leseproben und weitere Informationen finden Sie unter:
www.transcript-verlag.deRalf Schnell,Georg Stanitzek (Hg.)EphemeresMediale Innovationen1900/2000
2005, 242 Seiten,kart., 24,80 €,ISBN: 978-3-89942-346-4
Isabel Maurer Queipo,Nanette Rißler- Pipka (Hg.)
SpannungswechselMediale Zäsuren zwischen denMedienumbrüchen 1900/2000
2005, 220 Seiten,kart., 23,80 €,ISBN: 978-3-89942-278-8
Ralf Schnell (Hg.)Wahrnehmung – Kognition –
ÄsthetikNeurobiologie undMedienwissenschaften
2005, 264 Seiten,kart., 24,80 €,ISBN: 978-3-89942-347-1
Peter Gendolla,Jörgen Schäfer (Hg.)Wissensprozesse in der
Netzwerkgesellschaft
2004, 286 Seiten,kart., 26,80 €,ISBN: 978-3-89942-276-4
Marijana Erstic,Gregor Schuhen,Tanja Schwan (Hg.)
Avantgarde – Medien –
Performativität
Inszenierungs- undWahrnehmungsmuster zu
Beginn des 20. J ahrhunderts
2004, 370 Seiten,kart., 29,80 €,ISBN: 978-3-89942-182-8
Medienumbrüche
Uta Felten, V olker Roloff (Hg.)
Spielformen der
Intermedialität im spanischenund lateinamerikanischenSurrealismus
2004, 364 Seiten,kart., 27,80 €,ISBN: 978-3-89942-184-2
Michael Lommel,Isabel Maurer Queipo,Nanette Rißler -Pipka,
Volker Roloff (Hg.)
Französische Theaterfilme –
zwischen Surrealismus undExistentialismus
2004, 334 Seiten,kart., 28,80 €,ISBN: 978-3-89942-279-5
Matthias Uhl, Keval J. KumarIndischer FilmEine Einführung
2004, 174 Seiten,kart., 18,80 €,ISBN: 978-3-89942-183-5
Jens Schröter,
Alexander Böhnke (Hg.)Analog/Digital –Opposition oder K ontinuum?
Zur Theorie  und Geschichte
einer Unterscheidung
2004, 438 Seiten,kart., 32,80 €,ISBN: 978-3-89942-254-2
Michael Lommel,Isabel Maurer Queipo,Nanette Rißler- Pipka (Hg.)
Theater und Schaulustim aktuellen Film
2004, 172 Seiten,kart., 19,80 €,ISBN: 978-3-89942-181-1
Leseproben und weitere Informationen finden Sie unter:
www.transcript-verlag.de
