www.openup.co.uk
The study of new media opens up some of the most fascinating issues in
contemporary culture: questions of ownership and control over informationand cultural goods; the changing experience of space and time; the politicalconsequences of new communication technologies; and the power of usersand consumers to disrupt established economic and business models. 
The New Media Theory Reader brings together key readings on new media –
what it is, where it came from, how it affects our lives, and how it is managed.
Using work from media studies, cultural history and cultural studies,economics, law, and politics, the essays encourage readers to pay closeattention to the ‘new’ in new media, as well as considering it as a historicalphenomenon. The Reader features a general introduction as well as an
editors’ introduction to each thematic section, and a useful summary of eachreading.
The New Media Theory Reader is an indispensable text for students on new
media, technology, sociology and media studies courses.
Essays by: Andrew Barry, Benjamin R. Barber, James Boyle, James Carey,
Benjamin Compaine, Noam Cook, Andrew Graham, Nicola Green,
Thomas Hylland Eriksen, Ian Hunter, Kevin Kelly, Heejin Lee, Lawrence Lessig,Jonathan Liebenau, Jessica Litman, Lev Manovich, Michael Marien,Robert W. McChesney, David E. Nye, Bruce M. Owen, Lyman Ray Patterson,Kevin Robins, Ithiel de Sola Pool, David Saunders, Richard Stallman,Jeremy Stein, Cass R. Sunstein, McKenzie Wark, Frank Webster,Dugald Williamson.
Robert Hassan is Senior Research Fellow in Media and Communications at
the Media and Communications Program, The University of Melbourne,
Australia. He is the author of The Chronoscopic Society (2003) and Media,
Politics and the Network Society (Open University Press, 2004). He is the editor
of the journal Time & Society .
Julian Thomas is Director of the Institute for Social Research at Swinburne
University, Australia and a Professorial Fellow in Media and Communications.He has written widely on the social and policy dimensions of new media.
Cover design Hybert Design •www.hybertdesign.com
THE NEW MEDIA
THEORY READER
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
edited by
Robert Hassan &Julian Thomas
Hassan & Thomas (eds)
The New Media Theory Reader
The New Media
Theory Reader
Robert Hassan and Julian Thomas
Open University Press
Open University Press
McGraw-Hill EducationMcGraw-Hill HouseShoppenhangers RoadMaidenheadBerkshireEnglandSL6 2QL
email: enquiries@openup.co.uk
world wide web: www.openup.co.uk
and Two Penn Plaza, New Y ork, NY 10121-2289, USA
First published 2006
Copyright © Selection, editorial matter and introductions,
Robert Hassan and Julian Thomas 2006
All rights reserved. Except for the quotation of short passages for the
purposes of criticism and review, no part of this publication may bereproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or byany means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise,without the prior written permission of the publisher or a licence from theCopyright Licensing Agency Limited. Details of such licences (forreprographic reproduction) may be obtained from the Copyright LicensingAgency Ltd of 90 T ottenham Court Road, London, W1T 4LP .
A catalogue record of this book is available from the British LibraryISBN-10: 0 335 21710 9 (pb) 0 335 21711 7 (hb)
ISBN-13: 978 0335 21710 6 (pb) 978 0335 21711 3 (hb)
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
CIP data applied for
Typeset by ReﬁneCatch Limited, Bungay, Suﬀolk
Printed in Poland by OZGraf S.A.
www.polskabook.pl
Contents
Extracts viii
Introduction xvii
Publisher’s acknowledgements xxix
PART 1
Media transitions 1
Introduction 1
1.1 Lev Manovich: ‘What is new media?’ in The Language of New Media.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002 5
1.2 S.D. Noam Cook: ‘T echnological revolutions and the Gutenberg Myth’
inInternet Dreams. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997 11
1.3 Ithiel de Sola Pool: ‘A shadow darkens’ in T echnologies of Freedom.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2003 19
1.4 David E. Nye: ‘The consumer’s sublime’ in American T echnological
Sublime. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996 27
1.5 Kevin Kelly: ‘The computational metaphor’, Whole Earth, Winter 1998 39
1.6 Michael Marien: ‘New communications technology: a survey of
impacts and issues’, T elecommunications Policy, 20(5), pp. 375–387, 1996 41
PART 2
Governing new media 63
Introduction 63
2.1 David Saunders, Ian M. Hunter and Dugald Williamson:
‘Historicising obscenity law’ in On Pornography: Literature, Sexuality and
Obscenity Law. London: Macmillan, 1992 67
2.2 Bruce M. Owen: ‘The tragedy of broadcast regulation’ in The Internet
Challenge to T elevision. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1999 72
2.3 Andrew Graham: ‘Broadcasting policy in the digital age’ in Charles M.
Firestone and Amy Korzick Garmer (eds) Digital Broadcasting and the
Public Interest. Washington, DC: Aspen Institute, 1998 79
2.4 Kevin Robins and Frank Webster: ‘From public sphere to cybernetic
state’ in Times of the T echnoculture. New Y ork: Routledge, 1999 92
2.5 Robert W . McChesney: ‘Policing the thinkable’, Opendemocracy.net,
2001 101
2.6 Benjamin Compaine: ‘The myths of encroaching global media
ownership’, Opendemocracy.net, 2001 106
PART 3
Properties and commons 111
Introduction 111
3.1 Lyman Ray Patterson: ‘Copyright in historical perspective’ in Copyright
in Historical Perspective. Nashville, TN: Vanderbilt University Press, 1968 113
3.2 James Boyle: ‘Intellectual property and the liberal state’ in Shamans,
Software and Spleens: Law and the Construction of the Information Society.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1996 119
3.3 Jessica Litman: ‘Choosing metaphors’ in Digital Copyright: Protecting
Intellectual Property on the Internet. Amherst, NY: Prometheus, 2001 123
3.4 Lawrence Lessig: ‘The promise for intellectual property in cyberspace’
in Code and Other Laws of Cyberspace. New Y ork: Basic Books, 2000 133
3.5 Richard Stallman: ‘Why software should not have owners’ in Free
Software: Free Society. Boston, MA: Free Software Foundation, 2002 154
PART 4
Politics of new media technologies 159
Introduction 159
4.1 Andrew Barry: ‘On interactivity’ in Political Machines: Governing a
T echnological Society. London: Athlone Press, 2001 163
4.2 Benjamin R. Barber: ‘Pangloss, Pandora or Jeﬀerson? Three scenarios
for the future of technology and strong democracy’, in A Passion for
Democracy: American Essays, Princeton University Press, pp. 245–257,2000 188vi
CONTENTS
4.3 Cass Sunstein: ‘Citizens’ in Republic.com. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 2001 203
4.4 McKenzie Wark: ‘Abstraction/class’ in A Hacker Manifesto. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press, 2004 212
PART 5
Time and space in the age of information 221
Introduction 221
5.1 James Carey: ‘T echnology and ideology: the case of the telegraph’ in
Communication as Culture. London: Routledge, 1989 225
5.2 Jeremy Stein: ‘Reﬂections on time, time–space compression and
technology in the nineteenth century’ in M. Crang, P . Crang and J. May
(eds), Virtual Geographies: Bodies, Space and Relations. New Y ork:
Routledge, 1999 244
5.3 Nicola Green: ‘On the move: technology, mobility, and the mediation
of social time and space’, The Information Society, 18(4), pp. 281–292,
2002 249
5.4 Heejin Lee and Jonathan Liebenau: ‘Time and the internet’, Time and
Society, 9(1), pp. 48–55, 2001 266
5.5 Thomas Hylland Eriksen: ‘Speed is contagious’ in T yranny of the
Moment: Fast and Slow Time in the Age of Information. London: PlutoPress, 2001 272
Biographical notes 279
Bibliography 285
Index 311CONTENTS vii
Extracts
One: Media transitions
Manovich (2002) – ‘What is new media?’
This article argues that changes wrought by new media are profound. Qualitatively
different to past technologies such as the printing press or photography, emergingmedia, in combination with computer technology, render a fundamental shift due toan ability to affect all stages of communication. Outlining the interweaving historicaltrajectories of media and computing, the author traces the eventual convergence ofthe two technologies, explaining how developments in computers facilitated the abilityto store, synthesise and manipulate diverse types of media. This, in turn, creates a newset of possibilities, translating traditional forms of media – such as images, sound andtext – into new  media. conversations December summarizing
Cook (1997) – ‘Technological revolutions and the Gutenberg Myth’
Debunking the myth that the invention of movable type led to substantial advances inliteracy and learning, Cook highlights the essential roles of both cultural and techno-logical advances in explaining social change. Questioning the revolutionary claimsassociated with Gutenberg’s invention, he contends that the affect of the printing presswas mediated by the social, religious and political institutions of the day. Increases inliteracy rates were driven more by the imperatives of record-keeping, education and workthan the development of movable type, and the availability of large quantities of paperwere required before large-scale diffusion of writing became possible. He suggests thatthis traditional, one-dimensional account of a single technology causing broad socialchange, as typiﬁed by the Gutenberg Myth, is an inadequate model for assessing thecurrent realities of the developing world. The computer has already been the subjectof such an analysis, being touted as revolutionising society. Cook warns of such deter-minism, reiterating the need to consider the multiple inﬂuences inherent in any techno-logical innovation.
de Sola Pool (2003) – ‘A shadow darkens’
The legal status of new communication technologies remains a contested and complex
area. The domains of print, common carriers (for example, telegraph, telephone, post)and radio are covered by different sets of laws with little relation to each other, and lawsrelating to new electronic modes of communication do not always preserve the sameprotections afforded to traditional technologies. The author expresses concern over thepotential erosion of civil liberties and traditional freedoms which could occur as each ofthese domains enter the era of electronic communication and as law-makers discerna new regulatory course. Ironically, decentralisation and fragmentation, hallmarks of thenew media environment, are at risk of being bound up in a set of restrictive regulatorypractices which do not suit the current climate of technological innovation. How do werespond to this challenge? Offering ﬁve ingredients vital to the formulation of communi-
cation policy, Pool highlights the need to preserve freedom in this process.
Nye (1996) – ‘The consumer’s sublime’
Americans have a unique psychological attraction to new landscapes and new tech-nologies, or, as Nye puts it, the technological sublime. People marvel, indeed crave,the innovative technologies which trans ﬁx and then become a part of the national
identity. As each new generation throws up novel objects, the amazement associatedwith existing technology fades. Gradually, though, places and objects attract attentionnot according to their functional or productive use, but because of their commercialmagnetism and role in promoting consumption. Man-made skyscrapers replacemountain-tops. Drawing on the example of Las Vegas, Nye outlines the landscape ofcapitalist surrealism upon which the city was founded, where human order replaces thenatural world. Indeed, technological logic also permeates natural wonders and tries todominate them. The Grand Canyon is likened to a theme park: as visitors ﬂock to the
natural landform they are greeted with movie theatres, hotels and the constant noise ofaircraft hovering overhead. In this environment, however, any appreciation of progressand human accomplishment is overpowered by a rush of sight, sound and movement.
Kelly (1998) – ‘The computational metaphor’
The metaphor of computers has become a pervasive means of explaining the worldaround us. Evolution, DNA, biological reproduction, galaxies, mathematics, emotionsand rain forests have all been described in computational terms. But is the pervasive-ness of this universal vocabulary, able to describe all manner of phenomena, a welcomedevelopment?
Marien (1996) – ‘New communications technology: a survey of impacts
and issues’
Here Marien provides a balanced assessment of claims made about the emergence ofan information society. Offering a list of technologies likely to be disseminated in thenear future, he draws on two main schools of thought – enthusiasts and critics – in orderEXTRACTS ix
to speculate on the human impacts of these developments. Are the changes desirable
or undesirable? Who will be the winners and losers? Both camps have widely divergentviews, ranging from overt optimism through to grave concern. Similar debates arecanvassed and explored in the areas of democracy and governance, work, productivityand employment, education, culture and health. Citing an ironic lack of communicationbetween people harbouring different views, this article implores a more rigorousexamination of the realities of the information age and a consideration of effectiveresponses to these changes.
Two: Governing new media
Saunders, Hunter and Williamson (1992) – ‘Historicising obscenity law’
The connection between media content and regulation is addressed here in light of laws
pertaining to the publication of obscene material. This is not a new occurrence: as farback as 1727 pornography was regarded as a threat to public morality, and the ﬁrst
prosecution of such an offence signi ﬁed a breaking down of the division between
common law courts and spiritual courts, and an expansion of government and criminallaw into the area of morality. Their description highlights the particular historical andcultural inﬂuences surrounding this transition, and dismisses alternative accountswhich follow a single logic and fail to engage with the complex social milieu affectingsuch a decision.
Owen (1999) – ‘The tragedy of broadcast regulation’
According to Owen, although regulation is a creature of democratic process, policyoutcomes are inferior to market outcomes. Based on this contention, he suggests theAmerican government ’s role in regulating the radio and television broadcasting industry
has stiﬂed competition and diversity. Organisations set up to monitor these industriesoperate on two levels, formal and political, but this framework limits any sound eco-nomic and technical analysis which should inform policy choice. The end result is asmaller and more homogonous market which perpetuates the status quo, with con-sumers the eventual loser. The author ﬁnishes with a warning that similar structures
may inhibit new digital media: most prominently, the internet.
Graham (1998) – ‘Broadcasting policy in the digital age’
Public service broadcasting has an important role to play in promoting common know-ledge. It provides a source of information about the world around us, informing howwe perceive ourselves in relation to the broader society and how we understand com-munity itself. These characteristics are essential in nurturing commonality, as well astolerance amongst minority groups. However, market-driven broadcasting does not ful ﬁl
these goals well: ethical judgement and editorial responsibility often comes second toproﬁtability, and commercial interests may fragment audiences and hinder the provisionof accurate and balanced information. Their interest is in making money, not promotingdemocracy. Broadcasting then, should not be left entirely to the market: some regula-tions are necessary in order to ensure the values of choice, quality, communityx
EXTRACTS
and democracy. This task, however, is not an easy one. His point is clear: an active
commercial sector, complemented by a healthy universal public broadcasting service –
publicly ﬁnanced, producing its own programs, and supported by legal regulation – is
central to the health of a democratic society.
Robins and Webster (1999) – ‘From public sphere to cybernetic state’
Robins and Webster cast a critical eye over the role of information and communicationtechnologies in enhancing the government ’s ability to control political debate. Sur-
veillance, propaganda and social planning depend upon these technologies, theyargue, facilitating the development of opinion polling, public relations, news manage-ment, political advertising, censorship, and more precise advertising campaigns.Political campaigns, for example, use computers to access demographic details,organise mail-outs, and analyse and target voter groups. The Information Revolution isnot a matter of straightforward technological progress, but must be viewed in terms ofthe phenomena it has helped construct and consolidate: bureaucratic organisations,political and corporate power structures, social engineering, and surveillance andcontrol.
McChesney (2001) – ‘Policing the unthinkable’
In spite of deregulation, large and powerful organisations have come to dominate themedia industry. Because of this, it is hard for newcomers to enter the market. Thecontent of journalism has also taken a hit: driven by commercial rationale, news is lesscontroversial, focusing on trivial stories about celebrities and crime. New communica-tion media promise emancipation from these trends as they spawn an array of viablecompetition to the major players. This process is sti ﬂed, however, by the existing market
power of monopolies, a situation fuelled by government policy which provides them withlicences and subsidies. These ﬁrms have created what McChesney refers to as a
‘commercial media system ’. The result is an undermining of civic participation and,
most signiﬁcantly, the restriction of democratic public involvement in the formulation ofmedia policy.
Compaine (2001) – ‘The myths of encroaching global media ownership’
Compaine disputes the contention that corporate media ownership has contributedto an attack on democracy, creating unhealthy concentrations of power and control. Yes,company mergers are important and grab the headlines. But underneath lives adynamic industry: the number of smaller companies is growing, major organisations arebreaking up and new players are arriving on the scene. These corporations are, after all,publicly owned. And yes, the media is run according to pro ﬁt. But claims that they should
give the public ‘ what they want’  are too idealistic. In reality, mass media must be
ﬁnancially viable, and making decisions based on audience preference is fundamentalto the success of any program. More to the point, he argues, in democracies there is nosuch thing as a ‘ universal public interest ’.EXTRACTS xi
Three: Properties and commons
Patterson (1968) – ‘Copyright in historical perspective’
The legal deliberations surrounding copyright are complex. Although a clearly achieved
purpose and a concise de ﬁnition of the problems to be solved are ideal elements
of copyright law, these conditions are rarely attained. Initial laws were introduced inresponse to the book trade industry ’s concern in maintaining a monopoly. The con-
temporary environment is vastly different. Con ﬂicting concepts of freedom of expression
versus the protection of ideas as private property, rather than notions of control andcensorship, have taken centre stage. Despite this change, the legacy of previous lawshas produced confusion over the philosophical basis of copyright: is it about theauthor’ s actual work, or his ideas? Does an author have a natural right to protect his
work and ideas? As Patterson points out, publishers, and society more generally, createa range of competing, and sometimes complementary, interests. Recognition of thesedivergent interests, and the essential value of an author ’s creative work, is crucial in
order to more effectively protect an individuals ’ work.
Boyle (1996) – ‘Intellectual property and the liberal state’
Capturing and deﬁning the concept of physical property is not easy. Once conceivedof as absolute, the courts were willing to accept property as not only physical, butconceptual. Rights, then, may be restricted to particular interests, or apply in somesituations and not others. What, then, are the implications for intellectual property? Anumber of tasks must be accomplished: the role of information in liberal society mustbe clariﬁed, and the tension between protecting the private sphere whilst maintainingpublic debate (in order to avoid an oppressive state), must be addressed. Intellectualproperty law should also attempt to conceptually reconcile, or at least ﬁnd a middle
ground, between physical and absolute, and relativist and partial, conceptions of thelaw.
Littman (2001) – ‘Choosing metaphors’
The ways people think about and conceive copyright law can impact upon the applicationof that law. Over the years a range of models have guided the implementation ofcopyright regulations. In the early 1900s public authors were granted exclusive rightsin order to facilitate the dissemination of their work. This evolved into a frameworkbased on the idea of compensation, focusing ﬁrst on authors ’, and then copyright
owners’ , ability to make money off their work. This economic model turned into a
trade issue, where owners control property as they see ﬁt. This rhetorical man-
oeuvring has been adopted by various groups in order to achieve their own ends.Most prominently, content owners have been effective in promoting the term ‘piracy’
in order to reinforce a perception of content owners ’ control over property. This
strategy is exempliﬁed in the domain of music. The result has been a realisation ofmore control for copyright owners, an occurrence which has ﬂown under the radar of any
public discussion.xii
EXTRACTS
Lessig (2000) – ‘The promise for intellectual property in cyberspace’
It is hard to trace the distribution of and access to material on the internet. At present it
is an all or nothing proposition: you can copy or you can’ t, you have access or you don ’t.
But what if there were a way to accurately track, and therefore regulate and control,access to material? What might be the problems with this? Lessig offers two answers tothis latter question. First, intellectual property differs from physical property in funda-mental ways. Unlike an object, ideas are consumed in a different manner, whereby theiruse is not reduced by virtue of others consuming it. Second, if intellectual property wereto be monitored via technological means, the guarantee of public use disappears andsuch tracking would involve a degree of personal invasion. The implications are clear:anonymity and privacy in cyberspace should be preserved, and technological archi-tecture should include the ability to facilitate what Lessig calls an intellectual commons.
Stallman (2002) – ‘Why software should not have owners’
Although digital technology enhances the ease with which people can copy and modifyinformation, copyright laws aim to limit this action. Inheriting a legal heritage fromprinting, the rigid copyright system does not cope well will the ﬂexible and ﬂuid nature
of information technologies. The result, according to Stallman, is the enforcement ofdraconian measures based on existing laws. Aside from the threat of legal punishment,copyright owners have used a number of tactics to support their argument for morecontrol over information: exaggeration and name-calling, claims of natural rights forauthors of property, and economic disadvantage. Refuting each of these, he draws onthe free software movement to promote the open sharing of software.
Four: Politics of new media technologies
Barry (2001) – ‘On interactivity’
In light of the decline in political participation, interactive and networked technologies
have been heralded as a key resource in fostering public participation and facilitatingan active, empowered citizenry. Drawing a parallel between government and museumsof science, Barry argues that techniques which treat people as participants (ratherthan observers) encourages agency, experimentation, enterprise, democracy and self-regulation. But the effects of an interactive model are not restricted to just one arena:educational, political and broadcasting institutions are being reinvented along similarlines, and the importance of interactive devices is evident in the classroom, marketingand mass media. The emergence of new media and information technologies hasimportant implications for systems of governance because, suggests Barry, politicsﬂows through instruments and practices.
Barber (2000) – ‘Three scenarios for the future of technology and
strong democracy’
What will be the impact of new technologies on democracy? Barber offers three starkalternatives. In Pangloss, a posture of complacency will mean that existing inequalitiesEXTRACTS xiii
are perpetuated as new technologies are controlled and manipulated by current market
forces. For Pandora, the proliferation of information and communication technologies isat risk of being appropriated by tyrannical governments, who may use it to covertlymonitor and control citizens. In this scenario, the erosion of freedom and privacy, andthe potential for government and/or commercial monopolies, are very real possi-bilities. In a more optimistic prediction, the Jeffersonian world will see these tech-nologies enhancing education and participation in political processes, as well aspromoting tolerance and diversity. This piece concludes by suggesting that while tech-nology may facilitate ‘strong democracy ’, this will not eventuate of its own accord: it
will depend on the collective will and character of political institutions and theirconstituents.
Sunstein (2001) – ‘Citizens’
Sunstein explores the relationship between freedom, choice, citizenship and consump-tion, asking how these are affected by new communication technologies. He paints apicture of opportunity as well as limitation. New media has the potential to enhancechoice and expand knowledge, but at the same time our own preferences and choicescan limit freedom. Unrestricted consumer choice should not be equated with freedom,he says. Governments, too, can seek to inhibit ideas and possibilities via media policythat pursues censorship. In terms of a democratic system, an important distinctionneeds to be made between the roles of citizen and consumer. It is an error to merge thetwo, he argues, and political choice cannot be understood solely in terms of people ’s
capacity as consumers. Indeed, it is important to seek to promote a high-quality anddiverse communications market, even if consumers are satis ﬁed with programs which
satisfy narrow preferences. This is because limitless individual choice does not alwayssupport the interests of self-government and citizenship.
Wark (2004) – ‘Abstraction/class’
Wark tells the story of class and the appropriation of property, both physical andintellectual. First land, and then information, becomes a form of private property. Ascorporations monopolise intellectual property – via patents, copyrights and trademarks
– and increase their value by communication, a class of people is displaced. But as
information becomes the dominant resource, a new class emerges: that of the hacker.Venturing into a new world, they produce new concepts, perceptions and sensationsout of raw data, creating possibilities and standing against the ruling class who seek tocontrol innovation. Fact or ﬁction? You be the judge.
Five: Time and space in the age of information
Carey (1989) – ‘Technology and ideology: the case of the telegraph’
Telegraphy does not deserve to be one of the least studied communication tech-
nologies, suggests Carey. It spawned the ﬁrst communications empire and industrial
monopoly, was the ﬁrst product of the science and engineering-based industry, andxiv EXTRACTS
contributed to signi ﬁcant changes to the nature of language. Separating communication
from transportation, the telegraph laid the foundation for the development of future
generations of communication technologies. This innovation was not purely physicaland technical: it opened up new ways of thinking about communication and enabled thealteration of ideas. In particular, the telegraph had close ties with three ideologicaldevelopments: ﬁrst, it changed the form and structure of organisation and manage-
ment; second, it helped generate new religious and philosophical metaphors; and, third,it affected everyday, ordinary ideas. A critical instrument in the development of a uni-form price system, as well as the standardisation of time zones, the telegraph aideda fundamental recon ﬁguration and reconstruction of practical consciousness and
practical activity.
Stein (1999) – ‘Reﬂections on time, time–space compression and
technology in the nineteenth century’
The terms ‘ time– space convergence ’ and ‘ time– space compression ’ have been coined
recently in an effort to describe changes to physical advances in the movement ofservices and information, as well as the social and psychological affects of thesedevelopments. But current explanations need to be revised, according to Stein, becausethey fail to consider how the changes are experienced amongst different sections ofsociety, and the role of new technologies is often exaggerated. Far from being revo-lutionary, a combination of communication technologies has pre ﬁgured contemporary
developments, including the telegraph, telephone and railway line. Each added to asense of a shrinking world at the time, and coincided with novel ways of thinkingabout physics, psychology, art and music, culminating in the emergence of the term:‘annihilation of space and time ’. This phrase, which was adopted around the turn of the
nineteenth century in conceptualising this series of progressive, incremental changes,supports Stein’ s contention that modern accounts are overstated and lack historical
perspective.
Green (2002) – ‘On the move: technology, mobility, and the mediation of
social time and space’
The impact of new technologies has been profound. They have affected our experienceof time and the coordination of (work and personal) activities, dislocated individualsfrom the collective, fragmented interactions, and disrupted current understandingsof social relationships. Or so the argument goes. Green draws on the example ofmobile telephony in order to question these presuppositions, highlighting the device ’s
role in reinforcing existing patterns found in everyday life. By outlining the mobilephone’ s use in people’ s lives and its role in institutional change, Green shows how
many temporalities and experiences are relatively enduring, locally continuous and con-ﬁgured according to multiple daily rhythms and situated action. In contrast to grandioseclaims about revolutionary change, control of time and mobility is shaped in a moreunderstated manner by local factors and social practice.EXTRACTS xv
Lee and Liebenau (2001) – ‘Time and the internet’
Information technology is changing our conceptualisation of time. Constant and
instantaneous access, along with the construction of virtual reality environments, isreducing the signiﬁcance of time as a reference point and eliminating rigid workrhythms. The internet exempli ﬁes the characteristics (and potentialities) of new tech-
nologies in altering temporal dimensions in this manner. Lee and Liebenau offer sixinter-related effects of the internet which are contributing to this process: a reduction inthe duration of attention span, a weakening of the relevance of physical location, a lossof linear continuity, a renegotiation of the structure of deadlines and task cycles, and theability to manipulate work rhythms and ‘busy-ness’ .
Eriksen (2001) – ‘Speed is contagious’
Things are happening faster: news updates, renovating a house and everyday speech,to name a few. Information technology removes distance, shortens time and ﬁlls what
gaps are left with an abundance of information. But what are the consequences ofthis set of developments? In Eriksen ’s view the casualties are context, understanding
and, ultimately, credibility. Although the desire for speed grows the faster an activitygets, increases in processing power and speed do not, ironically, necessarily result ingreater efﬁciency. Simpler tasks may actually save time, because complex technologicaloperations increase the level of expertise and concentration required, whilst alsoraising the chance of system failure. This new reality, he asserts, creates subtle butserious unintended consequences. Are we able to counter a ‘contagious speed ’ which
is running out of control?xvi
EXTRACTS
Introduction
Introducing new media theory
The study of new media opens up some of the most fascinating and challenging issues
in contemporary culture: questions of ownership and control over information andcultural goods; the changing experience of space and time; the political consequencesof new communication technologies; the role of governments in global networks; thepower of users and consumers to disrupt established economic and business models.All these topics are vital current issues in economic, social and political life; all of themare also difﬁcult to analyse and understand, because the technologies are ﬂuid, the
outcomes are uncertain, and the whole ﬁeld is characterised by rapid innovation and
adaptation.
So where to begin if we are looking for a deeper understanding of new media? Neat
categorisations are rarely informative when describing the media, neither are theyalways the best place to begin a theoretical exploration of the subject. The term new
media  raises questions from the outset: what is it that is said to be new? What might
be particularly useful about theories of new media? One useful thing would be to helpus exercise some analytic caution at a time when so much is attributed to the power ofnew technologies: well into the second decade of the web, the promise of novelty stillfunctions as a demand for attention, for resources, for special dispensations in theworld of academic study as well as in the commercially and politically driven world ofthe media industries.
In selecting material for this book, we have attempted to encourage some detach-
ment from contemporary new media enthusiasms. First, we encourage readers to payclose attention to that adjective ‘new ’ and the many meanings it carries. Some writers
in this volume see the special quality of new media in its democratic promise; otherssee it in the individual character of digital communication; others in the transformedsocial and economic relationships that new media sustain. Second, we aim to drawattention to new media as a historical as well as a contemporary phenomenon. As anumber of contributions to this book show, new technologies have a past; and thechallenges and problems they present also have histories. Although the term newmedia is itself a new one, dating back less than 50 years, the issues it raises are not
new, and an understanding of contemporary transformations wrought by mobile phones
and the internet beneﬁts from an awareness of earlier ‘new technologies ’, such as the
printing press, radio and the telegraph. New media, in one form or another, have beenwith us for centuries.
One further aspect of the new media ﬁeld is important to note. We have drawn
together a reader in new media theory in the absence of any uni ﬁed body of new media
theory. New media theory is not comparable to topics in ﬁelds such as aesthetics,
history or law where there is a largely agreed core of foundational writing thathas shaped a discipline or subject area. Instead, this book draws on many areas ofacademic work, including cultural history, cultural studies, economics, law, and politics.From our point of view, this is not an undesirable aspect of the ﬁeld. New media is an
exciting and challenging subject of inquiry partly because it is still emerging and adapt-ing from other domains of knowledge. And precisely because studying new mediameans working across so many areas, claims to authoritative expertise in this ﬁeld
need to be treated with particular caution.
Our assumption in selecting material for this reader is that a broad understanding
of the most interesting, important and challenging arguments in this area involvesworking across a range of disciplines that go beyond the traditional boundaries ofmedia studies and cultural studies. Fresh thinking about new media involves applying,adapting and sometimes connecting knowledge, arguments and skills from thosediverse ﬁelds; and that means a great deal of writing in the area is necessarily still
provisional and tentative. Much of it is also responsive, not to strictly academicproblems, but to the pace of change and its sometimes unpredictable directions in thewider world. The eclectic, reactive and provisional nature of new media theory hasshaped this reader in the range of our sources and in the volume ’s organisation. We
have structured the book around key problems, issues and arguments rather thanfoundational texts.
Contemporary contexts for new media theory
Nonetheless, this somewhat arti ﬁcial perspective can sometimes highlight the
nature of change and assist us to understand some of its substantive qualities. Suchis the case, we believe, with the development of what are called new media and thetheories that have evolved to explain them. It is this approach we take in this introduc-tion to historically situate the developments in computer technologies that underlie newmedia and the context of economic, social and cultural transformation in which theyoperate.
The second half of the 20th century, essentially from the end of World War Two
until the millennium ’s closing years, was a period of immense social, political, economic
and technological change. This post-war dynamic of change grew rapidly and spreadcomprehensively; so much so that it was eventually experienced in every register of lifeand continues to be today. However, within this ﬁve-decade phase we can periodise yet
more: the world of the 1950s was very different from that of the 1960s, which was, in itsturn, markedly different from the crisis-prone 1970s, which itself became something ofa shadow of the enterprising and even more change- ﬁlled decades that followed.
Stephen Toulmin has argued similarly: ‘Experience in the last quarter of a century hasxviii
INTRODUCTION
convinced people that the twenty- ﬁrst century will resemble the twentieth even less than
the twentieth century has resembled the nineteenth ’ (1992:2).
If change is always with us what then is so different about this 50-year span? Were
not the previous 50 years just as transformative of every aspect of life? Well, yes, but in
different ways and at a slower rate. War and political strife and economic depressionseared the collective and individual consciousness of those who lived through the ﬁrst
half of the 20th century in ways and with an intensity that those born after 1950 wouldnot experience. These were cataclysms made possible by technological transformation,to be sure, but were of a different order and substance. It was change envisionedthrough an essentially late-19th-century mode of industrialisation that rested on thecentral pillars of classic modernity. And change was actualised through the power ofcoal, oil, electricity and the combustion engine. Modernisation and industrialisationwere spread through communication and distribution networks that were of similarvintage: through the spatial sinews of railways and macadam roads, and through the‘old media’  of telegraphs, telephones and newspapers. Such transformation was, in its
own way, revolutionary and signalled that we were living in a globalised (or globalising)world of interdependencies and contiguous effects that inserted themselves into moreand more parts of everyday life.
But this was change with a distinct political and economic context. It was a context
that served to shape the technological development of the period and made it verydifferent from that which would dominate the latter half of the century. For example, thelate-19th-century imperialist order contributed to an almost perpetual state of politicalcrises. Territorial rivalries between the major nation states would eventually provoke twoworld wars. In terms of the rate and spread of technological development across theworld, these were held back by a shift toward an economic and political autarky thatemerged especially after the 1914 –18 war. A traditionally ‘ isolationist’  USA and the
determination by certain European states to protect their own imperial systems throughtariffs and protectionism meant that technological change was incremental as opposedto radical and comprehensive. Indeed, many areas of everyday life and culture couldbe left almost untouched. It was a kind of ‘local– global’  form of development where
the political ‘ local’ still had preponderance over the natural ‘global’  tendencies of
capitalism.
The end of the hot war of 1945 saw a transition into a Cold War between the new
superpowers, the USA and the USSR. Military con ﬂict continued, of course, but these
were localised and conducted mainly in undeveloped countries under the auspices ofWashington– Moscow strategic rivalry. Enmity was ideological in the ﬁrst instance:
between the worldviews of liberal capitalism and totalitarian communism, but it hadimmensely important spin-offs. Primary among these, in terms of their effects uponeconomy and society, was the rapid developments in computer technology . The Cold
War put the immediate exigencies of large-scale military con ﬂict into deep freeze.
This released much of the ideological and inventive energies of politicians andscientists. These were channelled in no small part into research and development incomputer science (Edwards, 1996). In the USA, politicians and military analysts thoughtstrategically about how to best confront the challenges of the new times. The perceivedlevel of threat was such that they were prepared to do whatever it took to ensure thatthey could stay ahead of the USSR in terms of technological and scienti ﬁc development.INTRODUCTION xix
Much government largesse was thus conferred on the best and the brightest minds
in the universities and the industrial laboratories. Accordingly, in the 1950s, amongthe many beneﬁciaries of this intense focus on technological development were mensuch as Norbert Wiener and J.C.R. Licklider. These were in ﬂuential scientists who
pushed the boundaries of thinking about what humans in conjunction with computerswere capable of.
‘Conjunction’  – meaning ‘ the state of being joined ’ – is a key term that charac-
terises how these leading theorists thought about the science of computing. Weiner,a professor of logic and scientist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology(MIT) pioneered the school of thought he called ‘cybernetics’ . This was a theory
of both control and communication through ﬂows of information in which ‘feedback
mechanisms’  play an essential part. Fundamental to cybernetics was the claim that it
applied equally to humans and machines. Information feedback, Wiener argued, wouldgenerate automatic processes between the human and the machine (Wiener, 1950).Automatic doors work on this principle. A person approaching such a door alerts asensor which ‘ understands’  this human action and triggers a mechanism causing it to
open. Human and machine create this ‘automatic’  action through mutual interface –
through feedback. Cybernetics was, then, at its very inception, a mode of thought,a form of ‘ mediation’ , which was linked to the military concepts of ‘command and
control’ . Its overall purpose was to discover ways in which environments could be
engineered and manipulated through human and computer interaction. Wiener sawcomputers as machines that mirrored what humans were in their essence. In his 1950book The Human Use of Human Being: Cybernetics and Society  he was unequivocal
about this link:
[T]he [human] nervous system corresponds to the theory of those machines thatconsist in a sequence of switching devices in which the opening of a later switchdepends on the action of precise combinations of earlier switches leading into it,which open at the same time. This all-or-none machine is called a digital machine .
It has great advantages for the most varied problems of communication andcontrol.
Equating humans with computers through a system of cybernetics was a powerful
hypothesis in the development of computer networking and the systems of communica-
tion that would eventually become the internet, the network society and the new mediaapplications that make it possible. For example, J.C.R. Licklider, an intellectual father ofthe internet, wrote a highly in ﬂuential paper in 1960 called ‘Man– computer symbiosis’ .
In the introduction to this he wrote:
Man– computer symbiosis is an expected development in cooperative interaction
between men and electronic computers. It will involve very close coupling betweenthe human and the electronic members of the partnership. [. . .] In the symbioticpartnership, men will set the goals, formulate the hypotheses, determine thecriteria and perform the evaluations. Computing machines will do the routinizablework that must be done to prepare the way for insights and decisions in technicaland scientiﬁc thinking. Preliminary analyses indicate that the symbiotic partnershipxx
INTRODUCTION
will perform intellectual operations much more effectively that man alone can
perform them.
In both Wiener and Licklider we see two signi ﬁcant and mutually compatible theses
on the nature of computing and humans ’ relations to it. Wiener argues that to be fully
modern is to depend on computing power, and Licklider suggests that computing may
also reﬂect our human essence. These perspectives are at the core of post-war com-puter science; and the work of these towering intellectuals in information systems andcybernetics contain basic assumptions regarding people and computer systems thatﬂow directly into the creation of our networked society. Both theorists view humans asfundamentally processors of information  in a world whose reality becomes apparent only
through the interface with numbers. As Theodor Roszak wrote in his book The Cult of
Information : ‘In perfecting feedback and the means of rapid data manipulation, the
science of cybernetics was gaining a deeper understanding of life itself as being, at itscore, the processing of information ’ (p. 39). The central challenge for humans aspiring
to full modernity, so the logic runs, is to develop information-processing machines thatincrease in their sophistication, speed and capacity. The more powerful computersbecome, the more we realise our inner essence, and the more we are able to under-stand the world around us.
The computer-automated vistas of Wiener and Licklider were becoming a reality in
the 1950s and 1960s. The powerful number-crunching capabilities made possible bydevelopments in computing allowed advances in not only atomic weaponry, butalso solved some of the mathematical problems of trajectory plotting that had besetengineers of rocketry. Projectiles could now be launched with unprecedented levels ofaccuracy and power. In the USSR, similar developments in computer science weretaking place. So much so that the Soviets stole the march on the Americans in 1957 bylaunching into space the Sputnik  satellite. This was the ﬁrst time that humans had
achieved the ‘ escape velocity’  necessary to reach beyond the Earth ’s atmosphere –  and
computing power made it possible. The US response to this was to enter into whatwould become the ‘space race’  with a commitment by President Kennedy in 1960 to
land a man on the moon by the end of the decade. And so yet more funds pouredinto the universities and the commercial labs to give the USA and the ‘free West’  the
decisive technological edge through computer-based ‘solutions’  that were shown to
have applications across many industries as well as the military.
Away from the worries and concerns of superpower con ﬂict, this con ﬁdence in
technologically assisted human capabilities gave something of a fresh impetus to theproject of modernity. After the destruction of two global wars and the chaos of economicdepression, the post-war period opened up into what David Harvey (1989) called thephase of ‘ high modernity’  – at least in the liberal –capitalist west. In the 1960s the rate
of innovation in science and technology grew rapidly and the complexity and buoyancyof the globalising economy re ﬂected this. Full employment became the norm in the
developed economies of the west, and the growing af ﬂuence of society boosted yet
further the demand for technologically based solutions. In communications, jet travelbecame increasingly commonplace, as did use of the telephone for local, national andinternational networking. A global media was emerging through the mass diffusion oftelevision and transistor radios, allowing people to ‘experience’  live events such asINTRODUCTION xxi
soccer world cups or the Olympics; or the emergent mediascape brought political/
military events such as the Vietnam War much closer to our everyday consciousness.Indeed, much of the planet watched part of this global mediascape as PresidentKennedy’ s pledge was kept when astronaut Neil Armstrong stepped onto the Moon in
July 1969.
This ‘high modernity’  was organised and articulated through what might be equally
termed a ‘ high’ Fordism. In 1914 in the USA Henry Ford had pioneered his eponymous
system of automated production lines using low-skilled labour to mass manufacturethe Model T car. His techniques were revolutionary and soon multiplied far beyond theproduction of cars. Mass production was predicated on mass consumption, whichwas in turn reliant on mass communication. The technical rationality of micro-plannedand micro-managed Fordist principles spread across the emerging ‘mass society’  to
evolve into what Harvey termed ‘a whole way of life ’ (1989:135). As the method grew
and became more dominant in the 1950s and 1960s, Fordism evolved into a tightlymacro-managed economic system  through the top-level cooperation between business,
organised labour and corporate capitalism. The effect of this in culture, in economy, andin society was to regulate and make fairly predictable the pace of change and thetrajectory of change. And so British Prime Minister Harold Wilson ’s characterisation of
the 1960s as being shaped by the ‘white heat of the technological revolution ’ notwith-
standing, the reality was one of control and of management. Computer systems expertsof the time knew, for example, that the automation of much more of industry wouldenable it to be more ef ﬁcient and productive. However, in the context of full employment
and high proﬁts, the economic impetus to take such a step (which would be politicallysensitive and involve the destruction of many jobs) was simply not strong enough. Theconcept of the national economy  was still operating; and the political will to subsidise
industries and businesses in the national interest was still dominant. Local –global,
then, was still the dominant metaphor to describe the phase of ‘high modernity’  and
‘high Fordism’ .
This began to change in the 1970s. High Fordism and the high modernity it helped
produce as a ‘ whole way of life’  full of certainties in employment, in modes of consump-
tion and so on, had been maturing and was growing rigid and sclerotic (Kolko, 1988).The system, as it grew in scope and complexity, developed its own internal contradic-tions. The need for capitalism to ‘naturally’  expand spatially, and accelerate temporally,
was ‘artiﬁcially’  constrained by nation state politics. In Europe and North America, this
led directly to pressures of competition from the emerging economies of East Asia andJapan, which were aggressively export oriented. Moreover, falling productivity and fallingproﬁts increased the scale of economic crises in the west. These were exacerbatedby growing inﬂationary pressures and, in 1973, the ‘oil shock’  when the Arab members
of OPEC placed an embargo against the USA in particular, which sent world oil prices tounprecedented levels.
The economic and social system of Fordism was in trouble by the mid-1970s.
Indeed it was beginning to unravel though growing unemployment, growinguncertainty about the future, and a growing call for wide-ranging ‘solutions’ fromrepresentatives of big business and economic radicals in governments. Ideologueswith ‘solutions’ had, in fact, been growing in inﬂuence over the previous decade.
These were the ‘neoliberals’ who argued, after Adam Smith the 18th-century politicalxxii
INTRODUCTION
economist, that markets must be free from ‘rigidities’ such as tariffs and subsidies. A
central demand to be heard from business at the time was that it should be businessalone that should decide how and where capital is invested, free from either thesectional interests of organised labour or the narrow political interests of government.In the climate of deep crises, neoliberalism swept like a gale through the ‘whole way oflife’ that had been the system of post-war social, political and economic consensus.Led by political ideologues such as Margaret Thatcher and Ronald Reagan, govern-ment began to abnegate its consensus-building role between business and labour, aswell as its role as protector and nurturer of the national economy. Economics was totake the leading role and neoliberals identiﬁed major increases in productivity andefﬁciency, across the whole of the economy, as the prime factors in the restructuringof capitalism. The application of computer-based information and communicationtechnologies (ICTs) had long been developing in the commercial sector as spin-offsfrom military R&D. However during the 1950s, as we saw, the take-up was slow andaccumulative because of the political considerations of the consensus approach. Bythe early 1980s, however, ICTs were seen, as Neil Postman put it, as a ‘solution insearch of a problem’ (1993:17). Automation was thus to be the panacea for the issuesof low productivity and efﬁciency in just about every industry. It was at this time thatthe mutually reinforcing dynamics of neoliberal globalisation and the revolution inICTs really got under way.
The 1980s saw a phase of the entrenchment of neoliberal ideas, especially in the
polities and economies of the Anglo-American countries. This had a direct ﬂow-on
effect into less developed countries through multilateral organisations such as theWorld Bank and the International Monetary Fund. The restructuring of the world ’s econ-
omies to make them more ‘ﬂ exible’  and productive and ef ﬁcient was made possible
only through the unrestrained application of ICTs across industries and across entireeconomies. The ﬂow-on to culture and society of rapid computerisation was swift. Insomething of a homage to Wiener and Licklider ’s dreams of human– computer
‘symbiosis’ , the middle of the 1980s saw the beginnings of the quaintly termed ‘per-
sonal computer’  (PC) revolution at home and at the workplace. Growing and increasingly
ﬂexible ‘post-Fordist’  economies were now changing rapidly through the introduction of
new media technologies that seem to be getting faster and more powerful by the month.Fuelled by the growth of the NSDAQ bubble, the 1990s saw the popularisation of theinternet, the growth to behemoth status of corporations such as Microsoft, Intel andApple, and the realisation of the global ‘information economy’ . And into our collective
consciousness would be inserted, in the form of a verb, the spirit of the information agethrough neologisms such as Ebay, Amazon, Yahoo! and Google.
It was during this frenetic activity that Manuel Castells observed that: ‘The infor-
mation technology revolution, and the restructuring of capitalism, has induced a newform of society, the network society ’ (1996:xv). New media technologies were and are
central to this process. These are the technologies of ‘mediation’ ; connectable tech-
nologies that make networking and the network society possible. Castells furtherdescribes the social and economic effects of networks:
Networks are open structures, able to expand without limits, integrating newnodes as long as they are able to communicate within the network, namely asINTRODUCTION xxiii
long as they share the same communication codes [. . .] Networks are appropriate
instruments for a capitalist economy based on innovation, globalization, anddecentralised concentration; for work, workers, and ﬁrms based upon ﬂexibility,
and adaptability; for a culture of endless deconstruction and reconstruction; for apolity geared towards the instant processing of new values and public moods; andfor a social organization aimed at the suppression of space and the annihilationof time.
(1996:470– 471)
The notion of what Castells calls ‘polity geared toward the instant processing of
new values and public moods ’ is for us a fascinating consideration. How do we make
sense of constant, rapid, and often comprehensive new media-driven change? It is aconcern that was similarly expressed more recently by Thomas de Zengotita in his book,Mediated . In it he claims that: ‘The real world is reconstituting itself on a plane that
transcends ancient solidarities of nature and custom, craft and industry. The wholeprocess has been accelerated since the invention of modern communication technolo-gies (telegraph, photograph, telephone), and it crossed a qualitative threshold in thepast couple of decades, with the rise of new media ’ (2005:17– 18).
The works selected for this reader go to the heart of these qualitative changes –
if that, indeed, is what they are. The subtitle of de Zengotita ’s book is ‘ how the
media shape your world ’. Theorising effects of ‘ new media’  is not the same as
theorising the effects of a particular media technology such as a DVD player ormobile phone. ‘ New media’  in the context of this book are plural and encompassing
in their scope. It takes in a media or mediated environment  in which any application
or process that is networkable or digitisable has its place. This can range from thelatest and fastest wireless laptop and digital camera, to the act of shopping with aplastic card –  and even this book, which may be bought online, or easily scanned or
converted to PDF and made available online. New media technologies are aboveall connectable, compatible with others, creating in their plurality a highly mediatedcontext which connects to numberless other mediated contexts that users create intheir day-to-day life.
It is this evanescent media landscape that the authors in this collection attempt to
describe and explain. The extracts give the taste of larger works that look at the natureof technological change The challenge for us as editors was to try to capture, as muchas is possible, the kind of role new media has played in the undoubted change thathas taken place over the last couple of decades. This has meant taking a range of viewson new media theory that do not fall into a ‘gee whiz’  technophilia or, at the other pole,
a sombre technophobia that sees only doom and gloom. Many perspectives areunavoidably situated at some point along this continuum, although they never fall intoegregious or unconsidered writing that would place them at either extreme. Importantly,we have chosen to compile this collection in a more subtle and we think more intel-lectually fruitful way. Several of the works do not, in fact, deal with new media at all, butare perspectives on our relationship (cultural, economic, politic and psychological)with technology. What these do is to provoke other modes of thought that allow usto consider, say, the introduction of the telegraph in Canada in the 19th century, asJeremy Stein does in Part 5, and compare this with the writings – or our experience – of axxiv
INTRODUCTION
hyper-mediated world. We can then ask: is there really any qualitative difference? If so,
what, and if not, why not? We do not provide ‘answers’  to this or other questions; only
pathways to more questions.
Contents of this reader
The book is organised into ﬁve parts, which cover the broad themes we see as being
emblematic of the main debates today. We outline the content here in general termsas each part is prefaced by a short discussion on its detail.
Part 1 is called ‘ Media transitions’  and introduces some key ideas about the nature
of new media, both in the past and present. Here we try to clarify what is distinctiveabout contemporary networked, digital communication technologies, and also what wecan learn from earlier transformations. We see some of the claims made for new media,survey the extraordinary range of economic, social and political effects attributed to newmedia, and provide some cultural and historical contexts for understanding these.
Part 2, ‘ Governing new media ’, takes up questions, which although ﬂowing directly
from some of the issues raised already, are in themselves unique to our era. Theacceleration of change has legislators the world over constantly playing catch-up withthe social and economic effects that new media are having over the realm of mediaitself. New ways of delivering ‘old’ and once relatively stable media such as books,
newspapers or television; as well as new ways of organising the content and distributionof these on a global scale is transforming what it means to be a media consumer.‘Content’  is more than this or that soap opera, or news programme or sports coverage.
To be sure, networking and the imperatives of economic ‘efﬁciency’  has the capability
to merge it all into a single package, a single product. But the fact that there is an
important difference underlies the challenges to effectively and democratically govern-ing a new media-generated global mediascape. Content is information, the stuff of thenetwork society, and it is information which shapes our view of the world. The questions,in this context, inescapably become political. Who controls the new media landscape?In what ways are our views of the world being shaped? Who decides what is important inour media lives –  the market, the technology, or people themselves through a better
informed relationship with a vibrant and diverse media made possible by innovation inmedia technology?
In Part 3, ‘ Properties and commons’ , the central debates about the changing nature
of ownership in the network society are introduced. Arguments around the claimsand scope of intellectual property have a long history, but have sharpened in the newmedia environment. The French philosopher Henri Lefebvre argued in his 1991 bookThe Production of Space  that space is socially produced. The precise form and function
this takes stems from the ‘production and reproduction ’ characteristics of ‘ each social
formation’ . In other words, it tends to re ﬂect the power relations of a given society. In
the network society a cyberspace is being created by not only commercially orientedapplications and processes, but also by people as part of a civil society, creating a‘digital commons’  that, supposedly, is free from commercial concerns. The tensions
between these concepts of digital space – who owns it, who creates it and for whose
beneﬁt – are set to create a central battleground in the courts and in the streets in the
early decades of the 21st century.INTRODUCTION xxv
The overtly political battles of power, control and ownership that the network society
has brought into the digital age are discussed in Part 4, ‘Politics of new media technolo-
gies’. Control and the associated problems of governmentality , in the sense that Michel
Foucault (1978) used the term as a way of locating and analysing power at the level of
the individual, the institution such as the family, workplace and so on – right up to the
level of the network society itself – provide a context with which these extracts may
be read. The restructuring of society that new media technologies has made possiblehas reconﬁgured much of the power geometry that characterised the post-war age.Relatively settled and predictable patterns of power have eroded, throwing open toquestion the nature of social power and the effectiveness of institutional democraticpolitics in the network society. What is or should be the role of government in a net-worked society that is practically transnational? New sources of power are beginningto ﬁnd a political voice within cyberspace. How do we relate to these shifting forms of
power and what does the growing importance of some of them and a relative diminutionof others portend for democratic practices in the 21st century?
Finally, new media technologies have compressed time and space to an extent
that is claimed by some to be historically unprecedented. The concluding part,‘Time and space in the age of information ’, looks at what this means in theory and
in practice through a range of perspectives. Here we revisit the question of what, ifanything, makes digital networks different from, say, the analogue communicationnetworks based on telegraph and telephone that began to emerge as long ago as thelate 19th century? The part offers a comparative view of how communications tech-nologies change our relationships with time and space, in previous epochs and inour own, encouraging the reader to think about these relatively neglected socialcategories.
This reader is not a comprehensive account of the current state of opinion about
new media technologies, or the conceptual frameworks that seek to explain them. Whatwe have aimed for is a range of perspectives that are representative, not only of some ofthe most perceptive thinking on new media technologies, but also of the tremendousrange  of effects that they are having in every realm of life. The extracts themselves are
accessible and arranged in such a way as to encourage critical examination and debatearound the issues in question. In this way they function as introductions to largerarguments.
References
Castells, M. (1996) The Rise of the Network Society, 2nd edn, Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.
Edwards, P.N. (1996) The Closed World: Computers and the Politics of Discourse in Cold War
America, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Foucault, M. (1978) ‘Governmentality’, trans. Rosi Braidotti and revised by Colin Gordon, in
Graham Burchell, Colin Gordon and Peter Miller (eds) (1991) The Foucault Effect: Studiesin Governmentality, pp. 87–104, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Harvey, D. (1989) The Condition of Postmodernity, Oxford: Blackwell.Kolko, J. (1988) Restructuring the World Economy, New York: Pantheon.Lefebvre, H. (1991) The Production of Space, Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.Licklider, J.C.R. (1960) ‘Man–computer symbiosis’, IRE Transactions on Human Factors in
Electronics, HFE-1, March, pp. 4–11.xxvi INTRODUCTION
Postman, N. (1993) Technopoly, New York: Vintage.
Roszak, T . (1994) The Cult of Information: A Neo-Luddite Treatise on High-Tech, Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, and the True Art of Thinking, 2nd edn, Berkeley, CA: University of CaliforniaPress.
Toulmin, S. (1992) Cosmopolis: The Hidden Agenda of Modernity, Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press.
Wiener, N. (1950) The Human Use of Human Beings: Cybernetics and Society, Boston, MA:
Houghton Mifﬂin.
Zengotita, T . de (2005) Mediated: How the Media Shape Your World, London: Bloomsbury.INTRODUCTION xxvii
Publisher’s acknowledgements
The authors and publisher wish to thank the following for permission to use copyright
material:
Manovich, L (2001) ‘What is New Media?’ in The Language of New Media,
Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press
Cook, S as originally published in Steﬁk, M (1997) ‘Technological revolutions
and the Gutenberg myth’ in Internet Dreams: Archetypes, Myths and Metaphors,
Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press
Pool, Ithiel de Sola “A Shadow of Darkness” reprinted by permission of the pub-
lisher from TECHNOLOGIES OF FREEDOM: ON FREE SPEECH ANELECTRONIC AGE by Ithiel de Sola Pool, pp. 1–10, Cambridge, Mass.: HarvardUniversity Press, Copyright © 1982 by the President and Fellows of HarvardCollege
Nye, D. E (1996) ‘The Consumer’s sublime’ in American Technological Sublime,
Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press
Kelly, K ‘The Computational Metaphor’ in Whole Earth, Winter 1998
Marien, M (1996) in ‘New Communications Technology: a survey of impacts and
issues’ in Telecommunications Policy, Vol. 20, No 5, pp 375–387
Saunders, D; Hunter, I. M and Williamson, D (1992) ‘Historicising obscenity law’
in On Pornography: Literature, Obscenity and Law, London: Macmillan
Owen, B. M “The Tragedy of Broadcast Regulation” reprinted by permission of
the publisher from INTERNET CHALLENGE TO TELEVISION by Bruce M. Owen, pp.79–89, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, Copyright © 1999 by thePresident and Fellows of Harvard College
Graham, A (1998) ‘Broadcasting policy in the digital age’ in Firestone, C. M and
Korzick Garner, A (eds) Digital Broadcasting and the Public Interest, Washington,DC: Aspen Institute
Robins, K and Webster, F (1998) ‘The cybernetic imagination of capitalism’ in
Mosoko, V and Wasko, J (eds) The Political Economy of Information, Madison, WI:The University of Wisconsin Press
McChesney, R. W (2001) ‘Policing the thinkable’, Opendemocracy.net
Compaine, B (2001) ‘The myths of encroaching global media ownership’,
Opendemocracy.net
Patterson, L. R (1968) ‘Copyright in historical perspective’ in Copyright in Historical
Perspective, Nashville, TN: Vanderbilt University Press
Boyle, J (1996) ‘Intellectual property and the liberal state’ in Shamans Software
and Spleens: Law and the Construction of the Information Society, Cambridge,
Massachusetts: Harvard University Press
Litman, J (2001) ‘Choosing metaphors’ in Digital Copyright: Protecting Intellectual
Property on the Internet, Amherst, New York: Prometheus Books
Lessig, L (2000) ‘The promise for intellectual property in cyberspace’ in Code and
Other Laws if Cyberspace, New York: Basic Books
Stallman, R (2002) ‘Why software should not have owners’ in Free Software: Free
Society, Boston, Massachusetts: Free Software Foundation
Barry, A (2001) ‘On Interactivity’ in Political Machines: Governing a technological
Society, London: Athlone Press
Barber, B. R (2000) ‘Pangloss, Pandora or Jefferson? Three Scenarios for the
Future of Technology and Democracy’ in A Passion for Democracy: AmericanEssays, Princeton University Press, pp. 245 – 257
Sunstein, C (2001) ‘Citizens’ in Republic.com, Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton
University Press
Wark, M  (2004) ‘Abstraction/class’ in A Hacker Manifesto, Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press
Carey, J (1989) ‘Technology and Ideology: the case of the telegraph’ in Communica-
tion as Culture, London: Routledge
Stein, J (1999) ‘Reﬂections on time, time-space compression and technology in the
nineteenth century’ in Craig, M, Crang, P and May, j (eds) Virtual Geographies:Bodies, Space and Relations, New York: Routledge
Green, N (2002) ‘On the move: technology, mobility and the mediation of social time
and space’ in The Information Society, 18(4(, pp 281–292
Lee, H and Liebenau, J (2001) ‘Time and the internet’ in Time and Society, 9(1),
pp 48–55
Eriksen, T. H (2001) ‘Speed is contagious’ in Tyranny of the Moment: Fast and Slow
Time in the Age of the Information, London: Pluto Press
Every effort has been made to trace the copyright holders but if any have been inadver-tently overlooked the publisher will be pleased to make the necessary arrangement atthe ﬁrst opportunity.xxx
PUBLISHER’ S ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
PART 1
Media transitions
An underlying theme of this volume on new media theory is to examine the idea that
digital technologies have, over the past quarter-century or so, transformed our world.Undoubtedly, things have changed a lot. If one thinks about what Lev Manovich termsthe ‘language of new media ’, that is to say, the words, metaphors and narratives we use
routinely to describe our informationalised society, what stands out is a language  of
change that reﬂects a real-world process  of change. What is made implicit or explicit in
much of this discourse is not change in the ordinary sense of the word, but a rapid andfar reaching transformation. The materials collected in this part deal with the nature ofthis transformation –  its scope, its politics, its aesthetic basis, and its multifarious
consequences.
We painted a broadbrush picture of these changes in the Introduction . But we can
also sharpen the focus and go down to the level of the individual and to his or herexperiences, to ﬁnd the same seemingly constant and comprehensive dynamics ofchange. One only needs to think of the sense impressions gained by simply existing inthe developed or developing world, even over the last decade. For example, prior to, say,1995, the internet was not widely available, and mobile phones were still fairly exoticdevices used primarily by businessmen and women and could still make heads turn inthe street. Personal computers (PCs) were widely distributed in the workplace, but verymuch less so in the home. Moreover, they were big and noisy, and not routinely con-nected to global networks but to a big central inhouse computer, or they were simplystandalones. They ran on an MS-DOS operating system with a 386 CPU and had hardlyany memory. ‘ Floppy disks’  – an already neglected word as well as technology – were the
media they used. Blackberrys, iPods, Bluetooth-enabled wireless laptops, camera-phones, plasma screens, Google, broadband and most, if not all, of what you now seecramming your high street electronics store did not exist. A prototype of eBay, and aclunky PlayStation 1 had only just been launched. We nonetheless thought this wascutting-edge stuff, and felt on the cusp of a surging technological wave.
We still do today. Tutored as well as seduced by industry advertising, the lure of new
media for consumers and for business as ‘solutions’  for almost anything, is more
powerful than ever. What this momentum means is that new media-driven change is setonly to get faster and more inclusive. That we are living through a phase of technological,
economic and cultural change is now undeniable, but what kind of change is it, and is it
as widespread and systematic as many theorists argue? As Manovich observes: ‘New
media may look like media, but this is only the surface ’ (2002:47). For theorists of new
media who argue in such terms, what we are experiencing is something more funda-mental – a Kuhnian ‘ paradigm shift ’ (1962/1996). Deep-level computability transforms
how we represent life through the ubiquity of mutable digital imagery; and transformslife through the industries, cultures, and institutions that produce and sustain our senseof being in the world.
We have titled this opening part ‘Media transitions’ . The ideas and arguments
contained in it function within the open boundaries of the notion of ‘transition’ , of
moving from one paradigm to another, of moving from a world where computers andcomputer-based media were peripheral, to one where they are central. As with everychapter in this volume, the perspectives are not homologous. New media technologiesare seen to represent both threat and opportunity, liberation or trap – or possibly some-
thing more nebulous and subtle in between. An extract from Lev Manovich ’s book The
Language of New Media  opens the collection, and makes the bold argument that what
we are experiencing today is ‘ a [media] revolution [that is] . . . more profound than the
previous ones, and we are just beginning to register its initial effects ’. Essentially, for
Manovich, ubiquitous computing functions as a ‘manipulator’  and ‘ weaver’  of all cultural
forms into ‘ computer-mediated forms of production, distribution and communication ’.
In other words, ‘new media’ , in the wide de ﬁnition Manovich gives the term, is truly
a paradigm shift in that it represents a world-historically important convergence ofcomputation and media. S.D. Noam Cook ’s essay ‘ Technological revolutions and the
Gutenberg Myth’  indirectly takes up Manovich ’s claims for ‘ revolution’  by critically
appraising the more widely accepted notion of a revolution that occurred with theinvention of Gutenberg ’s movable-type printing press in the middle of the 15th century.
Explaining some of the ‘myths’  and the realities of the Gutenberg revolution, Cook
argues that we are then in a better position to more accurately assess the nature oftechnological development through digital new media today.
Ithiel de Sola Pool ’s extract from his Technologies of Freedom  was originally written
in 1983 and represents an early attempt to understand and predict the effects of the‘changed technological base ’ upon US First Amendment provisions for free speech in
the media. Foreshadowing many of the libertarian themes of the 1990s, de Sola Poolsees the ‘ convergence of delivery mechanisms ’ for media as both a threat to American
traditions of free speech and the opportunity to revitalise it. The author fears that theheavy regulation of the big media monopolies that was a feature of the early years ofbroadcasting will be grafted onto the new media environment. This is ironic, he argues,because the new environment is oriented towards fragmentation and decentralisation –
in other words back to the original 18th-century media environment in which the FirstAmendment protecting freedoms of speech and the press was crafted.
David E. Nye also provides a thought-provoking essay which discusses our
aesthetic and psychological relationship with technology. Its focus is the USA, but itholds relevance, although to a possibly lesser degree, to most developed economiesand societies. We tend to stand in awe of technological development, argues Nye. Thisproduces a kind of passivity in respect of the trajectory of technological development(where it is taking us); and an addiction to the constructed and essentially shallow world2
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
it represents for us. The simulated (and sublime) world of Las Vegas is examined as a
polar extreme of this propensity. As with Cook ’s essay, this thesis on the psychology of
our relationship with technology is able to illuminate the ways in which new media todayis revered by theorists and users alike. We reprint in full a short but insightful article byKevin Kelly which looks at the ‘subversive trend’  of using the metaphor of the computer
or computer logic to describe almost everything. This is the effect, possibly, of thesaturation of society by the computer. However, the growth of the computationalmetaphor in our language, Kelly argues, runs the risk of becoming a self-ful ﬁlling logic,
where the more we see the world through the lens of the computational metaphor, thenthe more we are likely to act on in it this way – to the detriment of other ways.
The ﬁnal extract is a valuable survey of the numerous and wide-ranging issues that
new media technology has raised since the beginnings of the ICT revolution. Writtenby Michael Marien in 1996 for the journal Telecommunications Policy , its incisive dis-
cussion of the new media ‘transition’  and extensive bibliography on theory and practice
of information technologies, remains a valuable resource for students wishing toexplore this formative phase of the age of information.
References
Kuhn, T . (1962/1996) The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press.
Manovich, L. (2002) The Language of New Media, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.MEDIA TRANSITIONS 3
1.1
What is new media?,
by Lev Manovich
What is new media? We may begin answering this question by listing the categories
commonly discussed under this topic in the popular press: the Internet, Web sites,computer multimedia, computer games, CD-ROMs and DVD, virtual reality. Is thisall there is to new media? What about television programs shot on digital video andedited on computer workstations? Or feature ﬁlms that use 3-D animation and digitalcompositing? Shall we also count these as new media? What about images and text-image compositions – photographs, illustrations, layouts, ads – created on computersand then printed on paper? Where shall we stop?
As can be seen from these examples, the popular understanding of new media
identiﬁes it with the use of a computer for distribution and exhibition rather thanproduction. Accordingly, texts distributed on a computer (Web sites and electronicbooks) are considered to be new media, whereas texts distributed on paper are not.Similarly, photographs that are put on a CD-ROM and require a computer to beviewed are considered new media; the same photographs printed in a book are not.
Shall we accept this deﬁnition? If we want to understand the eﬀects of computer-
ization on culture as a whole, I think it is too limiting. There is no reason to privilegethe computer as a machine for the exhibition and distribution of media over thecomputer as a tool for media production or as a media storage device. All have thesame potential to change existing cultural languages. And all have the same potentialto leave culture as it is.
The last scenario is unlikely, however. What is more likely is that just as the
printing press in the fourteenth century and photography in the nineteenth centuryhad a revolutionary impact on the development of modern society and culture,today we are in the middle of a new media revolution – the shift of all culture tocomputer-mediated forms of production, distribution, and communication. Thisnew revolution is arguably more profound than the previous ones, and we are justbeginning to register its initial eﬀects. Indeed, the introduction of the printing pressaﬀected only one stage of cultural communication – the distribution of media.Similarly, the introduction of photography aﬀected only one type of cultural com-munication – still images. In contrast, the computer media revolution aﬀects all stages
of communication, including acquisition, manipulation, storage, and distribution; it
also aﬀects all types of media – texts, still images, moving images, sound, and spatial
constructions.
How shall we begin to map out the eﬀects of this fundamental shift? What are the
ways in which the use of computers to record, store, create, and distribute mediamakes it “new”?
In the section “Media and Computation,” I show that new media represents a
convergence of two separate historical trajectories: computing and media technolo-gies. Both begin in the 1830s with Babbage’s Analytical Engine and Daguerre’sdaguerreotype. Eventually, in the middle of the twentieth century, a modern digitalcomputer is developed to perform calculations on numerical data more eﬃciently; ittakes over from numerous mechanical tabulators and calculators widely employed bycompanies and governments since the turn of the century. In a parallel movement, wewitness the rise of modern media technologies that allow the storage of images, imagesequences, sounds, and text using diﬀerent material forms – photographic plates, ﬁlmstocks, gramophone records, etc. The synthesis of these two histories? The translationof all existing media into numerical data accessible through computers. The result isnew media – graphics, moving images, sounds, shapes, spaces, and texts that havebecome computable; that is, they comprise simply another set of computer data. In“Principles of New Media,” I look at the key consequences of this new status of media.Rather than focusing on familiar categories such as interactivity or hypermedia, Isuggest a diﬀerent list. This list reduces all principles of new media to ﬁve – numerical
representation, modularity, automation, variability, and cultural transcoding. In thelast section, “What New Media Is Not,” I address other principles that are oftenattributed to new media. I show that these principles can already be found at work inolder cultural forms and media technologies such as cinema, and therefore in and ofthemselves are in suﬃcient to distinguish new media from old.
How media became new
On August 19, 1839, the Palace of the Institute in Paris was ﬁlled with curious Parisianswho had come to hear the formal description of the new reproduction processinvented by Louis Daguerre. Daguerre, already well known for his Diorama, calledthe new process daguerreotype. According to a contemporary, “a few days later, opti-cians’ shops were crowded with amateurs panting for daguerreotype apparatus, andeverywhere cameras were trained on buildings. Everyone wanted to record the viewfrom his window, and he was lucky who at ﬁrst trial got a silhouette of roof topsagainst the sky.”
1 The media frenzy had begun. Within ﬁve months more than thirty
diﬀerent descriptions of the technique had been published around the world –
Barcelona, Edinburgh, Naples, Philadelphia, St. Petersburg, Stockholm. At ﬁrst,daguerreotypes of architecture and landscapes dominated the public’s imagination;two years later, after various technical improvements to the process had been made,portrait galleries had opened everywhere – and everyone rushed to have her picturetaken by the new media machine.
2
In 1833 Charles Babbage began designing a device he called “the Analytical
Engine.” The Engine contained most of the key features of the modern digital com-puter. Punch cards were used to enter both data and instructions. This information6
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
was stored in the Engine’s memory. A processing unit, which Babbage referred to as a
“mill,” performed operations on the data and wrote the results to memory; ﬁnal
results were to be printed out on a printer. The Engine was designed to be capable ofdoing any mathematical operation; not only would it follow the program fed into it bycards, but it would also decide which instructions to execute next, based on inter-mediate results. However, in contrast to the daguerreotype, not a single copy of theEngine was completed. While the invention of the daguerreotype, a modern mediatool for the reproduction of reality, impacted society immediately, the impact of thecomputer was yet to be seen.
Interestingly, Babbage borrowed the idea of using punch cards to store informa-
tion from an earlier programmed machine. Around 1800, J. M. Jacquard invented aloom that was automatically controlled by punched paper cards. The loom was usedto weave intricate ﬁgurative images, including Jacquard’s portrait. This specializedgraphics computer, so to speak, inspired Babbage in his work on the AnalyticalEngine, a general computer for numerical calculations. As Ada Augusta, Babbage’ssupporter and the ﬁrst computer programmer, put it, “The Analytical Engine weavesalgebraical patterns just as the Jacquard loom weaves ﬂowers and leaves.”
3 Thus a
programmed machine was already synthesizing images even before it was put toprocessing numbers. The connection between the Jacquard loom and the AnalyticalEngine is not something historians of computers make much of, since for them com-puter image synthesis represents just one application of the modern digital computeramong thousands of others, but for a historian of new media, it is full of signiﬁcance.
We should not be surprised that both trajectories – the development of modern
media and the development of computers – begin around the same time. Both mediamachines and computing machines were absolutely necessary for the functioning ofmodern mass societies. The ability to disseminate the same texts, images, and soundsto millions of citizens – thus assuring the same ideological beliefs – was as essential asthe ability to keep track of their birth records, employment records, medical records,and police records. Photography, ﬁlm, the oﬀset printing press, radio, and televisionmade the former possible while computers made possible the latter. Mass media anddata processing are complementary technologies; they appear together and developside by side, making modern mass society possible.
For a long time the two trajectories ran in parallel without ever crossing paths.
Throughout the nineteenth and the early twentieth centuries, numerous mechanicaland electrical tabulators and calculators were developed; they gradually became fasterand their use more widespread. In a parallel movement, we witness the rise of modernmedia that allow the storage of images, image sequences, sounds, and texts in diﬀerentmaterial forms – photographic plates, ﬁlm stock, gramophone records, etc.
Let us continue tracing this joint history. In the 1890s modern media took
another step forward as still photographs were put in motion. In January 1893, theﬁrst movie studio – Edison’s “Black Maria” – started producing twenty-second shorts
that were shown in special Kinetoscope parlors. Two years later the Lumière brothersshowed their new Cinématographie camera/projection hybrid, ﬁrst to a scientiﬁcaudience and later, in December 1895, to the paying public. Within a year, audiencesin Johannesburg, Bombay, Rio de Janeiro, Melbourne, Mexico City, and Osaka weresubjected to the new media machine, and they found it irresistible.
4 Gradually scenesWHAT IS NEW MEDIA? 7
grew longer, the staging of reality before the camera and the subsequent editing of
samples became more intricate, and copies multiplied. In Chicago and Calcutta,London and St. Petersburg, T okyo and Berlin, and thousands of smaller places, ﬁlmimages would soothe movie audiences, who were facing an increasingly dense infor-mation environment outside the theater, an environment that no longer could beadequately handled by their own sampling and data processing systems (i.e., theirbrains). Periodic trips into the dark relaxation chambers of movie theaters became aroutine survival technique for the subjects of modern society.
The 1890s was the crucial decade not only for the development of media, but also
for computing. If individual brains were overwhelmed by the amount of informationthey had to process, the same was true of corporations and of governments. In 1887,the U.S. Census Bureau was still interpreting ﬁgures from the 1880 census. For the1890 census, the Census Bureau adopted electric tabulating machines designed byHerman Hollerith. The data collected on every person was punched into cards;46,804 enumerators completed forms for a total population of 62,979,766. The Hol-lerith tabulator opened the door for the adoption of calculating machines by business;during the next decade electric tabulators became standard equipment in insurancecompanies, public utility companies, railroad oﬃces, and accounting departments. In1911, Hollerith’s T abulating Machine Company was merged with three other com-panies to form the Computing-T abulating-Recording Company; in 1914, Thomas J.Watson was chosen as its head. T en years later its business tripled, and Watsonrenamed the company the “International Business Machines Corporation,” or IBM.
5
Moving into the twentieth century, the key year for the history of media and
computing is 1936. British mathematician Alan Turing wrote a seminal paper entitled“On Computable Numbers.” In it he provided a theoretical description of a general-purpose computer later named after its inventor: “the Universal Turing Machine.”Even though it was capable of only four operations, the machine could perform anycalculation that could be done by a human and could also imitate any other comput-ing machine. The machine operated by reading and writing numbers on an endlesstape. At every step the tape would be advanced to retrieve the next command, read thedata, or write the result. Its diagram looks suspiciously like a ﬁlm projector. Is this acoincidence?
If we believe the word cinematograph, which means “writing movement,” the
essence of cinema is recording and storing visible data in a material form. A ﬁlmcamera records data on ﬁlm; a ﬁlm projector reads it oﬀ. This cinematic apparatus is
similar to a computer in one key respect: A computer’s program and data also have tobe stored in some medium. This is why the Universal Turing Machine looks like a ﬁlmprojector. It is a kind of ﬁlm camera and ﬁlm projector at once, reading instructionsand data stored on endless tape and writing them in other locations on this tape. Infact, the development of a suitable storage medium and a method for coding datarepresent important parts of the prehistory of both cinema and the computer. As weknow, the inventors of cinema eventually settled on using discrete images recorded ona strip of celluloid; the inventors of the computer – which needed much greater speedof access as well as the ability to quickly read and write data – eventually decided tostore it electronically in a binary code.
The histories of media and computing became further entwined when German8
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
engineer Konrad Zuse began building a computer in the living room of his parents’
apartment in Berlin – the same year that Turing wrote his seminal paper. Zuse’scomputer was the ﬁrst working digital computer. One of his innovations was usingpunched tape to control computer programs. The tape Zuse used was actuallydiscarded 35 mm movie ﬁlm.
6
One of the surviving pieces of this ﬁlm shows binary code punched over the
original frames of an interior shot. A typical movie scene – two people in a roominvolved in some action – becomes a support for a set of computer commands.Whatever meaning and emotion was contained in this movie scene has been wipedout by its new function as data carrier. The pretense of modern media to createsimulations of sensible reality is similarly canceled; media are reduced to their originalcondition as information carrier, nothing less, nothing more. In a technologicalremake of the Oedipal complex, a son murders his father. The iconic code of cinemais discarded in favor of the more eﬃcient binary one. Cinema becomes a slave to thecomputer.
But this is not yet the end of the story. Our story has a new twist – a happy one.
Zuse’s ﬁlm, with its strange superimposition of binary over iconic code, anticipates
the convergence that will follow half a century later. The two separate historicaltrajectories ﬁnally meet. Media and computer – Daguerre’s daguerreotype and
Babbage’s Analytical Engine, the Lumière Cinématographie and Hollerith’s tabulator– merge into one. All existing media are translated into numerical data accessible forthe computer. The result: graphics, moving images, sounds, shapes, spaces, and textsbecome computable, that is, simply sets of computer data. In short, media becomenew media.
This meeting changes the identity of both media and the computer itself. No
longer just a calculator, control mechanism, or communication device, the computerbecomes a media processor. Before, the computer could read a row of numbers,outputting a statistical result or a gun trajectory. Now it can read pixel values, blurringthe image, adjusting its contrast, or checking whether it contains an outline of anobject. Building on these lower-level operations, it can also perform more ambitiousones – searching image databases for images similar in composition or content to an
input image, detecting shot changes in a movie, or synthesizing the movie shot itself,complete with setting and actors. In a historical loop, the computer has returned to itsorigins. No longer just an Analytical Engine, suitable only for crunching numbers, ithas become Jacquard’s loom – a media synthesizer and manipulator.
Principles of new media
The identity of media has changed even more dramatically than that of the computer.Below I summarize some of the key diﬀerences between old and new media. Incompiling this list of diﬀerences, I tried to arrange them in a logical order. That is, thethe last three principles are dependent on the ﬁrst two. This is not dissimilar toaxiomatic logic, in which certain axioms are taken as starting points and furthertheorems are proved on their basis.
Not every new media object obeys these principles. They should be considered
not as absolute laws but rather as general tendencies of a culture undergoingWHAT IS NEW MEDIA? 9
computerization. As computerization aﬀects deeper and deeper layers of culture,
these tendencies will increasingly manifest themselves.
1 Numerical representation
All new media objects, whether created from scratch on computers or convertedfrom analog media sources, are composed of digital code; they are numericalrepresentations. This fact has two key consequences:
1 A new media object can be described formally (mathematically). For instance, an
image or a shape can be described using a mathematical function.
2 A new media object is subject to algorithmic manipulation. For instance, by
applying appropriate algorithms, we can automatically remove “noise” from a
photograph, improve its contrast, locate the edges of the shapes, or change itsproportions. In short, media becomes programmable.
Notes
1 Quoted in Beaumont Newhall, The History of Photography from 1839 to the Present
Day, 4th ed. (New Y ork: Museum of Modern Art, 1964), 18.
2 Newhall, The History of Photography, 17 –22.
3 Charles Eames, A Computer Perspective: Background to the Computer Age
(Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press, 1990), 18.
4 David Bordwell and Kristin Thompson, Film Art: An Introduction, 5th ed. (New
Y ork: McGraw-Hill), 15.
5 Eames, A Computer Perspective, 22 –27, 46–51, 90–91.
6 Ibid., 120.10 THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
1.2
Technological revolutions and the
Gutenberg Myth,by S.D. Noam Cook
The dream of a digital network linking people and information around the globe is
commonly considered the technological revolution of the 1990s, with the shape of thetwenty-ﬁrst century issuing from it. The Internet, the World Wide Web, and theirnext-generation cousins have captured the imagination of the public and of specialistsin numerous ﬁelds. What is imagined is nothing short of revolutionary changes in ourlives, our society and our world. Ultimately, we are told, the scale of these changes willbe even greater than those of the Gutenberg revolution – the changes commonlyassociated with invention of movable type printing in ﬁfteenth-century Europe.
The new technologies of our time are indeed exciting and powerful. Much good
(or much evil) could be done with them. But the claim that we are seeing a newGutenberg revolution is a dangerous one. It is dangerous because the picture of theGutenberg revolution found in histories, encyclopedias, and the popular media ishistorically inaccurate and conceptually misleading. It would have us believe thatrapid and far-reaching changes in literacy, learning and social institutions were causedby a single new technology. This is what I call the Gutenberg Myth; it is not accuratehistory (as we will see below). Y et, the Gutenberg Myth has become the most com-monly used model for making predictions about the directions new technologies willtake and for identifying what we need to do to avoid being left behind.
As a model for understanding other revolutions the Gutenberg Myth can be
dangerously misleading. Using a faulty sense of printing as a way of understandingother powerful innovations guarantees neither their wise development nor responsibleuse of them. A better model for technological revolutions, especially the digital revolu-tions going on around us, is suggested by a broader, more realistic understanding ofthe Gutenberg revolution itself.
The Gutenberg Myth
The appearance of printing has been celebrated as a major step in the advance oftechnology and the development of western civilization. Charles Babbage, thenineteenth-century inventor of calculating machines, remarked that “the modernworld commences with the printing press.” T oday, it is commonly held that the
invention of movable type made possible the mass distribution of the printed word,
brought about a string of broad and rapid social advances through an explosion inliteracy and learning, and ultimately “democratized knowledge” (Burke 1978). TheMcGraw-Hill Encyclopedia of Science and T echnology states that the invention of mov-able type printing “. . . was one of the most important inventions in human history. Itwas signiﬁcant, even revolutionary, in two respects.” The ﬁrst was the principle ofmovable type itself. “A second and more important aspect [was that it] . . . made itpossible to put more information into the hands of more people in less time and at lowercost, and thereby to spread literacy and learning more widely and rapidly than everbefore” (Bruno 1987). As historian of science Derek de Solla Price put it, “By 1500 . . .the printed book had become a quite new force. The momentous eﬀect, of course, wasthat the world of learning, hitherto the domain of a tiny privileged elite, was suddenlymade much more accessible to the common man” (de Solla Price 1975, p. 99).
This is the traditional view of the Gutenberg revolution. It is the image that comes
to mind when printing is suggested as a model for other technological revolutions. Itdoes not, however, reﬂect the realities of European history. The process by which theworld of learning became “accessible to the common man” entailed several factors inaddition to movable type. I will focus on two of them that are particularly central. Theﬁrst was paper: bringing the printed word to the masses required a medium to printon which was available in quantities and at a cost amenable to “mass distribution.”The second factor was literacy: the “common man” needed to be able to read. Neitherof these requirements obtained in 1500. These discrepancies point to the need for aricher, more accurate account of the story of movable type and its relationship to thespread of literacy and learning to a broad population in western civilization. It is, afterall, the achievement of broad literacy and learning that makes the story of printingrevolutionary. This story can begin with the Gutenberg Bible itself.
Gutenberg revisited
The invention of movable type printing is usually credited to Johann Gutenberg ofMainz, Germany, who used it to produce one of the most famous masterpieces of theﬁfteenth century: the book now called the Gutenberg Bible. As with many importantinventions, when, where and by whom the invention actually came about has been thesubject of considerable debate. One theory, for example, holds that the ﬁrst person inEurope to develop movable type was not Gutenberg, but Laurens Janszoon Coster, acontemporary of Gutenberg’s living in the Netherlands. (This theory has a goodmeasure of historical merit; as well as a great deal of popularity among the Dutch.) Infact, Gutenberg was not the only person in Europe working on the idea of mechanicalprinting. It is also quite likely that Gutenberg drew on the work of others in such alliedcrafts such as metal alloying and casting. Further, it is possible that the work ofGutenberg, Coster, and others in Europe owes a signiﬁcant debt to the developmentof print blocks in Asia, which by the ﬁfteenth century had been in common use inChina, Japan, and Korea for generations (including their use in the printing of books).With these qualiﬁcations in mind, we can take the advent of movable type printing inmid-ﬁfteenth century Europe as a starting point of the “print revolution” associated,symbolically at least, with the printing of the Gutenberg Bible.12
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
The principle of movable type used in printing the Gutenberg Bible is elegantly
simple. Gutenberg took as his basic unit the single letter, making type blocks that
carried one letter each. The blocks were of standard size in all their dimensions sothey could be set one-by-one, in any combination, into consistently straight lines on aﬂat printing bed in an arrangement of text making up an entire page, which in turnoﬀered a consistently level printing surface. After being used to print any number ofcopies of that page, the arrangement could be broken down and the type blocksreused. Gutenberg’s chief technological accomplishments included developingtechniques of metal casting and alloying that made this process economically andtechnically practical.
In keeping with the principle of movable type, each letter of the Gutenberg Bible
was set by hand. The pages, over one thousand of them, were printed one at a timeonto hide parchment or rag-ﬁber paper. Next, in the spirit of the manuscripts of theday, hand illuminations and lettering, details were added to each of the printed pages.Letters at the beginning of chapters, for example, were written in by hand and elabor-ately illumined and every capital letter in the entire text had a red highlight scribedthrough it. Finally, the leaves were bound, again by the hand of the craftsman, intolarge, elegant volumes. The whole project, from casting the ﬁrst type to binding theﬁnal volume, took several years.
Looking at the Gutenberg Bible and at Gutenberg ’s practice as a craftsman, one
does not sense the invention and exploitation of a revolutionary technology but ratherthe conservative use of an innovative technique for the mechanical production ofmanuscripts. In fact, the very aim of movable type printing and the technical innov-ations Gutenberg brought to it were directed at producing volumes that looked asmuch as possible like manuscripts. Within the printing craft in general, moreover, thesame standards of craftsmanship and aesthetics associated with manuscripts wereapplied to printed books for at least two generations beyond the Gutenberg Bible.Had the new technology not met these old standards, it might well have been dis-missed as a failed experiment. Indeed, a judgment like this seems to have been madein China. Type blocks containing a single character were developed, but the Chineseabandoned them in favor of plate blocks containing entire texts; they felt that the typeblocks were not suﬃciently consistent in shape to produce a printed page that met thehigh aesthetic standards of their calligraphy. This suggests that the initiation of atechnological revolution may often depend on new technologies being functionallycompatible with old craft practices and traditional values of the surrounding culture.
Since printing the Gutenberg Bible on ﬁne parchment entailed the use of
hundreds of pieces of hide, raw materials alone could be a costly factor. A single copyrequired the skins of ﬁfty to seventy-ﬁve sheep. Likewise, the paper Gutenberg used(most copies were on paper), though less costly than parchment, was nonetheless avaluable commodity. It was produced a single sheet at a time by skilled craftsmendependent on often scarce supplies of waste rag or scrap from garment manufacture.
Gutenberg’s ﬁnished product, then, was a marvelously ﬁne piece of craftsman-
ship, a beautiful and valuable example of the printer’s art. And it remains so to thepresent day. But it was also an artifact for elites, chieﬂy the aristocracy and theChurch. The Word as printed by Gutenberg was not distributed to the masses. Infact, only about two hundred copies of the Gutenberg Bible were ever produced.TECHNOLOGICAL REVOLUTIONS AND THE GUTENBERG MYTH 13
Meanwhile, printed books in general remained far too costly for de Solla Price’s
“common man” well beyond 1500.
Not only were most people in the ﬁfteenth century unable to buy a Gutenberg
Bible, they were also unable to read it. This is an essential element in assessing thecourse of the printing revolution; any potential mass social change associated withprinting must be weighed against the extent of mass illiteracy.
Although diﬃcult to deﬁne and measure, even a cautious estimate places illiter-
acy in ﬁfteenth-century Europe at well over 90 percent of the general population.Further, since those who could read were concentrated among clergy, scholars, andaristocrats – and there almost entirely among men – illiteracy in most other segments
of society was close to universal. Even among those who could read, not all wereschooled in Latin, which was, of course, the language of the Christian Bible.
In the light of such factors. Gutenberg’s eﬀorts appear far from revolutionary –
indeed, they are quite in keeping with the social, religious, political, and economicinstitutions of his day.
Printing and mass illiteracy
Even so, printing was much faster and less expensive than the copying of manuscripts.This fact, along with the aesthetic quality of printed texts, came to present a signi ﬁ-
cant challenge to traditional manuscript production. Indeed, the displacement of cal-ligraphy by movable type as the preferred means of creating documents resulted in adramatic spread of printing technology. By the middle of the sixteenth century,presses were operating in most major centers of Europe and had begun to appear inthe Middle East and Asia. In the New World, the ﬁrst press was established at MexicoCity in 1539; the second, a century later in 1638, at Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Within literate communities, the press helped bring about a greater availability of
texts and a vastly expanded number of individual titles. It is estimated that some thirtythousand editions were printed in the ﬁrst ﬁfty years following the advent of the press,
equaling the number produced in the previous one thousand years. Moreover, inscholastic communities, the press became a key element in a remarkably rapid growthin the translation and publication of classical texts – a phenomenon that was to fan theglowing coals of the Enlightenment.
By 1650, movable type technology was a fact of life in hundreds of communities
throughout Europe. But the spread of the technology did not carry with it a broadsocial revolution in literacy and learning. Although levels of literacy rose in somesectors of the population (in connection with the Reformation, for example), illiteracyin Europe in general stood at about 80 percent in 1650, and the ability to read andwrite remained signiﬁcantly associated with class and gender. At this point, two hun-dred years after Gutenberg, access to the world of learning was not a fact of life for themasses.
In the eighteenth century, illiteracy began to decline at a greater rate. By 1700
it had fallen to between 65 and 70 percent. As the nineteenth century approached,the ﬁgure neared 50 percent. Among the factors associated with this improvement
was the growing role of reading and writing in work, especially in the trades. In fact,one of the earliest exceptions to the exclusion of literacy to all but social elites was its14
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
appearance among the trades. Reading and writing became a growing part of work as
the increasing organization of society expanded the need to keep records. Treatises oncraft skills, meanwhile, became one of the largest categories of printed books (thirdafter religion and law).
Signiﬁcantly, the spread of literacy to more people and more classes of people
during this period (approximately 1650 to 1800) occurred alongside some ratherremarkable changes in both the idea and reality of social equality. The notion thatindividuals are equal within a human community found strong expression in thepolitical, literary, and philosophical writings of the time. Philosophical propositionslike Hobbes’s argument that all people are equal in “a state of nature” and Locke’scontention that all people are by nature equally free found broader expression inJeﬀerson’s declaration that “all men are created equal” and Rousseau’s insistence that
social inequalities are unnatural creations of our institutions. Claims of a political rightto speciﬁc forms of social equality became banners of the American and FrenchRevolutions. Kant gave these themes a stronger moral sense with his argument that allpeople are (or ought to be) moral equals as legislators within a “kingdom of ends.”Similarly, various notions of equality were explored in the art, architecture and musicof the period.
Ultimately, this sweeping reevaluation of the idea of equality entailed nothing less
than a recasting of what was to be understood as the entitlements of membership insociety and the beginnings of a parallel redesign of the social institutions associatedwith providing and guaranteeing those rights. All this made the spread of literacy, asa prerequisite of citizenship rather than of privilege, more “thinkable,” and thusmore feasible. The decline in illiteracy during this period, therefore, must be under-stood as much more the product of changing social, political, and moral valuesthan as a consequence of the continued presence of the centuries-old technology ofprinting. That is, this aspect of the printing revolution was due more to social thantechnological factors.
The paper it’s printed on
From the time of Gutenberg until the early nineteenth century, paper was the productof costly materials and highly skilled craftsmanship. No major advance had beenmade in the painstaking, sheet-by-sheet hand work of the ancient craft since it enteredEurope from the Islamic world in the twelfth century.
Correspondingly, the value placed on paper is reﬂected in numerous laws and
customs from the time of Gutenberg to the nineteenth century. A 1666 English law,for example, decreed that only wool, being unsuitable for papermaking, could be usedin burying the dead. An early New England periodical, in encouraging readers to saverags for papermakers, suggested that each housewife make a rag tag and keep it nextto the family Bible – a wonderfully symbolic connection emphasizing the value placedon paper. The Boston News Letter printed an announcement in 1769 that “. . . the bellcart will go through Boston about the end of each month . . .” for the purpose ofcollecting rags. Readers were further encouraged to fulﬁll their civic duty with thefollowing poem.TECHNOLOGICAL REVOLUTIONS AND THE GUTENBERG MYTH 15
Rags are beauties which concealed lie,
But when in paper, how charms the eye!Pray save your rags, new beauties to discover,For of paper, truly, everyone’s a lover;By the pen and press such knowledge is displayedAs wouldn’t exist if paper was not made.Wisdom of things, mysterious, divine,Illustriously doth on paper shine.
In 1776 the Massachusetts General Court required that in each community a
person be appointed to collect rags. T o conserve paper, it remained until 1818 a
punishable oﬀense in England to print newssheets or broadsides larger than 22 by 32inches (roughly the current size of the New Y ork Times).
The search for a reliable, less expensive alternative to rag scrap as the raw material
for paper had been unsuccessful – though not for want of eﬀort. Several materialswere tried experimentally, including hemp, pine cones, used shingles, potatoes, andasbestos. A particularly imaginative source for rag, itself, was found in the mid-nineteenth century in Egyptian mummies. Shiploads of mummies were sent fromEgypt to paper companies in the United States, where their linen wrappings weretaken oﬀ and recycled, so to speak, into paper. This practice continued for some time,apparently without the intervention of concerned health oﬃcials, outraged clergy, orjealous archaeologists. The only competition the papermakers had for the mummieswas from the new Egyptian railroad, which, reportedly, used them as fuel.
That mummies could be shipped all the way from Egypt to the United States
solely for the use of their wrappings is a gauge of the value and cost of paper at thetime (as well as a measure of deﬁcit in respect for the dead). The availability of ragand the cost of paper were clearly serious obstacles to printing on a mass scale wellinto the nineteenth century.
Mass printing and mass society
Through the course of the nineteenth century, several technological and social innov-ations combined to produce dramatic changes in printing and literacy. By the turn ofthe century, wood pulp had been identiﬁed as a reliable and plentiful ﬁber source forpapermaking. The ﬁrst experimental techniques for producing pulp-ﬁber paper bymachine were operational by the 1810s. In the 1840s, a machine designed speci ﬁcally
for the mass production of paper-quality pulp was introduced. By the 1860s, woodpulp paper was being made commercially in mills that could turn out paper at daz-zling speed in continuous rolls of indeﬁnite length. The development of machine-made pulp and paper made possible a rapid drop in the cost of paper. The price ofnewsprint, for example, fell by a factor of ten between the 1860s and 1890s.
Printing itself developed remarkably through the nineteenth century. Steam
power was introduced to press operation in 1810. In the middle of the century, the ﬂatreciprocating printing bed was displaced by the development of the stereotype cylin-der, the molded and curved printing surfaces now associated with the “rolling press.”A major step in the printing craft was made in 1884 with the invention of the linotype.16
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
With this machine, the highly time-consuming hand work of setting type one letter at
a time could be replaced by a mechanized operation that cast type by the line. Thisprinciple dramatically increased the speed and reduced the cost of typesetting.In doing so, the linotype became an important factor in making possible the massproduction of the printed word. With respect to printing technology, meanwhile, thelinotype represents a signiﬁcant step away from the principle of movable type, since ittreats the line rather than the single letter as its basic unit.
Resting on expanding notions of social equality a fundamentally important social
innovation of the nineteenth century was the introduction of public education. Fromthe middle of the century onward, state-supported elementary education became areality in country after country. By the end of the century, it was accepted, at least inprinciple, throughout Western Europe. The parallel decline in illiteracy was dramatic.In 1800, half of the general population was illiterate. By the century ’s end, the ﬁgure
was under 10 percent.
With the advent of mass literacy and the development of technologies for the
rapid and relatively inexpensive mass production of paper and printed materials, themass distribution of the printed word became a meaningful and practical possibility.It was not until the latter decades of the nineteenth century, therefore, that the socialand technological elements for making “the world of learning . . . accessible tothe common” person through printing were fully in place – four hundred years after
the appearance of the movable type press.
All of these factors combine to help us sketch out a fuller, more accurate under-
standing of the printing revolution; they also point to the need for a broader,multi-dimensional model of the structure of technological revolutions to replace theGutenberg Myth. At the very least, this account of the printing revolution suggeststhat the traditional, one-dimensional model of new technologies (or a single newmaterial gadget) causing broad social change must be regarded with deep suspicion.
A healthy skepticism about the Gutenberg Myth is also called for in our eﬀorts to
understand the social changes associated with new technologies in our own time.Clearly, we need a new model of the structure of technological revolutions in order toassess the role of technological change in our lives and cultures in a way that avoidsthe political and moral myopia of the Gutenberg Myth. It is to the exploration of someexamples of these pitfalls that I now turn.
Illiteracy in the shadow of technology
The story of the spread of literacy and learning in western civilization is an importantone, as is the role of the printing press within it. At the same time, the call for making“learning . . . accessible to the common” person is still heard today in the broadercontext of making literacy and learning accessible to the peoples of the world.
Approximately 90 percent of the illiterate people alive today live in the developing
world, where the average level of adult illiteracy is around 40 percent. Many of thesecountries have literacy programs, and there are internationally sponsored literacyinitiatives through the United Nations and private organizations. Progress is beingmade, but neither the “problem” nor the “solution” is simple. Nor is it simply amatter of technological need. The level of illiteracy in these countries fell by almostTECHNOLOGICAL REVOLUTIONS AND THE GUTENBERG MYTH 17
10 percent between 1970 and 1980, yet (because of population trends) the absolute
number of illiterate people increased during that period by nearly seventy million.
Just as the Gutenberg Myth fails to capture the realities of western history, so too
it fails as a model for assessing the current realities of the developing world: Theimage of literacy and learning emerging on a mass scale from the introduction ofprinting technology would, indeed, be a very misleading model for these nations. Thesituation in the developing world is neither well understood nor eﬀectively addressedby assuming that mass literacy can emerge from the introduction of a single technol-ogy. T oday, print and other technologies such as computers are readily available, butthis has not made it possible to “put more information into the hands of more people. . . and thereby to spread literacy and learning” throughout the developing world (asthe McGraw-Hill encyclopedia’s formulation of the Gutenberg Myth might suggest).
Exciting new technologies, same old myth
The printing revolution is often evoked as a model for understanding the socialimportance of new technologies. The structure of technological revolutions implicitin such analogies is typically the Gutenberg Myth: a single technology being the solecause of rapid and far-reaching social change. Throughout the 1980s, for example,the personal computer was depicted in the popular and scholarly press as single-handedly revolutionizing the whole of society. By the early 1990s the same was beingsaid about the “data superhighway.” Not surprisingly such discussions of excitingnew technologies reﬂect the same sorts of historical and conceptual distortions foundin nearly all references to the printing revolution.
Conclusion: revolutions recaptured
This brief look at the printing revolution suggests that the structure of technologicalrevolutions is neither simple, technologically determined, nor everywhere the same,either historically or culturally. It is clear that the model of sweeping social changebeing caused by a single technological innovation is historically and conceptuallyfaulty and misleading. Such changes are not caused by the appearance of a singlegadget; they are constituted in multiple, mutually inﬂuencing technological and socialinnovations. A new model of the structure of technological revolutions must reﬂectthese facts. Moreover, it must be able to embrace the deeply held values that informour cultures and underlie the choices we make about the direction our technologiesought to take – even when those choices are made by default rather than by design.The technological determinism inherent in the Gutenberg Myth forecloses discussionof just these social, political, and moral values – which are ultimately the only meansby which we can distinguish between an appropriate and inappropriate role for any ofthe exciting new technologies of our day.18
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
1.3
A shadow darkens,
by Ithiel de Sola Pool
Civil liberty functions today in a changing technological context. For ﬁve hundred
years a struggle was fought, and in a few countries won, for the right of people tospeak and print freely, unlicensed, uncensored, and uncontrolled. But new technolo-gies of electronic communication may now relegate old and freed media such aspamphlets, platforms, and periodicals to a corner of the public forum. Electronicmodes of communication that enjoy lesser rights are moving to center stage. The newcommunication technologies have not inherited all the legal immunities that were wonfor the old. When wires, radio waves, satellites, and computers became major vehiclesof discourse, regulation seemed to be a technical necessity. And so, as speech increas-ingly ﬂows over those electronic media, the ﬁve-century growth of an unabridged
right of citizens to speak without controls may be endangered.
Alarm over this trend is common, though understanding of it is rare. In 1980 the
chairman of the American Federal Communications Commission (FCC) sent ashiver through print journalists when he raised the question of whether a newspaperdelivered by teletext is an extension of print and thus as free as any other newspaper,or whether it is a broadcast and thus under the control of the government.
1 A reporter,
discussing computerized information services, broached an issue with far-reachingimplications for society when she asked, “Will traditional First Amendment freedomof the press apply to the signals sent out over telephone wires or television cables?”
2
William S. Paley, chairman of the Columbia Broadcasting System (CBS), warned thepress: “Broadcasters and print people have been so busy improving and deﬁning their
own turf that it has escaped some of us how much we are being drawn together by thevast revolution in ‘electroniﬁcation’ that is changing the face of the media today . . .Convergence of delivery mechanisms for news and information raises anew somecritical First Amendment questions . . . Once the print media comes into the homethrough the television set, or an attachment, with an impact and basic content similarto that which the broadcasters now deliver, then the question of government regula-tion becomes paramount for print as well.”
3 And Senator Bob Packwood proposed
a new amendment to the Constitution extending First Amendment rights to theelectronic media, on the assumption that they are not covered now.
Although the ﬁrst principle of communications law in the United States is the
guarantee of freedom in the First Amendment, in fact this country has a trifurcated
communications system. In three domains of communication – print, commoncarriage, and broadcasting – the law has evolved separately, and in each domain with
but modest relation to the others.
In the domain of print and other means of communication that existed in the
formative days of the nation, such as pulpits, periodicals, and public meetings, theFirst Amendment truly governs. In well over one hundred cases dealing with publish-ing, canvassing, public speeches, and associations, the Supreme Court has applied theFirst Amendment to the media that existed in the eighteenth century.
In the domain of common carriers, which includes the telephone, the telegraph,
the postal system, and now some computer networks, a diﬀerent set of policies hasbeen applied, designed above all to ensure universal service and fair access by thepublic to the facilities of the carrier. That right of access is what de ﬁnes a common
carrier: it is obligated to serve all on equal terms without discrimination.
Finally, in the domain of broadcasting, Congress and the courts have established
a highly regulated regime, very diﬀerent from that of print. On the grounds of asupposed scarcity of usable frequencies in the radio spectrum, broadcasters areselected by the government for merit in its eyes, assigned a slice each of the spectrumof frequencies, and required to use that assignment fairly and for community welfareas deﬁned by state authorities. The principles of common carriage and of theFirst Amendment have been applied to broadcasting in only atrophied form. Forbroadcasting, a politically managed system has been invented.
The electronic modes of twentieth century communication, whether they be car-
riers or broadcasters, have lost a large part of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuryconstitutional protections of no prior restraint, no licenses, no special taxes, no regula-tions, and no laws. Every radio spectrum user, for example, must be licensed. Thisrequirement started in 1912, almost a decade before the beginning of broadcasting, ata time when radio was used mainly for maritime communication. Because the UnitedStates Navy’s communications were suﬀering interference, Congress, in an eﬀort atremedy, imposed licensing on transmitters, thereby breaching a tradition that wentback to John Milton against requiring licenses for communicating.
Regulation as a response to perceived technical problems has now reached the
point where transmissions enclosed in wires or cables, and therefore causing no over-the-air interference, are also licensed and regulated. The FCC claims the right tocontrol which broadcast stations a cablecaster may or must carry. Until the courtsblew the whistle, the rules even barred a pay channel from performing moviesthat were more than three or less than ten years old. T elephone bills are taxed. Apublic network interconnecting computers must be licensed and, according to presentinterpretations of the 1934 Communications Act, may be denied a license if thegovernment does not believe that it serves “the public convenience, interest, ornecessity.”
Both civil libertarians and free marketers are perturbed at the expanding scope
of communications regulation. After computers became linked by communicationsnetworks, for example, the FCC spent several years ﬁguring out how to avoidregulating the computer industry. The line of reasoning behind this laudable self-restraint, known as deregulation, has nothing to do, however, with freedom of speech.20
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
Deregulation, whatever its economic merits, is something much less than the First
Amendment. The Constitution, in Article 1, Section 8, gives the federal governmentthe right to regulate interstate commerce, but in the First Amendment, equallyexplicitly, it excludes one kind of commerce, namely communication, from govern-ment authority. Y et here is the FCC trying to ﬁgure out how it can avoid regulatingthe commerce of the computer industry (an authority Congress could have given, butnever did) while continuing to regulate communications whenever it considers thisnecessary. The Constitution has been turned on its head.
The mystery is how the clear intent of the Constitution, so well and strictly
enforced in the domain of print, has been so neglected in the electronic revolution.The answer lies partly in changes in the prevailing concerns and historical circum-stances from the time of the founding fathers to the world of today; but it lies at leastas much in the failure of Congress and the courts to understand the character of thenew technologies. Judges and legislators have tried to ﬁt technological innovationsunder conventional legal concepts. The errors of understanding by these scientiﬁclaymen, though honest, have been mammoth. They have sought to guide toward goodpurposes technologies they did not comprehend.
“It would seem,” wrote Alexis de T ocqueville, “that if despotism were to be
established among the democratic nations of our days . . . it would be more extensiveand more mild; it would degrade men without tormenting them.” This is the kind ofmild but degrading erosion of freedom that our system of communication facestoday, not a rise of dictators or totalitarian movements. The threat in America, asT ocqueville perceived, is from well-intentioned policies, with results that are poorlyforeseen. The danger is “tutelary power,” which aims at the happiness of the peoplebut also seeks to be the “arbiter of that happiness.”
4
Y et in a century and a half since T ocqueville wrote, the mild despotism that he
saw in the wings of American politics has not become a reality. For all his understand-ing of the American political system, he missed one vital element of the picture. In thetension between tutelary and libertarian impulses that is built into American culture, astrong institutional dike has held back assaults on freedom. It is the ﬁrst ten amend-ments to the Constitution. Extraordinary as this may seem, in T ocqueville’s great twovolumes there is nowhere a mention of the Bill of Rights!
The erosion of traditional freedoms that has occurred as government has striven
to cope with problems of new communications media would not have surprisedT ocqueville, for it is a story of how, in pursuit of the public good, a growing structureof controls has been imposed. But one part of the story would have surprised him, forit tells how a legal institution that he overlooked, namely the First Amendment, has upto now maintained the freedom and individualism that he saw as endangered.
A hundred and ﬁfty years from now, today’s fears about the future of free expres-
sion may prove as alarmist as T ocqueville’s did. But there is reason to suspect that oursituation is more ominous. What has changed in twentieth century communications isits technological base. T ocqueville wrote in a pluralistic society of small enterpriseswhere the then new mass media consisted entirely of the printed press which the FirstAmendment protected. In the period since his day, new and mostly electronic mediahave proliferated in the form of great oligopolistic networks of common carriersand broadcasters. Regulation was a natural response. Fortunately and strangely, asA SHADOW DARKENS 21
electronics advances further, another reversal is now taking place, toward growing
decentralization and toward fragmentation of the audience of the newest media. Thetransitional era of giant media may nonetheless leave a permanent set of regulatorypractices implanted on a system that is coming to have technical characteristics thatwould otherwise be conducive to freedom.
The causal relationships between technology and culture are a matter that social
scientists have long debated. Some may question how far technological trends shapethe political freedom or control under which communication takes place, believing, asdoes Daniel Bell, that each subsystem of society, such as techno-economics, polity,and culture, has its own heritage and axial principles and goes its own way.
5 Others
contend, like Karl Marx or Ruth Benedict, that a deep commonality binds all aspectsof a culture. Some argue that technology is neutral, used as the culture demands;others that the technology of the medium controls the message.
The interaction over the past two centuries between the changing technologies of
communication and the practice of free speech, I would argue, ﬁts a pattern that issometimes described as “soft technological determinism.” Freedom is fostered whenthe means of communication are dispersed, decentralized, and easily available, as areprinting presses or microcomputers. Central control is more likely when the means ofcommunication are concentrated, monopolized, and scarce, as are great networks.But the relationship between technology and institutions is not simple or uni-directional, nor are the eﬀects immediate. Institutions that evolve in response to onetechnological environment persist and to some degree are later imposed on what maybe a changed technology. The First Amendment came out of a pluralistic world ofsmall communicators, but it shaped the present treatment of great national networks.Later on, systems of regulation that emerged for national common carriers and for theuse of “scarce” spectrum for broadcasting tended to be imposed on more recentgenerations of electronic technologies that no longer require them.
Simple versions of technological determinism fail to take account of the diﬀer-
ences in the way things happen at diﬀerent stages in the life cycle of a technology.When a new invention is made, such as the telephone or radio, its fundamental lawsare usually not well understood. It is designed to suit institutions that already exist, butin its early stages if it is to be used at all, it must be used in whatever form it provedexperimentally to work. Institutions for its use are thus designed around a techno-logically determined model. Later, when scientists have comprehended the funda-mental theory, the early technological embodiment becomes simply a special case.Alternative devices can then be designed to meet human needs. T echnology, nolonger need control. A 1920s motion picture had to be black and white, silent, panto-mimic, and shown in a place of public assembly; there was no practical choice. A1980s video can have whatever colors, sounds, and three-dimensional or syntheticeﬀects are wanted, and can be seen in whatever location is desired. In the meantime,however, an industry has established studios, theaters, career lines, unions, funding,and advertising practices, all designed to use the technology that is in place. Changeoccurs, but the established institutions are a constraint on its direction and pace.
T oday, in an era of advanced (and still advancing) electronic theory, it has
become possible to build virtually any kind of communications device that one mightwish, though at a price. The market, not technology, sets most limits. For example,22
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
technology no longer imposes licensing and government regulation. That pattern was
established for electronic media a half-century ago, when there seemed to be noalternative, but the institutions of control then adopted persist. That is why today ’s
alarms could turn out to be more portentous than T ocqueville’s.
The key technological change, at the root of the social changes, is that communi-
cation, other than conversation face to face, is becoming overwhelmingly electronic.Not only is electronic communication growing faster than traditional media ofpublishing, but also the convergence of modes of delivery is bringing the press, jour-nals, and books into the electronic world. One question raised by these changes iswhether some social features are inherent in the electronic character of the emergingmedia. Is television the model of the future? Are electromagnetic pulses simply analternative conduit to deliver whatever is wanted, or are there aspects of electronictechnology that make it diﬀerent from print – more centralized or more decentralized,more banal or more profound, more private or more government dependent?
The electronic transformation of the media occurs not in a vacuum but in a
speciﬁc historical and legal context. Freedom for publishing has been one ofAmerica’s proudest traditions. But just what is it that the courts have protected, andhow does this diﬀer from how the courts acted later when the media through whichideas ﬂowed came to be the telegraph, telephone, television, or computers? What
images did policy makers have of how each of these media works; how far were theirimages valid; and what happened to their images when the facts changed?
In each of the three parts of the American communications system – print, com-
mon carriers, and broadcasting – the law has rested on a perception of technologythat is sometimes accurate, often inaccurate, and which changes slowly as technologychanges fast. Each new advance in the technology of communications disturbs astatus quo. It meets resistance from those whose dominance it threatens, but if useful,it begins to be adopted. Initially, because it is new and a full scientiﬁc mastery ofthe options is not yet at hand, the invention comes into use in a rather clumsy form.T echnical laymen, such as judges, perceive the new technology in that early, clumsyform, which then becomes their image of its nature, possibilities, and use. Thisperception is an incubus on later understanding.
The courts and regulatory agencies in the American system (or other authorities
elsewhere) enter as arbiters of the conﬂicts among entrepreneurs, interest groups, andpolitical organizations battling for control of the new technology. The arbiters, apply-ing familiar analogies from the past to their lay image of the new technology, create apartly old, partly new structure of rights and obligations. The telegraph was analo-gized to railroads, the telephone to the telegraph, and cable television to broadcasting.The legal system thus invented for each new technology may in some instances, likethe First Amendment, be a tour de force of political creativity, but in other instances itmay be less worthy. The system created can turn out to be inappropriate to morehabile forms of the technology which gradually emerge as the technology progresses.This is when problems arise, as they are arising so acutely today.
Historically, the various media that are now converging have been diﬀerently
organized and diﬀerently treated under the law. The outcome to be feared is thatcommunications in the future may be unnecessarily regulated under the unfree trad-ition of law that has been applied so far to the electronic media. The clash between theA SHADOW DARKENS 23
print, common carrier, and broadcast models is likely to be a vehement communica-
tions policy issue in the next decades. Convergence of modes is upsetting the tri-furcated system developed over the past two hundred years, and questions that hadseemed to be settled centuries ago are being reopened, unfortunately sometimes notin a libertarian way.
The problem is worldwide. What is true for the United States is true, mutatis
mutandis, for all free nations. All have the same three systems. All are in their waydeferential to private publishing but allow government control or ownership of car-riers and broadcasters. And all are moving into the era of electronic communication.So they face the same prospect of either freeing up their electronic media or elseﬁnding their major means of communication slipping back under political control.
The American case is unique only in the speciﬁc feature of the First Amendment
and in the role of the courts in upholding it. The First Amendment, as interpretedby the courts, provides an anchor for freedom of the press and thus accentuatesthe diﬀerence between publishing and the electronic domain. Because of the uniquepower of the American courts, the issue in the United States unfolds largely injudicial decisions. But the same dilemmas and trends could be illustrated by citingdeclarations of policy and institutional structures in each advanced country.
If the boundaries between publishing, broadcasting, cable television, and the
telephone network are indeed broken in the coming decades, then communicationspolicies in all advanced countries must address the issue of which of the three modelswill dominate public policy regarding them. Public interest regulation could begin toextend over the print media as those media increasingly use regulated electronicchannels. Conversely, concern for the traditional notion of a free press could lead toﬁnding ways to free the electronic media from regulation. The policies adopted, evenamong free nations, will diﬀer, though with much in common. The problems in all ofthem are very much the same.
The phrase “communications policy” rings oddly in a discussion of freedom
from government. But freedom is also a policy. The question it poses is how to reducethe public control of communications in an electronic era. A policy of freedom aims atpluralism of expression rather than at dissemination of preferred ideas.
A communications policy, or indeed any policy, may be mapped on a few central
topics:
Deﬁnition of the domain in which the policy operatesAvailability of resourcesOrganization of access to resourcesEstablishment and enforcement of norms and controlsProblems at the system boundaries
The deﬁnition of the domain of a communications policy requires consideration of
the point at which human intercourse becomes something more than communica-
tion. In American law, at some point speech becomes action and thus no longerreceives First Amendment protection. Similar issues arise as to whether under the lawpornography is speech, and whether commercial speech is speech.
The availability of resources raises another set of questions. T ools, money, raw24
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
materials, and labor are all required in order to carry on communication. The press
needs newsprint; broadcasters need spectrum. How much of these can be madeavailable, and at what prices can they be had?
The organization of access to these resources can be by a market or by rationing by
the state. There may be a diversity of sources of resources, or there may be a monop-oly. How much freedom is allowed to those who control the resources to exercisechoice about who gets what? Are resources taxed, are they subsidized, or neither?How is intellectual property deﬁned, and how is it protected?
The exercise of regulation and control over communication is a central concern in
any treatise on freedom. How much control are policy makers allowed to exercise?What are the limitations on them, such as the First Amendment? May they censor?May they license those who seek to communicate? What norms control the things thatcommunicators may say to each other? What is libel, what is slander, what violatesprivacy or security? Who is chosen to enforce these rules, and how?
The problems encountered at the system boundaries include the transborder issues
that arise when there is a conﬂict of laws about communications which cross frontiers.Censorship is often imposed for reasons of national security, cultural protection, andtrade advantage. These issues, which have not been central in past First Amendmentcontroversies, are likely to be of growing importance in the electronic era.
From this map of policy analysis can be extracted what social scientists some-
times call a mapping sentence, a brief but formal statement of the problem to beanalyzed in this book. It seeks to understand the impact of resource availability, asaﬀected both by technology and by the organization of access to the resources, uponfreedom from regulation and control. The speciﬁc question to be answered is whetherthe electronic resources for communication can be as free of public regulation in thefuture as the platform and printing press have been in the past. Not a decade goes byin free countries, and not a day in the world, without grim oppressions that bringprotesters once more to picket lines and demonstrations. Vigilance that must be soeternal becomes routine, and citizens grow callous.
The issue of the handling of the electronic media is the salient free speech prob-
lem for this decade, at least as important for this moment as were the last generation’sissues for them, and as the next generation’s will be for them too. But perhaps it ismore than that. The move to electronic communication may be a turning point thathistory will remember. Just as in seventeenth and eighteenth century Great Britainand America a few tracts and acts set precedents for print by which we live today, sowhat we think and do today may frame the information system for a substantial periodin the future.
In that future society the norms that govern information and communication will
be even more crucial than in the past. Those who read, wrote, and published in theseventeenth and eighteenth centuries, and who shaped whatever heritage of art, litera-ture, science, and history continues to matter today, were part of a small minority, wellunder one-tenth of the work force. Information activities now occupy the lives ofmuch of the population. In advanced societies about half the work force are informa-tion processors.
6 It would be dire if the laws we make today governing the dominant
mode of information handling in such an information society were subversive of itsfreedom. The onus is on us to determine whether free societies in the twenty-ﬁrstA SHADOW DARKENS 25
century will conduct electronic communication under the conditions of freedom
established for the domain of print through centuries of struggle, or whether thatgreat achievement will become lost in a confusion about new technologies.
Notes
1 Charles D. Ferris, quoted in The Report, Nov. 14, 1980, p. 11.2 Nina McCain, Boston Globe, Field News Service, Aug. 31, 1980.3“Press Freedom – A Continuing Struggle,” speech to Associated Press Broad-casters Convention, June 6, 1980; New Y ork Times, July 7, 1980, sec. B, p. 3.See also Judge David Bazclon, “The First Amendment and the New Media,”Federal Communications Law Journal 31.2 (Spring 1979); Bazelen, “TheFirst Amendment’s Second Chance,” Channels, Feb. –Mar. 1982, pp. 16–17;
Charles Jackson, Harry M. Shooshan, and Jane L. Wilson, Newspapers andVideotex: How Free a Press?  (St. Petersburg, Ha.: Modern Media Institute, 1982);
John Wicklein, Electronic Nightmare – The New Communications and Freedom(New Y ork: Viking, 1981); and an early statement by this author, Ithiel de SolaPool, “From Gutenberg to Electronics: Implications for the First Amendment,”
The Key Reporter 43.3 (Spring 1978).
4 Alexis de T ocqueville, Democracy in America (1840, reprint New Y ork: Knopf,
1945), 11, 316–318.
5 Daniel Bell, The Cultural Contradictions of Capitalism (New Y ork: Basic Books,
1975), p. 10.
6 Mark U. Porat and Michael R. Rubin, The Information Economy, 9 vols. (Washing-
ton, DC Government Printing Oﬃce, 1977); Organization for EconomicCooperation and Development, Information Activities, Electronics and T elecom-munications T echnologies: Impact on Employment, Growth and Trade (Paris: 1981).26
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
1.4
The consumer’s sublime,
by David E. Nye
In 1845 an American visitor to Niagara Falls stood watch on the piazza of his hotel
during a thunderstorm. He later wrote: “The ﬁnest thing we have seen yet – and one
of the grandest I ever saw – was a thunder storm among the waters . . . the other night,which lighted up the two cascades, as seen from our piazzas, with most magniﬁcenteﬀect. They had a spectral look, as they came out of the darkness and were againswallowed up in it, that deﬁes all description and all imagination.”
1 This spectacle
combined the mathematical sublime of the vast waterfall with the dynamic sublime ofthunder and lightning, creating a still more powerful eﬀect.
In a few years, the gorge at Niagara was spanned by Roebling’s railway bridge,
which many thought as wonderful as the falls. Two generations later, the fallswere illuminated by searchlights. These lights – major attractions of the electricalsublime – received their power from Niagara’s new hydroelectric power stations,
which themselves became tourist attractions and which provided the theme for the1901 Pan-American Exposition in Buﬀalo. The industrial sublime also emerged here,for the factories attracted to the site by cheap electricity drew crowds to witness thewonder of mass production. Thus, a succession of natural and technological sublimesappeared at this one site.
The sublime has persisted as a preferred American trope through two centuries.
Aside from the speciﬁc characteristics of each form, Americans seem to have a par-ticular aﬃnity for sharp discontinuities in sensory experience, for sudden shifts ofperspective, for a broken ﬁgure of thought in which the quotidian is ruptured. Thepsychology of the sublime has long been a recurrent ﬁgure of thought as Americanshave established their relationship to new landscapes and new technologies. Thisunderlying pattern persists in the descriptions of objects as disparate as Niagara Falls,the Grand Canyon, the Natural Bridge of Virginia, the ﬁrst railroads, suspensionbridges, skyscrapers, city skylines, spectacular lighting, electric advertising, world’sfairs, atomic explosions, and the rockets of the space program.
Europeans neither invented nor embraced the vertical city of the skyscraper.
Europeans banned or restricted electric signs, and rightly saw the landscape of TimesSquare as peculiarly American. Europeans did not see atomic explosions as touristsites. Europeans seldom journeyed to see rockets go into space, but Americans went
by the millions.2 There is a persistent American attraction to the technological
sublime.
Not only is the sublime a recurrent ﬁgure in American thought; potential sub-
limity has also justiﬁed the creation of new technologies in the ﬁrst place. This was not
merely a matter of the rationalization of new projects, or a simple form of classdomination in which an overawed populace acceded to new displays of technologicalpower. There is an American penchant for thinking of the subject as a consciousnessthat can stand apart from the world and project its will upon it. In this mode ofthought, the subject elides Kantian transcendental reason with technological reasonand sees new structures and inventions as continuations of nature. Those operatingwithin this logic embrace the reconstruction of the life-world by machinery, experi-ence the dislocations and perceptual disorientations caused by this reconstruction interms of awe and wonder, and, in their excitement, feel insulated from immediatedanger. New technologies become self-justifying parts of a national destiny, just as thenatural sublime once undergirded the rhetoric of manifest destiny. Fundamentalchanges in the landscape paradoxically seem part of an inevitable process in harmonywith nature.
After centuries of neglect, the sublime – ﬁrst described in classical antiquity –
reemerged in the eighteenth century in tandem with the apotheosis of reason and theadvent of industrialization. This broken ﬁgure of thought, which permitted both theimagination of an ineﬀable surplus of emotion and its recontainment, was not basedon a perceived opposition between nature and culture in the ancient world or inEnlightenment England. Nor was there an absolute opposition between the naturaland the technological sublime in Jacksonian America. Although there is an undoubtedtension between what Leo Marx terms “the machine” and “the garden,” Americanslooked for sublimity in both realms.
3 Each provided a disruption of ordinary sense
perception, and each was interpreted as a sign of national greatness.
At ﬁrst the sublime was understood to be an emotion almost exclusive to the male
sex, women being relegated to the realm of the beautiful, as in Kant ’s early writings.
The mature formulation of Kant’s aesthetic held, however, that the sublime was auniversal emotion, accessible to all. Y et, in practice, the scenes that elicited the sublimewere usually more accessible, and accessible at an earlier time, to men than to women.The explorers who ﬁrst saw Y osemite and the Grand Canyon were men. The engin-eers who built the railways, the architects that designed the skyscrapers, and thetechnicians who created the electrical displays were men. Men created virtually all thecentral objects of the technological sublime that have been the focus of this study. Itwas the male gaze of domination that looked out from the railway engine, the sky-scraper, and the factory manager’s oﬃce, surveying an orderly domain. Thoughwomen were not absolutely excluded, they were marginal.
Y et women played a vital part in the incorporation of the technological object
into ordinary life. Once the initial shock of the sublime object had passed, it wasdomesticated and made familiar through a process of feminization. The railwayengine soon became a “she,” and train crews spoke of getting “her” to the station ontime. The steel mill became an industrial mother, giving birth to molten ingots.Electricity was usually represented as a woman in statuary and paintings.
4 In the
1950s there was a “Miss Atom Bomb” beauty queen. In 1986 the sophisticated28 THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
engineering of Eiﬀel and the copper cladding of Bartholdi merged with laser beams
and computer-designed ﬁreworks in the rededication of the Statue of Liberty. Femi-nization transformed the alien into the familiar and implied the emergence of a newsynthetic realm in which the lines between nature, technology, and culture wereblurred if not erased.
Feminization tamed technology, preparing the subject to experience new forms
of the sublime. Despite its power, the technological sublime always implies its ownrapid obsolescence, making room for the wonders of the next generation. The railwayof 1835 hardly amazed in 1870, and most Americans eventually lost interest in trains(though that particular “romance” lasted longer than most). During each generationthe radically new disappeared into ordinary experience. The shape of the life-world,the envelope of techniques and customs that appeared natural to a child, kept chan-ging.
5 Travelers on the ﬁrst trains, in the 1830s, felt that their disruptive experience
was sublime, and remained in a state of heightened awareness, but the sense of anextraordinary break in experience soon disappeared. Similarly, the wonder of 1855was to see a freight train cross the suspension bridge over Niagara Gorge. In the1880s came the Brooklyn Bridge; in the 1930s came the Golden Gate Bridge. Each ofthese structures was longer than its predecessors, sustaining more weight over agreater span.
The logic of the technological sublime demanded that each object exceed its
precursors. Similarly, each world’s fair erected more elaborate lighting displays thanits predecessors, creating more powerful illusions to satisfy the viewers’ increasinglyvoracious appetite. The ﬁrst skyscrapers, which had fewer than 15 stories, soon were
overshadowed by far larger structures. The once dizzying and disorienting view fromatop the Flatiron Building became familiar, and higher towers were needed to upsetthe sense of “normal” spatial relations. Likewise, the ﬁrst airplanes to appear overChicago or New Y ork drew millions out into the streets; yet within 20 years daredevilstunts were necessary to hold the crowd’s interest, and by 1960 aviation had passedinto the ordinary. Each form of the technological sublime became a “natural” part ofthe world and ceased to amaze, though the capacity and the desire for amazementpersisted.
Although the wonder of one generation scarcely drew a glance in the next, each
loss of sublimity prepared the subject for more radical shifts in perspective yet tocome. In the early 1950s Las Vegas newspapers complained that a recent round ofopen-air atomic explosions had been too small: “‘ Bigger bombs, that’s what we’re
waiting for,’ said one Las Vegas nightclub owner. ‘Americans have to have theirkicks.’”
6
Sublime experience is not merely a matter of vision; all the senses are engaged.
Burke noted that, although the eye was often dominant, movement, noise, smell, andtouch were also important. A city sounds much diﬀerent at the top of a skyscraperthan on the street below. The wind makes one feel more vulnerable out on the openspan of a long bridge. The steam locomotive shook the ground and ﬁlled the air withan alien smell of steam, smoke, and sparks; the Saturn rocket did much the same thingon a larger scale. The strong contrast between the silence of a rocket’s liftoﬀ and thesudden roar that follows a few seconds later is also a vital element in making thatspectacle sublime. The sheer size of the crowd attracted to a technological displayTHE CONSUMER’ S SUBLIME 29
further arouses the emotions. In each event, the human subject feels that the familiar
envelope of sensory experience has been rent asunder.
Most Americans have not interpreted these powerful experiences according to
Kant. In the case of the natural sublime, while some well-read individuals deducedfrom the magniﬁcence of Niagara Falls and the Natural Bridge the existence of auniversal moral sense, many early visitors to these sites felt that they proved theexistence of God. T echnological marvels were even less likely to be “read” in Kantianterms. Most Americans thought that a man-made rupture in ordinary experienceproved the potential omnipotence of humanity. A railroad, a skyscraper, or a hydro-electric dam proclaimed the ever-increasing power of technicians, demonstratingtheir ability to disrupt what had become normal perception and creating the dis-continuity that Americans seemed to crave. This radical break in experience becamea necessary epiphany; it reinforced the sense of progress. At the same time, the“Americanness” of this epiphany invigorated nationalistic sentiment.
There were occasional dissenters. Since the 1820s some have greeted new tech-
nologies with skepticism. Thoreau suggested that the railroad, for all its admirablecelerity, nevertheless exempliﬁed a more general development, in which (in Emerson’swords) “things are in the saddle and ride mankind.”
7 Later, others felt the skyscraper
destroyed the scale of the city and reduced the citizen to a stick ﬁgure, a featurelesspedestrian seen from a great distance. This opposition suggests a contradiction at theheart of the technological sublime that invites the observer to interpret a suddenexpansion of perceptual experience as the corollary to an expansion of human powerand yet simultaneously evokes the sense of individual insigniﬁcance and powerless-ness. One is both the all-seeing observer in a high tower and the ant-like pedestrianinching along the pavement below. One can either be outside, terriﬁed by the speedand noise of the railway, or riding triumphantly over the landscape. One may (likethe young Lewis Mumford) experience the electriﬁed skyline as an epiphany, or onemay (like Claude McKay) feel overwhelmed by the swirling lights of Times Square.T echnologies can be perceived as an extension and aﬃrmation of reason or as theexpression of a crushing, omnipotent force outside the self. In this bifurcation, thosewho have the greatest political, economic, and social power are more likely to ﬁndthemselves inside the panopticon, surveying the vast surround.
Such a division was less evident during the Jacksonian period, when new tech-
nologies were embraced by a cross-section of the body politic. In the 1828 parade thatcelebrated the construction of the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad, representatives ofvirtually all trades and every social class took part. (Such events contrasted withunruly, spontaneous parades of the unskilled and the working poor.) During theremainder of the nineteenth century, formal parades organized by local elites grad-ually deleted the skilled worker and the ordinary citizen, focusing instead on engin-eers, entrepreneurs, and a few elected oﬃcials. Even more important, attention shiftedaway from human beings to technological objects. The huge Corliss Engine becamethe icon of the 1876 Centennial Exposition. A decade later, few of the millions whosaw the inauguration of Brooklyn Bridge or that of the Statue of Liberty heard thespeeches. The word was increasingly replaced by massive representations, a processadvanced by the electrical sublime at world’s fairs and the Hudson-Fulton Celebra-tion of 1909. Gradually the word ceased to be the carrier of sublimity. Reenactments30
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
and displays became important before ﬁlm and television, which proved ill suited
to convey the full force of the technological sublime. It had to be seen, heard, and feltin person. The citizen had become less an active participant than a tourist and aconsumer – a fact well understood by corporate exhibitors at the New Y ork World’s
Fair of 1939 and self-evident by the rededication of the Statue of Liberty in 1986.
The classic location of such experiences was the urban metropolis. It possessed
the magniﬁcent railway stations, the artiﬁcial cliﬀs and ravines of the new skyline, theskyscraper panoramas that encouraged fantasies of domain, the de-natured industrialdistricts, and the phantasmagoria of the Great White Way. Each of these oﬀeredthe visitor a powerful demonstration of what human beings had accomplished. In theview from a skyscraper, in the artiﬁcial totality of the factory zone, or in the specialeﬀects of the Great White Way, nature had disappeared. The visitor was by turnsterriﬁed, exalted, and reduced to insigniﬁcance. The new skyscrapers reduced
the individual to an insect or a shadow. The new factories contained vast interiorsﬁlled with workers whose sheer numbers demonstrated the insigniﬁcance and inter-changeability of individuals. Electric advertising did not emphasize producers, engin-eers, architects, or inventors; rather; it paraded the brand names of mass-producedproducts. Whereas Independence Day had been a once-a-year commemoration, thefactory tour and the skyscraper observation platform were open each day and theGreat White Way shone every night.
The paradox of the technological sublime is that it pretends to present a legible
materialization of the unrepresentable – as though a physical construction could beinﬁnite, as though the boundless could be bounded, as though the shapeless could beshaped. Slavoj Zizek has called the sublime “a unique point in Kant’s system, a pointat which the ﬁssures, the gap between phenomenon and Thing-in-itself, is abolishedin a negative way, because in it the phenomenon’s very inability to represent theThing adequately is inscribed in the phenomenon itself.”
8 For Kant the hurricane was
not a concretization of reason, but Americans have long thought that new machinesare nothing less than that. For Kant the natural sublime object evokes the feeling ofenthusiasm, or a pleasure of a purely negative kind, for it ﬁnally concerns a failure of
representation. In contrast, the American technological sublime is built on a pleasureof a positive kind, for it concerns an apparently successful representation of man’sability to construct an inﬁnite and perfect world.
In the search for this positive pleasure, a “consumer’s sublime” has emerged as
Americans shop for new sensations of empowerment. Icons of the natural sublime,such as the Grand Canyon, are subjected to this process, and indeed the nationalparks have far more visitors today than in the early twentieth century. But increasinglythey are appreciated not as signs of nature’s immeasurable power and sublimity but ascontrasts to a civilization that threatens to overwhelm them. The national park thusbecomes a species of theme park, making available a relatively unspoiled nature whichsociety has spared from development. In this reconﬁguration, part of the GrandCanyon’s attraction and interest is that it is threatened by an array of technologies andtherefore should be seen immediately before it is further deﬁled by the smog blowingin from the west, by acid rain, and by the “light pollution” that makes it hard to see thestars at night. The tourist is told to feel pleased if the weather is clear. A fortunate fewﬁll the quotas for river raft trips, although the rapids are more predictable now than inTHE CONSUMER’ S SUBLIME 31
the nineteenth century because the waters of the Colorado are dammed to the
immediate north and south of the park. Glen Canyon Dam impounds the silt androck that once would have been carried through the gorge and replenished its sandbanks. It releases water at an even rate, thus slowing the erosion that carved thecanyon in the ﬁrst place. The moderate ﬂow permits the growth of dense foliagewhere once the plants would have been scoured oﬀ the banks by ﬂash ﬂoods. The
water also is much colder now, since it comes from the deep lake behind the dam, andseveral species of ﬁsh unique to the area, such as the humpback chub, have beendriven back to the warmer tributary streams. At the other end of the canyon, a 1984government report found, unsupervised “use of the remote portions of the ColoradoRiver from Diamond Creek to Lake Mead is increasing dramatically. Boating upriverfrom Lake Mead is increasingly popular and diﬃcult to regulate.”
9 (Environmental
protests protected the canyon from another dam within its boundaries.) Noise pollu-tion is also a problem. Overhead, planes and helicopters carrying tourists from LasVegas and Phoenix can be heard during half of the daylight hours.
10 Five million
people came to the park in 1993, and the visitation rate has doubled every decadesince 1919. This massive inﬂux greatly exceeds the park’s hotel capacity of 3628 hotelrooms and 329 campsites. One feels fortunate to get a room inside the park, fortunateto have good visibility, fortunate if there are not too many planes overhead. In short,the Grand Canyon, if one is lucky, may appear undisturbed and “natural.”
Y et the environmental threats to the canyon and the increased visitation are only
one side of the problem. In the past the Grand Canyon invited reﬂection on humaninsigniﬁcance, but today much of the public sees it through a cultural lens shaped byadvanced technology. The characteristic questions about the canyon reported by ParkService employees assume that humans dug the canyon or that they could improve itso that it might be viewed quickly and easily. Rangers report repeated queries fordirections to the road, the elevator, the train, the bus, or the trolley to the bottom.Other visitors request that the canyon be lighted at night. Many assume that thecanyon was produced either by one of the New Deal dam-building programs or bythe Indians – “What tools did they use?” is a common question.
11 These remarks
reveal a common belief that the canyon is a colossal human achievement that ought tobe improved. Visitors enjoy it in its present form, but some see room for improve-ments: light shows, elevators, roads, tramways, riverboats, luxury hotels at the bottom.The assumption of human omnipotence has become so common that the naturalworld seems an extension of ourselves, rather than vice versa. These are by no meansthe opinions of all visitors, of course. Many want no “improvements” in the GrandCanyon, and some hope to see 90 percent of it set aside as a designated wilderness.Y et even the Park Service, which does not want further development, has asked themanagers of Disney World for advice on how to deal with the enormous inﬂux ofvisitors.
Paradigmatic sites of the natural sublime have long been made more accessible by
improved transportation, beginning with the Erie Canal. But increasingly advancedtechnologies not only get people to the site; they also provide alternatives to seeing it.A maximum of 92 people per night are allowed to stay at the Phantom Ranch, at thebottom of the Grand Canyon; but outside the park 525 people per hour can sit in anIMAX theater and watch The Grand Canyon – The Hidden Secrets, a 34-minute ﬁlm32
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
shown on a 70-foot screen with six-track Dolby sound. As an additional attraction, the
theater advertises “Native Americans in traditional dress on the staﬀ.” During theperformance guests are encouraged to “enjoy our fast food, popcorn, ice cream” andother snacks. Why bother to hike into the canyon when all the highlights have beenprepackaged? Similar theaters now serve Niagara Falls and Y osemite. Their gift shopssell videocassettes, postcards, photographs, slides, maps, guides, and illustrated books.These representations cannot extirpate the sublimity of these sites, but they can makeit diﬃcult for tourists, who usually remain for only one day, to rid themselves of theirpre-visualizations. Many people experience a natural wonder as incomplete, dis-appointing, or overrated, and even when the Grand Canyon satisﬁes it often does sobecause it lives up to its image.
This egotistical sublime is hardly new. In the nineteenth century it was familiar to
Margaret Fuller, to Nathaniel Hawthorne, and to the geologist Clarence Dutton. Butthis response has become pervasive, signaling the triumph of the consumer’s vision,which asks that each object be clearly labeled, neatly packaged, and easily appropri-ated. Each year several people fall into the Grand Canyon because they venture tooclose to the edge, and their relatives then sue the Park Service because there were nofences or guard rails – as if a terrifying immensity that people journey great distancesto see ought to have hand rails and warning signs; as if the “thing in itself” ought to beequipped with a snack bar; as if the unrepresentable could be projected on a 70-footscreen. The notion of a consumer’s sublime is ultimately a contradiction in terms. Notonly does it deny the existence of transcendental values that might be deduced fromthe natural object (that denial was always latent within the technological sublime): italso denies the exaltation, the danger, the diﬃculty, the immensity, and the othernessof the wild and the nonhuman.
The American fascination with the trope of the technological sublime implies
repeated eﬀorts at more and more powerful physical manifestations of human reason.For more than a century it was possible to incorporate each new technology into thelife-world. The succession of sublime forms – dynamic technological, geometrical,industrial, electrical – fostered a sense of human control and domination that wasradically at odds with the natural sublime. From c. 1820 to c. 1945 this incompatibil-ity, rooted in the diﬀerence between Kantian reason and technological reason,was muted. However, the atomic bomb manifested a purely material negativity; itwas the ultimate dead end of any attempted representation of the technological “thing
in itself.” The bomb materialized the end of human technique even as it dematerial-ized its target. Here the shaped and the bounded works of man merged with theshapeless and the boundless, and Americans ﬁrst glimpsed the death-world that thetechnological sublime might portend.
Y et history is not a philosopher’s argument. It records not logical developments
but a mixture of well-reasoned acts, unintended consequences, accidents, shiftingenthusiasms, and delusions. Though by the logic of argument the technologicalsublime “ought to” have gone into terminal decline after Hiroshima, something
more complex occurred instead. While most people dreaded atomic weapons, manyembraced the space program and most enjoyed spectacles such as the rededicationof the Statue of Liberty. At the same time, Disney transformed the exposition,merging the amusement park with magical corporate displays. These changesTHE CONSUMER’ S SUBLIME 33
marked a nostalgic return to the nineteenth-century technological object and to a
sanitized recollection of the city before the diaspora into suburbia. Like theJacksonians who mingled their awe for natural and man-made wonders, late-twentieth-century Americans seem oblivious to the logical impasses posed by thetechnological sublime, as their leisure travel increasingly demonstrates. They ﬂock tothe Kennedy Space Center, the Empire State Building and other skyscrapers, theGateway Arch, the Smithsonian Air and Space Museum, Disneyland, and, mostrecently, Las Vegas.
Unlike the Ford assembly line or Hoover Dam, Disneyland and Las Vegas have
no use value. Their representations of sublimity and special eﬀects are created solelyfor entertainment. Their epiphanies have no referents; they reveal not the existence ofGod, not the power of nature, not the majesty of human reason, but the titillation ofrepresentation itself. The genuine ceases to have any special status; the faked, theartiﬁcial, and the copy are the stock-in-trade.
Las Vegas, with more annual visitors than Y ellowstone, the Grand Canyon,
Niagara Falls, the Empire State Building, and Cape Kennedy combined, exempliﬁesthe full development of the consumer’s sublime, which ﬁrst emerged prominently atthe 1939 New Y ork World’s Fair. The traditional underpinnings of a city do not existin Las Vegas. Not the forces of trade nor those of industry nor those of religion northose of government explain its emergence as a metropolitan area with a population ofmore than 800,000. One-third of all its jobs are in the hotel and gaming industries,and a good many of the inhabitants who do not work in those industries beneﬁt fromtourism indirectly.
Las Vegas’s popularity is recent. Begun as a watering hole for westward-bound
migrants traveling by horse and wagon, it emerged as a raw railroad town in the earlytwentieth century. Its spectacular growth began after 1931, when the State of Nevadalegalized gambling (which was already prevalent).
12 The construction of Hoover
Dam and the establishment of military bases brought in new customers for thecasinos. After World War II, the mushrooming population of California and the rest ofthe Southwest enlarged the clientele further. As casinos grew more spectacular,
13 the
city invented its “strip,” a long row of lavish hotels decked with the most elaboratelighting west of Times Square and distinguished by an approach to architecture latercelebrated by Robert Venturi.
14 In the 1960s air travel made the city accessible to the
rest of the nation, and it became a convention and entertainment center as well as agambling mecca. More than 2100 conventions were held there in 1992, when LasVegas had more hotel rooms and a higher occupancy rate than London. The morethan 21 million visitors stayed an average of four days, gambled more than $430 perperson, and produced more than $14.6 billion in revenues.
15 Measured in terms of
time or money, Las Vegas has become one of America’s most important tourist sites.Built not on production but consumption, not on industry but play, not on the sacredbut the profane, not on law but chance, Las Vegas is that rupture in economic andsocial life where fantasy and play reign supreme, the anti-structure that reveals thestructure it opposes.
Neither the slow economy of the 1970s nor the stagnation of the early 1990s
aﬀected Las Vegas’s surging growth. Long one of the most spectacular sites of theelectrical sublime, the city has undergone a multi-billion-dollar development program34
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
that includes several skyscrapers and most of the elements once associated with
world’s fairs and amusement parks. The new casinos combine hotels, gaming rooms,and “Disney-quality” theme parks. The 3000-room Mirage Hotel (1990) cost $630
million. Despite dire predictions that it would never be proﬁtable, it has proved a“cash machine.” The Mirage’s $30 million, ﬁve-story volcano, which erupts severaltimes each hour in front of the hotel, was such a success that in 1993 the owneropened, right next to it, another casino hotel: Treasure Island, where battles betweenfull-size replicas of a pirate ship and a British frigate are staged. Nearby the4000-room Excalibur (1990), an ersatz castle with hotel towers attached, stresses apseudo-Arthurian motif, with jousting matches every evening. The Luxor (1993) is a2500-room pyramid-shaped hotel with a replica of the Sphinx, King Tutankhamen’stomb (“Tut ’s Hut”), talking robot camels, and a “Nile River” boat ride under the
casino, “past murals illustrating the rich history of the Egyptian empire.” Circus
Circus, which looks like an enormous tent, stages acrobatic acts every hour throughthe night and contains a $75 million climate-controlled amusement park called GrandSlam Canyon. The ﬁlm The Wizard of Oz provides the motif for the billion-dollar
MGM Grand Hotel (1993), the largest in the world. The visitor passes between thegolden paws of a 109-foot lion and along a yellow brick road to a 60-foot-highEmerald City, beyond which lie a 33-acre theme park, a 15,200-seat sports area, andeight restaurants.
16 Theme casinos and their amusement parks attract whole families
rather than only individuals and couples.17 They combine fantasies and legends with
simulated sublime experiences, including volcanoes, waterfalls, Grand Canyon rafttrips, and skyscrapers.
18
The transformation of Las Vegas into a family theme park in the desert makes it
the premiere postmodern landscape – a fantasy world for the middle class. It developsthe disembodied illusions of the Great White Way into a multidimensional hyperreal-ity, juxtaposing scenes from fairy tales, history, advertising, novels, and movies tocreate a dreamscape of disconnected signiﬁers. At the upscale Forum Shops a cornu-copia of designer goods are for sale on a simulated Roman street where the vaultedsky passes from morning to evening to night and “Roman gods come to life in theform of ‘animatronic’ robots.”
19 For those with less cash there are ordinary malls near
other casinos and factory outlet stores at the end of the strip. Likewise, Las Vegasstages entertainment for every taste, including Broadway musicals, magic shows,dancing girls, tennis tournaments, world championship boxing matches, demonstra-tions of virtual reality, and rock concerts. It even recycles elements of the zoo, display-ing caged white tigers and tanks full of sharks. This is the landscape of capitalistsurrealism, where a man-made order seems to replace the natural order entirely.Visitors experience a potpourri of the technological sublime in a synesthesia of lights,heights, illusions, and fantastic representations. All of these enhance the visceralexcitement of gambling, which contains the terror of ﬁnancial catastrophe and theallure of a huge jackpot.
Whereas the older forms of the technological sublime embodied the values of
production, and literally embodied the gaze of the businessman as he surveyed a cityfrom the top of a skyscraper or appreciated steel mills from the window of a passingtrain, Las Vegas validates the gaze of the consumer, who wants not the rational orderof work but the irrational disorder of play. Las Vegas manifests the dream world ofTHE CONSUMER’ S SUBLIME 35
consumption. The steamboat, the train, or the Corliss Engine has no role here. The
city presents itself as a world entirely without infrastructure and beyond the limita-tions of nature.
20 The dislocation and the “incoherence” of this landscape are its
strongest attractions, suggesting that technology faces no natural or economic con-straints. Las Vegas oﬀers visitors an intensiﬁcation of experience, speeding up timeand extending itself round the clock. Its lavishly mirrored interiors, like its landscapeof electric signs, destroy normal spatial relations. The aesthetic of Times Squaremerges here with the automotive strip as the consumer moves along the conveyorbelt of images from one fantasy to another. Las Vegas fuses the theme park, theshopping mall, and the casino, presenting itself as the central attraction and othernearby attractions – the Grand Canyon, Hoover Dam, the atomic testing site – as
secondary.
The consumer’s sublime on oﬀer in Las Vegas anthologizes sublime eﬀects.
These eﬀects emphasize not solitary communion with nature but experiences organ-ized for the crowd – not the mountaintop but man-made towers; not three-dimensional order but spatial and temporal disorientation. Kant had reasoned that theawe inspired by sublime objects would make men aware of their moral worth despitetheir frailties. The nineteenth-century technological sublime had encouraged men tobelieve in their power to manipulate and control the world. Those enthralled by thedynamic technological, geometrical, electrical, or industrial sublime felt omnipotenceand exaltation, counterpointed by fears of individual powerlessness and insigniﬁ-cance. Railways, skyscrapers, bridges, lighting systems, factories, expositions, rockets,and bombs were all extensions of the world of production. Through them, Americansinscribed technological systems on consciousness so that the unrepresentable seemedmanifest in human constructions.
But in the consumer’s sublime of Las Vegas or Disneyland, technology is put to
the service of enacting fantasy. The technological sublime had exhorted the observerto dominate and control nature. It celebrated rationality, substituting technique fortranscendental reason, celebrating work and achievement. But the consumer’s sub-lime erases production and excites fantasy. It privileges irrationality, chance, anddiscontinuity. There had always been an element of escapism in the tours to sublimeobjects, but there was an uplifting lesson to be drawn from Niagara Falls (God’shandiwork) or from a railway, a skyscraper, a factory, or a moon rocket (man ’s
accomplishments). The electrical sublime elided the line between nature and cultureand, in the process, dissolved the scale and the three-dimensionality of the landscape;yet it could still serve a vision focused on progress. In contrast, the billions of dollarsspent in Las Vegas represent a ﬁnancial and psychic investment in play for its ownsake. The epiphany has been reduced to a rush of simulations, in an escape from thevery work, rationality, and domination that once were embodied in the Americantechnological sublime.
Notes
1 George Ticknor, Life, Letters and Journals of George Ticknor, cited in Charles
Mason Dow, Anthology and Bibliography of Niagara Falls, vol. 1 (State of NewY ork, 1921), p. 221.36
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
2 On European intellectuals and their postmodern visions of America see Rob
Kroes, “Flatness and Depth,” in Consumption and American Culture., ed. D. E.
Nye and C. Pedersen (Amsterdam: Free University Press).
3 I believe Professor Marx would agree with this statement.
4 Martha Banta, Imaging American W omen: Idea and Ideals in Cultural History
(Columbia University Press, 1987), p. 761.
5 Don Ihde, T echnology and the Lifeworld: From Garden to Earth (Indiana University
Press, 1990), pp. 21–30.
6 Catherine Cauﬁeld, Multiple Exposures (University of Chicago Press, 1990),
pp. 106–107.
7 Poems of Ralph Waldo Emerson (Collected W orks, vol. 9) (Houghton Miﬄin,
1904), p. 78.
8 Slavoj Zizek, The Sublime Object of Ideology (Verso, 1989), pp. 203, 204.9 National Park Service, Grand Canyon Natural and Cultural Resource Management
Plan, April 1984.
10 See U.S. Department of the Interior, Aircraft Management Plan Environmental
Assessment, Grand Canyon National Park, May 1986.
11 These questions had been put so many times that the rangers at the information
counters had a list of the twenty most common queries printed up and taped itto the counter in early December 1993. I interviewed ﬁve staﬀ members, all ofwhom conﬁrmed that these were frequently asked questions. It is also commonfor people to ask where the geysers are and to ask for the location of the “carvedstone faces.” Some people also want to know if it is true that someone jumped thecanyon on a motorcycle.
12 For a history of gambling with a focus on Las Vegas see John M. Findlay, People
of Chance: Gambling in American Society from Jamestown to Las V egas (OxfordUniversity Press, 1986).
13 For a survey and a history of Las Vegas’s casinos see David Spanier, W elcome to
the Pleasure Dome (University of Nevada Press, 1992).
14 Robert Venturi, Learning from Las V egas: The Forgotten Symbolism of Architectural
Form , revised edition (MIT Press, 1991).
15 Statistics from Las Vegas Chamber of Commerce, Las V egas Perspective . Las
Vegas Review Journal, 1993.
16 My descriptions of the hotels are based on visits, brochures, and advertising. See
also Sergio Lalli, “Big Projects Boost Vegas,” Hotel and Motel Management 206,
November 4, 1991; “Wynn’s World: White Tigers, Blackjack, and a MidasT ouch,” Business W eek, March 30, 1992; David B. Rosenbaum, “Resorts: Precast
as Big Winner in Vegas” ERN 229, July 13, 1992.
17 This fact has interesting ﬁnancial implications. Surveys already show that Las
Vegas attracts mostly middle-class consumers who gamble “voraciously and withless regard for income” than those who go to Atlantic City. In eﬀect, those whovisit Las Vegas pay a highly regressive tax for their pleasure. See Mary O. Borg,“An Economic Comparison of Gambling Behavior in Atlantic City and LasVegas,” Public Finance Quarterly 18 (1990), no. 3, pp. 291–312.
18 For background information on the new casinos I am indebted to the Las Vegas
News Bureau.THE CONSUMER’ S SUBLIME 37
19 Mike Weatherford, “Where Dreams Come True,” Nevada, January–February
1993, pp. 10–14.
20 Though water is used lavishly at the new family resorts, water shortages present a
potentially crippling barrier to further development. See John Jesitus, “Growing
Gambling Mecca Reacts to Dwindling Supply of Water,” Hotel and Motel
Management 206, November 4, 1991.38 THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
1.5
The computational metaphor,
by Kevin Kelly
The least noticed trends are usually the most subversive ones. First on my list for an
undetected upheaval is our collective journey toward the belief that the universe is acomputer.
Already the following views are widespread: thinking is a type of computation,
DNA is software, evolution is an algorithmic process. If we keep going we will quietlyarrive at the notion that all materials and all processes are actually forms of computa-tion. Our ﬁnal destination is a view that the atoms of the universe are fundamentallyintangible bits. As the legendary physicist John Wheeler sums up the idea: “Its arebits.”
I ﬁrst became aware of this increasingly commonly held (but not yet articulated)
trend at the ﬁrst Artiﬁcial Life Conference in 1987, where biological reproductionand evolution were described by researchers in wholly computer science terms. Thesurprise wasn’t that such organic things could be given mathematical notations,because scientists have been doing that for hundreds of years. The surprise wasthat biological things could be simulated by computers so well. Well enough thatsuch simulations displayed unexpected biological properties themselves. From thiswork sprang such fashionable patterns as cellular automata, fractals, and geneticalgorithms.
The next step in this trend was to jettison the computer matrix and re-imagine
biological processes simply in terms of computer logic. But to do this, ﬁrst computa-tion had to be stripped from computers as well. Starting with the pioneering work ofVon Neumann and Turing, a number of mathematicians concluded that the essentialprocess of computing was so elementary and powerful that it could be understood tohappen in all kinds of systems. Or, in other words, the notion of computation wasbroadened so wide that almost any process or thing could be described in computa-tional terms. Including galaxies, molecules, mathematics, emotions, rain forests andgenes.
Is this embrace just a trick of language? Y es, but that is the unseen revolution. We
are compiling a vocabulary and a syntax that is able to describe in a single language allkinds of phenomena that have escaped a common language until now. It is a newuniversal metaphor. It has more juice in it than previous metaphors: Freud’s dream
state, Darwin’s variety, Marx’s progress, or the Age of Aquarius. And it has more
power than anything else in science at the moment. In fact the computational meta-phor may eclipse mathematics as a form of universal notation.
This quickening of the new metaphor was made crystal clear recently in the work
of mathematicians and physicists who have been dreaming up the next great thingafter silicon chips: quantum computers. Quantum computers lie at the convergenceof two “impossible” ﬁelds, the world of the impossibly small (quantum states), and
the world of the impossibly ghostly (bits). Things get strange here very fast, but onething is strangest of all. In the eﬀort to create mathematical theories of how matterworks at levels way below sub-atomic particles, and in the eﬀort to actually buildcomputers that operate in this realm, some scientists have found that using the lan-guage of bits best explains the behavior of matter. Their conclusion: Its are bits. Y oung
Einsteins such as mathematician/theoretical physicist David Deutsch are now in thevery beginnings of a long process of re-describing all of physics in terms of computertheory. Should they succeed, we would see the material universe and all that it holds asa form of computation.
There will be many people who will resist this idea ﬁercely, for many good
reasons. They will point out that the universe isn’t really a computer, only that it mayact as if it was one. But once the metaphor of computation inﬁltrates physics andbiology deeply, there is no diﬀerence between those two statements. It’s the metaphorthat wins.
And as far as I can tell the computational metaphor is already halfway to winning.40
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
1.6
New communications technology: a survey
of impacts and issues,by Michael Marien
This biblioessay examines a wide range of recent literature to consider the
impact and issues raised by new communications technologies. It surveys theextent of the impact of new communications technologies, enthusiasm for andcriticism of the information society concept, the eﬀects of television, and theimpact of new communications technologies on democracy and governance,work and employment, and education. Copyright © 1996 Elsevier Science Ltd
Introduction: how big a transition?
In an age of multiple transformations, one of the major changes – arguably the mostcentral of all – is the advent of a wide range of new communications technologies.This is resulting in an information society or information age, also described as aknowledge society (Drucker, 1994), a network society (Drucker, 1995), the ThirdWave civilization (T oﬄer, 1995), the intelligent state (Connors, 1993), the infomediaage (Koelsch, 1995), cyberspace (Time, Special Issue, 1995) and cybersociety (Jones,1995).
The information society has emerged gradually throughout the 20th century
(Schement/Curtis, 1995). First usage of the term ‘information society’ appeared onlyin the late 1970s in Japan. Enthusiasm and dismay regarding this development are notnew: consider the extraordinary Spring 1966 special ‘Electronic Revolution’ issueof The American Scholar, with articles by Marshall McLuhan. Buckminster Fuller,
Herbert Simon, and many others. There is now a widespread sense, however, that themulti-faceted transformation is accelerating in the mid-1990s, and that much morechange lies ahead. Connors (1993) speculates that the information revolution is likelyto have run its course by 2005, but is the only observer to see some sort of end. Itseems far more likely that the development and dissemination of new informationtechnologies (IT) will continue for the next few decades at least. A vast industry is inplace to do just that, and there are many rewards for companies and nations that takethe lead, and few barriers to stop them.
In general outlines, we are undergoing a new era of communication that changes
the balance between pictures and words (Davies et al., 1990), and moves from relative
scarcity of information to hyperabundance in multiple forms. As noted by Daniel Bell
(1989), the most crucial fact about the new IT is that it creates a set of changes thatpervade all aspects of society and reorganizes all older relationships: it widens arenas,multiplies actors, and increases the velocity and volatility of transactions. Alvin andHeidi T oﬄer (1993) insist that Third Wave societies run at hyperspeed, although onewonders how much additional speed is desirable, or humanly possible.
In a recent Special Issue of Futures, Sardar and Ravetz (1995) declare that “So
deep is our collective ignorance of what cybertechnologies are doing to us, that theﬁrst urgent task is to discover our ignorance”. What sort of revolution this is, andwhere it is taking us and what we can do about it, they lament, “is as yet completelyobscure”. This is exaggerated: some of the key technologies, actors, and issues can beidentiﬁed, which is the purpose of this survey of recent English-language literature.But it is wise to declare ‘ignorance’ as a starting point – a noteworthy irony in the ageof information!
New and prospective technologies
A proper starting point should brieﬂy mention the panoply of communications tech-nologies that are now being disseminated, developed, or expected in the next decadeor so. There is no single source that authoritatively describes all of these technologies,and many of the sources listed here may be somewhat out-of-date.
Looking to the near future, Coates et al. (1994) state that the art of technology
forecasting is still underdeveloped and may well be worsening instead of improving.Many forecasts noted here are propelled by enthusiasm and/or self-interest, and arethus likely to be overstated. Y et other recent IT developments (notably fax machinesand the explosive growth of the Internet) were expected by very few observers, if any.
A basic development in the very near future is the merger of computers and
telecommunications (Bradley et al., 1993; Scientiﬁc American Special Issue, 1991),known variously as the information superhighway (Koelsch, 1995), the infobahn(Mitchell, 1995), Integrated Services Digital Network (Horrocks/Scarr, 1993), thetelecomputer (Gilder, 1990), the SuperTube (Minow/LaMay, 1995) the NationalInformation Infrastructure (Kahin/Abbate, 1995), the global information utility(Masuda, 1980: 1990), multimedia computing (Laudon et al., 1994), C&C/computers and communications (Makridakis, 1995), universal information systems(Mayo, 1990), integrated information environments (Leebaret, 1991), Omnimedia(Snider/Ziporyn, 1992), and the network of networks (Blackman, 1994; Coates,1994).
Other interrelated developments and expectations are:
microprocessor performance doubling every 18 months through 2000 andperhaps beyond (Patterson, 1995; Mayo, 1992);
ubiquitous computing/embodied reality as dominant mode of computer accessover the next 20 years (Weiser, 1991);
Very Large Scale Integration as key (Horrocks/Scarr, 1993);
Internet and World Wide Web: explosive growth (Sussman, 1995);
virtual reality (Durlach/Mavor, 1995; Adam, 1993; Aukstakalnis/Blatner, 1992);42 THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
mirror worlds by end of 1990s (Gelerntner, 1991);
expert systems widespread by 1998 (Halal, 1993);
voice-access computers by 2002 (Halal, 1993; Roe/Wilpan, 1994);
software agents/custom-designed software (Maes, 1995; Leebaert, 1995);
Global Brain as emergent structure (Mayer-Kress/Barczys, 1995; Pelton, 1989);
language translators for some vocabularies by 2025 (Coates, 1994);
global currency by 2025 (Coates, 1994);
smart cards for most Americans within three years (Belsie, 1993);
e-mail as dominant telecom media in 15 years (Negroponte, 1995);
wrist-mounted TV/computer/telephone in 5 years (Negroponte, 1995);
photonic lightwave transmission systems capability doubling annually for next
two decades (Mayo, 1992);
Universal Information Systems oﬀering any combination, anywhere, anytime(Mayo, 1990);
public networks enabling access for all by 2007 (Halal, 1993);
500-channel cable TV (Brody, 1993);
home distribution video systems in a few years (Minoli, 1995);
long-distance charges abolished by 2001 (Lundberg, 1991);
a global personal communicator by 2010 (Lundberg, 1991);
wireless cellular services for nearly a half billion people worldwide by 2001(Zyzman, 1995);
ﬁber ampliﬁers increasing lightwave communication transmission capacities by afactor of 100 (Desurvire, 1992);
pager use up 15% per annum for next few years (MacLachlan, 1993);
electronic book under development (Markoﬀ, 1991; Lande, 1991);
service robotics outstripping industrial robotics before 1995 (Engelberger, 1989);
robots widespread by 2015 (Makridakis, 1995);
humanlike androids to perform ‘drudge’ jobs within 20 years (Caudill, 1992);
greater-than-human intelligence within 30 years (Vinge, 1993); and
human equivalence (AI) in desktop computers in 30–65 years (Crevier, 1993);
Some of these developments – perhaps many – will be delayed. A few might not
be realized at all, eg Japan’s failure to develop Fifth Generation artiﬁcial intelligence
(Pollack, 1992). But a few might be realized sooner than expected, and someunexpected technologies or technological twists are likely. If, say, only half of the abovedevelopments were widespread in the next decade or so, human communicationswould surely be markedly transformed, for better and worse.
The new technologies will not simply happen. They demand public policies to
smooth the way and deal with various problems:
regulating the degree of competition (Blackman/Schoof, 1994);
controlling the emerging Microsoft monopoly (Gleick, 1995; Burstein/Kline,1995);
providing public access to the Internet (Kahin/Keller, 1995);
correcting Internet security ﬂaws (Markoﬀ, 1995);
developing standards for interconnection and interoperability (Kahin/Abbate,1995);NEW COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY: IMPACTS AND ISSUES 43
considering options for the National Information Infrastructure (National
Research Council, 1994a; Oﬃce of T echnology Assessment, 1994; CPSR, 1993;Dertouzos, 1991);
developing policy on intellectual property rights (National Research Council,1993; Dyson, 1995);
policy for the International Public Network (Harasim, 1993); and
articulating a Bill of Rights for the Information Age (Glastonbury/LaMendola,1992).
Ideally, a long-term program, as proposed by Bankes and Builder of the Rand
Corporation (1992), could identify high-leverage investments in infotech, expand
human rights, and promote an open world society. Muddling through seems far morelikely. One way or another, though, we will live in the midst of most of these newcommunications technologies, as well as others not mentioned here and yet to beimagined by anyone.
Information society enthusiasts
The rapidly-changing conﬁguration of new communications technologies can beroughly grasped, but requires constant updating. We already live in an informationsociety, where most workers are involved in information-related work, involving com-puters and other new technologies. In the next decade, infotech will aﬀect morepeople worldwide, at an ever-deeper level. What, then, are the many human impactsthat can now be recognized, and, overall, is the information society desirable orundesirable, and for whom? Who gains, and who loses?
The answer to this basic question depends very much on who is consulted. As
noted by Rob Kling (1994), the literature on computerization is divided by utopians,anti-utopians, and more empirically-anchored writers. The gulf between utopianenthusiasts and anti-utopian critics is vast; ironically, there is virtually no evidence ofany communication! A leading early enthusiast was the late Marshall McLuhan(1964), who identiﬁed the transition from ‘the mechanical age’ to ‘the electric age’ inUnderstanding Media , and later supplied the visionary ‘global village’ term that is still
widely used. Less well-known in the West is Japan’s Y oneji Masuda (1980, 1990),who spelled out a highly optimistic and humanistic ideal of the global informationsociety. Alvin T oﬄer’s best-seller The Third W ave (1980) pronounced a ‘quantumleap forward’ and a ‘new civilization’, based on a new techno-sphere and info-sphere,demassiﬁed media, and working at home in the electronic cottage.
Another best-seller was written by John Naisbitt (1982), who extolled the ﬁrst of
his ten ‘megatrends’ as the transition from industrial society to information society. Inthe late 1980s, conservative thinker George Gilder declared the overthrow of matterby the microchip (1989) and the interactive telecomputer replacing the age of televi-sion (1990). Joseph Pelton (1989) saw the global brain making the global village areality and leading to ‘Homo electronicus’.
Among contemporary visionaries, Bill Gates (1995), the Chairman and CEO of
Microsoft (and today’s wealthiest American), is leading the way, with a rather blandview of the wallet PC, digital cash, and E-books. Other enthusiasts include Nicholas44
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
Negroponte of the MIT Media Lab (1995), Arno Penzias of Bell Labs (1995), Frank
Koelsch (1995), Myron C Tuman (1992), and Peter Huber (1994), who notes howour present communications are quite the opposite from the monolithic telescreen ofGeorge Orwell’s 1984 Big Brother. Howard Rheingold (1993) oﬀers guarded opti-
mism for the ‘virtual community’ warning that big power and big money may controlaccess. The home for enthusiasts is Wired magazine in San Francisco (call 1–800/SOWIRED), which boasted some 250 000 subscribers in late 1995 – only its third yearof publication!
T o summarize the proclaimed beneﬁts of information society:
democracy enhanced (Gilder, 1990; Masuda, 1990; Rheingold, 1993);
education enhanced (Gilder, 1990; Masuda, 1990);
science enhanced (Rheingold, 1993);
individualism enhanced (Gilder, 1990; Negroponte, 1995);
global consciousness/global brain (Pelton, 1989);
global economy (Masuda, 1980; Koelsch, 1995);
harmonization when business and technology work together (Penzia, 1995;Negroponte, 1995);
online literacy to free us from the deadening past (Tuman, 1992);
more free expression/freedom of thought (Huber, 1994);
ample means to close rich/poor gap (Penzias, 1995; Gates, 1995);
thousands of choices; shopper’s heaven; friction-free capitalism (Gates, 1995);and
faster ﬂows, shortening sender/receiver distance and collapsing the ‘information
ﬂoat’ (Naisbitt, 1982).
The visionaries as a group make no reference to each other or to any of their
critics. Nor do they make any eﬀort to provide any suggestive evidence for their
hopeful claims.
This survey now turns to the critics, and then to experience with actual infotech
impacts in various areas.
Information society critics
The utopian/enthusiasts include techno-leaders (Gates, Negroponte, Penzias, Pelton,Masuda), futurist/business consultants (T oﬄer, Naisbitt, Koelsch), and political lib-ertarians (Huber, Rheingold, Gilder).
In contrast, the critics are social scientists (Ellul, Estabrooks, Klapp, Kurtzman,
Roszak), communications scholars (Haywood, Postman, Winston), political leftists(Brook/Boal, Kroker/Weinstein, Sale), humanists (Birkerts, Slouka), psychologists(Gergen, Kegan), and computer experts with no ﬁnancial stake (Stoll, T albott). Incontrast to merely making assertions, many of their arguments are amply documented(eg Ellul, Webster/Robins). Several proudly identify themselves as neo-Luddites(Roszak, Sale, Webster/Robins, Brook/Boal).
The most frequent and perhaps most important general complaint is that of
information overload or infoglut (Ellul, 1990; Postman, 1992; Roszak, 1986; Klapp,NEW COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY: IMPACTS AND ISSUES 45
1986; Stoll, 1995; Kegan, 1994). Even Alvin T oﬄer (1970) dealt extensively with the
stressful impacts of too much information in Future Shock (but his later writingignores this problem). Other concerns:
absurdity and unreason (Ellul, 1990; Gergan, 1991);
ﬂying blind/obsessive gambling (Hamelink, 1988);
undermining humanity and morals (Postman, 1992; Sale, 1995);
unemployment (Webster/Robins, 1986);
distraction from reality (Stoll, 1995; Slouka, 1995);
literacy and creativity diminished (Stoll, 1995; Birkerts, 1994);
culture of the book declining (Sanders, 1994; Kernan, 1990);
reduced attention span (Birkerts, 1994);
technobabble/computerese inﬂuencing language (Barry, 1991);
loss of community; networks as isolating (Stoll, 1995; Birkerts, 1994; Slouka,1995);
rich/poor gap aggravated (Stoll, 1995; Haywood, 1995);
saturated and disconnected self (Gergan, 1991);
critical discourse diminished; information commodiﬁed (Haywood, 1995);
hyperactive society increases demands on managers and workers; degrading work(Estabrooks, 1988; Brook/Boal, 1995);
volatile electric economy adding to social instability (Kurtzman, 1993;Cunningham/Porter, 1992);
cyber-authoritarianism (Kroker/Weinstein, 1994);
computer dehumanizes many social activities (Forester, 1992); and
costs of insecure and unreliable computer systems (Ellul, 1990; Forester/Morrison, 1994).
Television pro and con
T elevision has been a major social force for nearly 50 years. Thus in some respects itmight be overlooked as a ‘new’ communication technology. But it has been evolvingand extending its inﬂuence through cable and satellites. And it will further evolvewhen it is married to computers in the near future.
The impacts of TV, in America at least, are generally considered to be negative,
and getting more so. Among recent commentators, there are a few supporters:Neuman (1995) argues that TV has not replaced or diminished literacy; Bianculli(1992) writes that TV has improved substantially and deserves more respect than itgets; Fowles (1992) attacks anti-TV attitudes of TV priggery and asserts that TV is agrandly therapeutic force for nearly all Americans. Contrast these views with thecritics:
TV as principal cause of our demoralization due to too much vicarious experience(Shrader, 1992);
reduced imagination and corporate domination (O’Neill, 1991);
an age of missing information when vital knowledge is beyond our reach andlessons of the natural world grow fainter (McKibbon, 1992);46
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
neglected potential of children’s TV (Minow/LaMay, 1995; Palmer, 1988);
abandonment of public interest TV (Day, 1995; Minow/LaMay, 1995);
growing corporate control of mass media and cultural industries (Schiller, 1989);
talk shows bad for mental health (Heaton/Wilson, 1995);
pursuit of sensation and vulgarity; excessive commercialism (Bogart, 1995);
considerable expansion of space occupied by advertising (Mattelart, 1991);
market-driven ‘junk journalism’ displacing healthier fare (McManus, 1994);
decrease in quality of TV news due to network cutbacks (Kimball, 1994); and
growing concentration and globalization of media ownership (Bagdikian, 1992;
Smith, 1991; Kobrak/Luey, 1992).
Will the augmented TV of the future be any diﬀerent? According to Minow and
LaMay (1995), who argue that the explosion of cable and new interactive media have
increased the violence children are exposed to, the ‘SuperTube’ is likely to be more ofthe same without constructive policy intervention.
Democracy and governance: better or worse?
Developments in infotech and the growing role and reach of the mass media create newpatterns of human interconnection and a loss of boundaries: as society becomes morecomplex, the capacity of governing systems becomes overwhelmed (Rosell, 1992;Michael, 1993). Ronfeldt (1992) describes how the modern bureaucratic state is giv-ing way to ‘cyberocracy’, which may radically aﬀect who rules, how, and why. He warnsthat “cyberocracy, far from favoring democracy or totalitarianism, may make possible
still more advanced, more opposite, and farther apart forms of both”. Similarly, Ogden(1994) oﬀers two contrasting scenarios of cyberdemocracy (Jeﬀersonian networkscommitted to pluralism and diversity) vs virtual mercantilism of private sector control.
An interesting coalition of Alvin T oﬄer, George Gilder, Ester Dyson, and Jay
Keyworth, working through the Progress and Freedom Foundation allied to Rep.Newt Gingrich, proposes a ‘Magna Carta for the Knowledge Age’ to facilitate andhasten the transition to a Third Wave economy and a ‘vastly smaller’ (perhaps by 50%or more) Third Wave government (Dyson, 1994).
There are potentials for infotech enhancement of democracy. Ganley (1992)
extols the role that ‘personal electronic media’ have already played in empowerment.Slaton (1992) reports on ‘T elevote’ experiments for a much more participatorygovernment. And Snider (1994) describes how both direct and mediated democracycan be ideally enhanced by electronic town meetings and interactive multi-media.Potentially, online resources could empower 21st century journalists and the public(Koch, 1991).
But arguments are building that infotech is diminishing democracy. A Time
Magazine cover story (Wright, 1995) asserts that a ‘hyperdemocracy’ of too muchpublic feedback has led to impulsive passage of dubious laws and fosters gridlock.Wines (1994) complains that modern communications have made politicians slavesto public opinion. Meanwhile, public opinion rests on a slimmer foundation, as morecitizens rely on TV for information at the same time that TV news is being downsized(Cook et al., 1992; Kaniss, 1995), soundbites have radically shrunk (Tierney, 1992),NEW COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY: IMPACTS AND ISSUES 47
and local TV news is more susceptible to manipulation (Kaniss, 1995). T elevision
makes voters feel informed about public aﬀairs while miseducating the citizenry(Hart, 1994; Iyengar, 1991). At a time when citizens should appreciate the new globalreality of increasing complexity, the ‘unreality industry’ works in the opposite direction(Mitroﬀ/Bennis, 1989).
Work, productivity, employment: better or worse?
One highly popularized enthusiast (Dent, 1995) asserts that infotech is bringing awork revolution that will lead to a ‘tidal wave of progress’, advancing our standard ofliving and humanizing our lives. (Characteristically, the argument is made withoutany documentation.) Another enthusiast, writing in The Futurist (Hines, 1994), envi-sions massive data storage systems helping workers with infoglut, and various AIsystems becoming partners with workers by 2010. Penzias (1995) envisions usefulemployment for all in the approaching ‘Era of Harmony’.
There are indeed many potential beneﬁts in computer conferencing/electronic
meeting systems (Coates/Jarratt, 1994; Finley, 1991), telecommuting/distributedwork (Schepp/Schepp, 1995; Coates/Jarratt, 1994), ‘groupware’ cooperative working(Lloyd, 1994), networked organizations (Sproull/Kiesler, 1991), and telerobotics(1992). Electronic job recruitment (Kennedy/Morrow, 1994) is already reshaping thejob market. Coates (1995) forecasts that distributed work (those working outside thetraditional workplace) could grow from 3.5% of today’s workforce to 20% by 2005and 40% by 2020.
Oﬀsetting these beneﬁts are four problems:
extensive unemployment (Coates, 1995; Rifkin, 1995; Aronowitz/DiFazio, 1994;Mowshowitz, 1994; Bridges, 1994);
the need for highly skilled employees in a process of continuous learning incomplex organizations (Howard, 1995; Adler, 1992; NRC, 1994b);
ineﬀective use of infotech: only a few ﬁrms are demonstrably better oﬀ and manyshow negative productivity (Morton, 1991); avoiding blind alleys and overambi-tious claims (Weizer, 1991; NRC, 1994b); full and eﬀective use far from realized(Bikson/Law, 1993); and
criminal use and abuse of infotech: viruses (Louw/Duﬀy, 1992); inadequatecomputer security (NRC, 1991; Lewis, 1995); cellular theft and phone fraud(Stephens, 1995); virtual crimes such as nonexistent properties and stocks(Stephens, 1995); computer extortion and credit card fraud (Moore, 1994,1995); moles in ﬁnancial institutions providing access codes (Moore, 1994);global organized crime threatening world ﬁnancial infrastructure (Raine/Cilluﬀo,1994); info-terrorism (T oﬄer, 1993).
The criminal dimension is diﬃcult to measure and underreported (Lewis, 1995),
and frequently ignored because it doesn’t ﬁt into conventional categories of analysis.
Cybercrime may already be contributing signiﬁcantly to the chaos and anxiety of our
times. And the potential for disruption of work, productivity, and employment itself ishigh. Necessary responses to this situation may well include an international criminal48
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
justice system (Moore, 1995) and hastening the transition to a cashless society to
reduce crime (Warwick, 1992). Until security is improved, many Internet users arebarricaded behind ﬁrewalls (Lewis, 1995).
Education potentials and realities
The educational potentials of infotech are profound and numerous, and it is easy to getinto the enthusiast/visionary mode of thought. Seymour Papert (1993) of the MITMedia Lab points to the centrality of the computer in the truly modern school, and topersonal media capable of supporting a wide range of intellectual styles. LewisPerelman (1992) extols hyperlearning technology that will enable virtually anyone tolearn anything, anywhere, any time, and goes on to propose the new technology as atotal replacement for conventional schools. Within the schools and colleges, the virtualclass (Tiﬃn, 1995) and the virtual classroom (Hiltz, 1994) are seen as the new primarylocus of learning. English professor Richard Lanham (1993) claims that electronicexpression “has come not to destroy the Western arts and letters, but to fulﬁll them”.
The University of the World has been established to disseminate electronic resources tostudents and faculty worldwide (Becker, 1989), and many global ideas are explored byRossman (1992) in The Emerging W orldwide Electronic University . Dunn (1994)
envisions the totally wired campus and signs of the coming virtual university by2000. Feigenbaum (1989) sees the library of the future as an active intelligent know-ledge server. Halal and Liebowitz (1994) point to millions of corporate employeesnow being trained with interactive multimedia systems, and business is taking thelead in applying electronic technology to a ‘K-80’ marketplace for learning (Davis/Botkin, 1994). Electronic links for learning are getting better and could still expandgreatly (Horner/Roberts, 1991; Palmer, 1993; Oﬃce of T echnology Assessment,1993).
But there are sobering cautions. The Oﬃce of T echnology Assessment (1995)
reports that a substantial number of teachers still make little or no use of computersbecause they lack training. Computer-literacy education often teaches only shallowrecognition of jargon and components, and only a few applications (Rosenberg,1991). A study of school reform in America (Tyack/Cuban, 1995) ﬁnds recurringfaith in revolutionary electronic pedagogy over the past 70 years (Edison proclaimedthat the motion picture would revolutionize education). Birdsall (1994) points to asimilar myth of the electronic library over the past 50 years (micro ﬁlm was once seen
as revolutionizing library services). Meanwhile, librarians are getting technical educa-tion at the expense of subject-matter education (American Library Association,1995), and libraries are suﬀering from an ever-growing number of increasingly costlyperiodicals at a time of diminishing library budgets (Rice/Robillard, 1991), and frominfoglut in general (ALA, 1995; Kingston, 1989).
Other concerns
Global culture: how engulﬁng?
In the concluding sentence to Understanding Media , Marshall McLuhan (1964)
stated that “Panic about automation as a threat of uniformity on a world scale is theNEW COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY: IMPACTS AND ISSUES 49
projection into the future of mechanical standardization and specialism, which are
now past”. There is some justiﬁcation for this view. A study of cultural imperialism(T omlinson, 1991) concludes that the subject is exaggerated by media theorists andthat globalization weakens the cultural coherence of all nation-states. A study ofinternational popular music (Robinson et al., 1991), “the most universal of all themedia”, found that world musical homogenization is clearly not occurring. And arecent report on global television (Parker, 1995) found that global programs suchas CNN newscasts are growing much slower than expected, and that nationalbroadcasting systems are gaining strength. On the other hand, powerful argumentsare made for the growth of ‘the global cultural bazaar’ and ‘the global shoppingmall’ (Barnet/Cavanagh, 1994) and for the force of transnational corporate culture(Schiller, 1992).
Nationalism seriously eroded
It is commonly held that the global economy has weakened the nation-state in manyrespects. But this argument can also be overstated, as in book titles such as TheT wilight of Sovereignty (Wriston, 1992) and The End of the Nation State (Ohmae,1995).
Development potentials and realities
Information technology can help to expand access to science and technology fordeveloping countries (Salomon/Sachs-Jeantet, 1994). Expert systems seem to be anespecially promising tool for knowledge transfer (Woherem, 1991), and communica-tion satellites can reach out to noncabled rural areas (Hudson, 1990). Mexico is oneexample of explosive growth in telecoms, both wired and wireless, which opens possi-bilities for tele-education and stemming the ﬂow of people to over-populated cities(Vajda, 1993). ‘Rural area networks’ also hold promise for developing poor ruralcommunities in the US (Oﬃce of T echnology Assessment, 1991). And the role ofmass communications in development could be greatly enhanced by operating undera new paradigm of more egalitarian relationships and shared responsibility (Casmir,1991). But it is cautioned that infotech is not a panacea to Third World nations(Dordick/Wang, 1993), that transnational corporations and the US dominate the new‘informatics’ (Gonzalez-Manet, 1992), and that more critical perspectives are neededagainst yet another instance of Western domination, well-meaning or not (Sussman/Lent, 1991).
Cities reshaped
Mitchell (1995) sketches the ‘City of Bits’ as the new capital of the 21st century,and follows with various suggestions for urban design and rethinking the bodyin space. Intelligent transportation systems seem likely in 21st century urban areas(Diebold Institute, 1995). But Gibbs (1993) cautions against certain forms oftelematics infrastructure that may lock an urban area into particular types ofdevelopment.50
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
Health care facilitated
Medical informatics will assist surgery and dental care, provide large databases and
data interchange to greatly increase the speed and eﬃciency of research, and dramat-ically enhance the sharing of health knowledge by medical personnel and patients(Pickover, 1995; McNerney/Bezold, 1995). The potential of electronic health careservices to the home is being realized at a time when prohibitive health care costsforce more consideration of home care economies (Jones, 1995). But computerizeddecision support could accelerate an ongoing decline in medical autonomy andstatus (Weaver, 1991). And medical histories on smart cards and health databaseorganizations pose threats to privacy (Donaldson/Lohr, 1994).
Privacy invaded
Some excellent reports on privacy were published in the 1980s and deserve mentionhere: several studies by the Oﬃce of T echnology Assessment (1985, 1986), a warningabout ‘dossier society’ as the other side of the information economy (Laudon, 1986),
and a comparative study of surveillance in Germany, Sweden, France, Canada and theUS (Flaherty, 1989). The former chairman of the US Privacy Protection Commissionwarns that “silently but relentlessly the computer is making it easy for big business andgovernment to erode our right to be let alone” (Linowes, 1989). More recent literatureexplores legal issues of the information age (Branscomb, 1994), the need for betterprivacy safeguards (Ware, 1993), the loss of privacy from new telephone services(Dutton, 1992; Marx, 1994), and privacy principles and codes of ethics for industry(Smith, 1994; Mason et al., 1995). A new approach to information-handling based onnew advances in cryptography, whereby one gives diﬀerent pseudonyms to diﬀerentorganizations, is proposed to end the ‘dossier society’ threat (Chaum, 1992).
Consuming enhanced
The credit card industry is spreading worldwide and could well be a major threat toprivacy (Ritzer, 1995). Ritzer also points to how growing credit card use facilitatesconsumption, and how these cards have become ‘instruments of bondage’ for manypeople, embedding them in the consumer society. Many activities now undertaken atshopping malls will soon be eﬃciently undertaken at the information mall (Sheth/Sisodia, 1993). Software mogul Bill Gates (1995) envisions the electronic market-place as the universal middleman: “market information will be plentiful and trans-action costs low. It will be a shopper’s heaven”. Snider and Ziporyn (1992) idealisticallypropose a new type of consumerism based on an age of ‘Omnimedia’ and independ-ent consumer information companies. The advent of E-money will facilitate “buyingsprees at the virtual mall” (Levy, 1994).
Truth-seeking made difﬁcult
Increasing complexity and turbulence, along with more access to multiple points ofview, make truth-telling more diﬃcult (Michael, 1993). This growing uncertainty canNEW COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY: IMPACTS AND ISSUES 51
only be aggravated by the new possibilities of creating, recombining, and transform-
ing visual images (Mitchell, 1992), and by the advent of virtual reality, which may wellerode our sense of what is real (Heim, 1993: Cartwright, 1994: Jones, 1995).
A culture of peace obstructed?
The laudable notion of building a culture of peace appears conﬁned to FedericoMayer and UNESCO. A massive campaign on many fronts would be necessary toadvance it, preferably combined with some reinvented notion of the public interest asa governing ethic in television broadcasting (Day, 1995). According to Day, trendsare moving away from this ideal. Another ominous trend is the growth of video gameslargely based on themes of aggression and violence, and now a part of the dailyexperience of many children (Provenzo, 1991).
Evolution accelerated
The executive editor of Wired has recently articulated a complex theory of the rise ofneo-biological civilization replacing the old world of mechanistic control (Kelly,1994). Another recent view holds that the merging of humans and machines willcreate Meta-man, a global superorganism and a powerful new image of ourselves(Stock, 1993). Both views are in the visionary/enthusiast school of positive thinkingabout infotech.
Conclusion: getting a grip on the real road ahead
Above all else, this survey should clearly impress any reader that our ignorance aboutinfotech and its impacts is vast, and the infoglut demonstrated here should rightfullybe unsettling.
No one has a good, up-to-date grasp of the emerging technologies. The enthusi-
astic advocates have no communication with the critics and the empiricists. Com-munications scholars are notably unhelpful, with the vast majority losing themselvesin behaviorist trivia and minutia. There are remarkably few journals in this area, andno yearbooks to survey the ‘knowledge industry’ in its broadest dimensions (in con-trast, the travel industry has several yearbooks). Futurists and their publications havemade many contributions (often on the upbeat/enthusiast side), but still largely focuson single topics rather than broad patterns and frameworks.
Weighing the pros and cons of information society in general, as well as impacts
in speciﬁc areas, the skeptical and negative views appear to have at least as muchintellectual foundation as the positive views – and perhaps much more. The key is toseparate potentials and promising experiments from reality, and to look at all impacts.Democracy has the potential to be enhanced by infotech, but present trends suggesterosion by TV . Work and productivity have the potential to be enhanced, but misuseof infotech and criminal activity raise questions about productivity, and the socialcosts of unemployment may be vast. Infotech applications to education have vastpotential, yet the technology is still not used well and the learning climate in manyschools is being strained by budget cuts, violence, and bureaucracy. The potentials for52
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
enhanced health care seem immense. The potentials for growing privacy invasion also
seem immense. And there is a wide variety of opinions on the pros and cons ofinfotech aiding development, enhancing consumption, reshaping cities, and accelerat-ing evolution in very new directions.
No answers can be oﬀered here, only more questions. This survey is both too
long and too short. The reader is thanked for enduring to the ambiguous end; yet,much more could be included. Somehow, we need to get a grip on the emerginginformation society: the ever-unfolding panoply of technologies, the actual and poten-tial impacts, the pros and cons of what we are doing, and alternative policies topromote the public interest. This survey suggests the beginnings of what must bedone: an ongoing, timely, and comprehensive survey of all relevant thinking world-wide on this momentous global development, with resulting information arrayed in avariety of formats. Think about it.
Bibliography
Adam, JA (1993) ‘Virtual reality is for real’ (Special Report) IEEE Spectrum 30 (10) (October)
22–29
Adler, PS (ed) (1992) T echnology and the Future of W ork Oxford University Press, New Y ork
(April) 336 pages
American Library Association, Library Instruction Round T able (1995) Information for a
New Age: Redeﬁning the Librarian Libraries Unlimited, Englewood, CO (February) 192
pages
Aronowitz, S, and DiFazio, W (1994) The Jobless Future: SciT ech and the Dogma of W ork
University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, MN (October) 392 pages
Aukstakalnis, S, and Blatner, D (1992) Silicon Mirage: The Art and Science of Virtual Reality
Peachpit Press, Berkeley, CA, 317 pages
Bagdikian, BH (1992) The Media Monopoly (Fourth Edition) Beacon Press, Boston, MA, 288
pages
Bankes, S, and Builder, C (1992) ‘Seizing the moment: harnessing the information society’ The
Information Society 8 (1) (January–March) 1–59
Barnet, RJ, and Cavanagh, J (1994) Global Dreams: Imperial Corporations and the New W orld
Order Simon and Schuster, New Y ork, 480 pages
Barry, JA (1991) T echnobabble MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 268 pagesBecker, J (1989) ‘The concept of a University of the World’ The Information Society 6 (3) 83–92
Bell, D (1989) ‘The third technological revolution: and its possible consequences’ Dissent 36
(2) (Spring) 164–176
Belsie, L (1993) ‘Smart cards connect customers’ The Christian Science Monitor (13 August) 8
Bianculli, D (1992) T eleliteracy: T aking T elevision Seriously Continuum Publishing Co. New
Y ork, 315 pages
Bikson, TK, and Law, SA (1993) ‘Electronic mail use at the World Bank: messages from users’
The Information Society 9 (2) (April–June) 89–124
Birdsall, WF (1994) The Myth of the Electronic Library: Librarianship and Social Change in
America Greenwood Press, Westport, CT, 206 pages
Birkerts, S (1994) The Gutenberg Elegies: The Fate of Reading in an Electronic Age Faber and
Faber, Winchester, MA (December) 231 pages. Fawcett Columbine paperbound edition,New Y ork (November 1995)
Blackman, C, and Schoof H (eds) (1994) ‘Competition and convergence’ (Special Issue)
T elecommunications Policy 18 (8) (November) 571–667NEW COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY: IMPACTS AND ISSUES 53
Bogart, L (1995) Commercial Culture: The Media System and the Public Interest Oxford
University Press. New Y ork (January) 384 pages
Bradley, SP et al. (1993) Globalization, T echnology and Competition: The Fusion of Computers and
T elecommunications in the 1990s Harvard Business School Press, Boston, MA, 392 pages
Branscomb, AW (1994) Who Owns Information? From Privacy to Public Access Basic Books,
New Y ork (June) 241 pages
Bridges, W (1994) JobShift: How to Prosper in a W orkplace Without Jobs Addison-Wesley,
Reading, MA (October) 257 pages
Brody, H (1993) ‘Information highway: the home front’ T echnology Review 96 (6) (August–
September) 30–40
Brook, J, and Boal, IA (eds) (1995) Resisting the Virtual Life: The Culture and Politics of Informa-
tion City Lights Books, San Francisco, CA (June) 278 pages
Burstein, D, and Kline, D (1995) Road W arriors: Dreams and Nightmares along the Information
Highway Dutton/Penguin, New Y ork (November) 466 pages
Cartwright, GF (1994) ‘Virtual or real? The mind in cyberspace’ The Futurist 28 (2)
(March–April) 22–26
Casmir, FL (ed) (1991) Communication in Development Ablex Publishing Co, Norwood, NJ,
352 pages
Caudill, M (1992) In Our Own Image: Building an Artiﬁcial Person Oxford University Press,
New Y ork. 242 pages
Chaum, D (1992) ‘Achieving electronic privacy’ Scientiﬁc American 267 (2) (August) 96–101
Coates, JF (1994) ‘The highly probably future: 83 assumptions about the year 2025’ The
Futurist 28 (4) (July–August) 7-page insert
Coates, JF (1995) ‘Work and pay in the twenty-ﬁrst century: an impending crisis ’ Employment
Relations T oday (Spring) 17–22
Coates, JF , and Jarratt, J (1994) ‘White collar productivity: key to future competitiveness’ The
Future at W ork 9 (November) 8 pages
Coates, JF et al. (1994) ‘T echnological forecasting: 1970–1993’ T echnological Forecasting and
Social Change 47 (1) (September) 23–33
Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility (1993) Serving the Community: A Public
Interest Vision of The National Information Infrastructure Computer Professionals for Social
Responsibility, Palo Alto, CA, 30 pages
Connors, M (1993) The Race to the Intelligent State: T owards the Global Information Economy of
2005 Blackwell Business, Oxford, UK, and Cambridge, MA, 221 pages
Cook, PS et al. (1992) The Future of News: T elevision–Newspapers –Wire Services–Newsmagazines
Wilson Center Press, Washington, and Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, 270pages
Crevier, D (1993) AI: The Tumultuous History of the Search for Artiﬁcial Intelligence Basic Books,
New Y ork, 386 pages
Cunningham, S. and Porter, AL (1992) ‘Communication networks: a dozen ways they’ll
change our lives’ The Futurist 26 (1) (January–February) 19–22
Davies, D et al. (1990) The T elling Image: The Changing Balance between Pictures and W ords in a
T echnological Age Oxford University Press. Oxford, UK, 166 pages
Davis, S, and Botkin, J (1994) The Monster under the Bed: How Business is Mastering the
Opportunity of Knowledge for Proﬁt Simon and Schuster. New Y ork (September) 189pages
Day, J (1995) The V anishing Vision: The Inside Story of Public T elevision University of California
Press. Berkeley, CA (October) 443 pages
Dent, HS. Jr (1995) Job Shock: Four New Principles Transforming our W ork and Business
St Martin’s Press, New Y ork (March) 295 pages54 THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
Dertouzos, ML (1991) ‘Building the information marketplace’ T echnology Review 94 (1)
(January) 28–40
Desurvire, E (1992) ‘Lightwave communications: the ﬁfth generation’ Scientiﬁc American 266
(1) (January) 114–121
Diebold Institute for Public Policy Studies (1995) Transportation Infrastructures: The Develop-
ment of Intelligent Transportation Systems Praeger, Westport, CT (May) 207 pages
Donaldson, MS, and Lohr KN (eds) (1994) Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure,
and Privacy National Academy Press, Washington, DC (April) 257 pages
Dordick, HS, and Wang, G (1993) The Information Society: A Retrospective View Sage Publica-
tions, Newbury Park, CA, 168 pages
Drucker, PF (1994) ‘The age of social transformation’ The Atlantic Monthly 274 (5)
(November) 53–80
Drucker, PF (1995) Managing in a Time of Great Change Truman T alley Books/Dutton, New
Y ork (November) 371 pages
Dunn, SL (1994) ‘The challenge of the nineties in US higher education: from Camelot to the
21st century’ Futures Research Quarterly 10 (3) (Fall) 35–55
Durlach, NI, and Mavor, AS (eds) (1995) Virtual Reality: Scientiﬁc and T echnological Challenges
National Academy Press, Washington, DC (January) 542 pages
Dutton, WH (1992) ‘The social impact of emerging telephone services’ T elecommunications
Policy 16 (5) (July) 377–387
Dyson, E (1995) ‘Intellectual value’ Wired 3 (7) (July) 136–141
Dyson, E, Gilder, G, Keyworth, J, and T oﬄer, A (1994) ‘A Magna Carta for the knowledge
age’ New Perspectives Quarterly 11 (4) (Fall) 26–37
Ellul, J (1990) The T echnological Bluﬀ (translated by Bromiley, GW) William B Eerdmans
Publishing Co, Grand Rapids, MI, 418 pages
Engelberger, JF (1989) Robotics in Service MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 248 pages
Estabrooks, M (1988) Programmed Capitalism: A Computer-Mediated Global Society ME
Sharpe, Armonk, NY, 205 pages
Feigenbaum, EA (1989) ‘T oward the library of the future’ Long Range Planning 22 (1)
(February) 118–123
Finley, M (1991) ‘The best of all possible meetings’ Across the Board 28 (9) (September) 40–45
Flaherty, DH (1989) Protecting Privacy in Surveillance Societies: The Federal Republic of
Germany, Sweden, France, Canada, and the United States University of North CarolinaPress, Chapel Hill, NC, 483 pages
Forester, T (1992) ‘Megatrends or megamistakes? What ever happened to the Information
Society?’ The Information Society 8 (3) (July–September) 133–146
Forester, T, and Morrison, P (1994) Computer Ethics: Cautionary T ales and Ethical Dilemmas in
Computing (Second Edition) MIT Press, Cambridge, MA (January) 347 pages
Fowles, J (1992) Why Viewers W atch: A Reappraisal of T elevision’s Eﬀects (Revised Edition) Sage
Publications, Newbury Park, CA, 280 pages
Ganley, GD (1992) The Exploding Political Power of Personal Media Ablex Publishing Co,
Norwood, NJ, 181 pages
Gates, B (1995) The Road Ahead Viking, New Y ork (November) 286 pagesGelernter, D (1991) Mirror W orlds, or the Day Software Puts the Universe in a Shoebox . . .
How It Will Happen and What It Will Mean Oxford University Press, New Y ork, 237pages
Gergen, KJ (1991) The Saturated Self: Dilemmas of Identity in Contemporary Life Basic Books,
New Y ork, 295 pages
Gibbs, D (1993) ‘T elematics and urban economic development policies: time for caution?’
T elecommunications Policy 17 (4) (May–June) 250–256NEW COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY: IMPACTS AND ISSUES 55
Gilder, G (1989) Microcosm: The Quantum Revolution in Economics and T echnology Simon and
Schuster, New Y ork, 426 pages
Gilder, G (1990) Life After T elevision Whittle Direct Books, Knoxville, TN, 86 pages
Glastonbury, B, and LaMendola, W (1992) The Integrity of Intelligence: A Bill of Rights for the
Information Age St Martin’s Press, New Y ork, 206 pages
Gleick, J (1995) ‘Making Microsoft safe for capitalism’ (Cover Story) The New Y ork Times
Magazine (5 November) 50–57
Gonzalez-Manet, E (1992) Informatics and Society: The New Challenges Ablex Publishing Corp,
Norwood, NJ, 201 pages
Halal, WE (1993) ‘The information technology revolution: computer hardware, software, and
services into the 21st century’ T echnological Forecasting and Social Change 44 (1) (August)
69–86
Halal, WE, and Liebowitz, J (1994) ‘T elelearning: the multimedia revolution in education’ The
Futurist 28 (6) (November–December) 21–26
Hamelink, CJ (1988) The T echnology Gamble. Informatics and Public Policy: A Study of T echno-
logy Ablex Publishing Corp, Norwood, NJ, 117 pages
Harasim, LM (ed) (1993) Global Networks: Computers and International Communication MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA, 411 pages
Hart, RP (1994) Seducing America: How T elevision Charms the Modern V oter Oxford University
Press, New Y ork (May) 230 pages
Haywood, T (1995) Info-Rich/Info-Poor: Access and Exchange in the Global Information Society
Bowker/Saur, West Sussex, UK (April) 274 pages
Heaton, JA, and Wilson, NL (1995) Tuning in Trouble: T alk TV’s Destructive Impact on Mental
Health Jossey-Bass, San Francisco (September) 284 pages
Heim, M (1993) The Metaphysics of Virtual Reality Oxford University Press, New Y ork, 175
pages
Hiltz, SR (1994) The Virtual Classroom: Learning Without Limits via Computer Networks Ablex
Publishing Corp, Norwood, NJ, 384 pages
Hines, A (1994) ‘Jobs and infotech: work in the information society’ The Futurist 28 (1)
(January–February) 9–13
Horner, VM (ed) (1991) ‘Electronic links for learning’ (special issue) Annals of The American
Academy of Political and Social Science 514 (March) 1–174
Horrocks, RJ, and Scarr, RWA (1993) Future Trends in T elecommunications John Wiley,
Chichester, UK, and New Y ork, 452 pages
Howard, A (ed) (1995) The Changing Nature of W ork Jossey-Bass, San Francisco (July)
590 pages
Huber, P (1994) Orwell’s Revenge: The 1984 Palimpsest The Free Press, New Y ork (November)
374 pages
Hudson, HE (1990) Communication Satellites: Their Development and Impact The Free Press,
New Y ork, 338 pages
Iyengar, S (1991) Is Anyone Responsible? How T elevision Frames Political Issues University of
Chicago Press, Chicago, 195 pages
Jones, MG (1995) Electronic House Calls: 21st Century Options Consumer Interest Research
Group, Washington (June) 27 pages
Jones, SG (ed) (1995) CyberSociety: Computer-Mediated Communication and Community Sage
Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA (January) 241 pages
Kahin, B, and Abbate. J (eds) (1995) Standards Policy for Information Infrastructure MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA (October) 653 pages
Kahin, B, and Keller J (eds) (1995) Public Access to the Internet MIT Press. Cambridge, MA
(September) 390 pages56 THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
Kaniss, P (1995) The Media and the Mayor’s Race: The Failure of Urban Political Reporting
Indiana University Press. Bloomington. IN (February) 395 pages
Kegan R (1994) In Over Our Heads: The Mental Demands of Modern Life Harvard University
Press, Cambridge, MA (May) 396 pages
Kelly, K (1994) Out of Control: The Rise of Neo-Biological Civilization Addison-Wesley, Reading,
MA (June) 521 pages
Kennedy, JL, and Morrow, TJ (1994) Electronic Job Search Revolution: Win with the New
T echnology that’s Reshaping T oday’s Job Market John Wiley, New Y ork, 207 pages
Kernan, A (1990) The Death of Literature Yale University Press, New Haven, CT, 230
pages
Kimball, Penn (1994) Downsizing the News: Network Cutbacks in the Nation’s Capital Woodrow
Wilson Center Press. Washington, and Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore
(March) 181 pages
Kingston, JA (1989) ‘Where information is all, pleas arise for less of it’ The New Y ork Times
9 July, E9
Klapp, OE (1986) Overload and Boredom: Essays on the Quality of Life in the Information Society
Greenwood Press, Westport, CT, 174 pages
Kling, R (1994) ‘Reading “all about” computerization: how genre conventions shape nonﬁc-
tion social analysis’ The Information Society 10 (3) (July–September) 147–172
Kobrak, F , and Luey, B (eds) (1992) The Structure of International Publishing in the 1990s
Transaction Publishers, New Brunswick, NJ, 240 pages
Koch, T (1991) Journalism for the 21st Century: Online Information, Electronic Databases, and the
News Greenwood/Praeger, Westport, CT, 374 pages
Koelsch, F (1995) The Infomedia Revolution: How it is Changing our W orld and your Life
McGraw-Hill Ryerson. T oronto (February) 358 pages
Kroker, A, and Weinstein, M (1994) Data Trash: The Theory of the Virtual Class St Martin’s
Press, New Y ork (November) 165 pages
Kurtzman, J (1993) The Death of Money: How the Electric Economy has Destabilized the W orld’s
Markets and Created Financial Chaos Simon and Schuster, New Y ork, 256 pages. Paper-bound edition from Little Brown Back Bay Books
Lande, N (1991) ‘T oward the electronic book’ Publishers W eekly (20 September) 28–30
Lanham, RA (1993) The Electronic W ord: Democracy, T echnology, and the Arts University of
Chicago Press, Chicago, 285 pages
Laudon, KC (1986) Dossier Society: V alue Choices in the Design of National Information Systems
Columbia University Press, New Y ork, 421 pages
Leebaert, D (ed) (1991) T echnology 2001: The Future of Computing and Communications MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA, 392 pages
Leebaert, D (ed) (1995) The Future of Software MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, (February)
300 pages
Levy, S (1994) ‘E-money’ Wired 2 (12) (December) 174–179
Lewis, PH (1995) ‘Security is lost in cyberspace’ The New Y ork Times 22 February, D1
Linowes, DF (1989) Privacy in America: Is your Private Life in the Public Eye? University of
Illinois Press, Urbana, IL, 190 pages
Lloyd, P (ed) (1994) Groupware in the 21st Century: Computer Supported Cooperative W orking
toward the Millennium Praeger, Westport, CT (November) 307 pages. Published in UK byAdamantine Press
Louw, E, and Duﬀy, N (1992) Managing Computer Viruses Oxford University Press, Oxford,
UK, and New Y ork, 171 pages
Lundberg, O (1991) ‘The perils of being a visionary: one man’s vision’ InterMedia 19 (1)
(January–February) 33–39NEW COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY: IMPACTS AND ISSUES 57
MacLachlan, SL (1993) ‘Pagers’ sophistication keeps sales growing’ The Christian Science
Monitor 23 August, 7
Maes, P (1995) ‘Intelligent software’ Scientiﬁc American (September) 84–86
Makridakis, S (1995) ‘The forthcoming information revolution: its impact on society and
ﬁrms ’ Futures 27 (8) (October) 799–821
Markoﬀ, J (1991) ‘Is the electronic book closer than you think?’ The New Y ork Times
29 December, E5
Markoﬀ, J (1995) ‘Discovery of Internet ﬂaws is setback for on-line trade’ The New Y ork Times
11 October, A1
Marx, GT (1994) ‘New telecommunications technologies require new manners’ T elecommuni-
cations Policy 18 (7) (October) 538–551
Mason, RO et al. (1995) Ethics of Information Management Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks.
CA (July) 327 pages
Masuda, Y (1990) Managing in the Information Society: Releasing Synergy Japanese Style Basil
Blackwell, Oxford, UK, and Cambridge, MA, 168 pages (New edition of The Information
Society as Post-Industrial Society Institute of the Information Society, T okyo, and World
Future Society, Bethesda, MD, 1980)
Mattelart, A (1991) Advertising International: The Privatisation of Public Space Routledge,
London and New Y ork (First published in Paris in 1989)
Mayer-Kress, G, and Barczys, C (1995) ‘The global brain as an emergent structure from the
worldwide computing network, and its implications for modeling ’ The Information Society
11 (1) January–March 1–27
Mayo, JS (1990) ‘The telecommunications revolution of the 1990s’ Vital Speeches of the Day 57
(5) (15 December) 151–155
Mayo, JS (1992) ‘R&D in the third millennium: requirements and challenges’ Vital Speeches of
the Day 59 (1) (15 October) 26–29
McKibbon, B (1992) The Age of Missing Information Random House, New Y ork (Brief version
in The New Y orker 9 March 1992 40–80)
McLuhan, M (1994) Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man  MIT Press, Cambridge, MA
(October) 365 pages (30th Anniversary reissue of 1964 McGraw-Hill edition)
McManus, JH (1994) Market-Driven Journalism: Let the Citizen Beware? Sage Publications,
Thousand Oaks. CA (April) 243 pages
McNerney, WJ, and Bezold, C (1995) Health Care Innovation: A Vision for the 21st Century
Institute for Alternative Futures, Alexandria, VA (August) 6 pages
Michael, DN (1993) ‘Governing by learning: boundaries, myths and metaphors’ Futures 25 (1)
(January-February) 81–89
Minoli, D (1995) Video Dialtone T echnology: Digital Video over ADSL, HFC, FTTC, and ATM
McGraw-Hill, New Y ork (June) 495 pages
Minow, NN and LaMay, CL (1995) Abandoned in the W asteland: Children, T elevision, and the
First Amendment  Hill and Wang, New Y ork (July) 237 pages
Mitchell, WJ (1992) The Reconﬁgured Eye: Visual Truth in the Post-Photographic Era MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA, 273 pages
Mitchell, WJ (1995) City of Bits: Space, Place, and the Infobahn MIT Press, Cambridge, MA
(September) 225 pages
Mitroﬀ, II, and Bennis, W (1989) The Unreality Industry: The Deliberate Manufacturing of
Falsehood and What it is Doing to our Lives Birch Lane Press/Carol Publishing Group, NewY ork, 218 pages
Moore, RH, Jr (1994) ‘Wiseguys: smarter criminals and smarter crime in the 21st century’ The
Futurist 28 (5) (September–October) 33–3758 THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
Moore, RH, Jr (1995) ‘Twenty-ﬁrst century law to meet the challenge of twenty-ﬁrst century
organized crime’ Futures Research Quarterly 11 (1) (Spring) 23–46
Morton, MSS (1991) The Corporation of the 1990s: Information T echnology and Organizational
Transformation Oxford University Press, New Y ork, 331 pages
Mowshowitz, A (1994) ‘Virtual organization: a vision of management’ The Information Society
10 (4) (October–December) 267–288
Naisbitt, J (1982) Megatrends: T en New Directions Transforming our Lives Warner Books. New
Y ork, 290 pages
National Research Council, Computer Science and T elecoms Board (1994) Information
T echnology in the Service Society: A T wenty-First Century Lever National Academy Press.
Washington, 270 pages
National Research Council. NRENAISSANCE Committee (1994) Realizing the Information
Future: The Internet and Beyond National Academy Press, Washington, 301 pages
National Research Council, Oﬃce of International Aﬀairs (1993) Global Dimensions of Intel-
lectual Property Rights in Science and T echnology National Academy Press, Washington,442 pages
National Research Council, System Security Study Committee (1991) Computers at Risk: Safe
Computing in the Information Age National Academy Press, Washington, 303 pages
Negroponte, N (1995) Being Digital Alfred A Knopf, New Y ork (February) 243 pagesNewman, SB (1995) Literacy in the T elevision Age: The Myth of the TV Eﬀect Ablex Publishing
Corp, Norwood, NJ (Spring) 233 pages
Oﬃce of T echnology Assessment, US Congress (1985) Federal Government Information
T echnology: Electronic Surveillance and Civil Liberties US Government Printing Oﬃce,Washington
Ibid (1986) Electronic Record Systems and Individual Privacy US Government Printing Oﬃce,
Washington
Ibid (1991) Rural America at the Crossroads: Networking for the Future US Government Printing
Oﬃce, Washington
Ibid (1993) Adult Literacy and New T echnologies: T ools for a Lifetime US Government Printing
Oﬃce, Washington
Ibid (1994) Electronic Enterprises: Looking to the Future US Government Printing Oﬃce,
Washington, 188 pages
Ibid (1995) T eachers and T echnology: Making the Connection  US Government Printing Oﬃce,
Washington, 304 pages
Ogden, MR (1994) ‘Politics in a parallel universe: is there a future for cyberdemocracy’ Futures
26 (7) (September) 713–729
Ohmae, K (1995) The End of the Nation State: The Rise of Regional Economies The Free Press,
New Y ork (June) 214 pages
O’Neill, J (1991) Plato’s Cave: Desire, Power, and the Specular Functions of the Media Ablex
Publishing Corp, Norwood, NJ, 206 pages
Palmer, EL (1988) T elevision and America’s Children: A Crisis of Neglect Oxford University
Press, New Y ork, 194 pages
Palmer, EL (1993) T oward a Literate W orld: T elevision in Literacy Education – Lessons from the
Arab Region Westview Press, Boulder, CO, 170 pages
Papert, S (1993) The Children’s Machine: Rethinking School in the Age of the Computer Basic
Books, New Y ork, 241 pages
Parker, R (1995) Mixed Signals: The Prospects for Global T elevision Twentieth Century Fund
Press, New Y ork (August) 103 pages
Patterson, DA (1995) ‘Microprocessors in 2020’ Scientiﬁc American (September) 62–67NEW COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY: IMPACTS AND ISSUES 59
Pelton, JN (1989) ‘T elepower: the emerging global brain’, The Futurist 23 (5) (September–
October) 9–14
Penzias, A (1995) Harmony: Business, T echnology & Life After Paperwork Harper Business, New
Y ork (April) 178 pages
Perelman, LJ (1992) School’s Out: Hyperlearning, The New T echnology, and the End of Education
William Morrow, New Y ork, 368 pages (Paperback edition from Avon Books, October
1993)
Pickover, CA (ed) (1995) Future Health: Computers and Medicine in the T wenty-ﬁrst Century
St Martin’s Press, New Y ork (November) 184 pages
Pollack, A (1992) ‘“ Fifth generation” became Japan’s lost generation’ The New Y ork Times
5 June, D1
Postman, N (1992) T echnopoly: The Surrender of Culture to T echnology Alfred A Knopf, New
Y ork, 222 pages
Provenzo, EF , Jr (1991) Video Kids: Making Sense of Nintendo Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, MA, 184 pages
Raine, LP , and Cilluﬀo, FJ (eds) (1994) Global Organized Crime: The New Empire of Evil Center
for Strategic and International Studies, Washington (November) 185 pages
Rheingold, H (1993) The Virtual Community: Homesteading on the Electronic Frontier  Addison-
Wesley, Reading, MA, 325 pages (Paperback edition from Harper Perennial)
Rice, PO, and Robillard, JA (eds) (1991) The Future of Serials: Proceedings of the North American
Serials Interest Group The Haworth Press, Binghamton, NY, 260 pages
Rifkin, J (1995) The End of W ork: The Decline of the Global Labor Force and the Dawn of the Post-
Market Era T archer/ Putnum, New Y ork (January) 350 pages
Ritzer, G (1995) Expressing America: A Critique of the Global Credit Card Society Pine Forge
Press/Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA (January) 240 pages
Robinson, DC et al. (1991) Music at the Margins: Popular Music and Global Cultural Diversity
Sage Publications, Newbury Park, CA, 312 pages
Roe, DB, and Wilpon, JG (eds) (1994) V oice Communication between Humans and Machines
National Academy Press, Washington, 548 pages
Ronfeldt, D (1992) ‘Cyberocracy is coming’ The Information Society 8 (4) (October–December)
243–296
Rosell, SA (1992) Governing in an Information Society Institute for Research on Public Policy,
Montreal, 167 pages
Rosenberg, R (1991) ‘Debunking computer literacy’ T echnology Review 94 (1) (January) 58–65
Rossman, P (1992) The Emerging W orldwide Electronic University: Information Age Global Higher
Education Greenwood Press, Westport, CT, 169 pages
Roszak, T (1994) The Cult of Information: A Neo-Luddite Treatise on High-T ech, Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence, and the True Art of Thinking (second edition) University of California Press, Berkeley,CA, 267 pages (First published in 1986)
Sale, K (1995) Rebels Against the Future: The Luddites and their W ar on the Industrial Revolution;
Lessons for the Computer Age Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA (May) 320 pages
Salomon, JJ et al. (eds) (1994) The Uncertain Quest: Science, T echnology, and Development United
Nations University Press, T okyo (April) 532 pages. Also see Wesley-T anakovic, I (1994)Expanding Access to Science and T echnology: The Role of Information T echnologies UnitedNations University Press, T okyo (February) 462 pages
Sanders, B (1994) A is for Ox: Violence, Electronic Media, and the Silencing of the Written W ord
Pantheon Books, New Y ork (October) 269 pages
Sardar, Z, and Ravetz, JR (eds) (1995) ‘Cyberspace: to boldly go’ (Special Issue) Futures 27 (7)
(September) 695–796
Schement, JR, and Curtis, T (1995) T endencies and T ensions of the Information Age: The60 THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
Production and Distribution of Information in the United States Transaction Publishers,
New Brunswick, NJ (January) 285 pages
Schepp, D, and Schepp, B (1995) The T elecommuter’s Handbook: How to Earn a Living without
Going to the Oﬃce (second edition) McGraw-Hill, New Y ork (August) 207 pages
Schiller, HI (1989) Culture, Inc.: The Corporate T akeover of Public Expression Oxford University
Press, New Y ork, 201 pages
Schiller, HI (1992) Mass Communications and American Empire (second edition, updated)
Westview Press, Boulder, CO, 214 pages
Scientiﬁc American (1991) ‘Communications, computers and networks’ (Special Issue) Scien-
tiﬁc American 265 (3) (September) 62–166
Sheridan, TB (1992) T elerobotics, Automation, and Human Supervisory Control MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA, 393 pages
Sheth, JN, and Sisodia, RS (1993) ‘The information mall’ T elecommunications Policy 17 (5)
(July) 376–389
Shrader, WK (1992) Media Blight and the Dehumanizing of America Praeger, New Y ork, 184
pages
Slaton, CD (1992) T elevote: Expanding Citizen Participation in the Quantum Age Praeger, New
Y ork, 226 pages
Slouka, M (1995) W ar of the W orlds: Cyberspace and the High-T ech Assault on Reality  Basic
Books, New Y ork (August) 185 pages
Smith, A (1991) The Age of Behemoths: The Globalization of Mass Media Firms A Twentieth
Century Fund Paper Priority Press, New Y ork, 83 pages (Distribution by BrookingsInstitution)
Smith, HJ (1994) Managing Privacy: Information T echnology and Corporate America University
of North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill, NC (June) 297 pages
Snider, J (1994) ‘Democracy on-line: tomorrow’s electronic electorate’ The Futurist 28 (5)
(September–October) 15–19
Snider, J, and Ziporyn, T (1992) Future Shop: How New T echnologies Will Change the W ay W e
Shop and What W e Buy St Martin’s Press, New Y ork. 316 pages
Sproull, L, and Kiesler, S (1991) Connections: New W ays of W orking in the Networked Organiza-
tion MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 212 pages
Stephens, G (1995) ‘Crime in cyberspace: the digital underworld’ The Futurist 29 (5)
(September–October) 24–28
Stock, G (1993) Metaman: The Merging of Humans and Machines into a Global Superorganism
Simon and Schuster, New Y ork, 365 pages
Stoll, C (1995) Silicon Snake Oil: Second Thoughts on the Information Highway Doubleday, New
Y ork (March) 247 pages
Sussman, G (ed) (1991) Transnational Communications: Wiring the Third W orld Sage Publica-
tions. Newbury Park, CA, 327 pages
Sussman, V (1995) ‘Gold rush in cyberspace’ (Cover Story) U.S. News & W orld Report 13
November, 72–83
T albott, SL (1995) The Future Does Not Compute: Transcending the Machines in Our Midst
O’Reilly and Associates, Sebastopol, CA (June) 481 pages
Tierney, J (1992) ‘Sound bites become smaller mouthfuls’ The New Y ork Times 23 January, A1
Tiﬃn, J, and Rajasingham, L (1995) In Search of the Virtual Class: Education in an Information
Society Routledge, London (August) 204 pages
Time Magazine (1995) ‘Welcome to cyberspace’ (Special Issue) Time Spring, 88 pagesToﬄer, A (1980) The Third W ave William Morrow and Company, New Y ork, 544 pages.
Toﬄer, A, and T oﬄer, H (1993a) ‘Societies at hyper-speed’ The New Y ork Times 31 October,
E17NEW COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY: IMPACTS AND ISSUES 61
Toﬄer, A, and T oﬄer, H (1993b) W ar and Anti-W ar: Survival at the Dawn of the 21st Century
Little Brown and Co. Boston, 302 pages
Toﬄer, A, and T oﬄer, H (1995) ‘Getting set for the coming millennium’ The Futurist 29 (2)
(March–April) 10–15
T omlinson, J (1991) Cultural Imperialism: A Critical Introduction Johns Hopkins University
Press, Baltimore, MD, 187 pages
Tuman, MC (1992) W ord Perfect: Literacy in the Computer Age University of Pittsburgh Press,
Pittsburgh, PA, 150 pages
Tyack, D, and Cuban, L (1995) Tinkering T oward Utopia: A Century of Public School Reform
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA (September) 184 pages
Vajda, SA (1993) ‘The growth and expansion of telecoms in Mexico’ InterMedia 21 (4–5)
(August–September) 8–13
Vinge, V (1993) ‘T echnological singularity’ Whole Earth Review 81 (Winter) 88–95
Ware, WH (1993) ‘The new faces of privacy’ The Information Society 9 (3) (July–September)
193–211
Warwick, DR (1992) ‘The cash-free society’ The Futurist 26 (6) (November–December)
19–22
Weaver, RR (1991) Computers and Medical Knowledge: The Di ﬀusion of Decision Support T ech-
nology Westview Press, Boulder, CO, 142 pages
Webster, F , and Robins, K (1986) Information T echnology: A Luddite Analysis Ablex Publishing
Co, Norwood, NJ, 387 pages
Weiser, M (1991) ‘The computer for the 21st century’ Scientiﬁc American 265 (3) (September)
94–104
Weizer, N et al. (1991) The Arthur D. Little Forecast on Information T echnology and Productivity:
Making the Integrated Enterprise W ork John Wiley, New Y ork, 272 pages
Wines, M (1994) ‘Washington really is in touch: we’re the problem’ The New Y ork Times
16 October, E1
Winston, B (1986) Misunderstanding Media Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
419 pages
Woherem, EE (1991) ‘Expert systems as a medium for knowledge transfer to less developed
countries’ Science and Public Policy 18 (5) (October) 301–309
Wright, R (1995) ‘Hyperdemocracy’ (Cover Story) Time 23 January, 15–21
Wriston, WB (1992) The T wilight of Sovereignty: How the Information Revolution is Transforming
the W orld Charles Scribner’s Sons/Macmillan, New Y ork, 192 pages
Zysman, GI (1995) ‘Wireless networks’ Scientiﬁc American (September) 68–7162 THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
PART 2
Governing new media
This part of the reader is concerned with the complex relations between new media and
government. On the one hand, as we saw in the Introduction , many writers see the new
media of the present as a distinctive product of the nationally driven military techno-logical competition of the 1950s and 1960s. On the other, new media are also widelyseen as creatures of globalisation, resistant to national laws and regulations. Govern-ments are long used to controlling the distribution or communication of cultural goods: itis, for example, broadcasting which is generally strictly controlled, not the making oftelevision programmes. The classi ﬁcation and circulation of tangible cultural goods,
such as books, magazines, ﬁlms, and sound recordings have also often been controlled
through laws regulating the importation of such works across national boundaries.But when these goods cease to be tangible objects, and become instead no more thana stream of signals being transmitted down a cable or through the atmosphere, theregulatory task becomes substantially more challenging.
Governments persist in seeking to exercise controls over new media broadly similar
to those which regulate old media; part of the reason is that citizens in most countriescontinue to expect governments to control offensive or dangerous media and communi-cations. But there is a strong view held by many that such efforts are a waste of time,economically costly and technically futile. This perspective may be summed up in thefamous mid-1990s ’ line ‘ the Net interprets censorship as damage and routes around
it’, attributed to the internet pioneer and free speech advocate John Gilmore.
Gilmore’ s view of the fundamental value of free expression is widely held. It is worth
comparing the approach of some of the writers in this part to that of Andrew Barry inPart 4. While many writers conceptualise the relationship between government andtechnology as a case of intervention in the private realm – whether necessary, counter-
productive, or doomed to failure – Barry suggests ways in which the focus can switch
to the formative, citizen-making role of new technologies. New media are shaped bygovernment; they also shape civic life.
Since censorship looms so large in debates over new media, we have included an
alternative perspective here, taken from Saunders, Hunter and Williamson ’s illuminating
historical study of pornography and obscenity law. The view they present may be usefullycontrasted with that of de Sola Pool and other writers in the technological –libertarian
tradition: instead of seeing censorship as an untoward governmental intrusion into a
domain of legitimate private choice, they characterise the emergence of obscenity lawas a response to the unplanned interactions of several historical forces, includingdevelopments in printing technology and the book trade: ‘Obscenity law ﬁrst emerged in
a complex technical environment formed by the overlap of a new governmental distinc-tion between public and private spheres and the spread of a speci ﬁc cultural technology
and competence’  (1992:51).
A further degree of complexity arises here around the relations between old
and new media, and the highly differential approaches of governments to them. Theemergence of what are now considered older electronic media – radio and television – in
the mid-20th century coincided with the expansion of western governments ’ liberalising
ambition. In many countries those industries remain highly regulated, harnessed tonational cultural and social policy goals. New networked media, by the same token, haveemerged and in the main continue to operate outside this domain, while increasinglycompeting with it. Bruce M. Owen presents a media economist ’s view of the legacy of
government’ s long era of regulating broadcast media. In Owen ’s view, government inter-
vention has reduced the capacity and ef ﬁciency of the broadcasting industry, and the
choices it has been able to offer consumers: ‘So restrictive and distorting has been the
effect of regulatory policy that it is almost impossible to imagine what broadcastingwould have been like had it developed in a free market environment, except that therewould have been a lot more of it a lot sooner. ’ Owen points to the commercial and
political pressures which give rise to costly over-regulation, and notes that there is noreason why new digital media should be immune from these very same dynamics.
Andrew Graham adopts a different approach to the policy legacy of broadcasting in
the extract from his work included here. Making a case for the continued role of what heterms ‘public service broadcasting’  in the digital age, he emphasises the economic,
social and political bene ﬁts of what he calls ‘common knowledge ’. Common knowledge
is essential to public debate in democracies: it is ‘what everyone knows everyone
knows’ . Further, the media are a major source of contemporary common knowledge, if
not the only one. Public service media, the argument runs, have a crucial role in aimingnot merely to inform people, or communicate news, or to attract audiences: they mustalso ‘extend the understanding and experience of those who watch and listen ’. Market-
driven media alone will not serve democracy or citizenship well. For Kevin Robins andFrank Webster, this failure has already occurred. For them the ‘public sphere’  has
become a rationalised ‘cybernetic state ’ which comprises a ‘programmed market and a
regulated and coded consumer society ’.
The question then becomes one of whether old media rules should or could be
remodelled along the lines of the relative freedoms accorded new media. Here RobertMcChesney and Ben Compaine conduct a lively debate over the relevance of new mediafreedoms for old media policy. Does the ef ﬂorescence of new media mean the end of
old media regulations, rendering irrelevant special rules such as those regarding take-overs and acquisitions? Are the media integrating, globalising and concentrating, as theeconomic and technological forces of convergence drive further restructuring and policyliberalisation? Speaking about the United States, McChesney makes the importantpoint, echoing Owen, that the media landscape does not re ﬂect the dynamics of the
market but is a corrupt dispersal of privileges and licences. Neither do the problems64
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
stop with old media: many new technologies have been developed with public sub-
sidies. McChesney ’s conclusion is that the threat to democracy from new media is such
that independent and non-commercial media will be more important than ever in theyears to come, and it is vital that media and communications policy itself bedemocratised.
Ben Compaine addresses McChesney ’s arguments directly. Compaine ’s point is
that globalisation and deregulation have not in fact produced more concentrated globalmedia sector: in his view, there is only one genuinely global media company. In diverseand complex societies with no single ‘public interest’ , markets actually provide an
important democratic constraint on media companies.GOVERNING NEW MEDIA 65
2.1
Historicising obscenity law,
by David Saunders, Ian M. Hunter andDugald Williamson
Literary histories of obscenity law – the work of what we have termed ‘censorship
historians’ – identify the person who creates and the person who is prosecuted.
This identiﬁcation is manifest in the attachment of post-Romantic criticism to theﬁgure of the transgressive author (or text), said to embody the whole impetus ofhuman development against the repressive powers of law and state. This identi ﬁca-
tion is so profoundly established that these literary histories do not pause to digest thefact that the bulk of obscenity prosecutions have been of printers, publishers andbooksellers, not of writers.
It was thus as a printer and bookseller, not as a writer, that an individual was ﬁrst
convicted of obscene publication. [In Chapter 2 we noted that] in 1727, with Rex v.Curll, the court of King’s Bench created the oﬀence of obscene libel, conceptualisedas a disturbing of the King’s peace by virtue of an obscene publication which doesharm to public morality.
1 In 1724, the London printer, bookseller, pamphleteer, jour-
nalist, publicist, employer of hacks, pirate and pornographer Edmund Curll wascharged in relation to the publication of V enus in the Cloister; or, the Nun in her Smock,an English translation of Jean Barrin’s Vénus dans le cloître, together with certain other
works. For the ﬁrst time, obscene publication appeared within the purview of thecommon law, entering the criminal justice system and thereby gaining a new socialgenerality as the object of governmental responsibility. With the sentencing of Curll in1727, obscene publication gained legal recognition as a danger which, left uncheckedby the custodial and legal powers of the sovereign, could morally harm the populationat large. In eﬀect, the judges in Curll’s case adopted a new disposition of publicmorality, transferring a speci ﬁc form of immorality from sin to crime and shifting its
control from religious to legal regulations.
This shift marked a signiﬁcant mutation in the existing division of jurisdiction
between the temporal or common law courts and the spiritual or ecclesiastical courtswhich, hitherto, had dealt with matters pertaining to personal morality and sex (hencetheir popular appellation as the Bawdy Courts).
2 The spiritual courts had tradition-
ally carried the responsibility for dealing with ‘personal’ o ﬀences pro custodia morum
of the community and pro salute animae of the oﬀender, that is, for the sake of reform-ing the sinner. The judges did not slip obscene publication across this jurisdictional
boundary without a deal of debate about the existing demarcation of competence
between the diﬀerent courts and about the indications and counter-indications ofsuch precedents as were to hand, notably Rex v. Sir Charles Sedley 1663 and Regina v.Read 1707. A solid tussle was conducted within the terms of a speciﬁc commonlaw procedure – the construction, extension and application of precedent. This is justone sign that the judges’ action was anything but automatic and driven by Puritanmorality or by a reﬂex repression of sexual expressivity.
Curll’s defence to the charge ran within established boundaries and rested, one
would think, on a solid precedent in Read. In 1707 the King’s Bench had quashed aconviction on the grounds that a written publication which did not defame someactual person was not a criminal matter. As Curll’s counsel said of Read:
[T]here was an information for a libel in writing an obscene book called The
Fifteen Plagues of a Maidenhead, and after conviction it was moved in arrest ofjudgement that this was not punishable in the T emporal Courts; and the opinionof Chief Justice Holt was so strong with the objection, that the prosecutor neverthought ﬁt to stir it again.
(Rex v. Curll, pp. 849–50)
Y et this defence failed against an evidently successful analogy drawn by the
Attorney General: just as ‘particular acts of fornication are not punishable in theT emporal Courts, and bawdy houses are’ (p. 850), so the action of obscene publica-tion – if it ‘tends to disturb the civil order of society’ or reﬂect upon morality – should
be considered by the court in the same terms as the running of a bawdy house.
In this unforeseen reorganisation of the institutions of moral regulation, the
common law courts acquired a new responsibility: regulation of the ﬁeld of obscenepublication. In its early modern conﬁguration, this ﬁeld was organised around anequally unforeseen yet potent liaison between certain literate products of a confes-sional practice concerned with instilling an ever more detailed sense of the erotic andthe sinful, and a commercial book trade beginning to exploit that same developingerotic sensitivity but for ends quite other than grace. The once specialist genre oflibertine anti-clerical erotica was thereby redirected to a new audience, as Englishtranslation and publication established new circulations for works such as Vénus dansle cloître. In Chapter 2, in considering the question of this new audience, we thussuggested that what pushed Curll’s publication across the threshold into the domainof criminal law was the formation of a new and less specialised public with adisposition for pornography in English.
This particular expansion of government and criminal law into the area of public
morality did not involve an abstract speciﬁcation of the existence of a public with apropensity for corruption. Without the de ﬁnite means of becoming corrupt, in other
words without the communications technology of the book and without the dissemi-nation of a particular cultural competence – print literacy – a public which might becorrupted by obscene publications could not actually exist. Hence the signiﬁcance ofone judge’s observation that ‘[t]he spiritual Courts punish only personal spiritualdefamation by words; if it is reduced to writing, it is a temporal oﬀence’ (p. 850).More pointed still is the contrast drawn by Justice Reynolds between Sedley, where68
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
Sir Charles had ‘only exposed himself to the people then present, who might choose
whether they would look upon him or not’, and the action of Curll, whose ‘book goesall over the kingdom’ (p. 851). The notion of the new distributional force of print, andthe judges’ suspicion that print exercises a certain type of direct impact upon itsreaders, swings the case against Curll. This had not been the decision in Read, and thedivergence of these two decisions at common law, separated by only twenty years, sayssomething of the instability of the pornographic ﬁeld from the very start. The court inCurll thus set itself to weigh up whether a publication of obscene literature, the distri-bution and reading of V enus in the Cloister, could disturb the King’s peace as surely asthe actions of Sedley, friend of Rochester, had been found to do in 1663. In the earliercase, along with the public display of nakedness on the balcony, the defendant had, asChief Justice Fortescue remarked in Curll, exercised a physical force in throwing outbottles and pissing down upon the people’s heads.
Aside from the telling contrast with our own times when, in the Williams Report
(1979), books fall by their essential nature as ‘writing’ into the realm of free ‘choice’
whereas photographs are excluded on the grounds of the coercive immediacy of their
impact, what is the historical and theoretical interest of Curll’s case for subsequent lawon obscenity?
3 The judges in Curll realised a complex piece of lawmaking which – as
the oﬀence of obscene libel – was to endure in English criminal law for 232 years, untilthe Obscene Publications Act of 1959. The creation of this new oﬀence and thejudicial initiative to use the criminal law for the moral government of the kingdomwere contingent on an unpredictable conjunction of legal and cultural factors: theSedley precedent whereby the common law declared itself competent – as custosmorum of all the king’s subjects – to indict on the grounds of a subversion of publicmorals; the rise of the distribution of printed works and a rapid expansion of thecultural capacity – discursive literacy – needed to consume them; the emergence ofa less specialist interest in erotic writings and the formation of a system of supply,for instance by a pornographer, printer and bookseller such as Curll, of a marketproviding for this new ‘personal’ interest.
It is in this conjunction of otherwise unrelated factors – legal, governmental,
cultural, technological and commercial – that the contingency of the early modernpornographic ﬁeld is displayed. Set against this background of unplanned circum-
stances, the attempt to account for the ﬁrst emergence of the crime of obscene publi-cation in terms of some general movement of consciousness of which the law was thepliant instrument – typically an access of ‘Puritan’ repressiveness – promises only aloss of historical speciﬁcity and a reduced descriptive capacity. Certainly, an expan-sion of the sphere of government occurred through the mechanism of the criminallaw. But this unanticipated reorganisation of the institutions regulating public moral-ity resulted from a characteristic piece of common law innovation, building up fromgritty example and particularity of circumstance. The court was confronted by thepossibility of a crime involving a disturbance of the peace where there was no use ofphysical force and a libel where no one was libelled. The question of how such an actcould have become intelligible as a crime, as it evidently did with Curll, calls foranalysis in terms of quite local circumstances, not grand philosophical schemes.
In Curll’s case, a printed and published writing was recognised as constituting an
obscene libel and made the object of a criminal sanction on the grounds that – leftHISTORICISING OBSCENITY LAW 69
unchecked – such a publication would harm public morality and disturb the social
balance by libelling the honour of the king through an exposure of his subjects to the
imperious force of printed obscenity. By the time of the Obscene Publications Act of1857 and Hicklin in 1868, things are very diﬀerent. By then, a work counted asobscene is treated as a toxic substance having ‘a tendency . . . to deprave and corruptthose whose minds are open to such immoral inﬂuences, and into whose hands apublications of this sort may fall’. If the publication is dangerous enough to bedeemed a social risk and thus made subject to preventive legal regulatory measures, itis no longer as an action liable to disturb the king’s peace. Rather, it has become adangerous substance, a commodity capable of inducing the user who comes fromwhat is deemed a category of vulnerable and non-competent persons to deviate fromknown norms of moral and physical health. What nineteenth-century obscenity lawtargetted as an essential object of government responsibility was no longer an act ofsedition endangering the social balance, but a dangerous poison inducing moral andmedical harm. T o underscore such transformations is to break with the receivedpattern of historiography that has been imposed on English obscenity law. We have inmind accounts such as St John-Stevas (1956), Hyde (1964), Rolph (1969), Thomas(1969) and Robertson (1979). These are unitary narratives which construct a historyof the legal relations of erotic writing in terms of a single trans-historical strugglebetween repressive external controls – censorship, obscenity law, police – and anessential subjectivity which seeks individual expression in writing the truth about sex.
What is the problem with such accounts? It is not just that they write the history
backwards from the present as if a single logic, a single dark and shining path led fromEzekiel to D. H. Lawrence (Robertson, 1979) or from ancient Greece to the FirstAmendment and Arthur Schlesigner Jr (Widmer, 1970). More importantly, thereceived historiography does no justice to the substantive changes in the social organ-isation of subjectivity. The medicalised morality and moralised medicine which cre-ated and so minutely managed the nineteenth-century sexual personality – and thusdirectly informed the obscenity law of that time and cultural milieu – register a highdegree of historical particularity. In our present study, historical transformations ofsubjectivity are taken as a necessary starting point for any attempt to put the recordstraight concerning the objectives and norms of obscenity law. The diﬀerence shouldbe clear between a history which recognises the historically distinctive but imperman-ent arrangement of sexual, moral, medical and legal attributes in nineteenth-centuryEngland and one – the received historiography of the censorship historians – thatassumes a timeless sexual subject upon which, except at rare moments of emancipa-tion, more or less the same censorious law eternally impinges in more or less the samerepressive manner. No doubt the notion of a transhistorical sexuality is convenient,providing both origin and destiny for the traditional history of erotic writing, whetherfor the author behind the work, the reader in front of it or the historian wanting towrite his or her single story of repression.
By contrast, we have emphasised the historical and cultural diﬀerences between a
crime of obscene publication deﬁned within a series comprising sin, sedition, disturb-ance of the king’s peace, print technology and a crime of obscene publication deﬁnedwithin a series comprising moral oﬀence, medical harm, abortiﬁcients, lotteries,the Post Oﬃce, unregulated poisons and mutoscopes allowing universal access. In70
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
foregrounding the fact of historical diﬀerence, we directly confront those two trad-
itional periodisations of English obscenity law which tie the emergence of that laweither to the alleged excess of puritan moral conscientiousness or to the supposedlyoverweaning power of Victorian moralism. In each case, the received historiographyunderestimates the technical complexity and historical particularity of the legal-cultural arrangements, just as it underestimates the possibility – if, that is, it evensuspects it – that western sexuality is less the locus of an essential human truththan a specialised cultural artefact into which so much work has gone. Not the leastimportant element of this work has been a remarkable alteration in the relationsbetween literature and sex. It is to this theme – a quite unforeseen transformationof the concerns and content of aesthetic literature and the problems which thistransformation posed for obscenity law – that we now turn.
Notes
1 For the detail of the record, we note the following factual errors in accounts of
Curll’s case. Thomas (1969, p. 82) names the three judges as Raymond, Fortescueand Reynolds. The ﬁrst of these names is wrong; it should be Mr Justice Probyn.The Williams Report (1979, p. 167) has the Chief Justice say that ‘if it were notfor the case of Read, he would see little diﬃculty in it’. In fact these are the wordsof the Attorney General prosecuting, in response to the opening by Curil’s coun-sel, Mr Marsh. The error arises from a mis-reading of a vocative at the head of theconcluding paragraph of the Attorney’s statement (‘Chief Justice, I think this is acase of very great consequence, though if it was not for the case of The Queen v.Read, I should make no great diﬃculty of it.’) The Chief Justice is responding tothis statement, so we can take the Attorney’s ‘Chief Justice’ to refer to him, not to
signal the reporter’s identiﬁcation of the speaker.
2 On these courts, see Chapter 8, ‘The Bawdy Courts’, in Hill (1964). On the state
and functions of the eccelesiastical courts at the start of the eighteenth century,see Archer (1956).
3 Reynolds (1975, p. 222) warns against too much reliance on early obscenity
decisions since ‘the eighteenth-century legal precedents for punishment ofobscene publication have politics as their basis, not close legal reasoning’. Curllhad published the memoirs of John Ker, a spy in the service of Queen Anne,which reﬂected unfavourably on the House of Hanover. According to Reynolds(p. 221), George II intervened in the case by having Chief Justice Fortescuereplaced by Francis Page, ‘the “hanging judge” notorious in Pope’s poems,
Johnson’s Life of Savage, and Fielding’s T om Jones’. With Page’s appointment, the
court rapidly and unanimously found in favour of punishing Curll.HISTORICISING OBSCENITY LAW 71
2.2
The tragedy of broadcast regulation,
by Bruce M. Owen
If it were not for the failure of government policy, American consumers would have
had much more and more diverse radio and television much sooner than they did,supported by vigorous competition. Sadly, not only has broadcast regulation beenwrong-headed and harmful, it has been largely unnecessary.
Broadcast regulation began in earnest in 1927, when the Radio Act nationalized
the airwaves. From the beginning, regulatory policies were heavily inﬂuenced by andtherefore beneﬁcial to the industry they regulated. This was by design. In closecooperation with Herbert Hoover and the Commerce Department from 1921 to1929, the industry did much to encourage and to engineer its own regulation.Government intervention in those years may have reduced risk and encouragedinvestment in the new radio medium. For these reasons, some defend early govern-ment intervention. But continued regulation had no such good eﬀects or rationale.Certainly the advent of television in the late 1940s was attended by none of theconfusion, risk, and uncertainty that attended the birth of radio, and thus provided nojustiﬁcation for the restrictive measures imposed on the industry.
The government has almost always acted to restrict and restrain both competition
and output in television markets in order to protect the economic interests ofmembers of the industry. The government has permitted technological change tohappen only very slowly for the same reason. In this respect the FCC has behaved nodiﬀerently than various now-defunct federal regulatory agencies such as the CivilAeronautics Board and the Interstate Commerce Commission.
Regulation is an invention and creature of the democratic process. Regulatory
agencies never make important decisions in a political vacuum, as a court might.They consult with executive agencies, the White House, and several congressionalcommittees (the House and Senate Commerce committees, among others) beforeannouncing any major decision. Interested industry groups must lobby not onlythe agency concerned but also other agencies and elected representatives with astake in the outcome as well. What comes out of this process is some sort of comprom-ise, or perhaps consensus. And that, of course, is what representative government is allabout.
The diﬃculty is that political outcomes, however procedurally democratic, are
not market outcomes – and for economic aﬀairs, market outcomes are generally
better for consumers than political consensus. For that reason, ideally, the politicalprocess is substituted for the market process only when the market has failed badly, orwould fail, but for the intervention.
As the FCC itself has demonstrated in recent years by gradually deregulating
some parts of the television industry, there is no reason to suppose that unregulatedtelevision markets will fail. Regulators have probably known this for many years. Butthen, why regulate? The answer is that having begun to regulate, the governmentcreated a set of economic interests that stand to lose from deregulation. They stand tolose because deregulation means increased competition from new sellers and thedestruction of incumbents’ rents. So the rationale for continued regulation and thesuppression of market forces is not market failure but the protection of clients whoseexistence or status is attributable to the government’s prior actions.
Allocation of room in the airwaves for digital television stations provides a good
illustration of these issues. Some policymakers have proposed giving every televisionbroadcaster one free digital channel in exchange for its conventional channel. ThenSenator Bob Dole, Representative Barney Frank, and other legislators opposed thisso-called giveaway to broadcasters and argued that the broadcasters should berequired to pay for their new digital channels. Is it a windfall to a broadcaster to behanded a free digital channel in exchange for its current analog one? There is no easyanswer. On the one hand, the conventional channels were originally given to broad-casters without charge. On the other hand, present-day broadcasters are not the sameentities who got those free licenses. Current broadcasters have had to pay previousowners tens or hundreds of millions of dollars for their channels. The original windfallwas capitalized into the market value of each channel, and any owner after the ﬁrst haspaid full value for it. Thus, to take away the present channels while requiring broad-casters to pay for the new digital ones would be arguably an unfair “taking” of privateproperty.
Digital television actually presents two problems: (1) allocating spectrum in an
eﬃcient manner that maximizes economic welfare and (2) ensuring that everyoneinvolved is treated fairly. An eﬀective solution to problem (1) would maximize the sizeof the pie available to be divided in solving problem (2). Often, however, there is nopractical way to compensate those that lose from eﬃcient changes. The lack of amechanism to compensate losers is one of many reasons why the political process andregulatory agencies in particular are so resistant to change, even change that wouldmake society as a whole better oﬀ. The issue arises in many other contexts. Forexample, an inability to decide how to compensate the owners of obsolete facilities hasdelayed the introduction of competition in the supply of telephone service andelectricity.
Bigger pie or bigger slice?
One of the easiest public policy choices is one that makes some people better oﬀ whileleaving no one worse oﬀ. But seldom do such “Pareto superior” choices presentthemselves. Very often, the welfare of some can be advanced only at the expense ofothers. One way to approach the more diﬃcult choices is to ask whether the pie as aTHE TRAGEDY OF BROADCAST REGULATION 73
whole is made bigger by some policy choice, or whether it is merely being divided in a
diﬀerent way. If the welfare of society as a whole is increased, it may be worthwhile tomake the move, even though some groups are made worse oﬀ. Such policies areespecially attractive if there exists a mechanism by which some of the winners’ gainscan be taxed away and used to compensate the losers. T oo often, there is no suchmechanism, and in a representative system of government it is not diﬃcult for groupsof potential losers to block action on plans that would hurt them.
For three-quarters of a century, the federal government has speciﬁed in great
detail the way in which the airwaves can be used, for what purpose, and by whom.These rules ﬁll 1,330 pages in the Code of Federal Regulations, and every one ofthem aﬀects the ability of communication ﬁrms to compete and to adopt innovativemethods of using the airwaves. And yet no change is possible without the elaborateand ponderous process of winning the government’s approval.
Like other agencies, the FCC operates on two levels. One is formal, even ritual-
istic, following the dictates of due process as deﬁned by the Constitution, theAdministrative Procedures Act, and various court decisions. There are notices andcomment periods, and reply comments, and petitions for reconsideration, and docu-ments with titles like “Sixth Further Notice of Proposed Rulemaking and Noticeof Inquiry in the Matter of the Assignment of Frequencies in the Fixed SatelliteService.” Sometimes there are hearings, which may be organized either like courtproceedings or like congressional committee hearings.
The other level is political. Congress created the Federal Communications
Commission in 1934 and delegated to it certain regulatory functions (to regulatetelephone and telegraph common carriers, allocate radio frequencies, license radioand television stations, and so on) that were too complex to handle through ordin-ary legislation. As such, the FCC, like other federal regulatory agencies, is an arm ofCongress. The President appoints its members, who must be approved by theSenate, and Congress appropriates the agency’s operating funds. The FCC’smain political function is accommodating diverse interests. The building of coalitionsof interests, usually blocking coalitions, is the meat and potatoes of regulatorypolicymaking.
Nowhere in either of these two levels of operation – the formal and the political –
is there much room for sound economic and technical analysis of the policy choicesthat will best serve the public. This is not to say that we need agencies peopled by anelite cadre of technocrats or economists tasked to serve the public interest as best theycan without regard to process or politics. That would be exceedingly undemocratic,and there could be no guarantee that the technocrats would get the answers right.Most of the time, the technocrats would have little or no basis on which to guess whatthe right answer might be. If regulation of the communication industry is required, theFCC is the kind of regulator we need and deserve.
But do we need to regulate the broadcast industry? What market failure is so
serious in this industry (as compared, say, with book or newspaper publishing orcomputer software manufacturing) that the guiding hand of government is requiredto protect consumers against market outcomes? Very simply, there is none. Segmentsof the industry have substantial market power. But this power is protected mostclosely not by natural barriers to entry, but by federal and state governments, whose74
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
permission is required by new entrants. At present, the airwaves do not have
well-deﬁned private property rights that would prevent serious externalities in theirprivate ownership and use. But the reason is not that such rights cannot be deﬁned; itis that the government has prevented their development. Broadcast regulation is anemperor with no clothes.
Naked or not, the regulators are not about to run away and hide. The FCC will
not go the way of abolished regulatory agencies like the CAB and the ICC. Anyattempt to understand why the communication industry has the structure it has,much less any attempt to predict its future, must take the FCC and the politicalsystem whose interests it serves into account.
Uncle Sam as Mary Shelley
It is diﬃcult to say much that is good about the role of regulation in the later history ofbroadcasting. So restrictive and distorting has been the eﬀect of regulatory policy thatit is almost impossible to imagine what broadcasting would have been like had itdeveloped in a free market environment, except that there would have been a lot moreof it a lot sooner. While it is possible to understand the underlying political motivation,the details of broadcast regulation in America are a Frankenstein’s monster hardlymore sensible than the Internal Revenue Code.
There have been two central diﬃculties. First, the government has assumed
responsibility for determining all of the structure and much of the behavior of thebroadcasting industry. This central planning role is not workable. Markets, evenvery imperfect ones, seem to do better than planners at serving consumers ’ needs,
and markets are far more easily revolutionized by innovation than are regulatoryﬁefs. Second, because regulation is an element of representative government, itsgoal has rarely been eﬃcient outcomes. Instead, the goal has been to reconcile andarbitrate interest group positions. But neither consumers nor those industries ortechnologies that would exist but for the rules can organize eﬀective interestgroups. Hence the government ends up catering chieﬂy to those economic intereststhat it has created or nurtured in the past. The result is a strong tendency toperpetuate the status quo, to protect economic rents, and to avoid undue competition.
The ﬁrst of these problems is probably best illustrated by the collapse of Soviet
economic central planning. The second problem can be illustrated by considering afew of the more famous broadcasting rules. Several have been mentioned already: thegovernment’s accommodation to RCA chief David Sarnoﬀ in the matter of FM radiospectrum assignments after World War II, and the chain broadcasting rules set up toprotect stations from networks. In eﬀect, the chain broadcasting rules increased thecost and reduced the eﬃciency in the broadcasting industry. Although the rulesshifted proﬁts from networks to broadcasters, they also reduced the overall amount ofproﬁts to be divided. The network “duopoly” rule, mentioned in Chapter 4 in con-nection with NBC’s divestiture of the Blue Network, probably had an adverse eﬀecton industry performance as well. When one company owns two networks or channels,it tries not to duplicate the programming on them or to serve the same audience.Instead, as with the BBC, each channel will be aimed at a diﬀerent kind of listener orviewer. For this reason, the network duopoly rule probably reduced program contentTHE TRAGEDY OF BROADCAST REGULATION 75
diversity in broadcasting, although it may have increased competition in advertising
markets.
The chain broadcasting rules were upheld on appeal to the Supreme Court in
the 1943 Networks case (National Broadcasting Company, Inc. v. United States, 319U.S. 190 (1943)). On this occasion Felix Frankfurter invented out of whole cloth thescarcity rationale for broadcast regulation, reading into history the false assumptionthat government regulation (beyond the Radio Act of 1912) was necessary to pre-vent “chaos” on the airwaves. Behind Frankfurter’s synthetic justiﬁcation for broad-
cast regulation, and behind the views of many inﬂuential lawmakers and opinionleaders then and since, lies a deep suspicion that broadcasting is too powerful asocial force to leave unregulated, whatever the economics of it may be. Frankfurterwrote his opinion at a time when the public well remembered the power that radioconferred on demagogues such as Father Coughlin and Huey Long. Other nationshave generally taken a similar view; indeed, until recently, most kept broadcasting astate monopoly.
The notion that broadcasting has too much social importance to be left to the
market is ironic: the fear of powerful media arises from the fact that the broadcastmedia have been so highly concentrated – a consequence of regulation, not of anynatural feature of radio or television technology. Spectrum could have been boughtand sold with no greater diﬃculty than land, and is no more scarce. Now that concen-tration in broadcasting has been greatly reduced, probably the greatest remaining“demand” for regulation comes from the industry itself, as it seeks to manipulate thegovernment to acquire or retain economic rents.
The government has a variety of “ownership” rules, some of them now codiﬁed
by the T elecommunications Act of 1996. There are limitations on the percentage ofsubscribers any cable operator can serve. There are limitations on the percentage ofthe population that jointly owned TV and radio stations may serve, both nationallyand in any given city. Some of these rules make sense as antitrust policy, although thesame result could probably be reached through direct application of the antimergerlaw (Clayton Act §7). But many make no sense at all, re ﬂect the obsolescent concern
with media social power, and simply inhibit industry performance. For example, thereis no anticompetitive eﬀect that arises from ownership of broadcast stations in morethan one city, and probably there are economies in such ownership. There is noreason for this limitation. The same applies with particular force to restrictions on thesizes of cable MSOs, a subject discussed in Chapter 7.
Two particularly painful episodes of broadcast regulation began in 1970. The
FCC adopted the Prime Time Access Rule (PTAR) and the Financial Interest andSyndication Rule (FISR). Just as the chain broadcasting rules were at bottom anattempt to shift proﬁts from networks to stations, these rules were attempts to shiftproﬁts from networks to Hollywood studios and other programming interests byeliminating more eﬃcient competitors.
The Prime Time Access Rule made it unlawful for any network-aﬃliated TV
station to show network programs (as opposed to programs purchased from syndica-tors or produced locally) between 7:00 .. and 8:00 .., except for a half-hour ofnetwork news. This bizarre regulation spawned a programming industry that wasdevoted to cheap game shows and made stars of Vanna White and Alex Trebeck. The76
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
network programming that was replaced was of higher “quality” in the sense that
more viewers watched it. (The reason that network aﬃliates previously broadcastnetwork programming in this period was that network programming generatedgreater proﬁts.) PTAR reduced overall TV audience size.
The Financial Interest and Syndication Rule made it unlawful for any network to
have ownership interests in the prime-time series programs that it aired or to engagein the business of syndicating network reruns to TV stations. This rule made it impos-sible for the networks to ﬁnance or underwrite program production in exchange foran equity interest in the show. The Hollywood studios stepped in to provide suchﬁnancing, but at a higher cost than the networks. (The studios individually weresmaller than the networks and thus less eﬃcient risk bearers. In addition, the networkswere in a position to optimize program schedules, which the studios were not.) Theeﬀect was to increase the cost of producing programs, while increasing the proﬁts ofHollywood studios.
Both PTAR and FISR were repealed in 1995, the latter after a scathing analysis
by the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeal. The government ’s own analysis of the rules
at the time of their repeal admits their adverse eﬀects. Starting as early as 1980,staﬀ studies had repeatedly condemned these rules, and they were universally treatedwith derision by scholars. And yet it took twenty-ﬁve years to repeal rules that weresupported by no one but the Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA) andrelated Hollywood interests, including a certain former president of the ScreenActors’ Guild named Ronald Reagan. The point is not to disparage the MPAA,which was after all remarkably eﬀective; it is to highlight the process that permitssmall groups with strong interests to govern regulatory outcomes, especially when itcomes to preventing change.
The Internet: a fat new target
On July 1, 1997, President Bill Clinton announced a new government policy towardthe Internet. The policy was characterized as “hands oﬀ” – that is, minimizing gov-
ernment regulation and taxation. At the same time, the policy was promotional. TheWhite House championed the Internet as an engine for the growth of transactionalcommerce as well as a vehicle for U.S. export sales of related computer equipmentand software. The Internet, the President implied, would bring extraordinary high-tech beneﬁts to American citizens – praise reminiscent of the pronouncements madeat the time cable television was “deregulated” in 1984.
In spite of the government’s “hands-oﬀ” pronouncement, regulation surely
looms in the future of the Internet, for several reasons. First, the development of videoor other entertainment delivery on the Internet will economically threaten the currenttelevision industry, which will quickly call upon the government to bring the Internetfurther within the regulatory ambit. The eﬀect of this would be to attenuate theInternet’s ability to threaten broadcasters – by no means a far-fetched possibility, asthe cable industry knows to its chagrin. Broadcasters were able to delay the growth ofcable for years by such means.
Second, the government may be the solution to some of the problems of excessive
risk and lack of standardization that today delays the commercial exploitation ofTHE TRAGEDY OF BROADCAST REGULATION 77
digital technology. In other words, the government may do for the Internet what
Secretary Hoover did for radio – make the technology safe for business. Just as theydid in the 1920s, major industry players may seek government help.
Third, boisterous hyperbole is an important element of successful new Internet
technologies. The government’s overblown prediction of what the Internet canachieve, however, has created expectations that the Internet industry may be unable tomeet. The government is prematurely licking its chops at the prospect of the socialbeneﬁts, including tax revenues, that will result from Internet growth and commercial-ization. Some of those beneﬁts are already being distributed to schools, hospitals, andthe poor by overeager politicians. Businesses associated with the Internet are bene ﬁt-
ing from a variety of preferences mandated by the government in order to encouragethe growth of digital media. For example, Internet service providers and users arespared telephone access fees that might otherwise be imposed on them. If expect-ations are disappointed (and perhaps even if they are not), the government is likely tobecome disenchanted or impatient and to demand something in return, especially ifthere is an identiﬁable commercial enterprise or group to blame for the lack ofperformance.
The ﬁrst forays into Internet regulation have already occurred: the 1996 T ele-
communications Act mandates subsidies for Internet access by certain groups at theexpense of certain other groups, the national security agencies have attemptedto impose “key escrow” requirements on users of cryptographic software, and (inSeptember 1997) the government proposed requiring that personal computers beequipped with the “V-chip,” a move intended to regulate objectionable TVprogramming.
Conclusion
Restrictions of competition and limitations on spectrum availability may have facili-tated the early development of radio. But these government policies did not cease afterthe developmental period, and they have had signiﬁcant adverse eﬀects on consumersfor more than half a century. First radio and then television channels were limited,leaving unsatisﬁed consumer demand for programming. The legal establishment suc-ceeded in inventing the required rationalizations. Such anticonsumer policies have notarisen simply from errors of judgment; they are a reﬂection of the workings of thepolitical process, which requires regulators to take account of important economicinterest groups. New digital media such as the Internet are not immune from thisprocess.78
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
2.3
Broadcasting policy in the digital age,
by Andrew Graham
Citizenship, culture, and community
The argument, so far, has been that there is a case for public service broadcasting so
as to make good the deﬁciencies of the market in providing what well-informed con-sumers , acting either individually or in aggregate, would wish to buy over the longer
term. A quite separate argument arises from the fact that there are parts of our lives towhich the market is simply not relevant. T o be more concrete, we watch television andlisten to the radio, not just as consumers, but also as citizens.
Our citizenship carries with it three separate implications. First, as citizens we
have rights. This includes the right to certain core information about our own society.Thus almost everyone would agree that anyone is entitled to know without having topay for it such basic things as the key items of news, their legal rights, who theirMember of Congress is, etc. It is immediately obvious that the market makes noprovision for this (any more than it does for basic education or primary health care forthe poor). Moreover, there is a danger that, in the absence of appropriate publicpolicy, the new technology of the Internet and Intranets will create a world in whichthere is high-quality commercially provided information but only poor-quality infor-mation in the public domain. In this new context the informational role of a publicservice broadcaster operating universally is therefore more important than ever. Asthe local public library declines, so the public broadcaster must ﬁll the gap – and forzero charge at the margin.
Second, as citizens we have views about society that cannot be captured just in
our buying and selling. In particular, in a wide-ranging investigation carried out in1994 and 1995, the Bertelsmann Foundation working with the European Institutefor the Media found that in all ten countries covered by its study people expectedand wanted “socially responsible television.”
1 Moreover, they concluded that
“responsibility in programming has a chance only if and when it has been deﬁned andconstantly pursued as a strategic aim in the management [of the broadcaster].”
2 It is
diﬃcult to see how both proﬁtability and responsibility can be constant strategic aimsat the same time. In the competitive marketplace proﬁtability is bound to take priority.
Third, as citizens we are members of a community. It has been said that while we
are all individual we are also all individual somebodies. In other words our sense of our
own identity derives from how we see ourselves in relation to society and where we“locate” ourselves within it. Stated simply, there is intrinsic value to individuals if theyhave a sense of community – to be alienated is literally to lose a part of oneself.
The crucial importance of broadcasting in this context is that for the great major-
ity of people it is today their major source of information about the world beyond thatof family, friends, and acquaintances. T elevision provides not only the hard facts, butalso the fuzzy categories – the social, ethnic, psychological, etc., concepts within whichwe must make sense of the world. It also supplies a set of fantasies, emotions, andﬁctional images with which we construct our understanding (or misunderstanding) ofall those parts of society beyond our immediate surroundings. It is therefore part notjust of how we see ourselves in relation to the community, or communities, withinwhich we are embedded, but also part of how we understand the community itself –and indeed part of where the very idea of community arises and is given meaning.
The general importance of community and of a common culture to the well-
being of a society and its citizens is widely recognized. Culture and community pro-vide a common frame of reference in terms of which to comprehend the history,present, and future of one’s society and of one’s own place within it, and so to makesense of the decisions one has to take both as an individual and as a citizen. Moreover,the texts, practices, and traditions that make it up function as sources of aesthetic andmoral understanding and empowerment, as well as providing a focus for communalidentiﬁcation.
There is little doubt that in today’s society the viewing of television is part of what
creates any sense of commonality that we may have. This is true as much of low as ofhigh culture. The latest episode of a soap opera or a recent football match can func-tion as a topic upon which all members of the society can form an opinion or conversewith one another regardless of the diﬀerences in their life-style, social class, or statusgroup. Given that any society must embody such sociocultural diﬀerences, the valueof a community where people have things in common and can interact on that basis isor should be obvious. Indeed the winning of the World Cup by France in 1998,watched on television by almost the entire nation, is already being credited witha more tolerant and inclusive approach to the immigrant community in France.Commonality has generated the overlap from one community to another.
The value of commonality, the value of shared experience, the value of self-
identity, and the value provided by non-stereotypical portrayal of other cultures arenot considerations that do, or could, enter into the transactions of the marketplace –but they are values nonetheless. For all of these reasons there is a case for publicservice broadcasting, one of whose objectives would be the provision of thosebroadcasts to which we are entitled as citizens.
Fragmentation
This general point about commonality takes on added importance as well as a di ﬀer-
ent form in the context of a pluralist society, such as the United States in the late1990s. As the processes of technological, economic, and social change increase inrapidity, traditional forms of social unity can break down, and new subcultures based80
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
on partially overlapping but less widely shared and equally deep commitments to
certain forms or styles of life (ones based on class, region, religion, race, sexualorientation, and so on) can proliferate. T o this must be added the near certainty that a“free market” in broadcasting based on an abundance of channels would itself frag-ment audiences and, by so doing, increase the sense of separateness. In such a context,the risks of socio-cultural fragmentation are high, and so is the value of any mediumby means of which that fragmentation could be fought.
As technology fragments the market, it is therefore entirely appropriate for U.S.
public service broadcasting in the 1990s to contribute towards the (re)constructionand maintenance of a common national culture – not a single dominant culture, but aset of shared values that are accommodating enough to accept on equal terms as manyas possible of the minority group cultures that go to make up such a pluralist society,and thereby minimize its tendency towards fragmentation. What would be shared bythe members of such a culture would not be belief in a particular form of life, butrather an understanding of the lives of other citizens, together with a shared acknow-ledgment of their worth or validity. And it is this latter requirement that speciﬁes thesense in which the various subcultures are accepted within (form part of) a commonculture on equal terms with one another.
The importance of one or more public service broadcasters in this process would
be that by broadcasting informed and accurate representations of minority cultures,they would help to maintain the culture’s shared emphasis upon respect for humanlife – it would do so by disseminating the knowledge that forms the essential basis for
acknowledging those aspects of the minority cultures that make them worthy ofrespect. Indeed in modern society, the key way of ensuring the legitimation of a givensubculture by conferring a public proﬁle upon it is through television.
One ﬁnal area under the heading of citizenship and community where a public
service broadcaster might play a special role is in the broadcasting of national events.Here, the idea would be that a public service broadcaster should be given theresponsibility to broadcast events which, going beyond questions of purelysubculture-speciﬁc interests, are of genuinely national interest. The events in questionwould include happenings anywhere in the world that are of signiﬁcance to virtuallyanyone (e.g., the collapse of the Berlin Wall) or to the United States in particular (e.g.,the U.S. athletics team in the Olympic Games), as well as events in the United Statesthat are primarily of importance to its citizens (e.g., the inauguration of the presi-dent). The idea would not be to stop the commercial stations from covering suchevents, but to ensure (especially as we move into pay-per-view) that events which areconstitutive of citizenship are also available free at the point of view. Such broadcast-ing would help to maintain a sense of national identity that transcends morelocal communal identiﬁcations and allows individuals to understand themselves asmembers of a particular nation.
Democracy and the mass media
It is a basic principle of democratic society that votes should not be bought and sold.This alone is suﬃcient justiﬁcation for broadcasting not being entirely commercial. AsPresident Clinton put it, “Candidates should be able to talk to voters based on theBROADCASTING POLICY IN THE DIGITAL AGE 81
strength of their ideas, not the size of their pocketbooks.”3 By the same token, broad-
casting should not be directly under the control of the state. There has to be a source of
information that can be trusted to be accurate in its news, documentaries, and currentaﬀairs programs and to be impartial among diﬀering social and political views. It is anecessary, but not suﬃcient condition, for this to be possible that some at least of thebroadcasters be independent of any political party and of any business interest.
It is not enough, however, for truth to be upheld. It must also be available – and
available to all. In other countries with strong public service broadcasting traditions, itis fundamental that they are nationally available and easily accessible. Moreover, theirtradition of dedicated public service provides the basis for trust without which muchinformation is just propaganda; and their independence from governmental andcommercial or marketplace pressures has, on the whole, made it more capable ofrepresenting unpopular or otherwise unpalatable truths.
These arguments are not, however, absolute ones, but contingent upon behavior.
A number of supposedly “public service” broadcasters have been little more thanmouthpieces for the state. The reputation of the PSBs is not therefore automatic –they have to continue to be earned.
On the other side of the coin, it should also not be assumed (as it often is) that
commercial broadcasting is necessarily freer of politics than public service broadcast-ing just because one is public and one is commercial. In France, the close connectionbetween Canal Plus and Mitterrand has already been noted. In Italy, the interventionshave been far more blatant. In the March 1994 elections, Berlusconi used his threeTV stations reaching 40 percent of the Italian audience to give unremitting support tohis own political party, Forza Italia, and the wider grouping of the Freedom Alliance.Subsequent research showed not only that there was a bigger swing to the right (3.5percent more) among Berlusconi viewers than in the electorate in general, but alsothat this swing could not be explained by the fact that viewers of Berlusconi channelswere already more right wing. Viewers of these channels were found to be middle of
the road and only shifted their voting after watching the Berlusconi channels.
4 Then,
of course, after the election, the government was  Berlusconi and in the referendum on
whether Berlusconi should be obliged to sell oﬀ two of its three TV networks, Finin-vest used its networks to support the “Vote No” campaign. Fininvest carried 520spots for the Vote No campaign as compared with only 42 for the “Vote Y es” cam-paign, which was eﬀectively forced oﬀ the air because its slots were placed in suchdisadvantageous positions.
5
Common knowledge
So far the arguments about the relationship between the mass media and democracystrongly reinforce the case for public service broadcasters existing as major sources ofindependent, accurate, and impartial information. However, the ideas of accurateinformation and of impartiality need to be seen in a wider context. Although it is notoften recognized, society depends critically on the existence of “common knowledge”– what everybody knows that everybody knows. Most of the time the existence of suchknowledge is taken for granted. However, it plays a role in society that is both moreprofound and more important than at ﬁrst it seems.82
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
The inﬂuence of common knowledge is more profound than it might seem
because any debate requires some common knowledge – at a minimum, it has to be
agreed upon what is being debated. Moreover, in modern societies the media is
one major way in which common knowledge is created. The inﬂuence of commonknowledge is also more important than it might seem because almost all solutions toproblems require the extension of common knowledge. In order to be agreed upon,solutions have to be based on a common understanding of the situation. Commonknowledge is therefore a precondition of many coordination problems in democraticsocieties.
Agreeing on solutions and agreeing on correct solutions are not, however, the
same thing. Or to put the same point another way, knowledge, which implies that whatis known is true, is not the same as belief, which may or may not be true. The “power
of the witch doctor” may have been thought of as common knowledge, but strictlyspeaking it was only “common belief.” Another more contemporary example thatdisplays both the power of the media and the danger and ineﬃciency of inaccurate“common knowledge,” if that contradiction may be used, comes from the experiencereported by the British Labor Member of Parliament Dianne Abbott. When visiting aschool in the United Kingdom she asked what number the pupils would dial inan emergency. The answer from many was “911” – yet the U.K. emergency number
is 999!
This example also illustrates that “knowledge” and “information” need to be
understood as including much more than is dealt with by news programs. It alsocovers the discussions of news, trends, and images that are to be found on radiophone-in shows, chat shows, and so on, as well as the scientiﬁc and cultural matterstypically dealt with by programs such as those on the Discovery channel, not tomention the lifestyles presented in so many contemporary ﬁctional creations.
Furthermore, central to the idea of the democratic society is that of the well-
informed and self-determining individual; but, if individuals are to be genuinelyautonomous, it is not suﬃcient for them merely to receive information (no matterhow much and how impartially presented), they must be able to understand it.They must be able to make sense of it in ways that relate to their own lives anddecisions. Neither facts on the one hand nor opinions on the other (although both areimportant) are suﬃcient; for neither are utilizable by those who absorb them unlessthey are made the subject of reasoned analysis – unless, in other words, they arenot merely transmitted but presented (organized and submitted to informed andcoherent criticism from as many perspectives as possible) in a way which allows themto be understood and thereby incorporated into the audience’s own judgments.Information without “organizing insights” is just noise.
The media has therefore a double responsibility. First, programs need to handle
information in such a way to increase understanding and create knowledge. Second,programs need to ensure, as far as possible, that such knowledge correctly representsthe world as we know it.
It is worth noting here the sharp contrast between talk shows on commercial and
on public service channels. In April 1996, the New Y ork radio station WABC ﬁred a
talk-show host named Bob Grant, but this was only after twenty-ﬁve years of regularattacks on blacks, Hispanics, and other minorities. An ABC producer was askedBROADCASTING POLICY IN THE DIGITAL AGE 83
whether Bob Grant’s remarks were an example of free speech that should be pro-
tected under the First Amendment or whether they were verbal pollution. His replywas “If the person has good ratings a station has to overlook the garbage that he
spews out.” The same producer added, “[In the United States,] radio is the onlyserious soapbox the racists have. Our advertisers are aware that hate sells theirproducts.”
6
The editorial responsibility that is so obviously lacking in this case is not surpris-
ing. If the product sells and makes a proﬁt, that is all that is required. Ethical judg-ments, even where the only ethical requirement is a respect for evidence, is not part ofits natural domain. Its purpose is to make money, not to sustain democracy, nor toexpand common knowledge nor to extend the tastes and capacities of its audience.
Purposes matter. Almost all societies allow children to attend a single school for
many years. The school is therefore the monopoly provider of both information andunderstanding – and at a particularly formative stage in a person’s life. Y et an equiva-
lent commercial monopoly, even later in life, is strongly resisted. The reason is thatschools and commerce have diﬀerent objectives. The purpose of a school is not toindoctrinate, but to educate. Indeed the exception proves the rule. In the rare numberof cases when people do object to the inﬂuence of schools it is usually because theschool is suspected of peddling a particular point of view to the detriment ofeducation.
Closely related to this is what can be described as the “Y es, Minister” problem
(after the famous U.K. TV show of that name). Someone has a piece of information.Y ou may know that they have it and you may know that the information would beuseful to you. However, you may not know what question to ask to elucidate thatinformation. As the “Y es, Minister” program brought out so well, some civil servantslike being in that kind of position, because information is power and power is notalways given up easily. Typically the way in which this problem has been handled inthe past has been through education. The purpose of educators is to empower otherpeople and they want to teach people what questions to ask and how to use informa-tion to understand the world. Such an assumption cannot be made of the commercialworld. The purpose of the commercial world is to make a proﬁt. Nothing wrong inthat, but it is diﬀerent.
In brief, if democracy (and the role of its citizens) is left just to the market,
democracy and its citizens will be poorly served. There will be a gap in broadcasting; afully functioning democracy requires public service broadcasting to ﬁll that gap.Moreover, one key principle for public service broadcasters to follow on this count isthat they should aim to extend the understanding and experience of those who watchor listen. It is important to emphasize that this core principle is not restricted in itsapplication to certain types of current aﬀairs or documentary programming(although of course it does apply to them). Drama, soap operas, chat shows, child-ren’s programs, and situation comedies could all contribute to empowering as large abody of the citizenry as possible.
Public service broadcasters performing this function would therefore provide a
central forum – the public space – within which society could engage in the process ofextending its common knowledge as well as in illuminating and either reaﬃrming,questioning, or extending its already existing values.84
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
Rules-based intervention versus public service broadcasting
The arguments above provide a strong case for thinking that broadcasting should not
be left just to the market. There is therefore a prima facie case for intervention, butsuch arguments provide no guidance on the form that intervention should take. Why,one has to ask, could market failures not be dealt with by regulation, as occurs, forexample, in the case of health and safety legislation?
The answer to this question is in two parts. First, it can be agreed that in some
cases regulation is appropriate. For example, if the only concern of public policy werethat child pornography should not be broadcast, then rules banning this activity couldmake an important contribution. The same is true of concentration. If the goal is tostop a single person or organization controlling a large part of the media, then lawslimiting cross-ownership of media outlets have an important role to play. In short, theFederal Communications Commission (FCC) can play an important role – if itchooses to do so.
However, the second answer is far more important. In the particular case of
broadcasting, rules-based intervention is necessary but not suﬃcient, especially not inthe new environment of the late 1990s.
The ﬁrst reason why rules are insuﬃcient is that many of the issues concerning
broadcasting are qualitative rather than quantitative in nature. This is self-evidentlytrue of quality itself, but it applies equally to the discussion above of the importance ofmaintaining a sense of community as well as valuing a democratic society. Thesebroad principles, which should guide part of broadcasting, could not be incorporatedin any precise set of rules – indeed it is the impossibility of doing so that diﬀerentiatesqualitative from quantitative assessments.
7
The need to make qualitative judgments creates diﬃculties for all countries, but
especially so in the United States where any attempt to impose such judgments oncommercial companies is regarded as unconstitutional. Of course, it might, neverthe-less, still be possible to design a legislative framework containing clear principles andfor the judgments about the principles to be delegated to a broadcasting authority.However, once rules are discretionary, a new set of issues arises. The regulators,unable to appeal to a ﬁrm rule, may give in to pressure from those they are regulating.If so, the apparent attraction of rules-based intervention is much diminished. Simi-larly, if producers are required to act in necessarily loosely deﬁned ways and in waysthat are against their commercial interests, it may be more eﬃcient to establish apublic body charged with explicitly non-commercial goals than to police a complexand imprecise set of regulations. T o put the same point another way, trying to achievemultiple and complex objectives via regulation is just writing a blank check for thelawyers.
The second reason why rules are insuﬃcient is that rules are, at best, negative –
especially when regulating against strong commercial forces. While regulation may,therefore, be able to protect standards, for example by preventing the display of exces-sive violence or sexual material considered oﬀensive, it is much less well suited topromoting quality. This point is central. At numerous points in the earlier argument ithas been shown that purposes matter. But purposes are about doing things – educating,informing, and entertaining, for example. Such purposes cannot possibly be achievedBROADCASTING POLICY IN THE DIGITAL AGE 85
by rules because rules cannot make things happen. This is of great importance
because, in the case of broadcasting it has been shown that there are gaps in thesystem which require positive pressure to correct them. This is why, corresponding toeach area in which the market would fall down, it has been possible above to identifyone or more primary objectives that a public service broadcaster should pursue. T ooﬀset market failure, it should aim to expand quality and to extend individuals’ ideasof what they can achieve; to meet the requirements of citizenship it should provide forthe needs of community (or communities); and to sustain democracy it should extendcommon knowledge and empower those that watch it or listen to it.
Moreover, none of these objectives is genre speciﬁc. Neither enrichment, nor our
ideas of community, nor common knowledge are restricted to some “high-brow”ghetto. What will matter most of the time are not the kinds of programs that are made,but how they are made – hardly the task for a regulator.
Nevertheless, at the risk of repetition, it should be emphasized that the structure
of broadcasting envisaged here would include some regulation. Indeed one funda-mental point of this section is that, in the particular case of broadcasting, regulationand direct public provision can be and should be complementary to one another.Equally important is that the particular mix of regulation and public provision shouldchange as the context changes.
In the late 1990s in the United States, as elsewhere, there are two reasons why this
context is altering in ways that make rules-based intervention less eﬀective. First,there is technological change. At the moment, the government (via the FCC) retainsthe ability to allocate frequencies and so regulation can be enforced. However, assatellite broadcasting (including from outside the borders of the United States) andInternet TV become more widespread, such regulation becomes more diﬃcult.Second, the spread of the new media means that citizens will increasingly rely ontelevision (or whatever the TV becomes) for their information. And, as shown above,good information cannot be produced via rules.
The answer to such problems is not to conclude that regulation is impossible, but
to reconsider the objectives and to see whether there is some other way of inﬂuencingthe market. One obvious possibility is to use public service broadcasting. If so, publicservice broadcasting will become more, rather than less, important as the technologydevelops.
One ﬁnal point about the role of a public service broadcaster remains to be
underlined. Each of the three grounds for public service broadcasting – the need topromote high-quality broadcasting, the need to generate a sense of community, andthe need for citizens to have and understand the information essential for the func-tioning of democracy – exist independent of the particular set of choices made now.
Suppose, purely hypothetically, that everyone today had full information and full
autonomy and that they chose a particular (narrow) mix of programs. This outcomewould then have occurred without market failure. Nevertheless, given the potentialinterdependence between the broadcasting oﬀered and the preferences of consumers,there would still remain the requirement that the next generation of consumers shouldbe presented with a diverse, informative, and enriching range of programs so that theirright to exercise their choice with full information and full autonomy would beensured. The market, left to itself, would not guarantee this right. Consumers whose86
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
tastes were unexposed to, and underdeveloped by, a richer fare would not and could
not demand programs that did not exist, and so producers, for their part, wouldexperience no unﬁlled demand. There would be no driving force towards betterquality.
Similarly, suppose – again hypothetically – that the interaction of today’s con-
sumers with the market produced a myriad of channels, each with its own format,each diﬀerentiated (however marginally) from the others, presenting an endlessstream of diverse information and diverse lifestyles without apparent connection.Here again there would remain the case, many would say the imperative need, topresent within one universally available channel the idea of a society (or societies)with which future generations of individuals could identify if they so wished. Wecannot choose to belong to a society unless a society exists to which we may choose tobelong. T o deny future generations this would be to deny them a choice, not justbetween brand A and brand B, but about how they might wish to lead their lives andthe kinds of people they might wish to become.
On all three grounds (quality, community, and democracy), therefore, a major
argument for public service broadcasting today is that it provides an insurance policyfor the desires, needs, and rights of the generations of tomorrow. Moreover, this is notan insurance policy that any form of rules-based intervention will provide. What isrequired, especially within the increasingly deregulated environment of the late 1990s,is one or more public service broadcasters, widening and extending choice, both by itsown existence and by its inﬂuence on other broadcasters.
There is much misunderstanding on this question of choice. It is clear that the
fear of censorship and, in particular, of hidden censorship, has loomed large in theminds of many of the critics of public service broadcasting. In the United States inparticular such fears are written deep into the Constitution – no discussion of U.S.broadcasting is complete without reference to the First Amendment. Similarly, in theUnited Kingdom, such fears are a major reason for criticism of the BBC, which isseen by some as elitist and paternalistic. These fears and criticisms were understand-able in the past when spectrum scarcity prevailed and when, as a result, access totelevisual media was, as the critics would have said, exclusively under the control ofeither state-funded or state-authorized institutions. But this will not be the broadcast-ing world of the next century. Satellite, cable, and video mean that private televisualmedia will expand considerably irrespective of the role played by public broadcastersand so, in this new world, provided only that the costs are met and the general law ofthe land is respected, no one will be denied making or seeing anything they wish. Onthe contrary, in the face of the new technology which threatens excessive fragmenta-tion, the loss of common knowledge, and low quality, it will be the existence of apublic service broadcaster that widens choice and which, through its commitment toprovide understanding, gives the means to make the choice for oneself. Thus a vibrantcommercial system plus a context inﬂuenced by public service broadcasting would bethe very opposite of elitism, paternalism, or censorship.
In other words, public production and public broadcasting is needed for the
health of the whole system. Thus public service broadcasting is central, not anoptional add-on. In short, such a public service broadcaster is a real public goodand the true justiﬁcation for public funding is not the ﬁnancing of a particularBROADCASTING POLICY IN THE DIGITAL AGE 87
corporation, but the ﬁnancing of choice, quality, and public information throughout
the system as whole.
Just as in the nineteenth century no one thought that regulation could provide
public libraries, so in the twenty-ﬁrst century regulation cannot provide public servicebroadcasting. Public service broadcasting exists to meet goals that are not those of themarket and no amount of regulation can make the market pursue such goals. Thuswhile public service broadcasters have no right to exist, there are purposes for theirexistence.
Policy suggestions
The arguments above have set out the case for public service broadcasting. If this is toexist, what form (or forms) should it take? No attempt will be made here to answerthis question in detail. Nevertheless, the arguments above plus the particular contextof the United States suggest certain key principles.
First, and most important of all, there has to be a public service broadcasting
institution. Trying to impose public service obligations on the commercial channels ishopeless in the U.S. context. As noted in the Bertelsmann study mentioned above,socially responsible television occurs only when it is a constant strategic aim of themanagement of the broadcaster. Moreover, as Henry Geller argues, the “play or pay”option always was a non-starter – any commercial broadcaster will always spend aslittle as possible on the public service slots that have been imposed upon it.
8 Even in
the U.K. context such public service obligations only worked (a) because U.K. regu-lators can make qualitative judgments (not possible in the United States), (b) becausethe BBC is very large and so able to inﬂuence the system as a whole (not applicable tothe United States), and (c) because the U.K. system has in the past contained anelement of monopoly proﬁt so there was scope for the commercial broadcasters to act“non-commercially” (but even this is rapidly disappearing). In short, instead of legalregulations or obligations there must be direct public provision.
Second, as emphasized earlier, legal regulations can play a complementary role.
In particular, depending on the structure chosen, regulations on both the nationalcommercial channels and on cable TV could insist on a “must carry” clause as well ason a “must display prominently” clause so that in the world of digital television theviewer can easily ﬁnd the public service broadcasts on his/her EPG. In saying this itmust, of course, be noted that a “must carry” clause is fundamentally diﬀerent from asystem in which commercial broadcasters are required to reserve a certain number ofhours for public service broadcasting, but hours which they then ﬁll. What is implied
here is that they would be required to broadcast material produced by the public servicebroadcaster(s), which, with adequate funding, should be of high quality.
Third, the institution must be publicly ﬁnanced. The analogy with club member-
ship was made above – and for the nation the club is everyone and with no opting out.What is more, the ﬁxed costs must be met collectively, but with consumption of theservices free at the point of use (for all the reasons given above).
Fourth, the scale of such a broadcaster must be substantial and it must not spread
its investments too thinly. In particular, if such a broadcaster were to transmit its ownprograms nationally it should not at the same time aim at providing a proliferation of88
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
channels. Both of these points follow from the requirement that there must be suf-
ﬁcient funds to meet the high ﬁxed costs that quality requires – and if it is not to behigh quality, why bother?
Fifth, if one of its key roles is to provide the core public information to which all
citizens are entitled, and without which there will be a nation of the information-richand the information-poor, then it must be universal in its reach. It must therefore benationally available (another reason why it must be substantial in scale and why “must
carry” clauses could be so important).
Sixth, it must make some of its own programs (though not necessarily all). This is
because so many of the public service objectives are not genre speciﬁc. Neither enrich-ment, nor our ideas of community, nor common knowledge are restricted to some“highbrow” ghetto. What will matter most of the time are not the kinds of programs thatare made, but how they are made. There must therefore be an institution whose purpose
is the making of public service programs. The argument is exactly analogous with thereasons why we have schools and universities. They have purposes quite diﬀerent fromthose of the market and these values and purposes – just like any others – require aninstitutional context if they, and the individuals committed to them, are to prosper.
One ﬁnal suggestion remains to be made. It has been argued above (and by many
others before) that television is uniquely well placed to provide the new public spacewithin which the issues of the day can be debated. Digital television dramaticallyreinforces these possibilities both by creating the potential for interactivity and byincreasing the availability of the spectrum. What is more, here there is genuine scopefor (a) television to be local, and (b) for low-cost entry. Web-based TV does oﬀerwholly new possibilities for deliberative discourse. Nevertheless here also there isscope for an extremely important public service element. The evidence is overwhelm-ing in favor of the view that constructive debate occurs best when someone acts as amoderator so that some degree of order is maintained and so that someone some-times, gently and tactfully, summarizes and/or poses the next question. Carrying outthis task of editing, facilitating, and moderating in ways intended to be democratic isself-evidently a public interest activity.
In other words, entirely complementary to the public service broadcasting institu-
tion recommended above would be the training of individuals to act as the new publicinterest moderators. At the risk of repetition it must be emphasized that there is noimplicit censorship here – multiple commercial sites where anything that the marketwill support and tolerate would, and should, still exist. But alongside this, it is recom-mended that there should be some sites, run locally, but possibly supported centrallyby funds and training from the public service broadcaster (as well as by other quasi-public or not-for-proﬁt organizations), whose function would be the promotion oflocal democracy and local participation.
Summary and conclusions
Who needs public service broadcasting in a digital era? The answer is that we alldo and that the new technology increases, not decreases, this need. The reasonsare, ﬁrst, that there is a real danger that if broadcasting were left just to the market it
would become excessively concentrated; second, that even if this were not the case,BROADCASTING POLICY IN THE DIGITAL AGE 89
commercial broadcasting on its own would fail to produce the form of broadcasting
which people individually or as citizens and voters collectively require; and, third, thatthere is no set of rules or regulations or laws which could entirely correct the de ﬁcien-
cies of a purely commercial system. This is for the simple but powerful reason thatrules are necessarily negative. They have the capacity only to stop the undesirable.They cannot promote the desirable.
The only way to counteract fully the deﬁciencies of a purely commercial system
is through the existence of a broadcaster that has as its driving force the ethos ofpublic service broadcasting. In the context of the United States such a public servicebroadcaster would fulﬁll four crucial and interrelated roles.
First, it would act as a counterweight to possible monopolization of ownership
and yet fragmentation of audiences in the private sector. Second, because its purposesare diﬀerent, it would widen the choices that consumers individually and collectivelywill face. Third, provided that, via one means or another, it were universal in its reach,it would be the only sure way of protecting against the emergence of the information-rich and the information-poor. Fourth, and most important of all, it is essential that ina democratic society the issues of the day should be debated not just in terms of thevalues of the market, but also in terms of the public interest.
There could be more than one such public service broadcaster – since competi-
tion within the public sector is also healthy. But this would only be sensible if funding
on a very large scale were available. Moreover, if it were, then it would be essential thatone of them be vertically integrated. This follows from two considerations. First, thereis the need for public service broadcasting to be concerned with the full range ofbroadcasting (training, production, scheduling, and broadcasting). Second, publicservices values and the commitment to quality can only be maintained, developed,and passed on within an institutional framework that persists.
Equally important is that, alongside any public service broadcaster, there should
be an active commercial sector. Each improves the other. The commercial sectorkeeps the public sector competitive; the public sector raises quality and keeps thecommercial sector honest.
In brief, such public service broadcasting is not an optional add-on. It is central to
the health of all broadcasting and, beyond this, to the health of a democratic society.
Notes
1 B.P . Lange and R. Woldt, “The Results and Main Conclusions of the
International Comparisons,” in T elevision Requires Responsibility (Gütersloh:Bertelsmann Foundation Publishers, 1995), 463–502.
2 I. Hamm and F . Harmgarth, “Responsibility of T elevision – An Introduction,”
in T elevision Requires Responsibility (Gütersloh: Bertelsmann Foundation
Publishers, 1995), 5–7.
3 President Bill Clinton at the National Press Club, 11 March 1997.4 C. Gallucci, “How Many Votes Did TV Change?” L ’Espresso, 11 November
1994.
5“One Voice on Italy TV,” Free Press-Journal of the Campaign of Press andBroadcasting Freedom (London: July/August 1995).90
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
6 Quoted in R. Williams, Normal Service W on’t Be Resumed (Sydney: Allen &
Unwin, 1996), 92.
7 Some of the problems of regulating public utilities where there is an element
of quality are discussed in L. Rovizzi and D. Thompson, Price-Cap Regulated
Public Utilities and Quality Regulation in the U.K. (London: Centre for BusinessStrategy, Working Paper Series No 111, London Business School, 1991). How-ever, the authors frequently mean not “quality,” but “standards” and thereforetreat quality as quantiﬁable, a confusion that the English language has beendesigned to avoid!
8 Henry Geller, “Public Interest Regulation in the Digital TV Era,” in R. G. Noll
and M. E. Price, A Communications Cornucopia: Markle Foundation Essays onInformation Policy (Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 1998).BROADCASTING POLICY IN THE DIGITAL AGE 91
2.4
From public sphere to cybernetic state,
by Kevin Robins and Frank Webster
The growth of a ‘programmed’ market, of a regulated and coded consumer society, is
a fundamentally cultural phenomenon. The stimulation of needs, the recording oftastes, the surveillance of consumption, all reﬂect a more rationalised and regulatedway of life. (This does not, of course, imply the necessary success of such strategies,nor does it deny the ability of individuals to derive pleasure and creativity fromconsumer goods.) We want now to turn to a second set of forces that have beencentral to the historical development of the ‘information society’. We are referring tothe role of information and communications resources in the political process.Here too we can trace the tendency towards combined planning and control, and heretoo this has been of profound signiﬁcance for the cultural life of modernity.
1
We have referred to Anthony Giddens’ argument that the state, and particularly
the nation state, has always been propelled into the business of surveillance andinformation gathering. Giddens suggests that ‘storage of authoritative resources is thebasis of the surveillance activities of the state’, and such surveillance, he argues, entails‘the collation of information relevant to state control of the conduct of its subjectpopulation, and the direct supervision of that conduct’. The storage of authoritativeresources and control depends upon ‘the retention and control of information orknowledge’.
2 Information and communications, capabilities have been fundamental
to the state and the political sphere in a number of respects. First, they have beenindispensable prerequisites for administrating and co-ordinating – maintaining thecohesion and integrity – of complex social structures. Second, they have played animportant part in policing and controlling ‘deviant’ members of the internal popula-tion, and in the surveillance of external (potential enemy) populations. And, third,they have been central to the democratic process of political debate in the publicsphere. In the following discussion we want to outline the speciﬁc shape and force thatthese various information functions have assumed in political life during this century.
Our historical account of the relation between information and the political sys-
tem gives rise to a number of observations that can usefully be detailed at the outset.First, we should emphasise again that neither planning nor surveillance depends upontechnological support. Thus, Theodore Roszak notes what the English Utilitariansrecognised early in the nineteenth century, ‘the persuasive force of facts and ﬁgures in
the modern world’: ‘All the essential elements of the cult of information are there – the
facade of ethical neutrality, the air of scientiﬁc rigor, the passion for technocratic
control. Only one thing is missing: the computer ’.3 And the principles of disciplinary
surveillance, too, have non-technological and Benthamite origins in the architectureof the Panopticon. The issue we are addressing is fundamentally about relations ofpower – though, having said that, we must emphasise that technologies have increas-
ingly been deployed in the twentieth century to render the exercise of power moreeﬃcient and automatic. Our second point is that the functions of administration andcontrol have increasingly coalesced, and regulatory and disciplinary tendencies haveincreasingly expressed themselves through the calculative and ‘rational’ machinery ofadministration. Third, we argue that the idea of a democratic ‘conversation’ in thepublic sphere has given way to that of the instrumental and ‘eﬃcient’ Scientiﬁc Man-agement of political life. Along with this, surveillance has become associated with atransformation of the political identity and rights of the internal population, andcomes to be directed against the ‘enemy within’. Finally, we argue that, although therehas always been an information politics, a particularly important moment in theseprocesses occurred early in the twentieth century and was associated with the projectof T aylorism.
T o clarify these arguments, let us begin with the ideal role of information and
communications in democratic political theory. In his classic account of the emer-gence of the bourgeois public sphere, Habermas describes the historical convergenceof democratic principles, the new channels of communication and publicity, and theEnlightenment faith in Reason.
4 The public sphere is the forum, open equally to all
citizens, in which matters of general and political interest are debated and ideasexchanged. It remains distinct and separate from the state, and, indeed, insofar as it isthe locus of critical reasoning, it operates as a curb on state power. The fundamentalprinciples are that ‘opinions on matters of concern to the nation and publiclyexpressed by men outside the government . . . should inﬂuence or determine theactions, personnel, or structure of their government’, and that ‘the government willreveal and explain its decisions in order to enable people outside the government tothink and talk about those decisions’.
5 Such democratic discussion within the frontiers
of the extended nation state depends necessarily upon an infrastructure of communi-cation and publicity. Indeed, it is only on this basis that the idea of a public can haveany meaning. It is through these media that channels of communication and dis-course, and access to information resources, are assured. On this basis the public useof reasoning could be assured. Gouldner describes the bourgeois public sphere as‘one of the great historical advances in rationality’.
6
That was the aspiration, though many critics of Habermas have doubted whether
the bourgeois public sphere – and the ‘ideal speech situation’ that it presupposes –were ever signiﬁcant historical realities. For the present argument, however, theseobjections are not important. What concern us now are the subsequent transform-ations of the public sphere, which do have manifest historical palpability. One processthat occurs is the intrusion of market and commodity relations into the public sphere,and this results in the transformation of reasoning into consumption.
7 But perhaps
even more important has been that process through which political debate hascome to be regulated by large corporate bodies and by the state (‘refeudalisation’ isFROM PUBLIC SPHERE TO CYBERNETIC STATE 93
Habermas’s term for it). The ‘public’ is then ‘superseded, managed and manipulated
by large organisations which arrange things among themselves on the basis of tech-nical information and their relative power positions’, and what results is ‘the domin-ance of corporative forms within which discussion is not public but is increasinglylimited to technicians and bureaucrats’, with the public now becoming ‘a conditionof organisational action, to be instrumentally managed – i.e. manipulated’.
8 What
Habermas and Gouldner both discern is the technocratic and administrative rational-isation of political life, the Scientiﬁc Management of the public sphere and of publicinformation and communication. Gouldner goes further, however, in recognising thatthis rationalising tendency is, ironically, already present in the very foundations of thepublic sphere. He demonstrates that
the means to bring about the communicative competence that Habermas requiresfor rational discourse presuppose precisely the centralisation and strengtheningof that state apparatus which increasingly tends to stiﬂe rather than facilitatethe universalisation of the rational, uninhibited discourse necessary for anydemocratic society.
9
The most important cultural change with regard to the public sphere is the histor-
ical shift from a principle of political and public rationality, to one of ‘scientiﬁc’ andadministrative rationalisation. As Anthony Giddens argues, there are problems in thevery scale and complexity of the modern nation state. Social integration dependsupon a strengthening and centralisation of the state, and one aspect of this is thedevelopment and regulation of communication and information resources. Therationale and justiﬁcation of such tendencies become a ‘technical’ matter of ‘eﬃcient’management and administration over the extended territory of the nation state. Onthis basis, political debate, exchange and disagreement in the public sphere can cometo seem ‘ineﬃcient’, an inhibiting and disturbing obstacle to the rational managementof society. Rational and informed discourse in the public sphere gives way to rationalScientiﬁc Management of society by technicians and bureaucrats. In this process, thevery nature and criteria of rationality have been transformed. In the ﬁrst case, appeal
is made to the reason and judgement of the individual citizen. In the second, it is madeto the scientiﬁc rationality of the expert, and to the rationality of the social system.The more ‘objective’ rationality of Scientiﬁc Management seems to promise a more‘eﬃcient’ democratic order than the often inarticulate and irrational citizen. Reasonthus becomes instrumental, the mechanism for administrating, and thereby eﬀectivelycontrolling, the complex social totality. The Enlightenment ideal of Reason givesbirth to what Castoriadis calls the ‘rationalist ideology’: the illusion of omnipotence,the supremacy of economic ‘calculus’, the belief in the ‘rational’ organisation of society,the new religion of ‘science’ and technology.
10
This technocratic tendency is, of course, reﬂected in the positivist philosophy of
Saint-Simon and Comte, which, as Gouldner persuasively argues, was inimical to theideal of a politics open to all and conducted in public, and which maintained thatpublic aﬀairs were in fact scientiﬁc and technological problems, to be resolved byprofessionals and experts.
11 But it is with a later form of practical sociology, that
associated with the extension of the principles of Scientiﬁc Management to the wider94 THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
society, that such social engineering assumed its most sustained form and that the
systematic exploitation of information and communications resources was taken up inearnest. And an emblematic ﬁgure here was Walter Lippmann. Scientiﬁc Manage-ment, especially when placed within the conditions of industrial democracy,embodied in the factory regime what progressive thinkers such as Walter Lippmannenvisioned within society at large.
12
Lippmann points to two dilemmas of the modern mass society. The ﬁrst refers to
the political competence of citizens in democratic society: ‘The ideal of the omni-competent, sovereign citizen is, in my opinion, such a false ideal. It is unattainable.The pursuit of it is misleading. The failure to produce it has produced the currentdisenchantment’.
13 The second dilemma is that society has attained ‘a complexity
now so great as to be humanly unmanageable’.14 The implication is that central
government has been compelled to assume responsibility for the control and co-ordination of this increasingly diﬀuse social structure. And this entails ‘the need forinterposing some form of expertness between the private citizen and the vastenvironment in which he is entangled’.
15 As in the T aylorist factory, this depends on
‘systematic intelligence and information control’; the gathering of social knowledge,Lippmann argues, must necessarily become ‘the normal accompaniment of action’.
16
If social control is to be eﬀective, the control of information and communicationchannels is imperative. With the Scientiﬁc Management of social and political lifethrough the centralisation of communications and intelligence activities, ‘persuasion. . . become[s] a self-conscious art and a regular organ of popular government’ andthe ‘manufacture of consent improve[s] enormously in technique, because it is now
based on analysis rather than rule of thumb’.
17
What is especially important here, we believe, is the association of public opinion
theory with the study of propaganda in contemporary political discourse. Propagandahas commonly, and common-sensibly, been seen as inimical to rational politicaldebate, as a force that obstructs public reasoning. In the context, however, of thesocial complexity and citizen ‘incompetence’ observed by Lippmann, propagandaassumed the guise of a more positive social force in the eyes of many social andpolitical thinkers in the early decades of the century. An increasingly pragmatic and‘realistic’ appraisal of the political process suggested that ‘in a world of competingpolitical doctrines, the partisans of democratic government cannot depend solelyupon appeal to reason or abstract liberalism’.
18 It became clear that ‘propaganda, as
the advocacy of ideas and doctrines, has a legitimate and desirable part to play in ourdemocratic system’.
19 The very complexity of the modern nation state is such that a
‘free market’ of ideas and debate must be superseded by the management and orches-tration of public opinion. Harold Lasswell makes the point succinctly:
The modern conception of social management is profoundly aﬀected by thepropagandist outlook. Concerted action for public ends depends upon a certainconcentration of motives. . . . Propaganda is surely here to stay; the modern worldis peculiarly dependent upon it for the co-ordination of atomised components intimes of crisis and for the conduct of large scale ‘normal’ operations.
20
Propaganda is understood here in terms of the regulation and control of channelsFROM PUBLIC SPHERE TO CYBERNETIC STATE 95
of communication and information in democratic societies. At one level, this is a
matter of disseminating and broadcasting certain categories of information.21 At
another level, it is a matter of restricting access to speciﬁc categories of information.As Walter Lippmann makes clear, ‘without some form of censorship, propaganda inthe strict sense of the word is impossible. In order to conduct a propaganda theremust be some barrier between the public and the event’.
22 For Lippmann, propa-
ganda and censorship are complementary, as forms of persuasion and public opinionmanagement. There has been a shift from the idea of an informed and reasoningpublic, to an acceptance of the massage and manipulation of public opinion bythe technicians of public relations. The state function has increasingly come to sub-sume and regulate the democratic principle; and this to the point that it now seemsindissociable from that principle.
23
We have spent some time in outlining the development of rationalised political
management and information control because we feel, again, that this is an importanthistorical context for the development of new information and communicationstechnologies. Through the impetus of Scientiﬁc Management, and the developmentof propaganda and public opinion research, it became clear that social planning andcontrol depended upon the exploitation of information resources and technologies.This was the historical moment of the Information Revolution. The most recenttechnological developments – in space and satellite technologies, data processing,and in telecommunications – extend what was in reality a fundamentally political‘revolution’ in information (and communication) management. It was this historicalconjuncture that spawned the ‘modern’ industries and bureaucracies of public rela-tions, propaganda, public (and private) opinion polling, news management, imageproduction and advocacy, political advertising, censorship and ‘oﬃcial’ secrecy, thinktanks, and so on. More recent innovations have come with the increase in scale andthe exploitation of technological resources.
While information management took on its major features in the period between
the wars, in recent decades its growth and spread have been accelerating dramatically.Ironically, however, more information management has been accompanied by areluctance to admit of its existence. Consider, for example, the enormous expansionand extension of the advertising industry since 1945.
24 Not only has advertising
grown massively in economic worth, but it has also extended its reach to incorporate abattery of new informational and communications activities, ranging from consult-ancy to public relations, direct mail to corporate imagery. In tandem have developedthe phenomena of ‘junk mail’ and free local ‘newspapers’, innovations designed toreach more, and to more precisely ﬁnd, potential consumers. Along with theseextensions into new products and new markets has come about an improved profes-sionalism amongst practitioners (clear evidence of which is the proliferation ofcourses in advertising, PR and marketing available in the education system) and anotable increase in the precision of their ‘campaigns’ (careful market research usingsocial science techniques such as survey samples, focus groups, etc., computerisedrecording and analysis of data, and carefully ‘targeted’ audiences).
Further evidence of the growing trend towards managing opinion, and something
which reaches deep into the political domain, is the dramatic rise in Britain of lobby-ing concerns that penetrate Whitehall to extend the inﬂuence of their paymasters. A96
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
key constituent of this strategy is the hiring of parliamentarians by interested parties.
Indeed, Adam Raphael estimated that one-third of British members of parliamentare paid ‘consultants’,
25 with over half having commercial interests either as paid
consultants, directors or shareholders.
An important rationale for the deployment of new information technologies is,
then, the regulation of political life and the engineering of public opinion. JeremyTunstall describes the technological streamlining of political management in theUnited States: election campaigns ‘are now managed via computers’; electronic mail-ing permits ‘separate mailing shots . . . targeted at particular occupational groups ortypes of housing area’; electronic databases provide political and demographicinformation.
26 In Britain, too, electioneering is increasingly a matter of electronic
techniques, with the development of software programmes to analyse voter groupsand behaviour, detailed scrutiny of carefully selected subjects prior to productlaunch,
27 the growth of targeted mail, and computerised planning of campaigns.28
Conclusion
‘Is closer and closer social control the inevitable price of “progress”, a necessaryconcomitant of the continued development of modern social forms?’
29 We believe that
this is indeed the case. Against those who see the new communications technologiesas the basis for a coming ‘communications era’,
30 and the new information technolo-
gies as the panacea for our present ‘Age of Ignorance’,31 our own argument is
that their development has, in fact, been closely associated with processes of socialmanagement and control. The scale and complexity of the modern nation state hasmade communications and information resources (and technologies) central to themaintenance of political and administrative cohesion.
The ‘Information Revolution’ is, then, not simply and straightforwardly a matter
of technological ‘progress’, of a new technological or industrial revolution. It is signiﬁ-cant, rather, for the new matrix of political and cultural forces that it supports. And acrucial dimension here is that of organisational form and structure. Communicationand information resources (and technologies) set the conditions and limits to the scaleand nature of organisational possibilities. What they permit is the development ofcomplex and large-scale bureaucratic organisations, and also of extended corporatestructures that transcend the apparent limits of space and time (transnational corpor-ations). They also constitute the nervous system of the modern state and guaranteeits cohesion as an expansive organisational form. Insofar as they guarantee and con-solidate these essential power structures in modern society, information and com-munication are fundamental to political administrative regulation, and consequentlyto the social and cultural experience of modernity.
The exploitation of information resources and technologies has expressed itself,
politically and culturally, through the dual tendency towards social planning andmanagement, on the one hand, and surveillance and control on the other. In historicalterms, this can be seen as the apotheosis of Lewis Mumford’s megamachine: technol-ogy now increasingly fulﬁls what previously depended upon bureaucratic organisa-tion and structure. But the central historical reference point is the emergence, early inthe twentieth century, of Scientiﬁc Management (as a philosophy both of industrialFROM PUBLIC SPHERE TO CYBERNETIC STATE 97
production and of social reproduction). It was at this moment that ‘scientiﬁc’ plan-
ning and management moved beyond the factory to regulate the whole way of life. Atthis time, the ‘gathering of social knowledge’ became ‘the normal accompaniment ofaction’, and the manufacture of consent, through propaganda and opinion manage-ment, was increasingly ‘based on analysis rather than on rule of thumb’.
32 If, through
Scientiﬁc Management, the planning and administration of everyday life becamepervasive, it also became the pre-eminent form and expression of social control.Planning and management were, necessarily and indissociably, a process of surveil-lance and of manipulation and persuasion. T o the extent that these administrative anddominative information strategies were ﬁrst developed on a systematic basis, it was atthis historical moment, we believe, that the ‘Information Revolution’ was unleashed.New information and communications technologies have most certainly advanced,and automated, these combined information and intelligence activities, but theyremain essentially reﬁnements of what was fundamentally a political-administrative‘revolution’.
Recent innovations in information and communications technologies have gen-
erally been discussed from a narrow technological or economic perspective. It hasbeen a matter of technology assessment or of the exploitation of new technologies topromote industrial competitiveness and economic growth. This, in the light of ourdiscussion, seems a partial and blinkered vision. The central question to be raised inthe context of the ‘Information Revolution’ today, is, we believe, the relation betweenknowledge/information and the system of political and corporate power. For some,knowledge is inherently and self-evidently a benevolent force, and improvements inthe utilisation of knowledge are demonstrably the way to ensure social progress.
33
Information is treated as an instrumental and technical resource that will ensure therational and eﬃcient management of society. It is a matter of social engineering byknowledge professionals and information specialists and technocrats. For us, theproblems of the ‘information society’ are more substantial, complex, and oblique.
This, of course, raises diﬃcult political and philosophical issues. These are the
issues that Walter Lippmann comes up against when he recognises in the GreatSociety ‘that centralisation of power which deprives [citizens] of control over the use
of that power’, and when, he confronts the disturbing awareness that ‘the problemsthat vex democracy seem to be unmanageable by democratic methods’.
34 They are
the issues that Lewis Mumford addresses when he argues that ‘the tension betweensmall-scale association and large-scale organisation, between personal autonomy andinstitutional regulation, between remote control and diﬀused local intervention, hasnow created a critical situation’.
35 And they are the monumental issues that concern
Castoriadis in his analysis of instrumental reason and the ‘rationalist ideology, thosemyths which, more than money or weapons, constitute the most formidable obstaclesin the way of the reconstruction of human society’.
36
Among the signiﬁcant issues to be raised by the new information technologies are
their relation to social forms of organisation, their centrality to structures of politicalpower, and their role in the cultural logic of consumer capitalism. Sociological analy-sis is naïve, we believe, when it treats the new telecommunications, space, videoand computing technologies as innocent technical conceptions and looks hopefully toa coming, post-industrial utopia. Better to look back to the past, to the entwined98
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
histories of reason, knowledge and technology, and to their relation to the economic
development of capitalism and the political and administrative system of the modernnation state.
Notes
1 Philip Corrigan and Derek Sayer, The Great Arch: English State Formation as
Cultural Revolution, Oxford, Blackwell, 1985.
2 Anthony Giddens, A Contemporary Critique of Historical Materialism, vol. 1, Power,
Property and the State, London, Macmillan, 1981, p. 94.
3 Theodore Roszak, The Cult of Information, Cambridge, Lutterworth Press, 1986,
p. 156.
4Jürgen Habermas, Strukturwandel der Öﬀentlichkeit, Darmstadt, Luchterhand,
1962.
5 Hans Speier, ‘Historical Development of Public Opinion’, American Journal of
Sociology, 1950, vol. 55, January, p. 376.
6 Alvin Gouldner, The Dialectic of Ideology and T echnology, London, Macmillan,
1976; cf. Nicholas Garnham, ‘The Media and the Public Sphere’, in Peter Gold-ing, Graham Murdock and Philip Schlesinger (eds), Communicating Politics:Mass Communications and the Political Process, Leicester, Leicester UniversityPress, 1986, pp. 37–53.
7 Jurgen Habermas, Strukturwandel der Oﬀentlichkeit, Darmstadt, Luchterhand,
1962, p. 194.
8 Alvin Gouldner, The Dialectic of Ideology and T echnology, London, Macmillan,
1976, pp. 139–40.
9 Paul Piccone, ‘Paradoxes of Reﬂexive Sociology’, New German Critique, 1976,
no. 8, Spring, p. 173.
10 Cornelius Castoriadis, ‘Reﬂections on “Rationality” and “Development”’ ,
Thesis Eleven, 1984/85, no. 10/11.
11 Alvin Gouldner, The Dialectic of Ideology and T echnology; London, Macmillan,
1976, pp. 36–37.
12 Samuel Haber, Eﬃciency and Uplift: Scientiﬁc Management in the Progressive Era,
1890–1920, Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1964, pp. 90, 93, 97–98.
13 Walter Lippmann, The Phantom Public, New Y ork, Harcourt, Brace and Co.,
1925, p. 39.
14 Walter Lippmann, Public Opinion, London, Allen and Unwin, 1922, p. 394.15 Ibid., p. 378.16 Ibid., p. 408.17 Ibid., p. 248.18 William Albig, Public Opinion, New Y ork, McGraw-Hill, 1939, p. 301.19 Harwood L. Childs, Public Opinion: Nature, Formation and Role, Princeton, NJ,
Van Nostrand, 1965, p. 282.
20 Harold D. Lasswell, ‘The Vocation of Propagandists’ in On Political Sociology,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, (1934) 1977, pp. 234, 235.
21 Edward Bernays refers to this as ‘special pleading’ and Harold Lasswell writes of
the function of advocacy, suggesting that as an advocate the propagandist canFROM PUBLIC SPHERE TO CYBERNETIC STATE 99
think of himself as having much in common with the lawyer’. Indeed, according
to Lasswell, society ‘cannot act intelligently’ without its ‘specialists on truth’;‘unless these specialists are properly trained and articulated with one another andthe public, we cannot reasonably hope for public interests’. Edward L. Bernays.Crystallising Public Opinion, New Y ork, Boni and Liveright, 1923; HaroldD. Lasswell, Democracy Through Public Opinion, Menasha, Wis., George BantaPublishing Company (The Eleusis of Chi Omega, 1941, vol. 43, no. 1, Part 2),pp. 63, 75–76.
22 Walter Lippmann, Public Opinion, London, Allen and Unwin, 1922, p. 43.23 As Francis Rourke observes ‘public opinion [has] become the servant rather than
the master of government, reversing the relationship which democratic theoryassumes and narrowing the gap between democratic and totalitarian societies’.Francis E. Rourke, Survey and Publicity: Dilemmas of Democracy, Baltimore, JohnsHopkins Press, 1961, p. xi.
24 John Sinclair, Images Incorporated: Advertising as Industry and Ideology, London,
Croom Helm, 1987, pp. 99–123.
25 Adam Raphael, ‘What Price Democracy?’, Observer (Colour Supplement), 1990,
14 October, pp. 7–47.
26 Jeremy Tunstall, ‘Deregulation is Politicisation’, T elecommunications Policy, 1985,
vol. 9, no. 3, September, p. 210.
27 See the exceptionally informative article by Bernice Marrin, ‘Symbolic Know-
ledge and Market Forces at the Frontiers of Postmodernism: Qualitative MarketResearchers (Britain)’ in Hans Kellner and Peter Berger (eds), Hidden T echno-crats: The New Class and New Capitalism, New Brunswick, Transaction, 1992,pp. 111–56.
28 Cf. Bob Franklin, Packaging Politics: Political Communications in Britain’s Media
Democracy, London, Edward Arnold, 1994.
29 James B. Rule, Private Lives and Public Surveillance, London, Allen Lane, 1973,
p. 43.
30 T om Stonier, ‘Intelligence Networks, Overview, Purpose and Policies in the Con-
text of Global Social Change’, Aslib Proceedings, 1986, vol. 38, no. 9, September.
31 Michael Marien, ‘Some Questions for the Information Society’, The Information
Society, 1984, vol. 3, no. 2.
32 Walter Lippmann, Public Opinion, London, Allen and Unwin, 1922, pp. 408, 248.33 Kenneth E. Boulding and Lawrence Senesh, The Optimum Utilisation of Know-
ledge: Making Knowledge Serve Human Betterment, Boulder, Col., Westview Press,1983.
34 Walter Lippmann, The Phantom Public, New Y ork, Harcourt, Brace and Co.,
1925, pp. 189–90.
35 Lewis Murnford, ‘Authoritarian and Democratic T echnics’, T echnology and
Culture, 1964, vol. 5, no. 2.
36 Cornelius Castoriadis, ‘Reﬂections on “Rationality” and “Development”’ ;
Thesis Eleven, 1984/85, no. 10/11, p. 35.100
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
2.5
Policing the thinkable,
by Robert W. McChesney
The global media are integrating and their ownership is concentrating in
fewer hands. This process threatens to undermine democracy. We needmore independent and non-commercial media to challenge the corporatestranglehold on the culture.
Over the past two decades, as a result of neoliberal deregulation and new communica-
tion technologies, the media systems across the world have undergone a startlingtransformation. There are now fewer and larger companies controlling more andmore, and the largest of them are media conglomerates, with vast empires that covernumerous media industries.
Media industries are barely competitive in the economic sense of the term. The
giants do compete ferociously, but they do so under the rules of oligopolistic markets,meaning they have far greater control over their fate than those in truly competitivemarkets. It also means that it is extremely diﬃcult, if not impossible, for newcomers toenter these markets as viable players.
By most theories of liberal democracy, such a concentration of media power into
so few hands is disastrous for the free marketplace of ideas, the bedrock upon whichinformed self-government rests. The key to making markets work in the consumers ’
interest is that they be open to newcomers, but the present conglomerate-dominatedmarkets are not even remotely competitive in the traditional sense of the term.
This is not a new problem for capitalist media. In fact, in the United States, it was
nothing short of a crisis a century ago, as one-newspaper towns and chain news-papers terminated competition in the American newspaper market, then the primarypurveyor of journalism. Journalism at the time was still quite partisan, whence thepolitical crisis that resulted from virtual monopoly. It was one thing for newspapers tobe opinionated when there were several in a community and it was relatively easy toenter the market. It was quite another thing to have opinionated journalism whenthere were monopoly newspapers and they stridently advocated the political positionsof their owners and major advertisers.
We report, you decide
The solution to this problem was the birth of professional journalism, based on the
idea that news should not be opinionated. T o cite the slogan for Murdoch’s US FoxNews Channel: “We report, you decide.” In theory news would be produced bytrained professional editors and reporters, free of the political bias of owners andadvertisers, who would concede control over editorial matters to the professionals.
Readers could trust the news, and not worry about the paucity of local news-
papers. Of course, professional journalism was hardly neutral – it tended to volleywithin the walls of elite opinion and call that neutrality. Even after professionalismbecame the rule in the United States by mid-century, it was never pristine. But it didserve to make the concentrated ownership of media appear less signiﬁcant than itwould otherwise have been.
In the past 15 years, the autonomy granted professional journalists has come
under sustained attack. As many of the major newspaper chains and TV networkshave been gobbled up – at high prices – by the giant conglomerates, the traditionaldeal between owners and journalists has made less and less business sense. Why,accountants ask, should a ﬁrm ’s news division generate less proﬁt than its ﬁlm studio,
its music division, or its TV networks?
Accordingly, newsrooms have increasingly been subjected to commercial ration-
alisation: reduced staﬀ, less controversial and labour intensive investigative reporting,and more easy-to-cover but trivial stories about celebrities, crime and royal families.News is increasingly pitched to the upscale audience desired by advertisers; in theUnited States, business news has therefore become a huge part of the overall news,while labour news has fallen from view. The measure of the decline in professionaljournalism is indicated in every major study of journalists over the past decade. Anec-dotally, one need only read the laments of former journalists to see that somethingfundamental has taken place.
New media provides competition?
With the decline of professionalism as a protection against concentrated control overthe media, a new reason to keep things as they are has emerged: the internet will set usfree. New digital technologies are so powerful that they will provide a platform for amassive wave of new media competitors who will slay the existing giant corporatemedia dinosaurs. A golden age of competition is returning.
It is true that the internet is changing a great deal about our lives. In certain media
industries, especially music and book publishing, it is forcing a thoroughgoing re-evaluation of the reigning business models. But the evidence so far is emphatic: theinternet is not going to launch viable commercial competitors to the existing mediagiants. Their existing market power trumps the possibilities of the new technologies.There is a plus side for internet journalism; people can access news media from acrossthe planet. But sustaining doing good journalism requires resources and institutionalsupport. There is nothing in the technology or the market that provides either of theseto internet upstarts.102
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
Not behind closed doors
A key reason the internet will not set us free is the thoroughly corrupt nature of
communication policy making in the United States, and, to varying extents, world-wide. New technologies – often developed by public subsidy – could be used toprovide for a new sector of commercial and non-commercial media if public policieswere so inclined. But they are not, and they are not for a reason: important licencesand subsidies are routinely doled out to media corporations behind closed doors – inthe public’s name but without the public’s informed consent.
In the United States, for example, the premier licences for monopolistic rights to
broadcasting frequencies on the scarce airwaves have been provided at no charge to ahandful of corporations including Disney, Viacom and News Corporation. A trainedchimpanzee could make millions with VHF TV licenses in New Y ork, Chicago, andLos Angeles. Someone with the cunning of a Rupert Murdoch or a Sumner Redstonecan do far better than that.
This points to the daunting task that faces those who wish to challenge the cor-
porate media status quo. The nature of our media industries results not from somenatural “free” market but from explicit government policies and subsidies. As the
media ﬁrms have grown larger, their power over government policymakers has turned
into a vice-grip. They alone control the means of communication, meaning they canshape the manner in which debates over media policy are disseminated andunderstood.
Global media system
The internet is not all that has changed in the past decade. There has emerged a globalcommercial media system during the same period. Twenty years ago, one thought ofmedia systems as national phenomena ﬁrst, with imports a secondary consideration.T oday this is reversed. We must see the global system ﬁrst, then make allowances fordiﬀerences between nations and regions. This global media system is an indispensablepart of the rise of global neoliberal capitalism. Indeed, it would diﬃcult to imagine“globalisation” without the emergence of the international commercial media system.Through these systems transnational ﬁrms have access to unprecedented markets,broadcasting content that inevitably supports the values necessary to keep the systemticking.
At the top of the global media system is a tier of fewer than ten transnational
giants – AOL Time Warner, Disney, Bertelsmann, Vivendi Universal, Sony, Viacom
and News Corporation – that together own all the major ﬁlm studios and musiccompanies, most of the cable and satellite TV systems and stations, the US televisionnetworks, much of global book publishing and much, much, more. By 2001 nearly allof the ﬁrst tier ﬁrms rank among the 300 largest corporations in the world, severalamong the top 50 or 100. As recently as 20 years ago, one would have been hard-pressed to ﬁnd a single media company among the 1,000 largest ﬁrms in the world.Or, to consider the growth of the media sector in another manner, consider the AOL –Time Warner merger, the largest in business history. That deal, valued at around$160 billion, was nearly 500 times larger than any media deal in history.POLICING THE THINKABLE 103
The global media system is rounded out by a second tier of 60–80 ﬁrms. Most of
them are powerhouses in North America or Europe, but several are based in Asia and
a few in Latin America. These ﬁrms are competitors in some markets but are oftencollaborators, partners and customers in other markets. They are all wed to the neo-liberal deregulatory model that has permitted them to grow wealthy and proﬁtable.The governments of the United States and its trusty sidekick, Britain, have dedicatedthemselves to the advancement of these ﬁrms ’ global operations. In many nations,
these powerhouses and four or fewer other ﬁrms dominate the media systems.
Proﬁt over public service
Although the global media system produces much of value, it is deeply ﬂawed whenmeasured by a democratic yardstick. Journalism tends to assume and support thepatterns described above for the United States, undermining civic participation andencouraging business domination of social life. Notions of public service invariablyfall before the altar of proﬁt, as Andrew Graham argued in the ﬁrst issue ofopenDemocracy. The collapsing of professional standards in journalism, as JeanSeaton suggested in her contribution, is one of the inevitable outcomes.
Public service broadcasting ﬁnds itself the square peg in a neoliberal hole,
and survives as an increasingly commercialised aﬀair only because it is popular,not because it can be justiﬁed in market ideology. The great strength of the com-mercial system is its ability to generate commercially marinated light entertainment,which suits perfectly the sort of depoliticised and inegalitarian society as exists inneoliberalism’s spawning ground, the United States.
The media giants themselves assert that their power permits them to stand up to
huge governments with large armies and report the tough stories that would otherwisebe neglected. The record, however, points to the contrary. The annual lists ofreporters who have been arrested, beaten, harassed, and murdered worldwide includeprecious few employees of the media giants. They are mostly freelance reporters orjournalists working with small-scale media. The media giants might claim that this isbecause tyrannical thugs fear them, but then one would expect to see the media giantsaggressively pursuing the stories that put those valiant journalists in hot water. Theyaren’t.
Consider the case of China, where the corporate media lust for a massive market
locked in by a police state has seen News Corporation, Disney, Viacom and all the resttrade in their scruples for a crack at the jackpot. A jackpot that Murdoch seems tohave won. The moral of the story is clear: the global media giants use their marketpower to advance their interests and the wealth of their shareholders, and to precludeany public involvement in democratic media policy making. It is a poison pill fordemocracy.
The solution follows from the critique. We need to democratise media policy-
making, and take it from the hands of the self-interested media corporations. Weneed to determine how to establish a well-funded viable and healthy non-pro ﬁt
and non-commercial media sector, independent of big business and government.We need to maintain a strong and vibrant non-commercial public broadcastingservice that provides a full range of programming to the entire population. We need104
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
strict ownership and public interest regulations for media ﬁrms that are granted
broadcast or cable licences. And we need policies that promote the creation of smallcommercial media as well as media workers’ trade unions. In combination, thesereforms would go a long way toward democratising our media systems and blastingopen the corporate grip over our political cultures. It is not necessarily the mostimportant task for those who favour a more egalitarian, democratic and humaneworld, but it is nonetheless indispensable. It will not be an easy task, but that makes itno less important.POLICING THE THINKABLE 105
2.6
The myths of encroaching global
media ownership,by Benjamin Compaine
Media conglomerates are not as powerful as they seem, for even corporations
must respect the discipline of the market. A diverse media re ﬂects the plurality
of publics in modern society. This is democracy in action.
Is corporate media ownership leading to a dangerous, undemocratic concentration of
power and editorial control? In my view it is not. The democracy of the marketplacemay be ﬂawed but it is, if anything, getting better, not worse. The ﬁrst question thatmust be addressed to fully discuss media ownership and its consequences is: what arethe empirical facts?
I try to report these in my book, Who Owns the Media? Competition and
Concentration in the Mass Media.
T ake Robert McChesney’s opening statement and the very basis for his thesis –
that there are fewer and larger companies controlling more and more. This is wrong.Certainly a casual reading of the headlines would lead to this assumption. The mergerof Time with Warner and then with America Online got headlines. But the incre-mental growth of smaller companies from the bottom does not make headlines. Nordo break-ups and divestitures usually get front-page treatment. Nor do the arrival ofnew players or the shrinkage of old players.
In 1986 there was a list of the ﬁfty largest media companies and there is still a list
of the top ﬁfty. And the current ﬁfty account for little more of the total of media pietoday than in 1986. In 1986, for example, CBS, Inc. was the largest media company inthe US, with sizeable interests in broadcasting, magazine and book publishing. In thefollowing decade it sold oﬀ its magazines, divested its book publishing, and was noteven among the ten largest US media companies by the time it agreed to be acquiredby Viacom. Conversely, Bertelsmann, though a major player in Germany in 1986, wasbarely visible in the US. By 1997 it was the third largest player in the US. Companiessuch as Amazon.com, Books-A-Million, Comcast and C-Net were nowhere to befound on a list of the largest media companies in 1980. Others, such as Allied Artists,Macmillan, and Playboy Enterprises either folded or grew so slowly as to fall out ofthe top ranks. It is a dynamic industry.
More channels, more choice – and more owners
Overall, an index of economic concentration of the ﬁfty largest media industry play-
ers, where one thousand is the bottom range of oligopolistic tendencies, stood at twohundred and sixty-eight in the US in 1997, up only marginally from two hundred andsix in 1986. That was before AOL and Time Warner or CBS and Viacom merged, butit was also before Ziﬀ broke itself up or Thomson, the owner of more newspapersthan any other company in North America, sold oﬀ most of its holdings to severalestablished as well as newer players.
There is also the reality that “getting bigger” needs context. Because all
developed economies grow, enterprises that grow larger are often simply staying stillin relative terms. Or the growth looks less weighty than it would in absolute terms. Forexample, measured by revenue, Gannett was the largest US newspaper publisher in1986, its sales accounting for 3.3% of all media revenue that year. In 1997, helped bymajor acquisitions, its revenue had grown 69%. But the US economy had grown by86%, leaving Gannett behind. And the media industry had grown by 188%, making a“bigger” Gannett “smaller,” with under 2% of total media revenue. There are manysimilar stories.
There is no doubt that some sectors of the media industry are more concentrated
than ten or twenty years earlier – but with little economic or social impact. There arefewer newspaper publishers in the US, but then again the newspaper industry hasbeen contracting in size for decades, and faces far more competition from other mediathan in its heyday early in the twentieth century. Circulation has fallen steadily, as hasits share of advertising. One can’t expect a dying industry to do anything butconsolidate.
On the other hand, the broadcasting industry in the US, as much of Europe, has
become far more competitive. This may not seem evident at ﬁrst glance, but it isabsolutely true. From the 1950s to 1986 US households had access to only threecommercial networks. In 1986 News Corp took the risk of putting together a fourthnetwork where others had failed. It was aided by two regulatory decisions that wouldseem counter-intuitive in promoting competition: a single ﬁrm was permitted to owntwelve instead of the previous limit of seven local broadcast licenses. This allowedNews Corp. to assemble a core of stations in larger markets that gave it a viable start inensuring a base of an audience.
The Federal Communications Commission also waived a regulation that pro-
hibited TV networks from owning its programming. The original regulation wassupposed to foster competition, but was fatal to the economics of a ﬂedging network.News Corp bought 20th Century Fox. With these two pieces in place, the Fox net-work was the ﬁrst new and successful alternative to the Big 3 in thirty years. It alsoshowed the way for three other large media players to start two networks. T oday thereare six commercial broadcast networks controlled by ﬁve corporate owners.
From the point of view of the media consumer, then, there is more choice on
television. In addition, nearly every household in the US that so desires subscribes toeither cable or satellite services, providing them with scores of programming choicesfrom dozens of owners.THE MYTHS OF ENCROACHING GLOBAL MEDIA OWNERSHIP 107
The Internet effect
Nor should the Internet glibly be written oﬀ as a promise unfulﬁlled. At this writing,
the Internet as a commercial medium for a mass audience is barely seven years old.Only in 1994 did Netscape launch the ﬁrst commercially promoted user-friendlybrowser. It was even later that AOL opened itself to the Internet, completely under-mining the proprietary online model that had been central to the business model itshared with CompuServe and Prodigy.
So the Internet today is analogous in both maturity of content and format as was
radio in roughly 1928, or television in about 1952. They evolved mightily in alldimensions and the Internet will as well. But rather than seeing the glass as half emptytoday, it is half – if not more – ﬁlled. Certainly the incumbent media companies are
going to want to be involved. Not to would be derelict in their ﬁduciary duties to theemployees and stockholders (see below). But the Internet is and will remain a low costconduit of all manners of players. There’s an old adage – “freedom of the press is
available only to anyone who owns one.” The alternative was often the sound of one’svoice at Hyde Park Corner or ﬂyers handed out at a rally. Make no mistake: anadvocate of a cause with a dial-up Internet connection and 10mb of space for a Website on a server cannot easily challenge Disney for audience attention. But as MattDrudge proved in “breaking” the Monica Lewinsky aﬀair, an individual or smallgroup has access to the world and, with a little work and less money, can actually ﬁndan audience. As has historically been true, news or information of real value has a wayof getting picked by the mainstream media.
In cumulative small ways the Internet is having a large impact. Less than a decade
ago the number of AM or FM radio signals an individual could receive variedfrom under a half dozen in rural towns to perhaps forty to ﬁfty stations in the largestcities in the US. They provided a variety of news, talk and public aﬀairs and a limitedrange of culture primarily in the form of music. T oday, anyone with an Internetconnection and appliance (in the form of a PC or dedicated Internet radio) has accessto thousands of programmers. Some are the same old players – Disney, Inﬁnity, theold government-run stations in much of the world. But there is a plethora of newer,Internet-only options. They have not had to invest in government-sanctioned licensesand generally have no limits on their speech (depending on where domiciled) short ofoutright pornography and slander. Down the road wireless Internet connects will addto its mobility.
Realguide.com provides links to 2500 real time audio streams from around the
world. Many are over-the-air stations. The single jazz or classical music station inone market is now supplemented by over one hundred and thirty jazz and nearly onehundred classical others globally. While the vast majority is in English, eighty-two arein Spanish, sixty-three in German, even nine in Icelandic. The audiences, as meas-ured in the US, are heaviest for those stations that are Internet-only. The NetRadiogroup outdraws stations owned by Disney and other traditional broadcasters. Thissuggests that the Internet-only broadcasters are doing a better job of understandingtheir audiences and/or promoting themselves.108
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
The restraint of the market
The notion of the rise of a handful of all-powerful transnational media giants is also
vastly overstated. There is only one truly global media enterprise, Australia’s NewsCorporation. In the past decade Germany’s Bertelsmann has expanded beyond itsEuropean base to North America. And that’s it. The substantial global presence of allothers is primarily the output of the same Hollywood studios that have distributedtheir ﬁlms globally for decades. Nothing new there. Some owners and names have
changed: Universal has gone from MCA (US) to Matsushita (Japan) to Seagrams(Canada) to Vivendi (France). But in each case the principal media holding of eachowner has been little more than this studio. AOL Time–Warner receives only one-ﬁfth of its revenue from outside the US – and that primarily from Warner Bros.Disney, Viacom and Sony also owe most of their non-North America media revenueto ﬁlms, a non-event in terms of change over the past few decades.
The number of media companies is only part of the picture. Who actually owns
and controls the companies? How do editorial, pricing and programming decisionsget made? For the most part, ownership of the media, especially in the US, isextremely democratic. Most of the largest media companies are publicly owned.Through their pension funds teachers in California own parts of Dow Jones andViacom. The owners of Fidelity’s mutual funds had a vested interest in nine per centof CBS and eight per cent of AOL in 1998. Although these large institutions tend tovote their shares for management’s proposals, the media companies have a legalobligation to consider the best interest of their stockholders. When a steel worker orpayroll clerk retires, their well-being is directly aﬀected by the ﬁnancial decisions oftheir pension funds and investments.
Finally, this leads to a need to understand what motivates media management
decision-making. In 1947, AJ Liebling, a ﬁerce critic of the American press, nonethe-less understood that in its very commercialism and proﬁt-seeking the media caters toits audience, not to the political or culture whims of its owners and managers. Lieblingwrote, “The American press has never been monolithic, like that of an authoritarian
state. One reason is that there is always money to be made in journalism by standingup for the underdog . . . His wife buys girdles and baking powder and Literary Guildselections, and the advertiser has to reach her.” While stated in impolitic terms bytoday’s correctness, its essence rings true.
That is, the media – certainly in the US and to varying degrees elsewhere – tends
to be run not to promote an ideology but to seek proﬁt. T o do that, it needs tounderstand what its audiences expect, what they will respond to. It does tend to makemedia institutions followers more than leaders. But as a graveyard of entrepreneursand government regulators with good intentions have learned, mass media cannot besustained only by meaning well. While there may be a role on the edge for somegovernment or other non-commercial media to promote otherwise non-economicallyviable approaches, the vast majority of media can exist only if it can sustain itself.No newspaper ever folded because of lack of something to write about, but only for alack of circulation and therefore advertising. Writers, artists, graphics designers,producers and editors want and need proﬁtable employers to provide livable wages,appropriate equipment, suﬃcient travel and similar resources.THE MYTHS OF ENCROACHING GLOBAL MEDIA OWNERSHIP 109
Cultural elitists distort the picture
This tyranny of the marketplace also means that many media critics and, for lack of a
better term, cultural elitists, complain that the public doesn’t get what they, the critics,think they should get from the media. Should newspapers be more serious, less ﬂuﬀ?
With circulation declining as it is, can newspapers aﬀord to cater to a much smallercadre of readers? Could they then aﬀord any level of quality? Or should we look to theInternet as the vehicle of niche audiences?
That cultural bias of many media critics is evidenced in their view of the Fox
Network and the Fox News channel on cable. After years of lamenting the hegemonyand cookie-cutter programming of the three US networks, critics expected that a newnetwork would provide the “quality” programming they wanted for “the people.”News Corp’s Fox did provide a very noticeably diﬀerent approach in programming –but it was aimed more down-market than the other networks. Fox News, again takinga diﬀerent approach from CNN and the news operations of the older networks,proclaimed, “We report, you decide.” The critics called it politically conservative. A
growing audience found it refreshing. Both Foxes clearly added to the long-desiredpolicy goal of diversity of US programming. If it’s not what the elitists had in mind,well, be careful what one wishes for – it may come to pass.
It is not generally known that in the 1980s VCRs spread in much of Western
Europe faster than in the US. This was in contrast to most technologies, from radio toTV, cable, PCs and the Internet, which tend to catch on faster in North America.Why? In most European countries, broadcasting was generally controlled directly orindirectly by government agencies. There were only two or three channels. Viewerswere often oﬀered high culture or low production-value programming. Viewershipwas hence lower than in the US. The VCR was a taste of choice: rent a video andbecome your own programmer. In the US, where programming was more democraticvia the decisions of the marketplace and the remote control device – and where cablewas already providing more choice – the VCR was less obviously needed.
The structure of the media is not perfect. Individual decisions by editors, pub-
lishers, and owners are not always those that someone else, with diﬀerent standards,would make. There are awful policy mistakes made, as when the US Congress sup-ported the lobbying eﬀorts of the broadcasters to be given digital spectrum at no cost.But even that is democracy at work: there were other large constituencies lobbyingagainst the give-away.
In democracies, there is no universal “public interest.” Rather there are numer-
ous and changing “interested publics” which ﬁght battles issue by issue, in legislativecorridors, regulatory commission hearings and ultimately at the ballot box. That itis sloppy and imperfect is beside the point. T o loosely paraphrase Winston Churchill,it works better than any alterative that’s been tried or proposed. The media, in allits forms, may be increasingly important in our world. But it is not concentratingor becoming any more monopolistic than it was in the twentieth century. Its ownersare not cynical manipulators, who undermine the public’s better judgement. Ourdemocracy may be ﬂawed, but it is still in charge, not suborned by the news andprogrammes produced by the media conglomerates.110
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
PART 3
Properties and commons
This part focuses on one of the most fraught problems surrounding new media: the
question of the ownership and control of new media products. How much freedom dousers of digital music or ﬁlms have to copy, share or modify the works they buy? Is thereroom in the information economy for a commons, where work might be productively andcreatively shared?
Intangible information goods are often described as intellectual property , although
this is a generic term which includes a wide variety of different kinds of exclusiverights, ranging from patented inventions to trade marks to plant varieties. New mediaoften fall within the scope of copyright law, which protects certain categories of culturaland information work, including literary works, ﬁlms, music, games and software. While
copyright is technical and often abstruse, the implications of the arguments that haverecently developed around it are profound for the circulation of information in con-temporary societies and the accessibility of new media.
We emphasised in the general introduction to this reader the fact that new media
are, in large part, the products of liberal capitalist economies. New media industriesproduce commodities in huge volumes for consumer markets: text, music, and audio-visual entertainment, news and information are typical new media products. The soft-ware and hardware that enable people to use these electronic products are alsocritical elements in the new media industries. The publishers and producers of theseworks are in the same position as publishers of sheet music in the 19th century: theproﬁtability of their business depends on preserving exclusive rights over the works theycontrol. But sheet music, like books, tapes, and so many other cultural goods, are nothard for other people to copy and distribute, so the battle against piracy has alwaysbeen a key part of the copyright story. Digital environments introduce another level ofcomplexity; controlling the distribution of music in printed form may have been a con-stant battle, but it was probably easier than controlling the circulation of digital ﬁles
over the global internet.
In the 1990s many observers of the emerging internet believed it marked the end of
copyright. Copyright, the idea was, would be shortly rendered irrelevant by perfect digitalreproduction, ubiquitous public networks, and ever decreasing prices for ever morepowerful hardware. The view was not radically different from similar claims made about
the impact of earlier technologies – the photocopier, the video recorder, the audio cas-
sette. But in the 1990s those industries that depended on copyright reacted quickly to
claims that copyright was threatened. Governments responded by accepting the needfor substantially modiﬁed policies. And this drive to change copyright law coincidedwith the liberalisation and privatisation of telecommunications around the world and aconcomitant shift to privately funded public networks.
The new media were understood in the terms of the time: an ‘information super-
highway’ . In the USA, the idea of the ‘National Information Infrastructure ’, circa 1995,
was not the internet as we now know it, but a vision for a gigantic cable televisionnetwork, with 1000 channels. The technology of the 1990s was seen, perhaps inevit-ably, through the prism of old media, and subscription television in particular. Unlike theold academic and military internet, the new one would be built by the private sector,which would only invest the billions necessary if the regulatory structures for commerceand security, including copyright, were in place in advance.
In this part, we provide an overview of some of the current debates, prefaced by
Lyman Ray Patterson ’s brief discussion summarising his study of copyright in historical
perspective. Patterson emphasises the unsatisfactory compromises and shifts inemphasis of US copyright law. His account points to an underlying theme in much writingabout copyright: the complexity of a legal structure with multifarious and unstableobjectives. While there is no doubt that any copyright law must strike balances, containtensions and ﬁnd compromises between competing interests, the picture emergingfrom Patterson’ s account is of a legal structure which lacks coherence.
James Boyle explores these complexities of copyright law further in his discussion
of its relationship to broader traditions of liberal political theory. The problem, perhaps,is that copyright law simply cannot be easily mapped onto liberal philosophicalarguments about equal justice, or a benign balance of public and private rights. ForBoyle, copyright law must fail because it is required to do too much. Jessica Litmanprovides a more concrete and more political analysis of the debates surrounding therewriting of US copyright law in the 1990s. Litman ’s account is interesting because she
looks at the language of debate around copyright and how it has changed over time.From a sequence of highly speci ﬁc arguments about the nature of the copyright ‘bargain’
between rights-holders and consumers, the copyright debate evolved into claimsaround ‘incentives’  for the producers of copyright works. Inevitably, the incentives for
producers are found to be lacking, and governments ﬁnd themselves seeking ways of
strengthening protection for cultural goods. Whether it is, in fact, in the public interestto make these goods more expensive, harder to access, and more dif ﬁcult to share or
modify is rarely examined in any detail.
The two ﬁnal pieces in this section explore more radical possibilities. Lawrence
Lessig makes the case for a public domain, or commons, for digital works. He writesalso about what happens when copyright law – and implicitly governments – fail to
secure the public interest in workable legislation. As he points out, private rules, writteninto the code of our digital media products, may easily replace public legislation, witha cost to hard won consumer rights. Finally, Richard Stallman, a pioneer of the‘free software’  movement, discusses the promise of alternative models of software
distribution, breaking away from the copyright model altogether.112
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
3.1
Copyright in historical perspective,
by Lyman Ray Patterson
Copyright can most usefully be viewed as a legal concept – a series of ideas formu-
lated and directed to a common end. The ideas vary in their degree of deﬁniteness,ranging from the general to the speciﬁc, for they manifest both the ends to beachieved and the means of achieving those ends. The general ideas are principlesexpressing the ends to be achieved; the speci ﬁc ideas are rules, expressing the means
of achieving those ends. The principles are directed to the purposes to be served, therules are directed to the resolution of problems in order to achieve those purposes.Legal concepts are thus ideally formulated in terms of purposes to be achieved andproblems to be resolved.
The purposes, however, are not always clearly deﬁned, and the problems are not
always agreed upon. As the history of copyright illustrates, purposes and problemsvary according to whose interest is being served. Moreover, they change with newdevelopments. The changes, however, do not necessarily result in the appropriatedevelopment of rules. Almost certainly they do not if principles have not been pro-perly formulated, for of the two groups of ideas, principles and rules, principles are byfar the more important. It is the choice of principles that determines whether a legalconcept is to have the degree of consistency necessary for a uniﬁed whole, or whetherit is to consist primarily of a series of fragmented rules.
The concept of copyright is more nearly of the latter than the former category, for
there is no set of clearly deﬁned principles for copyright. Our ideas of copyright are aheritage of history – few modern statutes are based on an English statute enacted in1709; fewer still have a direct lineage that goes back to a Star Chamber Decree of1586. And familiarity with ideas often breeds conﬁdence in their soundness thatinvestigation would undermine: that which is historically sound is not always logicallydefensible.
Herein lies the value of a historical perspective. The historical context removes
obstacles – long-continued acceptance of certain ideas, self-interest, and the pressing
need to resolve immediate problems – which may be present when analysis occurs in awholly contemporary context. And it yields a basis for employing the logic of experi-ence. The historical perspective thus provides the opportunity to compare the ideasof copyright and the problems to which those ideas were directed in origin and
development with the ideas of the concept and the problems of today. A brief summary
brings into focus the early problems.
Copyright began in the sixteenth century as a device for maintaining order
among members of the book trade organized as the Stationers’ Company. Supportedby laws of press control and censorship, it developed and existed as the private con-cern of these guild members for a hundred and ﬁfty years. As such, it was the basis ofa monopoly in the book trade.
With the demise of censorship, the private copyright of the members of the book
trade, no longer supported by governmental sanctions, failed in its purpose of protect-ing published works. T o restore order to the trade, Parliament was ﬁnally prevailedupon to enact a copyright statute, modelled on the stationer’s copyright, but withoutits two most objectionable features, its limitation to members of the company, and itsperpetual existence. The statutory copyright was available to anyone, and it waslimited to two terms of fourteen years each. Instead of an instrument of monopoly,as the stationer’s copyright had been, the statutory copyright was intended to be atrade-regulation device.
The developments following the enactment of the statute created the principle
source of discontent for copyright. This was the ill-considered transformation of aprotection for publishers created by the Stationers’ Company into a correspondingright for the author created by law. This change of a copyright to protect members ofa guild into an author’s legal right was a consequence of the booksellers’ e ﬀorts to
continue their monopoly. Their eﬀorts resulted in a misunderstanding of the Statuteof Anne and at the same time they sowed the seeds of the idea that copyright was anatural right of the author.
They almost succeeded, because they framed their issues in the courts so as to
preclude the judges from distinguishing the several interests involved: the interests ofthe author, the publisher, and the public. In this respect, the booksellers were aidedby the fact that the courts had no role in the early development of copyright. Thecommon-law courts were thus at a disadvantage because they were dealing in acommon-law context with a statute based on a concept developed by a group ofprivate individuals. The courts accepted the ideas presented by the booksellers andapplied them, but not as the booksellers desired. The result, not surprisingly, was aconfusion of ideas.
In its origin and development, then, there were two fundamental problems to
which copyright was directed. In origin, the problem was to provide order in the booktrade for the members of a guild organization which had a monopoly of the trade. Indevelopment, the problem came to be to destroy the monopoly of the book tradesubsequently developed by a small group of men controlling copyrights.
T oday, the problem of copyright has taken on new dimensions. The United States
of the twentieth century bears little resemblance to England of the sixteenth andeighteenth centuries. In relation to copyright, the basic diﬀerence is freedom of thepress and speech rather than press control and censorship. Copyright is no longer aninstrument used to control and suppress ideas for the beneﬁt of the government; noris it an instrument used by a private group of monopolists to control the book trade; itis used to protect the expression of ideas for proﬁt. The modern context thus createsa fundamental contradiction for copyright law. A society which has freedom of114
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
expression as a basic principle of liberty restricts that freedom to the extent that it
vests ideas with legally protected property interests. The contradiction arises fromsound, although competing, policies – to enable the author to beneﬁt from his workand to make publication feasible, thereby promoting learning. And the resolution ofthe conﬂicts created by the competing policies requires a careful delineation of therights to be had in connection with published works in terms of principles rather thanmerely in terms of rules. Thus, the problem of copyright today is how best to reconcilethe interests of three groups – authors, who give expression to ideas; publishers, whodisseminate ideas; and the members of the public, who use the ideas.
The contradiction of protecting ideas as private property in a society devoted to
freedom of expression has been rationalized away with assurances that copyright doesnot protect ideas, but only the expression of ideas. The rationalization, however, willnot stand up in light of the concept of copyright as it exists today. While in origincopyright was a publisher’s right giving the publisher protection against the piracy ofhis manufactured work, it has today developed so as to give protection to the contentof the work as well. Here is another irony of copyright law – in a society where therewas no freedom of ideas, copyright protected only against piracy; in a society wherethere is freedom of ideas, copyright protects against plagiarism. Copyright, begun asprotection for the publisher only, has come to be protection for the work itself.
The development is due in no small measure to the confusion of ideas resulting
from the events in eighteenth-century England, and the confusion has continued. Theideas – that copyright is a monopoly; that copyright is primarily an author’s right; that
the author has natural rights in his works which must be limited by statute – oncestated by the courts, became a ﬁxed part of the heritage of copyright. They weretaken over in this country and used almost indiscriminately. And they served as aninadequate substitute for analysis of the several interests in published works and aconsideration of how to deal with them appropriately. The emphasis of the law-makers, both judges and legislators, on copyright as a monopoly and as an author’sright and the issues created by this emphasis have hindered a clear-cut analysis ofcopyright ideas. Copyright history thus gives us reason to pause: Is the concept aspresently constituted best suited to resolve the fundamental problems of reconcilingthe interests, conﬂicting in some respects, compatible in others, of the author, thepublisher, and society?
There are three ideas of copyright relevant to the modern concept that the history
of copyright crystallizes. The ﬁrst has to do with monopoly, an idea which had itsorigins in the booksellers’ control of the book trade in eighteenth-century England. Indealing with the monopoly problem of copyright, the real source of the monopolydanger is generally ignored. That source, of course, is not the author, but the pub-lishers. It is the publisher, not the author, who would control the book trade; and it isthe publisher, not the author, who desires protection against economic competition.Y et, the problem has been obscured because the availability of the copyright to thepublisher is screened behind the idea of copyright as only an author’s right.
This fact raises the second problem which history develops. Is copyright an
appropriate concept to accommodate the interest of both the publisher and theauthor? The development of copyright implies not. Copyright changed from a pub-lisher’s right to an author’s right for reasons that had little to do with the interest of theCOPYRIGHT IN HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE 115
author. The change, brought about by publishers in an eﬀort to perpetuate their
monopoly, has continually obscured the diﬀerence between the interest of thepublisher and the interest of the author in the author’s work.
The interests of the author and the publisher, of course, coincide in the economic
beneﬁt to be derived from the publication of the work. Beyond this point, however,their interests may well conﬂict. The author, as creator of his work, has an interestin maintaining its integrity and protecting his personality and reputation, a creativeinterest which the publisher does not share. Y et, apart from copyright, the commonlaw oﬀers little protection for the creative interest.
The legal recognition of such interest in the author is neither logically unsound
nor undesirable; it is only historically precluded. The booksellers in eighteenth-century England prevailed upon the courts to accept the idea that all rights of copy-right are derived from the author. The courts, however, upon accepting the idea thatthe rights of the publisher conferred by copyright were derived from the author,limited the rights to those deﬁned by statute. In so doing, they not only limited therights of the author – they left no basis for distinguishing between the interest ofthe author and that of the publisher. The judges did not suggest what more carefulanalysis might have made apparent: to recognize common-law rights of the authorwould not necessarily have been inconsistent with the limitation of the rights ofpublishers.
If the author invariably retained the copyright, there would be fewer problems, for
copyright gives the owner complete protection. But the author does not, invariably –indeed, he seldom retains the copyright. And the subtle irony is that the scope ofcopyright, supposedly broadened in the author’s interest, may very well serve todefeat that interest. Y et, the courts have here overlooked a basic point. Since thestatutes have dealt with the economic aspect of copyright, they have left to the courtsthe power, as yet unused, to deal with the creative interest as justice requires.
Finally, there is a third idea of copyright which has been given little explicit
consideration, an idea that was irrelevant when copyright was ﬁrst developed by theStationers’ Company in the time of censorship and press control. This is the interestof the individual user and thus of society. The interest of society in copyright has nowlong been acknowledged – the Statute of Anne was “An act for the encouragement oflearning,” and the Constitution empowers Congress to establish copyright “to pro-mote science and useful arts.” But these ideas have traditionally been applied so thatsociety is an indirect rather than a direct beneﬁciary. The exclusive rights conferredon the copyright owner have served to limit the rights of the individual, although pleasfor copyright protection, so that, ostensibly, the public will not be deprived of anadequate supply of books go back to the seventeenth century.
From a legal standpoint, the individual’s right to use a copyrighted work is min-
imal. By and large, when he purchases a book, it is his chattel and no more; the workitself is owned by the copyright owner. And only the nebulous and uncertain doctrineof fair use, the idea that one may reproduce a small part of a copyrighted work for alimited purpose, protects the individual who wishes to extend his use of the workbeyond the reading of it.
This problem has lately taken on enlarged signiﬁcance. The limited ability of the
individual a few years ago to reproduce a book has been changed by the availability of116
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
high-speed copying machines. The change has made copyright owners – that is,
publishers – look to the long-continued concept of monopoly in the guise of property
rights to protect their interest. A more subtle and signiﬁcant point is overlooked.However slight the danger, the failure to recognize the individual user’s right results ina limitation upon the freedom of expression. The copyright owner’s complete controlof his work, based on the notion of the expression of ideas for proﬁt, allows him tocontrol that work completely. A vestige of the heritage of censorship in the law ofcopyright remains in the interest of proﬁt.
These three ideas – the danger of monopoly from the publisher rather than the
author, the diﬀering interests of the publisher and the author, and the rights of theindividual user – are the forgotten ideas of copyright. But simple as they are, they arefundamental, and they are the basis for the principles necessary for an integratedconcept of copyright.
From the fact that the danger of the monopoly of copyright is the monopoly of
the publisher rather than the author, it follows that the basic function of copyright is toprotect the publisher – not against the author or the individual user, but against otherpublishers. This suggests that copyright should be limited again to its traditionalfunction of protecting the entrepreneur, not the work itself. Thus, the ﬁrst basicprinciple of copyright is that a copyright owner has a right as against an economiccompetitor to the exclusive reproduction of a work in its original or derivative form.
T o the extent that copyright protects the publisher, it also protects the author. But
there is little reason to limit the author’s protection to that of the publisher. Indeed, toprovide the author additional protection would be eﬀectively to limit the monopoly ofthe publisher’s copyright. And herein lies the essential value of recognizing theauthor’s creative interest in his works. The second principle of copyright, then, shouldbe that an author retains an inalienable right to protect the integrity of his work andhis reputation in connection therewith.
And, ﬁnally, the limitation of the publisher’s protection against economic com-
petitors would constitute a recognition of the right of the individual to make whateveruse of a copyrighted work he desires, except for competing proﬁts. The third principleof copyright is that the right of individuals to the use of a copyrighted work forpersonal, private, or reasonable uses shall not be impaired.
The interrelationship of these ideas suggests a major reason for the unsatisfactory
law of copyright and at the same time a reason for the way in which it developed. Thecharacteristic is a rigidity in dealing with copyright problems resulting from theapplication of rules without guiding principles. Copyright is a concept used to dealwith exceedingly complex issues, issues which require careful distinctions basedupon a perceptive awareness of the problems, an understanding of purpose, and anappreciation of function.
The distinctions were not made, the purposes not clearly understood, and the
functions not appreciated. Copyright was dealt with in absolute, not relative terms.
The reason can be found in the history of copyright. Copyright was developed as
a private concept by a private group; subsequently, it was embodied in a statute.When copyright problems were ﬁnally brought to the common-law courts, the task ofthe courts was not to develop a law, but to construe a statute, and to construe a statutefor a particular purpose: to destroy an opprobrious monopoly.COPYRIGHT IN HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE 117
In this country, from the beginning, copyright was a statutory concept, not one of
common law. And the judges in copyright cases felt themselves bound by the language
of the statutes. There was, in the light of history as they understood it, little room tomake careful distinctions, analyze problems, and deﬁne function. Their task was toresolve disputes under the statute, not to formulate guiding principles.
The implication is clear. Copyright is too complex a matter, too delicate a subject,
to be dealt with by statutes alone. Copyright statutes have provided rules, not prin-ciples, and if the principles necessary to a sound body of copyright law are to beformulated, the judges must accomplish the task. History shows the consequences tobe expected if they fail. More important, however, history gives them an adequatebasis upon which to proceed, to recognize the limited function of copyright, to protectthe author’s creative interest, and to give due regard to the rights of the individual’suse of a copyrighted work.118
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
3.2
Intellectual property and the liberal state,
by James Boyle
Like information, property plays a vital role in liberal state theory. That role imposes
certain conﬂicting requirements on the concept of property itself.1 Legal realism,
Lockean political theory, critical legal thought, and law and economics have allstressed – each in its own vocabulary – the idea that property is perhaps the most
important mechanism we use in our attempt to reconcile our desire for freedom andour desire for security.
2 How can we be free and yet secure from other people’s
freedom, secure and yet free to do what we want to do?3 The most obvious way to deal
with this apparent contradiction is to conceive rights of security “in a manner thatboth makes them appear to be absolute and negates the proposition that they restrictthe legitimate freedom of action of others. Thus if we deﬁne liberty as free actions thatdo not aﬀect others at all, and rights as absolute protections from harm, the contradic-tion vanishes.”
4 The traditional Blackstonian deﬁnition of property does just that.
But there are irresoluble conceptual tensions in any such formulation, a point whichhas considerable relevance to intellectual property law, as we will see later. KennethVandevelde states the problem in the following way:
At the beginning of the nineteenth century, property was ideally de ﬁned as abso-
lute dominion over things. Exceptions to this deﬁnition suﬀused property law:instances in which the law declared property to exist even though no “thing” wasinvolved or the owner’s dominion over the thing was not absolute. Each of theseexceptions, however, was explained away. Where no “thing” existed, one wasﬁctionalized. Where dominion was not absolute, limitations could be camou-ﬂaged by resorting to ﬁctions, or rationalized as inherent in the nature of the thingor the owner . . . As the nineteenth century progressed, increased exceptions toboth the physicalist and the absolutist elements of Blackstone’s conception ofproperty were incorporated into the law . . . This dephysicalization was a devel-opment that threatened to place the entire corpus of American law in the categoryof property. Such conceptual imperialism created severe problems for the courts.First, if every valuable interest constituted property, then practically any actwould result in either a trespass on or a taking of, someone ’s property, especially
if property was still regarded as absolute. Second, once property had swallowed
the rest of American law, its meaningfulness as a separate category would disap-
pear. On the other hand, if certain valuable interests were not considered pro-perty, ﬁnding and justifying the criteria for separating property from non-property
would be diﬃcult.
5
T o the extent that there was a replacement for this Blackstonian conception, it
was the familiar “bundle of rights” notion of modern property law, a vulgarization ofWesley Hohfeld’s analytic scheme of jural correlates and opposites, loosely justiﬁed bya rough and ready utilitarianism and applied in widely varying ways to legal interestsof every kind. The euphonious case of LeRoy Fibre Co. v. Chicago, Milwaukee &St. Paul Ry. is used in many a ﬁrst-year law school class to illustrate the conceptualshift.
6 Could a ﬂax maker be found guilty of contributory negligence for piling his
stacks of ﬂax too close to the tracks? The majority bridled at the very thought. Theﬂax maker was piling his ﬂax on his own property, after all. “The rights of one man inthe use of his property cannot be limited by the wrongs of another . . . The legalconception of property is of rights. When you attempt to limit them by wrongs, youventure a solecism.” Though the majority’s circular reasoning carried the day, it isOliver Wendell Holmes’s (partial) concurrence that pointed to the future.
7 Rather
than imagining an absolute sphere of rights surrounding the property lines like a glassbubble, Holmes was happy to remove the ﬂax-piling entitlement from the bundle ofproperty rights for whatever swathe of the property was “so near to the track as to bein danger from a prudently managed engine.” He also directed a few sanguine, ifvaguely crocodilian, comments toward the majority on the subject of their concernabout the apparent relativism of his concept of property: “I do not think we needtrouble ourselves with the thought that my view depends upon diﬀerences of degree.The whole law does so as soon as it is civilized. Negligence is all degree – that of thedefendant here degree of the nicest sort; and between the variations according todistance that I suppose to exist and the simple universality of the rules in the TwelveT ables or the Leges Barbarorum, there lies the culture of two thousand years.”
8
Presumably, the majority consoled itself with the fact that its concern with abso-
lutism and universality was two thousand years out of date. In any event, the writingwas on the wall. Property was no longer conceived of as absolute, no longer a guaran-teed trump against the interests of the majority or the state, no longer related to anyphysical thing. Indeed, so thoroughly had the conception been relativized that courtswere willing to admit that there could be property rights restricted to particularinterests, to be asserted against one person, rather than another, and only in somesituations and moments. But if this is the case, where is our shield against other peopleor the state? If the ﬂax-piling entitlement can be stripped from seventy yards of theLeRoy Fibre Company merely because there would be utilitarian beneﬁts to lettingthe railroad run unmolested, then why not from one hundred yards, or from the wholething? Instead of an absolute, unchanging, and universal shield against the world,property is now merely a bundle of assorted entitlements that changes from momentto moment as the balance of utilities changes. It seems that the modern concept ofproperty has given us a system that works on the day-to-day level, but only at the priceof giving up the very role that property was supposed to play in the liberal vision.
Thus when we turn to intellectual property, an area which throughout its history120
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
has been less able to rely on the physicalist and absolutist ﬁctions which kept the
traditional concept of property going, we will see an attempt not only to clothe anewly invented romantic author in robes of juridical protection, but to struggle with,mediate, or repress one of the central contradictions in the liberal world view. This,then, is the redoubled contradiction of which I spoke earlier. If it is to protect thelegitimacy and intellectual suasion of the liberal world view, intellectual property law(and indeed, all law that deals with information) must accomplish a number of taskssimultaneously. It must provide a conceptual apparatus which appears to mediatethe various tensions associated with the role of information in liberal society. Thus,for example, it must give some convincing explanation as to why a person whorecombines informational material from the public sphere is not merely engagingin the private appropriation of public wealth. It must explain how it is that we canmotivate individuals – who are sometimes postulated to be essentially self-serving,and sometimes to be noble, idealistic souls – to produce information. If the answer is,“by giving them property rights,” it must also explain why this will not diminish thecommon pool, or public domain, so greatly that a net decrease in the production ofinformation will result. (Think of overﬁshing.) It must reassure us that a realm ofguarded privacy will be carved out for the private sphere and at the same time explainhow it is that we can have a vigorous sphere of public debate and ample informationabout a potentially oppressive state. It must do all of this within a vision of justice thatexpects formal equality within the public sphere, but respect for existing disparities inwealth, status, and power in the private. And all of these things must be accomplishedwhile we are using a concept of property which must avoid the conceptual impossi-bilities of the physicalist, absolutist conception, but which at the same time is not tooobviously relativist, partial, and utilitarian.
Notes
1 See Frances Philbrick, “Changing Conceptions of Property in Law,” 86 University
of Pennsylvania Law Review 691 (1938); Joseph W . Singer, “The Legal RightsDebate in Analytical Jurisprudence from Bentham to Hohfeld,” 1982 WisconsinLaw Review 975; Kenneth Vandevelde, “The New Property of the NineteenthCentury: The Development of the Modern Concept of Property,” 29 BuﬀaloLaw Review 325 (1980).
2 T o put it in the simplest terms possible, property is a strong barrier against
potentially dangerous other people but, at least since the decline of classical legalthought, a weaker barrier against the state. See also Poletown NeighborhoodCouncil v. Detroit, 304 N.W .2d 455 (Mich. 1981); Hawaii Housing Authority v.Midkiﬀ, 467 U.S. 229 (1984). Constitutional rights, by contrast, are generally astronger barrier against the state but a weak barrier against “private” parties. Or,as one of my colleagues puts it, the full panoply of Constitutional restraintsapplies to the actions of the dogcatcher in Gary, Indiana, but not to Exxon orGeneral Motors. The best explanation of property as a mediator between free-dom and security comes from Singer, “The Legal Rights Debate,” and I amindebted to his analysis.
3 See Thomas Hobbes, Leviathan, 189–190 (C. B. McPherson ed., 1976); JohnINTELLECTUAL PROPERTY AND THE LIBERAL STATE 121
Stuart Mill, On Liberty, 70 –85 (1975); James Boyle, “Thomas Hobbes and the
Invented Tradition of Positivism: Reﬂections on Language, Power, and Essential-
ism,” 135 University of Pennsylvania Law Review  383 (1987); Duncan Kennedy,
“The Structure of Blackstone’s Commentaries,” 28 Buﬀalo Law Review 205,209–221 (1979).
4 Singer, “The Legal Rights Debate,” 980.
5 Vandevelde, “The New Property,” 328–329.
6 232 U.S. 340 (1914).7 If the railroad had a duty not to cause the destruction of only that property kept at
a reasonably safe distance from the track, where was the wrong? T o put it anotherway, why isn’t the majority venturing a solecism by allowing the “wrong” of theﬂax stacker (in stacking the ﬂax by the tracks) to limit the “rights” of the railroadcompany to operate its property?
8 Rust v. Sullivan, 500 U.S. 354 (1991).122
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
3.3
Choosing metaphors,
by Jessica Litman
A public domain work is an orphan. No one is responsible for its life. But every-
one exploits its use, until that time certain when it becomes soiled and haggard,barren of its previous virtues. Who, then, will invest the funds to renovate andnourish its future life when no one owns it? How does the consumer beneﬁt fromthat scenario? The answer is, there is no beneﬁt.
– Jack Valenti
1
The copyright law on the books is a large aggregation of speciﬁc statutory provi-sions; it goes on and on for pages and pages. When most people talk about copyright,though, they don’t mean the long complicated statute codiﬁed in title 17 of the U.S.Code. Most people’s idea of copyright law takes the form of a collection of principlesand norms. They understand that those principles are expressed, if sometimesimperfectly, in the statutory language and the case law interpreting it, but they tend tobelieve that the underlying principles are what count. It is, thus, unsurprising that therhetoric used in copyright litigation and copyright lobbying is more often drawn fromthe principles than the provisions.
One can greatly overstate the inﬂuence that underlying principles can exercise
over the enactment and interpretation of the nitty-gritty provisions of substantive law.In the ongoing negotiations among industry representatives, normative argumentsabout the nature of copyright show up as rhetorical ﬂourishes, but, typically, changenobody’s mind. Still, normative understandings of copyright exercise some constraintson the actual legal provisions that the lobbyists can come up with, agree on, convinceCongress to pass, and persuade outsiders to comply with. The ways we have ofthinking about copyright law can at least make some changes more diﬃcult to achievethan others.
Lawyers, lobbyists, and scholars in a host of disciplines have reexamined and
reformulated copyright principles over the past generation, in ways that haveexpanded copyright’s scope and blinded many of us to the dangers that arise fromprotecting too much, too expansively for too long. That transformation has facilitatedthe expansion of copyright protection and the narrowing of copyright limitations andexceptions.
At the turn of the century, when Congress ﬁrst embraced the copyright confer-
ence model that was to trouble us for the rest of the century, the predominant meta-
phor for copyright was the notion of a quid pro quo.2 The public granted authors
limited exclusive rights (and only if the authors fulﬁlled a variety of formal condi-tions) in return for the immediate public dissemination of the work and the eventualdedication of the work in its entirety to the public domain.
3
As the United States got less hung up on formal prerequisites, that model evolved
to a view of copyright as a bargain in which the public granted limited exclusive rightsto authors as a means to advance the public interest. This model was about compensa-tion:
4 it focused on copyright as a way to permit authors to make enough money from
the works they created in order to encourage them to create the works and make themavailable to the public. That view of the law persisted until fairly recently.
If you read books, articles, legal briefs, and congressional testimony about copy-
right written by scholars and lawyers and judges ﬁfty years ago, you ﬁnd widespread
agreement that copyright protection aﬀorded only shallow and exception-ridden con-trol over protected works. Forty, thirty, even twenty years ago, it was an article of faiththat the nature of copyright required that it oﬀer only circumscribed, porous protec-tion to works of authorship. The balance between protection and the material thatcopyright left unprotected was thought to be the central animating principle of thelaw. Copyright was a bargain between the public and the author, whereby the publicbribed the author to create new works in return for limited commercial control overthe new expression the author brought to her works. The public’s payoﬀ was that,beyond the borders of the authors’ deﬁned exclusive rights, it was entitled to enjoy,consume, learn from, and reuse the works. Even the bounded copyright rights wouldexpire after a limited term, then set at ﬁfty-six years.
A corollary of the limited protection model was that copyright gave owners con-
trol only over particular uses of their works.
5 The copyright owner had exclusive
rights to duplicate the work. Publishing and public performance were within thecopyright owner’s control. But copyright never gave owners any control over reading,or private performance, or resale of a copy legitimately owned, or learning from andtalking about and writing about a work, because those were all part of what the publicgained from its bargain. Thus, the fact that copyright protection lasted for a very longtime (far longer than the protection oﬀered by patents); the fact that copyright protec-tion has never required a government examination for originality, creativity, or merit;and the fact that copyright protects works that have very little of any of them wasdefended as harmless: because copyright never took from the public any of the rawmaterial it might need to use to create new works of authorship, the dangers arisingfrom overprotection ranged from modest to trivial.
There was nearly universal agreement on these points through the mid-1970s.
Copyright was seen as designed to be full of holes. The balance underlying that viewof the copyright system treated the interests of owners of particular works (and oftenthose owners were not the actual authors) as potentially in tension with the interests ofthe general public, including the authors of the future; the theory of the system was toadjust that balance so that each of the two sides got at least as much as it needed.
6
In economic terms, neither the author nor the public was entitled to appropriatethe entire surplus generated by a new work of authorship.
7 Rather, they shared the124 THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
proceeds, each entitled to claim that portion of them that would best encourage the
promiscuous creation of still newer works of authorship.
If you’re dissatisﬁed with the way the spoils are getting divided, one approach is
to change the rhetoric. When you conceptualize the law as a balance between copy-right owners and the public, you set up a particular dichotomy – some would argue, afalse dichotomy
8 – that constrains the choices you are likely to make. If copyright law
is a bargain between authors and the public, then we might ask what the public isgetting from the bargain. If copyright law is about a balance between owners’ controlof the exploitation of their works and the robust health of the public domain, onemight ask whether the system strikes the appropriate balance.
9 Y ou can see how, at
least in some quarters, this talk about bargains and balance might make trouble.Beginning in the late 1970s and early 1980s, advocates of copyright owners beganto come up with diﬀerent descriptions of the nature of copyright, with an eye toenabling copyright owners to capture a greater share of the value embodied incopyright-protected works.
10
In the last thirty years, the idea of a bargain has gradually been replaced by a
model drawn from the economic analysis of law, which characterizes copyright as asystem of incentives.
11 T oday, this is the standard economic model of copyright law,
whereby copyright provides an economic incentive for the creation and distributionof original works of authorship.
12 The model derives a lot of its power from its sim-
plicity: it posits a direct relationship between the extent of copyright protection andthe amount of authorship produced and distributed – any increase in the scopeor subject matter or duration of copyright will cause an increase in authorship; anyreduction will cause a reduction.
The economic analysis model focuses on the eﬀect greater or lesser copyright
rights might have on incentives to create and exploit new works. It doesn’t botherabout stuﬀ like balance or bargains except as they might aﬀect the incentive structurefor creating and exploiting new works. T o justify copyright limitations, like fair use,under this model, you need to argue that authors and publishers need them in order tocreate new works of authorship,
13 rather than, say, because that’s part of the public’s
share of the copyright bargain. The model is not rooted in compensation, and so itdoesn’t ask how broad a copyright would be appropriate or fair; instead it inquireswhether broader, longer, or stronger copyright protection would be likely to lead tothe production of more works of authorship.
The weakness in this model is that more and stronger and longer copyright
protection will always, at the margin, cause more authors to create more works – that’show this sort of linear model operates. If we forget that the model is just a usefulthought tool, and persuade ourselves that it straightforwardly describes the real world,then we’re trapped in a construct in which there’s no good reason why copyrightsshouldn’t cover everything and last forever.
Lately, that’s what seems to have happened. Copyright legislation has recently
been a one-way ratchet, and it’s hard to argue that that’s bad within the conﬁnes of theconventional way of thinking about copyright. In the past several years we’ve seen afurther evolution. Copyright today is less about incentives or compensation than it isabout control.
14 What ended up persuading lawmakers to adopt that model was the
conversion of copyright into a trade issue: The content industries, copyright ownersCHOOSING METAPHORS 125
argued, were among the few in which the United States had a favorable balance of
trade. Instead of focusing on American citizens who engaged in unlicensed uses ofcopyrighted works (many of them legal under U.S. law), they drew Congress’s atten-tion to people and businesses in other countries who engaged in similar uses. TheUnited States should make it a top priority, they argued, to beef up domestic copy-right law at home, and thus ensure that people in other countries paid for any use ofcopyrighted works abroad. United States copyright law does not apply beyond U.S.borders, but supporters of expanded copyright protection argued that by enactingstronger copyright laws, Congress would set a good example for our trading partners,who could then be persuaded to do the same. Proponents of enhanced protectionchanged the story of copyright from a story about authors and the public collaborat-ing on a bargain to promote the progress of learning, into a story about Americanstrying to protect their property from foreigners trying to steal it.
That story sold. It oﬀered an illusion that, simply by increasing the scope and
strength and duration of U.S. copyright protection, Congress could generate newwealth for America without detriment or even inconvenience to any Americans. Thatrecasting of the copyright story persuaded Congress to “improve” copyright protec-tion and cut back on limitations and exceptions.
15
The upshot of the change in the way we think about copyright is that the domin-
ant metaphor is no longer that of a bargain between authors and the public. We talknow of copyright as property that the owner is entitled to control – to sell to the public
(or refuse to sell) on whatever terms the owner chooses. Copyright has been trans-formed into the right of a property owner to protect what is rightfully hers. (Thatallows us to skip right past the question of what it is, exactly, that ought to be rightfullyhers.) And the current metaphor is reﬂected both in recent copyright amendmentsnow on the books and in the debate over what those laws mean and whether they gotoo far.
One example of this trend is the piecemeal repeal of the so-called ﬁrst sale doc-
trine, which historically permitted the purchaser of a copy of a copyrighted work tosell, loan, lease, or display the copy without the copyright owner’s permission, and isthe reason why public libraries, video rental stores, and art galleries are not illegal.
16
The ﬁrst sale doctrine enhanced public access to copyrighted works that some were
unable to purchase. Because the ﬁrst sale doctrine applies only to copies of a copy-righted work, it became increasingly irrelevant in a world in which vast numbers ofworks were disseminated to the public through media such as television and radio,which involved no transfer of copies. Copyright owners who did distribute copies oftheir works, however, lobbied for the ﬁrst sale doctrine’s repeal. Congress yielded tothe entreaties of the recording industry to limit the ﬁrst sale doctrine as it applied torecords, cassette tapes and compact discs in 1984, and enacted an amendment thatmade commercial record rental (but not loan or resale) illegal.
17 After the computer
software industry’s attempts to evade the operation of the ﬁrst sale doctrine – byclaiming that their distribution of software products involved licenses rather thansales
18 – received an unenthusiastic reception in court,19 Congress partially repealed
the ﬁrst sale doctrine as it applied to computer programs.20 Bills to repeal the ﬁrst sale
doctrine for audio/visual works were introduced in Congress,21 but never accumu-
lated enough support to be enacted. The actual bites these laws took out of the ﬁrst126 THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
sale doctrine were small ones, but in the process, the principle that the doctrine
represents has been diminished.
If we no longer insist that people who own legitimate copies of works be permit-
ted to do what they please with them, that presents an opportunity to attack a hugerealm of unauthorized but not illegal use. If copyright owners can impose conditionson the act of gaining access, and back those conditions up with either technologicaldevices, or legal prohibitions, or both, then copyright owners can license access to anduse of their works on a continuing basis. T echnological fences, such as passwords orencryption, oﬀer some measure of control, and enhanced opportunities to extractvalue from the use of a work. The owner of the copyright in money managementsoftware, for example, could design the software to require purchasers of copies toauthorize a small credit card charge each time they sought to run the program. Theowner of the copyright in recorded music could release the recording in a scrambledformat, and rent access to descramblers by the day. T echnological controls, though,are vulnerable to technological evasion, which is where the part about legal controlscomes in.
When copyright owners demanded the legal tools to restrict owners of legitimate
copies of works from gaining access to them, Congress was receptive. Copyrightowner interests argued that, in a digital age, anyone with access to their works couldcommit massive violations of their copyrights with a single keystroke by transmittingunauthorized copies all over the Internet. In order for their rights to mean anything,copyright owners insisted, they were entitled to have control over access to their works– not merely initial access, but continuing control over every subsequent act of gain-ing access to the content of a work.
22 Thus, to protect their property rights, the law
needed to be amended to prohibit individuals from gaining unauthorized access tocopyrighted works.
23
Augmenting copyright law with legally enforceable access control could com-
pletely annul the ﬁrst sale doctrine. More fundamentally, enforceable access controlhas the potential to redesign the copyright landscape completely. The hallmark oflegal rights is that they can be carefully calibrated. Copyright law can give authorscontrol over the initial distribution of a copy of a work, without permitting theauthor to exercise downstream control over who gets to see it. Copyright law can giveauthors control over the use of the words and pictures in their books without givingthem rights to restrict the ideas and facts those words and pictures express. It can givethem the ability to collect money for the preface and notes they add to a collection ofShakespeare’s plays without allowing them to assert any rights in the text of thoseplays. It can permit them to control reproductions of their works without giving themthe power to restrict consumption of their works. Leaving eye-tracks on a page hasnever been deemed to be copyright infringement.
Copyrighted works contain protected and unprotected elements, and access to
those works may advance restricted or unrestricted uses. Access controls are not sodiscriminating. Once we permit copyright owners to exert continuing control overconsumers’ access to the contents of their works, there is no way to ensure that accesscontrols will not prevent consumers from seeing the unprotected facts and ideas ina work. Nor can we make certain that the access controls prevent uses that thelaw secures to the copyright owner, while permitting access when its purpose is toCHOOSING METAPHORS 127
facilitate a use the law permits. If the law requires that we obtain a license whenever we
wish to read protected text, it encourages copyright owners to restrict the availabilityof licenses whenever it makes economic sense for them to do so. That, in turn, makesaccess to the ideas, facts, and other unprotected elements contingent on copyrightholders’ marketing plans, and puts the ability of consumers to engage in legal uses ofthe material in those texts within the copyright holders’ unconstrained discretion. Inessence, that’s an exclusive right to use. In other words, in order to eﬀectively protectauthors’ “exclusive rights” to their writings, which is to say, control, we need to give
them power to permit or prevent any use that might undermine their control. Whatthat means is that a person who buys a copy of a work may no longer have the right toread and reread it, loan it, resell it, or give it away. But the law has been moving awayfrom that principle for years.
A second example of this trend is the campaign to contract the fair use privilege.
Fair use was once understood as the ﬂip side of the limited scope of copyright.
24 The
copyright law gave the copyright holder exclusive control over reproductions of thework, but not over all reproductions.
25 The justiﬁcations for fair use were various; a
common formulation explained that reasonable appropriations of protected workswere permissible when they advanced the public interest without inﬂicting unaccept-ably grave damage on the copyright owner. Fair use was appropriate in situationswhen the copyright owner would be likely to authorize the use but it would be a greatdeal of trouble to ask for permission, such as the quotation of excerpts of a novel in afavorable review or the use of selections from a scholarly article in a subsequentscholarly article building on the ﬁrst author’s research. Fair use was also appropriatein situations when the copyright owner would be unlikely to authorize, such as par-odies and critiques, under a justiﬁcation Prof. Alan Latman described as “enforcedconsent.” The social interest in allowing uses that criticized the copyright owner’swork, for example, outweighed the copyright owner’s reluctance to permit them. Fairuse was appropriate whenever such uses were customary, either under the implied-consent rubric or as a matter of enforced consent. Fair use was ﬁnally asserted to bethe reason that a variety of uses that come within the technical boundaries of theexclusive rights in the copyright bundle, but were diﬃcult to prevent, like privatecopying, would not be actionable.
26
Recent reformulations of the fair use privilege, however, have sought to con ﬁne it
to the implied assent justiﬁcation. Where copyright owners would not be likely toauthorize the use free of charge, the use should no longer be fair. The uses that werepermitted because they were diﬃcult to police are claimed to be a subset of theimpliedly permitted uses; should copyright owners devise a mechanism for licensingthose uses, there would, similarly, no longer be any need to excuse the uses as fair.
27 In
its most extreme form, this argument suggests that fair use itself is an archaic privilegewith little application to the digital world: where technology permits automatic licens-ing, legal ﬁctions based on “implied assent” become unnecessary.
28 Limiting fair use
to an implied assent rationale, moreover, makes access controls seem more appealing.Thus, the fact that access controls would make no exception for individuals to gainaccess in order to make fair use of a work is said to be unproblematic. Why should fairuse be a defense to the act of gaining unauthorized access?
By recasting traditional limitations on the scope of copyright as loopholes,128
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
proponents of stronger protection have managed to put the champions of limited
protection on the defensive. Why, after all, should undesirable loopholes not now beplugged? Instead of being viewed as altruists seeking to assert the public’s side of thecopyright bargain, library organizations, for example, are said to be giving aid andcomfort to pirates. Instead of being able to claim that broad prohibitions on techno-logical devices are bad technological policy, opponents of the copyright-as-controlmodel are painted as folks who believe that it ought to be okay to steal books ratherthan to buy them. And when educators have argued that everyone is losing sight of therights that the law gives the public, they have met the response that the copyright lawhas never asked authors to subsidize education by donating their literary property.
Then there’s the remarkable expansion of what we call piracy. Piracy used to be
about folks who made and sold large numbers of counterfeit copies. T oday, the term“piracy” seems to describe any unlicensed activity – especially if the person engagingin it is a teenager. The content industry calls some behavior piracy despite the factthat it is unquestionably legal. When a consumer makes a noncommercial recordingof music by, for example, taping a CD she has purchased or borrowed from a friend,her copying comes squarely within the privilege established by the Audio HomeRecording Act. The record companies persist in calling that copying piracy eventhough the statute deems it lawful.
29
People on the content owners’ side of this divide explain that it is technology that
has changed penny-ante unauthorized users into pirates, but that’s not really it at all.These “pirates” are doing the same sort of things unlicensed users have always done –
making copies of things for their own personal use, sharing their copies with theirfriends, or reverse-engineering the works embodied on the copies to ﬁgure out howthey work. What’s changed is the epithet we apply to them.
If we untangle the claim that technology has turned Johnny T eenager into a pirate,
what turns out to be fueling it is the idea that if Johnny T eenager were to decide toshare his unauthorized copy with two million of his closest friends, the eﬀect on arecord company would be pretty similar to the eﬀect of some counterfeit CD fac-tory’s creating two million CDs and selling them cheap. Copyright owners are worried,and with good reason. But, in response to their worry, they’ve succeeded in persuad-ing a lot of people that any behavior that has the same e ﬀect as piracy must be piracy,
and must therefore reﬂect the same moral turpitude we attach to piracy, even if it isthe same behavior that we all called legitimate before. Worse, any behavior that could
potentially cause the same eﬀect as piracy, even if it doesn’t, must also be piracy. Becausean unauthorized digital copy of something could be uploaded to the Internet, where itcould be downloaded by two million people, even making the digital copy is piracy.Because an unauthorized digital copy of something could be used in a way that couldcause all that damage, making a tool that makes it possible to make an unauthorizeddigital copy, even if nobody ever actually makes one, is itself piracy, regardless of thereasons one might have for making this tool. And what could possibly be wrong with alaw designed to prevent piracy?
My argument, here, is that this evolution in metaphors conceals immense sleight
of hand. We as a society never actually sat down and discussed in policy termswhether, now that we had grown from a copyright-importing nation to a copyright-exporting nation, we wanted to recreate copyright as a more expansive sort of control.CHOOSING METAPHORS 129
Instead, by changing metaphors, we somehow got snookered into believing that copy-
right had always been intended to oﬀer content owners extensive control, only, beforenow, we didn’t have the means to enforce it.
Notes
1Copyright T erm Extension Act: Hearing on H.R. 989 Before the Subcommittee OnCourts and Intellectual Property of the House Committee on the Judicary, 104thCong., 1st sess. (June 1, 1995) (testimony of Jack Valenti, Motion PictureAssociation of America).
2See Jessica Litman, The Public Domain, 39 Emory Law Journal 965, 977–92(1990).
3See, e.g., London v. Biograph, 231 F . 696 (1916); Stone & McCarrick v. DuganPiano, 210 F . 399 (ED La 1914).
4I’m indebted to Professor Niva Elkin-Koren for this insight. See Niva Elkin-Koren,
It’s All About Control: Copyright and Market Power in the Information Society  (7/00
draft).
5See, e.g., U.S. Library of Congress Copyright Oﬃce, Report of the Register of Copyrighton the General Revision of the U.S. Copyright Law 6, 21–36 (1961).
6See, e.g., Chaﬀee, Reﬂections on the Law of Copyright, 45 Columbia Law Review
503 (1945); Report of the Register of Copyrights, note 5 above, at 6.
7 Economists would say that the authorship of a new work creates a beneﬁt that
exceeds the costs of authoring it. That is the reason why the public beneﬁtswhen authors create new works. The excess beneﬁt is a surplus. It falls to thelaw to determine how that surplus should be allocated. Classically, copyrightlaw accorded the author a portion of the surplus thought to be necessary toprovide an incentive to create the work and reserved the remaining beneﬁt tothe public.
8See, e.g., Jane C. Ginsburg, Authors and Users in Copyright , 45 Journal of the
Copyright Society of the USA 1 (1997).
9See Benjamin Kaplan, An Unhurried View of Copyright 120–22 (Columbia Uni-versity Press, 1967); Stephen Breyer, The Uneasy Case for Copyright: A Study ofCopyright in Books, Photocopies and Computer Programs, 84 Harvard Law Review281 (1970).
10 One series of writings explored the possibility of characterizing copyright as
a natural right, on the theory that works of authorship emanated from andembodied author’s individual personalities. See, e.g., Edward J. Damich, The Rightof Personality: A Common Law Basis for the Protection of the Moral Rights of Authors ,
23 Georgia Law Review 1 (1988); Justin Hughes, The Philosophy of IntellectualProperty, 77 Georgetown Law Journal 287 (1988); John M. Kernochan, Impera-tives for Enforcing Authors’ Rights, 11 Columbia-VLA Journal of Law & the Arts587 (1987). Ignoring for the moment that, at least in the United States, theoverwhelming majority of registered copyrights were corporately owned, thesethinkers posited the model of author who creates all works from nothing. Theparent/progeny metaphor was popular here – authors were compared withmothers or fathers; their works were their children. Therefore, the argument130
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
went, they were morally entitled to plenary control over their works as they would
be over their children.
11See, e.g., Paul Goldstein, Derivative Rights and Derivative W orks in Copyright,30 Journal of the Copyright Society 209 (1982); Wendy J. Gordon, Fair Use asMarket Failure: A Structural and Economic Analysis of the Betamax Case and ItsPredecessors , 82 Columbia Law Review 1600 (1982); William M. Landes and
Richard Posner, An Economic Analysis of Copyright, 18 Journal of Legal Studies325 (1989).
12See, e.g., Dennis Karjala, Copyright in Electronic Maps, 35 Jurimetrics Journal 395(1995); Alfred C. Y en, When Authors W on’t Sell: Parody, Fair Use and Eﬃciency inCopyright Law, 62 University of Colorado Law Review 1173 (1991).
13See Wendy J. Gordon, T oward a Jurisprudence of Beneﬁts: The Norms of Copyright
and the Problems of Private Censorship , 57 University of Chicago Law Review
1009, 1032–49 (1990); Litman, note 2 above, at 1007–12.
14 Again, I’m indebted to Professor Elkin-Koren for the taxonomy. See Elkin-Koren,
note 4 above.
15 I have told that story in some detail in Jessica Litman, Copyright and Information
Policy, 55 Law & Contemporary Problems (Spring 1992), at 185.
16See 17 USCA § 109; see generally John M. Kemochan, The Distribution Right inthe United States of America: Review and Reﬂections, 42 Vanderbilt Law Review1407 (1989).
17 Record Rental Amendment of 1984, Pub. L No 98–450, 98 Stat 1727 (1984)
(codiﬁed as amended at 17 USCA §§ 109, 115).
18See Pamela Samuelson, Modifying Copyrighted Software: Adjusting CopyrightDoctrine to Accommodate a T echnology, 28 Jurimetrics Journal 179, 188–89 (1988).
19 In V ault Corp. v. Quaid Software, Ltd., 847 F2d 255 (5th Cir 1988), the court
rejected such a license and the state law purporting to enforce it because the courtfound it to be inconsistent with federal copyright law, which gives purchasers ofcopies of computer programs the rights that the shrink-wrap license attempted towithhold.
20 Computer Software Rental Amendments Act of 1990, Pub. L. No. 101–650, 104
Stat 5089, 5134 §§ 801 –804 (codiﬁed at 17 USC § 109). Like the Record Rental
Act, the CSRA prohibits commercial software rental, but not resale, gift, or loan.
21See S. 33, 98th Cong, 1st sess. (January 25, 1983), in 129 Cong. Rec. 590 (January26, 1983); H.R. 1029, 98th Cong., 1st sess. (January 26, 1983), in 129 Cong. Rec.H201 (January 27, 1983); Home Video Recording, Hearing Before the SenateCommittee on the Judiciary, 99th Cong. 2d sess. (1987).
22See Jane C. Ginsburg, Essay: From Having Copies to Experiencing W orks: TheDevelopment of an Access Right in U.S. Copyright Law, in Hugh Hansen, ed., U.S.Intellectual Property: Law and Policy (Sweet & Maxwell, 2000).
23 I discuss the access-control amendments extensively in chapter 9. As enacted,
they prohibit individuals from circumventing any technological devices designedto restrict access to a work, and make it illegal to make or distribute any tool orservice designed to facilitate circumvention. See 17 U.S.C. § 1201. The lawimposes substantial civil and criminal penalties for violations. See 17 U.S.C.§§ 1203, 1204.CHOOSING METAPHORS 131
24See, e.g., Alan Latman, Study # 14: Fair Use 6–7 (1958), reprinted in 2 Studies on
Copyright, Studies on Copyright 778, 784–85 (Arthur Fisher Memorial Edition,1963).
25See Folsom v. Marsh, 9 Fed Cas. 342 (1841); H. Ball, The Law of Copyright andLiterary Property 260 (Bender, 1944); L. Ray Patterson, Understanding Fair Use ,
55 Law and Contemporary Problems (Spring 1992), at 249.
26See generally Latman, note 24 above at 7–14, 2 Studies on Copyright at 785–92;Lloyd Weinreb, Commentary: Fair’s Fair: A Comment on the Fair Use Doctrine, 105Harvard Law Review 1137 (1990).
27See, e.g., Jane C. Ginsburg, note 8 above, at 11–20 (1997); American GeophysicalUnion v. T exaco, 60 F .3d 913 (2d Cir. 1995).
28See, e.g., T orn W . Bell, Fared Use v. Fair Use: The Impact of Automated RightsManagement on Copyright’s Fair Use Doctrine, 76 N. Carolina Law Review 101(1998).
29See, e.g., Music on the Internet: Is There an Upside to Downloading? Hearing Beforethe Senate Judiciary Committee, 106th Cong., 2d sess. (July 11, 2000) (remarks ofHilary Rosen, RIAA).132
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
3.4
The promise for intellectual property
in cyberspace,by Lawrence Lessig
It all depends on whether you really understand the idea of trusted systems. If you don ’t
understand them, then this whole approach to commerce and digital publishing is
utterly unthinkable. If you do understand them, then it all follows easily.
Ralph Merkle, quoted in Steﬁk, “Letting Loose the Light” (1996)
Given the present code of the Internet, you can’t control well who copies what. If youhave a copy of a copyrighted photo, rendered in a graphics ﬁle, you can makeunlimited copies of that ﬁle with no eﬀect on the original. When you make the one-hundredth copy, nothing indicates that it is the one-hundredth copy rather than theﬁrst. There is very little in the code as it exists now that regulates the distribution ofand access to material on the Net.
This problem is not unique to cyberspace. We have already seen a technology that
presented the same problem; a solution to the problem was subsequently built into thetechnology.
1 Digital audio technology (DAT) tape was a threat to copyright, and a
number of solutions to this threat were proposed. Some people argued for higherpenalties for illegal copying of tapes (direct regulation by law). Some argued for a taxon blank tapes, with the proceeds compensating copyright holders (indirect regula-tion of the market by law). Some argued for better education to stop illegal copies oftapes (indirect regulation of norms by law). But some argued for a change in the codeof tape machines that would block unlimited perfect copying.
With the code changed, when a machine is used to copy a particular CD, a serial
number from the CD is recorded in the tape machine’s memory. If the user tries tocopy that tape more than a limited number of times, the machine adjusts the quality ofthe copy. As the copies increase, the quality is degraded. This degradation is delib-erately created. Before DAT, it was an unintended consequence of the copying tech-nologies – each copy was unavoidably worse than the original. Now it has been
reintroduced to restore a protection that had been eroded by technology.
The same idea animates Steﬁk’s vision, though his idea is not to make the quality
of copies decrease but rather to make it possible to track and control the copies thatare made.
2
Think of the proposal like this. T oday, when you buy a book, you may do any
number of things with it. Y ou can read it once or one hundred times. Y ou can lend it to
a friend. Y ou can photocopy pages in it or scan it into your computer. Y ou can burn it,use it as a paperweight, or sell it. Y ou can store it on your shelf and never once open it.
Some of these things you can do because the law gives you the right to do them –
you can sell the book, for example, because the copyright law explicitly gives you thatright. Other things you can do because there is no way to stop you. A book sellermight sell you the book at one price if you promise to read it once, and at a diﬀerentprice if you want to read it one hundred times, but there is no way for the seller toknow whether you have obeyed the contract. In principle, the seller could sell a policeoﬃcer with each book to follow you around and make sure you use the book as youpromised, but the costs would plainly be prohibitive.
But what if each of these rights could be controlled, and each unbundled and sold
separately? What if, that is, the software itself could regulate whether you read thebook once or one hundred times; whether you could cut and paste from it or simplyread it without copying; whether you could send it as an attached document to afriend or simply keep it on your machine; whether you could delete it or not; whetheryou could use it in another work, for another purpose, or not; or whether you couldsimply have it on your shelf or have it and use it as well?
Steﬁk describes a network that makes such unbundling of rights possible. He
describes an architecture for the network that would allow owners of copyrightedmaterials to sell access to those materials on the terms they want and would enforcethose contracts.
The details of the system are not important here
3 (it builds on the encryption
architecture I described in chapter 4), but its general idea is easy enough to describe.As the Net is now, basic functions like copying and access are crudely regulated inan all-or-nothing fashion. Y ou generally have the right to copy or not, to gain accessor not.
But a more sophisticated system of rights could be built into the Net – not into a
diﬀerent Net, but on top of the existing Net. This system would function by dis-criminating in the intercourse it has with other systems. A system that controlledaccess in this more ﬁne-grained way would grant access to its resources only toanother system that controlled access in the same way. A hierarchy of systems woulddevelop, and copyrighted material would be traded only among systems that properlycontrolled access.
In such a world, then, you could get access, say, to the New Y ork Times and pay a
diﬀerent price depending on how much of it you read. The Times could determinehow much you read, whether you could copy portions of the newspaper, whether youcould save it on your hard disk, and so on. But if the code you used to access the Timessite did not enable the control the Times demanded, then the Times would not let youonto its site at all. In short, systems would exchange information only with others thatcould be trusted, and the protocols of trust would be built into the architectures of thesystems.
Steﬁk calls this “trusted systems,” and the name evokes a helpful analog. Think of
bonded couriers. Sometimes you want to mail a letter with something particularlyvaluable in it. Y ou could simply give it to the post oﬃce, but the post oﬃce is not aterribly reliable system; it has relatively little control over its employees, and theft and134
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
loss are not uncommon. So instead of going to the post oﬃce, you could give your
letter to a bonded courier. Bonded couriers are insured, and the insurance is a costthat constrains them to be reliable. This reputation then makes it possible for sendersof valuable material to be assured about using their services.
This is what a structure of trusted systems does for owners of intellectual prop-
erty. It is a bonded courier that takes the thing of value and controls access to and useof it according to the orders given by the principal.
Imagine for a moment that such a structure emerged generally in cyberspace.
How would we then think about copyright law?
An important point about copyright law is that, though designed in part to pro-
tect authors, its protection was not to be absolute – the copyright is subject to “fairuse,” limited terms, and ﬁrst sale. The law threatened to punish violators of copyrightlaws – and it was this threat that induced a fairly high proportion of people to comply
– but the law was never designed to simply do the author’s bidding. It had publicpurposes as well as the author’s interest in mind.
Trusted systems provide authors with the same sort of protection. Because
authors can restrict unauthorized use of their material, they can extract money inexchange for access. Trusted systems thus achieve what copyright law achieves. But itcan achieve this protection without the law doing the restricting. It permits a much moreﬁne-grained control over access to and use of protected material than law permits,and it can do so without the aid of the law.
What copyright seeks to do using the threat of law and the push of norms, trusted
systems do through the code. Copyright orders others to respect the rights of thecopyright holder before using his property. Trusted systems give access only if rightsare respected in the ﬁrst place. The controls needed to regulate this access are builtinto the systems, and no users (except hackers) have a choice about whether to obeythese controls. The code displaces law by codifying the rules, making them moreeﬃcient than they were just as rules.
Trusted systems in this scheme are an alternative for protecting intellectual prop-
erty rights – a privatized alternative to law. They need not be exclusive; there is noreason not to use both law and trusted systems. Nevertheless, the code in eﬀect isdoing the work that the law used to do. It implements the law’s protection, throughcode, far more eﬀectively than the law did.
What could be wrong with this? We do not worry when people put double bolts
on their doors to supplement the work of the neighborhood cop. We do not worrywhen they lock their cars and take their keys. It is not an o ﬀense to protect yourself
rather than rely on the state. Indeed, in some contexts it is a virtue. Andrew Jackson’smother, for example, told him, “Never tell a lie, nor take what is not your own, nor sueanybody for slander, assault and battery. Always settle them cases yourself.”
4 Self-
suﬃciency is often seen as a sign of strength, and going to the law as a sign ofweakness.
There are two steps to answering this question. The ﬁrst rehearses a familiar but
forgotten point about the nature of property; the second makes a less familiar, butcentral, point about the nature of intellectual property. T ogether they suggest whyperfect control is not the control that law has given owners of intellectual property.THE PROMISE FOR INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY IN CYBERSPACE 135
The limits on the protection of property
The realists in American legal history (circa 1890–1930) were scholars who (in part)
emphasized the role of the state in what was called “private law.”5 At the time they
wrote, it was the “private” in private law that got all the emphasis. Forgotten was the“law,” as if “property” and “contract” existed independent of the state.
The realists’ aim was to undermine this view. Contract and property law, they
argued, was law that gave private parties power.
6 If you breach a contract with me, I
can have the court order the sheriﬀ to force you to pay; the contract gives me access tothe state power of the sheriﬀ. If your contract with your employer says that it maydismiss you for being late, then the police can be called in to eject you if you refuse toleave. If your lease forbids you to have cats, then the landlord can use the power of thecourts to evict you if you do not get rid of the cats. These are all instances wherecontract and property, however grounded in private action, give a private person anentitlement to the state.
No doubt this power is justiﬁed in many cases; to call it “law” is not to call it
unjust. The greatest prosperity in history has been created by a system in whichprivate parties can order their lives freely through contract and property. But whetherjustiﬁed in the main or not, the realists argued that the contours of this “law” shouldbe architected to beneﬁt society.
7
This is not communism. It is not an attack on private property. It is not to say
that the state creates wealth. Put your Ayn Rand away. These are claims about therelationship between private law and public law, and they should be uncontroversial.
Private law creates private rights to the extent that these private rights serve some
collective good. If a private right is harmful to a collective good, then the state has no
reason to create it. The state’s interests are general, not particular. It has a reason tocreate rights when those rights serve a common, rather than particular, end.
The institution of private property is an application of this point. The state has an
interest in deﬁning rights to private property because private property helps producea general, and powerful, prosperity. It is a system for ordering economic relations thatgreatly beneﬁts all members of society. No other system that we have yet devisedbetter orders economic relations. No other system, some believe, could.
8
But even with ordinary property – your car, or your house – property rights are
never absolute. There is no property that does not have to yield at some point to theinterests of the state. Y our land may be taken to build a highway, your car seized tocarry an accident victim to the hospital, your driveway crossed by the postman, yourhouse inspected by health inspectors. In countless ways, the system of property wecall “private property” is a system that balances exclusive control by the individual
against certain common state ends. When the latter conﬂict with the former, it is theformer that yields.
This balance, the realists argued, is a feature of all property. But it is an especially
important feature of intellectual property. The balance of rights with intellectualproperty diﬀers from the balance with ordinary real or personal property. “Informa-tion,” as Boyle puts it, “is diﬀerent.”
9 And a very obvious feature of intellectual
property shows why.
When property law gives me the exclusive right to use my house, there’s a very136 THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
good reason for it. If you used my house while I did, I would have less to use. When
the law gives me an exclusive right to my apple, that too makes sense. If you eat myapple, then I cannot. Y our use of my property ordinarily interferes with my use of myproperty. Y our consumption reduces mine.
The law has a good reason, then, to give me an exclusive right over my personal
and real property. If it did not, I would have little reason to work to produce it. Or if Idid work to produce it, I would then spend a great deal of my time trying to keep youaway. It is better for everyone, the argument goes, if I have an exclusive right to my(rightly acquired) property, because then I have an incentive to produce it and notwaste all my time trying to defend it.
10
Things are diﬀerent with intellectual property. If you “take” my idea, I still have
it. If I tell you an idea, you have not deprived me of it.11 An unavoidable feature of
intellectual property is that its consumption, as the economists like to put it, is “non-
rivalrous.” Y our consumption does not lessen mine. If I write a song, you can sing itwithout making it impossible for me to sing it. If I write a book, you can read it (pleasedo) without disabling me from reading it. Ideas, at their core, can be shared with noreduction in the amount the “owner” can consume. This diﬀerence is fundamental,and it has been understood since the founding.
Jeﬀerson put it better than I:
If nature has made any one thing less susceptible than all others of exclusiveproperty, it is the action of the thinking power called an idea, which an individualmay exclusively possess as long as he keeps it to himself, but the moment it isdivulged, it forces itself into the possession of every one, and the receiver cannotdispossess himself of it. Its peculiar character, too, is that no one possesses theless, because every other possess the whole of it. He who receives an idea fromme, receives instruction himself without lessening mine; as he who lites his taperat mine, receives light without darkening me. That ideas should freely spreadfrom one to another over the globe, for the moral and mutual instruction of man,and improvement of his condition, seems to have been peculiarly and benevo-lently designed by nature, when she made them, like ﬁre, expansible over allspace, without lessening their density at any point, and like the air in whichwe breathe, move, and have our physical being, incapable of conﬁnement orexclusive appropriation. Inventions then cannot, in nature, be a subject ofproperty.
12
T echnically, Jeﬀerson is confusing two diﬀerent concepts. One is the possibility of
excluding others from using or getting access to an idea. This is the question whetherideas are “excludable”; Je ﬀerson suggests that they are not. The other concept is
whether my using an idea lessens your use of the same idea. This is the question ofwhether ideas are “rivalrous”;
13 again, Jeﬀerson suggests that they are not. Jeﬀerson
believes that nature has made ideas both nonexcludable and nonrivalrous, and thatthere is little that man can do to change this fact.
14
But in fact, ideas are not both nonexcludable and nonrivalrous. I can exclude
people from my ideas or my writings – I can keep them secret, or build fences to keeppeople out. How easily, or how eﬀectively, is a technical question. It depends on theTHE PROMISE FOR INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY IN CYBERSPACE 137
architecture of protection that a given context provides. But given the proper
technology, there is no doubt that I can keep people out.
What I cannot do, however, is change the nature of my ideas as “nonrivalrous”
goods. No technology (that we know of) will erase an idea from your head as it passesinto my head. No technology will make it so that I cannot share your ideas with noharm to you. My knowing what you know does not lessen your knowing of the samething. That fact is given in the world, and it is that fact that makes intellectual propertydiﬀerent. Unlike apples, and unlike houses, ideas are something I can take from youwithout diminishing what you have.
It does not follow, however, that there is no need for property rights over expres-
sions or inventions.
15 Just because you can have what I have without lessening what I
have does not mean that the state has no reason to create rights over ideas, or over theexpression of ideas.
If a novelist cannot stop you from copying (rather than buying) her book, then
she has very little incentive to produce more books. She may have as much as she hadbefore you took the work she produced, but if you take it without paying, she has nomonetary incentive to produce more.
Now in fact, of course, the incentives an author faces are quite complex, and it is
not possible to make simple generalizations about the incentives authors face.
16 But
generalizations do not have to be perfect to make a point: even if some authors writefor free, it is still the case that the law needs some intellectual property rights. If the lawdid not protect the author at all, there would be fewer authors. The law has a reasonto protect the rights of authors, at least insofar as doing so gives them an incentive toproduce. With ordinary property, the law must both create an incentive to produceand protect the right of possession; with intellectual property, the law need only createthe incentive to produce.
This is the diﬀerence between these two very diﬀerent kinds of property, and this
diﬀerence aﬀects fundamentally the nature of intellectual property law. While weprotect real and personal property to protect the owner from harm and give the owneran incentive, we protect intellectual property only to ensure that we create a suﬃcientincentive to produce it. “Suﬃcient incentive,” however, is something less than “per-fect control.” And in turn we can say that the ideal protections of intellectual propertylaw are something less than the ideal protections for ordinary or real property.
This diﬀerence between the nature of intellectual property and ordinary property
was recognized by our Constitution, which in article I, section 8, clause 8, givesCongress the power “to promote the Progress of Science and useful Arts, by securingfor limited Times to Authors and Inventors the exclusive Right to their respectiveWritings and Discoveries.”
Note the special structure of this clause. First, it sets forth the precise reason for
the power – to promote the progress of science and useful arts. It is for those reasons,and those reasons only, that Congress may grant an exclusive right – otherwise knownas a monopoly. And second, note the special temporality of this right: “for limitedTimes.” The Constitution does not allow Congress to grant authors and inventorspermanent exclusive rights to their writings and discoveries, only limited rights. Itdoes not give Congress the power to give them “property” in their writings anddiscoveries, only an exclusive right over them for a limited time.138
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
The Constitution’s protection for intellectual property then is fundamentally dif-
ferent from its protection of ordinary property. I’ve said that all property is granted
subject to the limit of the public good. But even so, if the government decided tonationalize all property after a ﬁfteen-year term of ownership, the Constitution wouldrequire it to compensate the owners. By contrast, if Congress set the copyright term atﬁfteen years, there would be no claim that the government pay compensation after theﬁfteen years were up. Intellectual property rights are a monopoly that the state gives toproducers of intellectual property in exchange for their producing intellectual prop-erty. After a limited time, the product of their work becomes the public’s to use as itwants. This is Communism, at the core of our Constitution’s protection of intellectualproperty. This “property” is not property in the ordinary sense of that term.
And this is true for reasons better than tradition as well. Economists have long
understood that granting property rights over information is dangerous (to say theleast).
17 This is not because of leftist leanings among economists. It is because econo-
mists are pragmatists, and their objective in granting any property right is simply tofacilitate production. But there is no way to know, in principle, whether increasing ordecreasing the rights granted under intellectual property law will lead to an increase inthe production of intellectual property. The reasons are complex, but the point isnot: increasing intellectual property’s protection is not guaranteed to “promote theprogress of science and useful arts” – indeed, often doing so will stiﬂe it.
The balance that intellectual property law traditionally strikes is between the
protections granted the author and the public use or access granted everyone else.The aim is to give the author suﬃcient incentive to produce. Built into the law ofintellectual property are limits on the power of the author to control use of the ideasshe has created.
18
A classic example of these limits and of this public use dimension is the right of
“fair use.” Fair use is the right to use copyrighted material, regardless of the wishes ofthe owner of that material. A copyright gives the owner certain rights; fair use is alimitation on those rights. Under the right of fair use, you can criticize this book, cutsections from it, and reproduce them in an article attacking me. In these ways and inothers, you have the right to use this book independent of how I say it should be used.
Fair use does not necessarily work against the author’s interest – or more accur-
ately, fair use does not necessarily work against the interests of authors as a class.When fair use protects the right of reviewers to criticize books without the permissionof authors, then more critics criticize. And the more criticism there is, the better theinformation is about what books people should buy. And the better the information isabout what to buy, the more people there are who will buy. Authors as a whole beneﬁtfrom the system of fair use, even if particular authors do not.
The law of copyright is ﬁlled with such rules. Another is the “ﬁrst sale” doctrine.
If you buy this book, you can sell it to someone else free of any constraint I mightimpose on you.
19 This doctrine diﬀers from the tradition in, for example, Europe,
where there are “moral rights” that give the creator power over subsequent use.20 I’ve
already mentioned another example – limited term. The creator cannot extend theterm for which the law will provide protection; that is ﬁxed by the statute and runswhen the statute runs.
21
T aken together, these rules give the creator signiﬁcant control over the use ofTHE PROMISE FOR INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY IN CYBERSPACE 139
what he produces, but never perfect control. They give the public some access, but
not complete access. They are balanced by design, and diﬀerent from the balance thelaw strikes for ordinary property. They are constitutionally structured to help build anintellectual and cultural commons.
The law strikes this balance. It is not a balance that would exist in nature. Without
the law, and before cyberspace, authors would have very little protection; with the law,they have signiﬁcant, but not perfect, protection. The law gives authors somethingthey otherwise would not have in exchange for limits on their rights, secured to beneﬁtthe intellectual commons as a whole.
Private substitutes for public law
But what happens when code protects the interests now protected by copyright law?What happens when Mark Steﬁk’s vision is realized, and when what the law protectsas intellectual property can be protected through code? Should we expect that any ofthe limits will remain? Should we expect code to mirror the limits that the lawimposes? Fair use? Limited term? Would private code build these “bugs” into itsprotections?
The point should be obvious: when intellectual property is protected by code,
nothing requires that the same balance be struck. Nothing requires the owner to grantthe right of fair use. She might, just as a bookstore allows individuals to browse forfree, but she might not. Whether she grants this right depends on whether it proﬁtsher. Fair use becomes subject to private gain.
22
As privatized law, trusted systems regulate in the same domain where copyright
law regulates, but unlike copyright law, they do not guarantee the same public useprotection. Trusted systems give the producer maximum control – admittedly at acheaper cost, thus permitting many more authors to publish. But they give authorsmore control (either to charge for or limit use) in an area where the law gave lessthan perfect control. Code displaces the balance in copyright law and doctrines suchas fair use.
Some will respond that I am late to the party: copyright law is already being
displaced, if not by code then by the private law of contract. Through the use of click-wrap, or shrink-wrap, licenses, authors are increasingly demanding that purchasers,or licensees, waive rights that copyright law gave them. If copyright law gives the rightto reverse-engineer, then these contracts might extract a promise not to reverse-engineer. If copyright law gives the right to dispose of the book however the purchaserwants after the ﬁrst sale, then a contract might require that the user waive that right.And if these terms in the contract attached to every copyright work are enforceablemerely by being “attached” and “knowable” then already we have the ability torewrite the balance that copyright law creates. Already, through contract law, copyrightholders can defeat the balance that copyright law intends.
I agree that this race to privatize copyright law through contract is already far
along, fueled in particular by decisions such as Judge Frank Easterbrook’s in ProCD vZeidenberg
23 and by the eﬀorts in some quarters to push a new uniform code that
would facilitate these contracts.24
But contracts are not as bad as code. Contracts are a form of law. If a term of a140 THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
contract is inconsistent with a value of copyright law, you can refuse to obey it and let
the other side get a court to enforce it. The ultimate power of a contract is a decisionby a court – to enforce the contract or not. Although courts today are relatively eagerto ﬁnd ways to enforce these contracts, there is at least hope that if the other side
makes its case very clear, courts could shift direction again.
25
The same is not true of code. Whatever problems there are when contracts
replace copyright law, the problems are worse when code displaces copyright law.Again – where do we challenge the code? When the software protects in a particular
way without relying in the end on the state, where can we challenge the nature of theprotection? Where can we demand balance when the code takes it away?
The rise of contracts modifying copyright law (due in part to the falling costs of
contracting) and the rise of code modifying copyright law (promised as trusted sys-tems become all the more common) raise for us a question that we have not had toanswer before. We have never had to choose whether authors should be permittedperfectly to control the use of their intellectual property independent of the law, forsuch control could only be achieved through law.
26 The balance struck by the law was
the best that authors could get. But now the code gives authors a better deal. And thuswe must now decide whether this better deal makes public sense.
Some argue that it does, and that this increased power to control use in fact is not
inconsistent with fair use.
27 Fair use, these commentators argue, de ﬁned the rights in
an area where it was not possible to meter and charge for use. In that context, fair useset a default rule that parties could always contract around. The default rule was thatuse was free.
But as the limits of what it is possible to meter and charge for changes, the scope
of fair use changes as well.
28 If it becomes possible to license every aspect of use, then
no aspect of use would have the protections of fair use. Fair use, under this concep-tion, was just the space where it was too expensive to meter use. By eliminating thatspace, cyberspace merely forces us to recognize the change in the context withinwhich fair use functions.
There are then, from this view, two very diﬀerent conceptions of fair use.
29 One
conception views it as inherent in the copyright – required whether technology makesit possible to take it away or not; the other views it as contingent – needed wheretechnology makes it necessary. We can choose between these two conceptions, ifindeed our constitutional commitment is ambiguous.
A nice parallel to this problem exists in constitutional law. The framers gave
Congress the power to regulate interstate commerce and commerce that aﬀects inter-state commerce.
30 At the founding, that was a lot of commerce, but because of the
ineﬃciencies of the market, not all of it. Thus, the states had a domain of commercethat they alone could regulate.
31
Over time, however, the scope of interstate commerce has changed so that much
less commerce is now within the exclusive domain of the states. This change hasproduced two sorts of responses. One is to ﬁnd other ways to give states domains ofexclusive regulatory authority. The justiﬁcation for this response is the claim thatthese changes in interstate commerce are destroying the framers’ vision about statepower.
The other response is to concede the increasing scope of federal authority, but toTHE PROMISE FOR INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY IN CYBERSPACE 141
deny that it is inconsistent with the framing balance.32 Certainly, at the founding,
some commerce was not interstate and did not aﬀect interstate commerce. But that
does not mean that the framers intended that there must always be such a space. Theytied the scope of federal power to a moving target; if the target moves completely tothe side of federal power, then that is what we should embrace.
33
In both contexts, the change is the same. We start in a place where balance is
given to us by the mix of frictions within a particular regulatory domain: fair use is abalance given to us because it is too expensive to meter all use; state power overcommerce is given to us because not all commerce aﬀects interstate commerce. Whennew technology disturbs the balance, we must decide whether the original intent wasthat there be a balance, or that the scope of one side of each balance should faithfullytrack the index to which it was originally tied. Both contexts, in short, presentambiguity.
Many observers (myself included) have strong feelings one way or the other. We
believe this latent ambiguity is not an ambiguity at all. In the context of federal power,we believe either that the states were meant to keep a domain of exclusive authority
34
or that the federal government was to have whatever power aﬀected interstate com-merce.
35 In the context of fair use, we believe that either fair use is to be a minimum of
public use, guaranteed regardless of the technology,36 or that it is just an ineﬃcient
consequence of ineﬃcient technology, to be removed as soon as eﬃciency can beachieved.
37
But in both cases, this may make the problem too easy. The best answer in both
contexts may be that the question was unresolved at the time: perhaps no one thoughtof the matter, and hence there is no answer to the question of what they would haveintended if some central presupposition had changed. And if there was no originalanswer, we must decide the question by our own lights. As Steﬁk says of trustedsystems – and, we might expect, of the implications of trusted systems – “It is a tool
never imagined by the creators of copyright law, or by those who believe laws governingintellectual property cannot be enforced.”
38
The loss of fair use is a consequence of the perfection of trusted systems.
Whether you consider it a problem or not depends on your view of the value of fairuse. If you consider it a public value that should exist regardless of the technologicalregime, then the emergence of this perfection should trouble you. From your perspec-tive, there was a value latent in the imperfection of the old system that has now beenerased.
But even if you do not think that the loss of fair use is a problem, trusted systems
threaten other values latent in the imperfection of the real world. Consider now asecond.
The anonymity that imperfection allows
I was a student in England for a number of years, at an English university. In thecollege I attended, there was a “buttery” – a shop that basically sold alcohol. During
the ﬁrst week I was there I had to buy a large amount of Scotch (a series of unimagina-
tive gifts, as I remember). About a week after I made these purchases, I received asummons from my tutor to come talk with him in his oﬃce. When I arrived, the tutor142
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
asked me about my purchases. This was, to his mind, an excessive amount of alcohol,
and he wanted to know whether I had a good reason for buying it.
Needless to say, I was shocked at the question. Of course, formally, I had made a
purchase at the college, and I had not hidden my name when I did so (indeed, I hadcharged it on my college account), so formally, I had revealed to the college and itsagents my alcohol purchases. Still, it shocked me that this information would bemonitored by college authorities and then checked up on. I could see why they did it,and I could see the good that might come from it. It just never would have occurred tome that this data would be used in this way.
If this is an invasion, of course it is a small one. Later it was easy for me to hide my
binges simply by buying from a local store rather than the college buttery. (Though Ilater learned that the local store rented its space from the college, so who knows whatdeal they had struck.) And in any case, I was not being punished. The college was justconcerned. But the example suggests a more general point: we reveal to the world acertain class of data about ourselves that we ordinarily expect the world not to use.
Trusted systems depend on such data – they depend on the ability to know how
people use the property that is being protected. T o set prices most eﬃciently, thesystem ideally should know as much about individuals and their reading habits aspossible. It needs to know this data because it needs an eﬃcient way to track use andso to charge for it.
39
But this tracking involves a certain invasion. We live now in a world where we
think about what we read in just the way that I thought about what I bought as astudent in England – we do not expect that anyone is keeping track. We would beshocked if we learned that the library was keeping tabs on the books that peoplechecked out and then using this data in some monitoring way.
Such tracking, however, is just what trusted systems require. And so the question
becomes: Should there be a right against this kind of monitoring? The question isparallel to the question of fair use. In a world where this monitoring could not e ﬀect-
ively occur, there was, of course, no such right against it. But now that monitoring canoccur, we must ask whether the latent right to read anonymously, given to us beforeby imperfections in technologies, should be a legally protected right.
Julie Cohen argues that it should, and we can see quite directly how her argument
proceeds.
40 Whatever its source, it is a value in this world that we can explore intel-
lectually on our own. It is a value that we can read anonymously, without fear thatothers will know or watch or change their behavior based on what we read. This is anelement of intellectual freedom. It is a part of what makes us as we are.
41
Y et this element is potentially erased by trusted systems. These systems need to
monitor, and this monitoring destroys anonymity. We need to decide whether, andhow, to preserve values from today in a context of trusted systems.
This is a matter of translation.
42 The question is, how should changes in techno-
logy be accommodated to preserve values from an earlier context in a new context? Itis the same question that Brandeis asked about wiretapping.
43 It is the question the
Court answers in scores of contexts all the time. It is fundamentally a question aboutpreserving values when contexts change.
In the context of both fair use and reading, Cohen has a consistent answer to this
question of translation. She argues that there is a right to resist, or “hack,” trustedTHE PROMISE FOR INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY IN CYBERSPACE 143
systems to the extent that they infringe on traditional fair use. (Others have called this
the “Cohen Theorem.”) As for reading, she argues that copyright management
schemes must protect a right to read anonymously – that if they monitor, they must beconstructed so that they preserve anonymity. The strategy is the same: Cohen identi-ﬁes a value yielded by an old architecture but now threatened by a new architecture,and then argues in favor of an aﬃrmative right to protect the original value.
The problems that perfection makes
These two examples reveal a common problem – one that will reach far beyondcopyright. At one time we enjoy a certain kind of liberty, but that liberty comes fromthe high costs of control.
44 That was the conclusion we drew about fair use – that
when the cost of control was high, the space for fair use was great. So too withanonymous reading: we read anonymously in real space not so much because lawsprotect that right as because the cost of tracking what we read is so great.
When those costs fall, the liberty is threatened. That threat requires a choice – do
we allow the erosion, or do we erect other limits to re-create the original space forliberty?
The law of intellectual property is the ﬁrst example of this general point. The
architectures of property will change; they will allow for a greater protection forintellectual property than real-space architectures allowed; and this greater protectionwill force a choice on us that we do not need to make in real space. Should thearchitecture allow perfect control over intellectual property, or should we build intothe architecture an incompleteness that guarantees a certain aspect of public use? Ora certain space for individual freedom?
Ignoring these questions will not make them go away. Pretending that the framers
answered them is no solution either. In this context (and this is just the ﬁrst) we willneed to make a judgment about which values the architecture will protect.
Choices
I’ve argued that cyberspace will open up at least two important choices in the contextof intellectual property: whether to allow intellectual property in eﬀect to becomecompletely propertized (for that is what a perfect code regime for protecting intel-lectual property would do), and whether to allow this regime to erase the anonymitylatent in less eﬃcient architectures of control. These choices were not made by ourframers. They are for us to make now.
I have a view, in this context as in the following three, about how we should exercise
that choice. But I am a lawyer, trained to be shy about saying “how things ought to be.”Lawyers are taught to point elsewhere – to the framers, to the United Nations charter,to an act of Congress – when arguing about how things ought to be. Having said thatthere is no such authority here, I feel as if I ought therefore to be silent.
Cowardly, not silent, however, is how others might see it. I should say, they say,
what I think. So in each of these four applications (intellectual property, privacy, freespeech, and sovereignty), I will oﬀer my view about how these choices should bemade. But I do this under some duress and encourage you to simply ignore what I144
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
believe. It will be short, and summary, and easy to discard. It is the balance of the book
– and, most importantly, the claim that we  have a choice to make – that I really want to
stick.
Anonymity
Cohen, it seems to me, is plainly right about anonymity, and the Cohen Theoreminspirational. However eﬃcient the alternative may be, we should certainly architectcyberspaces to ensure anonymity – or more precisely, pseudonymity – ﬁrst. If the
code is going to monitor just what I do, then at least it should not know that it is “I”
that it is monitoring. I am less troubled if it knows that “14AH342BD7” read such
and such; I am deeply troubled if that number is tied back to my name.
Cohen is plainly right for a second reason as well: all of the good that comes from
monitoring could be achieved while protecting privacy as well. It may take a bit morecoding to build in routines for breaking traceability; it may take more planning toensure that privacy is protected. But if those rules are embedded up front, the costwould not be terribly high. Far cheaper to architect privacy protections in now ratherthan retroﬁt for them later.
The commons
An intellectual commons I feel much more strongly about.
We can architect cyberspace to preserve a commons or not. (Jeﬀerson thought
that nature had already done the architecting, but Jeﬀerson wrote before there wascode.
45) We should choose to architect it with a commons. Our past had a commons
that could not be designed away; that commons gave our culture great value. Whatvalue the commons of the future could bring us is something we are just beginning tosee. Intellectual property scholars saw it – long before cyberspace came along – andlaid the groundwork for much of the argument we need to have now.
46 The greatest
work in the law of cyberspace has been written in the ﬁeld of intellectual property. In awide range of contexts, these scholars have made a powerful case for the substantivevalue of an intellectual commons.
47
James Boyle puts the case most dramatically in his extraordinary book Shamans,
Software, and Spleens.48 Drawing together both cyberspace and noncyberspace ques-
tions, he spells out the challenge we face in an information society – and particularlythe political challenge we face.
49 Elsewhere he identiﬁes our need for an “environ-
mental movement” in information policy – a rhetoric that gets people to see the broadrange of values put at risk by this movement to propertize all information.
50
We are far from that understanding just now, and this book, on its own, won’t get
us much closer. It is all that I can do here to point to the choice we will have to make,and hint, as I have, about a direction.
Notes
1 See Joel R. Reidenberg, “Governing Networks and Rule-Making in Cyberspace,”
Emory Law Journal 45 (1996): 911.THE PROMISE FOR INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY IN CYBERSPACE 145
2 In Shifting the Possible (142–44), Steﬁk discusses how trusted printers combine
four elements – print rights, encrypted online distribution, automatic billing for
copies, and digital watermarks – in order to monitor and control the copiesthey make.
3 Ibid.4 David Hackett Fischer, Albion’s Seed: Four British Folkways in America (New
Y ork: Oxford University Press, 1989), 765.
5 See American Legal Realism, edited by William W . Fisher III et al. (New Y ork:
Oxford University Press, 1993), 98–129; John Henry Schlegel, American LegalRealism and Empirical Social Science (Chapel Hill: University of North CarolinaPress, 1995). For a nice modern example of the same analysis, see Keith Aoki,“(Intellectual) Property and Sovereignty: Notes T oward a Cultural Geography ofAuthorship,” Stanford Law Review 48 (1996): 1293.
6 See Fried, The Progressive Assault on Laissez-Faire, 1 –28; see also Jael P . Trachtman
(“The international Economic Law Revolution,” University of Pennsylvania Jour-
nal of International Economic Law 17 [1996]: 33, 34), who notes that many realistsand critical legal theorists have asserted that “private law” is an oxymoron.
7 Judges have also made this argument; see Lochner v New Y ork, 198 US 45, 74
(1905) (Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr. dissenting).
8 This is the epistemological limitation discussed in much of Friedrich A. von
Hayek’s work: see, for example, Law, Legislation, and Liberty, vol. 2 (Chicago:University of Chicago Press, 1978).
9 Boyle, Shamons, Software, and Spleens, 174.
10 I am hiding a great deal of philosophy in this simpliﬁed utilitarian account, but for
a powerful economic grounding of the point, see Harold Dernsetz. “T oward aTheory of Property Rights,” American Economics Review 57 (1967): 347.
11 For a wonderfully clear introduction to this point, as well as a complete analysis of
the law, see Robert P . Merges et al., Intellectual Property in the New T echnologicalAge (New Y ork: Aspen Law and Business, 1997), ch. 1.
12 Thomas Jeﬀerson, letter to Isaac Mcpherson, August 13, 1813, reprinted in Writ-
ings of Thomas Jeﬀerson, 1790–1826, vol. 6, edited by H. A. Washington (1854),180–81, quoted in Graham v John Deere Company, 383 US 1, 8–9 n.2 (1966).
13 For the classic discussion, see Kenneth J. Arrow, “Economic Welfare and the
Allocation of Resources for Invention,” in The Rate and Direction of InventiveActivity: Economic and Social Factors  (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press,
1962), 609, 616–17.
14 For a powerfully compelling problematization of the economic perspective in this
context, see Boyle, “Intellectual Property Policy Online,” 35–46. Boyle’s workevinces the indeterminacy that economics ought to profess about whetherincreasing property rights over information will also increase the production ofinformation.
15 Some will insist on calling this “property”; see Frank H. Easterbrook,” Intellectual
Property Is Still Property,” Harvard Journal of Law and Public Policy 13
(1990): 108.
16 This is the message of Justice Stephen Breyer’s work on copyright, for example,
“The Uneasy Case for Copyright.”146
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
17 For an extensive and balanced analysis, see William M. Landes and Richard A.
Posner, “An Economic Analysis of Copyright Law,” Journal of Legal Studies 18
(1989): 325, 325–27, 344–46. These authors note that because ideas are a public
good – that is, an inﬁnite number of people can use an idea without using it up –
ideas are readily appropriated from the creator by other people. Hence, copyrightprotection attempts to balance eﬃciently the beneﬁts of creating new works withthe losses from limiting access and the cost of administering copyright protection;copyright protection seeks to promote the public beneﬁt of advancing knowledgeand learning by means of an incentive system. The economic rewards of themarketplace are oﬀered to authors in order to stimulate them to produce anddisseminate new works (326). See also Posner, Law and Literature, 389–405.
18 These limits come from both the limits in the copyright clause, which sets its
purposes out quite clearly, and the First Amendment; see, for example, FeistPublications, Inc. v Rural T elephone Service Co., 499 US 340, 346 (1991).
19 The “ﬁrst sale” doctrine was developed under § 27 of the former Copyright Act
(17 USC [1970]) and has since been adopted under § 109(a) of the presentCopyright Act; see United States v Goss, 803 F2d 638 (11th Cir 1989) (discussingboth versions of the Copyright Act).
20 Europeans like to say that “moral rights” have been part of their system since the
beginning of time, but as Professor Jane C. Ginsburg has shown with respect toFrance, they are actually a nineteenth-century creation; see “A T ale of TwoCopyrights: Literary Property in Revolutionary France and America,” Tulane
Law Review 64 (1990): 991.
21 Or so it is argued in Eldred v Reno (DDC ﬁled January 4, 1999).22 It is useful to compare the protection that copyright gives to the protection of
trade secret law. All of the protection of trade secret law comes, in a sense, fromthe architectural constraints I have described. One is always permitted, that is, toreverse-engineer to discover a trade secret; see Kewanee Oil Company v BicronCorporation, 416 US 470, 476 (1974): “A trade secret law . . . does not oﬀerprotection against discovery by fair and honest means, such as by independentinvention, accidental disclosure, or . . . reverse engineering.”
23 B6 F3d 1447 (7th Cir 1996): see also Easterbrook, “Intellectual Property Is Still
Property,” 113–14. For an excellent account of the debate, see Charles R.McManis, “The Privatization (or ‘Shrink-Wrapping’) of American Copyright
Law,” California Law Review 87 (1999): 173, 183.
24 This is a reference to the recent battle to draft what was originally called the
Uniform Commercial Code 2B, and more recently the Uniform ComputerInformation Transactions Act (UCITA). By essentially ratifying the click-wrapagreement, this code would facilitate online mass consumer contracts governingthe sale of “online information.” This move has been widely criticized: see“Symposium: Intellectual Property and Contract Law for the Information Age:The Impact of Article 2B of the Uniform Commercial Code on the Future ofInformation and Commerce,” California Law Review 87 (1999): 1; Lawrence
Lessig, “Pain in the OS,” The Industry Standard, February 5, 1999, available at
http://www.thestandard. com/articles/display/D, 1449,3423,00.html (visited May30, 1999). My criticism is that while the rhetoric of this move is grounded in theTHE PROMISE FOR INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY IN CYBERSPACE 147
“freedom of contract,” the code actually does nothing to ensure that the contract-
ing process produces understanding of the terms of the contract by both partiesto the contract. The incentives created by provisions like the “Restatement(Second) of Contracts” ( § 211) are not present in the UCITA, UCITA presup-
poses that if the consumer had a chance to understand, he understands. But froman eﬃciency perspective, let alone a justice perspective, the consumer is not thecheapest understanding producer. The code simply ratiﬁes the contract that theseller proposes. This is not “freedom of contract,” but contract according towhatever the seller says. For a useful analysis, see Walter A. Eﬀross, “The Legal
Architecture of Virtual Stores: World Wide Web Sites and the Uniform Com-mercial Code,” San Diego Law Review 34 (1997): 1263, 1328–59.
25 See William W . Fisher III. – “Compulsory-T erms in-Internet-Related Contracts,”
Chicago-Kent Law Review 73 (1998). Fisher catalogs public policy restrictions onfreedom of contract, which he characterizes as “ubiquitous.”
26 An argument is raging about whether, even through law, this modiﬁcation of the
default copyright law should be permitted. Mark A. Lemley has catalogued theprovisions of the Copyright Act that are arguably put at risk by contractingbehaviour; see “Beyond Preemption: The Law and Policy of Intellectual PropertyLicensing: California Law Review 87 (1999): 111; see also A. Michael Froomkin,
“Article 2B as Legal Software for Electronic Contracting – Operating System orTrojan Horse?,” Berkeley T echnology Law Journal 13 (1998): 1023; Michael J.
Madison, “Legal-War: Contract and Copyright in the Digital Age,” Fordham Law
Review 67 (1998): 1025; David Nimmer et al., “The Metamorphosis of Contractinto Expand,” California Law Review 87 (1999): 17; Pamela Samuelson, “Intel-
lectual Property and Contract Law for the Information Age: Foreword,” California
Law Review 87 (1999): 1. The questions Lemley raises, however, cannot be easilyraised when it is the code that protects the intellectual property interest: MaureenA. O’Rourke, “Copyright Preemption After the ProCD Case: A Market-Based
Approach,” Berkeley T echnology Law Journal 12 (1997): 53.
27 See T om W . Bell, “Fair Use vs. Fared Use: The Impact of Automated Rights
Management on Copyright’s Fair Use Doctrine,” North Carolina Law Review 76
(1998): 557, 581–84. Bell argues that technology will prove more eﬀective thanfair use in curing the market failure that results when transaction costs discourageotherwise value-maximizing uses of copyrighted work; see also the White Paperobservation that “it may be that technological means of tracking transactions andlicensing will lead to reduced application and scope of the fair use doctrine” (74).
28 See Bell, “Fair Use vs. Fared Use,” 582–84; U.S. Department of Commerce, T ask
Force – Working Group on Intellectual Property Rights, “Intellectual Property
and the National Information Infrastructure,” 66 n.228, notes the diﬃculty ofdeﬁning the bounds of the fair use doctrine.
29 For a foundational modern work on the nature of fair use, see Wendy J. Gordon,
“Fair Use as Market Failure: A Structural and Economic Analysis of the BetamaxCase and Its Predecessors,” Columbia Law Review 82 (1982): 1600. A more
recent work by William Fisher (“Reconstructing the Fair Use Doctrine,” Harvard
Law Review 101 (1988): 1659, 1661–95) considers both the eﬃciency and utopiangoals of copyright law.148
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
30 See Gibbons v Ogden, 22 US 1 (1824) (striking down New Y ork’s grant of a
monopoly of steamboat navigation on the Hudson River as inconsistent with the
federal Coasting Act of 1793): McCulloch v Maryland, 17 US 316 (1819) (pro-nouncing that Congress has the power to do what is “necessary and proper” toachieve a legitimate end, like the regulation of interstate commerce).
31 See Bernard C. Gavit, The Commerce Clause of the United States Constitution,
(Bloomington, Ind.: Principia Press, 1932), 84.
32 See Pensacola T elegraph Company v W estern Union T elegraph Company, 96 US 1,
9 (1877).
33 As one commentator put it near the turn of the century: “If the power of Congress
has a wider incidence in 1918 than it could have had in 1789, this is merelybecause production is more dependent now than then on extra-state markets. Nostate liveth to itself alone to any such extent as was true a century ago. What ischanging is not our system of government, but our economic organization”;Thomas Reed Powell, “The Child Labor Law, the T enth Amendment, and theCommerce Clause,” Southern Law Quarterly 3 (1918): 175, 200–201.
34 See Alexis de T ocqueville, Democracy in America, vol. 1 (New Y ork: Vintage,
1990), 158–70, on the idea that the framers’ design pushed states to legislate in abroad domain and keep the local government active.
35 See Maryland v Wirtz, 392 US 183, 201 (1968) (Justice William O. Douglas
dissenting: the majority’s bringing of employees of state-owned enterpriseswithin the reach of the commerce clause was “such a serious invasion of statesovereignty protected by the T enth Amendment that it . . . [was] not consistentwith our constitutional federalism”); State Board of Insurance v T odd Shipyards
Corporation, 370 US 451, 456 (1962) (holding that “the power of Congress togrant protection to interstate commerce against state regulation or taxation or towithhold it is so complete that its ideas of policy should prevail”) (citationsomitted).
36 See Michael G. Frey, “Unfairly Applying the Fair Use Doctrine: Princeton Uni-
versity Press v Michigan Document Services, 99 F3d 1381 (6th Cir 1996),”University of Cincinnati Law Review  66 (1998): 959, 1001; Frey asserts that
“copyright protection exists primarily for the beneﬁt of the public, not the beneﬁtof individual authors. Copyright law does give authors a considerable beneﬁt interms of the monopolistic right to control their creations, but that right exists onlyto ensure the creation of new works. The fair use doctrine is an important safetyvalve that ensures that the beneﬁt to individual authors does not outweigh thebeneﬁt to the public”; Marlin H. Smith (“The Limits of Copyright: Property,Parody; and the Public Domain,” Duke Law Journal 42 [1993]: 1233, 1272)
assets that “copyright law is better understood as that of a gatekeeper, controllingaccess to copyrighted works hut guaranteeing, via fair use, some measure ofavailability to the public.”
37 See Mark Gimbel (“Some Thoughts on the Implications of Trusted Systems for
Intellectual Property Law,” Stanford Law Review 50 [1998]: 1671, 1686), who
notes that fair use can be “explained as a method of curing the market failure thatresults when high transaction costs discourage otherwise economically eﬃcientuses of copyrighted material,” and that “because technologies like trusted systemsTHE PROMISE FOR INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY IN CYBERSPACE 149
promise to reduce the costs of licensing copyrighted works – thereby curing this
market failure – some argue that the doctrine of fair use will for the most part berendered unnecessary, obviating the need to regulate technologies that under-mine it”: Lydia Pallas Losen (“Redeﬁning the Market Failure Approach in FairUse in an Era of Copyright Permission System,” Journal of Intellectual Property
Law 5 [1997]: 1, 7) asserts that under a “narrowed market failure view of fair use.If a copyright owner can establish an eﬃcient ‘permission system’ to collect less
for a certain kind of use, then the copyright owner will be able to defeat a claim offair use.”
38 Steﬁk, “Letting Loose the Light,” 244.
39 Eﬃcient here both in the sense of cheap to track and in the sense of cheap to then
discriminate in pricing; William W . Fisher III, “Property and Contract on theInternet,” Chicago-Kent Law Review 74 (1998).
40 Julie E. Cohen, “A Right to Read Anonymously: A Closer Look at ‘Copyright-
Management’ in Cyberspace,” Connecticut Law Review 28 (1996): Reading
anonymously is “so intimately connected with speech and freedom of thoughtthat the First Amendment should be understood to guarantee such a right”(981, 982).
41“The freedom to read anonymously is just as much a part of our tradition, andthe choice of reading materials just as expressive of identity, as the decision to useor withhold one’s name” (ibid., 1012).
42 See Lessig, “Translating Federalism,” 125.43 See Ohmstead v United States 277 US 438, 474 (1928) (Justice Louis Brandeis
dissenting “Can it be that the Constitution aﬀords no protection against such
invasion of individual security?”).
44 Peter Huber relies explicitly on the high costs of control in his rebuttal to Orwell’s
1984; see Orwell’s Revenge: The 1984 Palimpset (New Y ork: Maxwell MacmillanInternational, 1994). But this is a weak basis on which to build liberty, especiallyas the cost of networked control drops, Frances Ciarncross (The Death of Distance:How the Communications Revolution Will Change Our Lives [Boston: HarvardBusiness School Press, 1997], 194–95) eﬀectively challenges the idea as well.
45 Washington, Writings of Thomas Jeﬀerson, 6: 180–81.
46 A founding work is David Lange, “Recognizing the Public Domain,” Law and
Contemporary Problems 44 (1981): 147. There are many important foundations,however, to this argument. See, for example, Benjamin Kaplan, An UnhurriedView of Copyright (New Y ork: Columbia University Press, 1967). Gordon (“FairUse as Market Failure”) argues that the courts should employ fair use to permituncompensated transfers that the market is incapable of eﬀectuating; see alsoWendy J. Gordon, “On Owning Information: Intellectual Property and Restitu-tionary Impulse,” Virginia Law Review 78 (1992): 149. In “Reality as Artifact:
From Feist to Fair Use”, Law and Contemporary Problems 555P9 (1992): 93–107.Gordon believes that, while imaginative works are creative, they may also com-prise facts, which need to be widely available for public dissemination. Gordon’s“T oward a Jurisprudence of Beneﬁts: The Norms of Copyright and the Problemof Private Censorship” ( University of Chicago Law Review 57 [1990]: 1009) is a
discussion of the ability of copyright holders to deny access to critics and others:150
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
see also Wendy Gordon, “An Inquiry into the Merits of Copyright: The Chal-
lenges of Consistency, Consent, and Encouragement Theory,” Stanford New
Review 41 (1989): 1343.
47 In addition to Boyle, I have learned most from Keith Aoki, Y ochai Benkler, Julie
Cohen, Niva Elkin-Koren, Peter Jaszi, Mark Lemley, Jessica Litman, Neil Netanel,Margaret Radin, and Pam Samuelson, but no doubt I have not read widelyenough. See, for example. Keith Aoki, “Foreword to Innovation and the Informa-tion Environment: Interrogating the Entrepreneur,” Oregon Law Review 75
(1996): 1; in “(Intellectual) Property and Sovereignty.” Aoki discusses the chal-lenges in the traditional concept of property that arise from the growth of digitalinformation technology; in “Authors, Inventors, and Trademark Owners; PrivateIntellectual Property and the Public Domain” ( Columbia-VLA Journal of Law and
the Arts 18 [1993]: 1), he observes the shifting boundaries in intellectual propertylaw between “public” and “private” realms of information and argues that trendsto increase the number of exclusive rights for authors are converting the publicdomain into private intellectual property and constraining other types of sociallyvaluable uses of expressive works that do not ﬁt the “authorship” model under-lying American copyright tradition; he also argues that recent expansion oftrademark law has allowed trademark owners to obtain property rights in theirtrademarks that do not further the Lanham Act’s goal of preventing consumerconfusion. Benkler, “Free as Air to Common Use”; Y orhai Benkler, “OvercomingAgoraphohia: Building the Commons of the Digitally Networked Environment,”Harvard Journal of Law and T echnology 11 (1998): 287; Julie E. Cohen, “Copy-right and the Jurisprudence of Self-Help,” Berkeley T echnology Law Journal 13
(1998): 1089; Julie E. Cohen, “Lochner in Cyberspace: The New EconomicOrthodoxy of ‘Rights Management,’”  Michigan Law Review 97 (1998): 462;
Julie E. Cohen, “Some Reﬂections on Copyright Management Systems and LawsDesigned in Protect Them,” Berkeley T echnology Law Journal 12 (1997): 161,
181–82; Julie E. Cohen, “Reverse-Engineering and the Rise of Electronic Vigil-antism: Intellectual Property Implications of ‘Lock-Out’ Programs,” Southern
California Law Review 68 (1995): 1091, Niva Elkin-Koren, “Contracts in Cyber-space: Rights Without Laws,” Chicago-Kent Law Review 73 (1998); Niva Elkin-
Koren, “Copyright Policy and the Limits of Freedom of Contract,” Berkeley
T echnology Law Journal 12 (1997): 93, 107–10 (criticizing the ProCD decision);Niva Elkin-Koren, “Cyberlaw and Social Change: A Democratic Approach toCopyright Law in Cyberspace,” Cardozo Arts and Entertainment Law Journal 14
(1996): 215; in “Copyright Law and Social Dialogue on the Information Super-
highway: The Case Against Copyright Liability of Bulletin Board Operators”(Cardozo Arts and Entertainment Law Journal 13 [1995]: 345, 390–99), Elkin-Koren analyzes the problems created by applying copyright law in a digilizedenvironment. In “Goodbye to All That – A Reluctant (and Perhaps Premature)Adieu to a Constitutionally Grounded Discourse of Public Interest in CopyrightLaw” ( V anderbilt Journal of Transnational Law 29 [1996]: 595), Peter A. Jaszi
advocates the development of new, policy-grounded arguments and constitution-ally based reasoning to battle expansionist legislative and judicial tendenciesin copyright to diminish public access to the “intellectual commons”; see alsoTHE PROMISE FOR INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY IN CYBERSPACE 151
Peter A. Jaszi, “On the Author Eﬀect Contemporary Copyright and Collective
Creativity,” Cardozo Arts and Entertainment Law Journal 10 (1992): 293, 319–20;
Peter A, Jaszi, “T oward a Theory of Copyright: The Metamorphoses of ‘Author-ship,’”  Duke Law Journal 1991 (1991): 455. On the misuse of copyright, see
Lemley, “Beyond Preemption”; Mark A. Lemley, “The Economics of Improve-
ment in Intellectual Property Law,” T exas Law Review 25 (1997): 989, 1048 –68;
in “Intellectual Property and Shrink-wrap Licenses” ( Southern California Law
Review 68 [1995]: 1239, 1239), Lemley notes that “software vendors are attempt-ing en masse to ‘opt out’ of intellectual property law by drafting license provisionsthat compel their customers to adhere to more restrictive provisions than copy-right . . . law would require, ” Jessica Litman ( “The T ales That Article 2B T ells,”
Berkeley T echnology Law Journal 13 [1998]: 931, 938) characterizes as “dubious”the notion that current law enables publishers to make a transaction into a licenseby so designating it. In her view, article 2B is “confusing and confused” aboutcopyright and its relationship with that law, and would make new law. She believesthat “whatever the outcome” of the debate over whether copyright makes sense
in the digital environment (see “Reforming Information Law in Copyright’sImage,” Dayton Law Review 22 [1997], 587, 590), “copyright doctrine is ill-
adapted to accommodate many of the important interests that inform our infor-mation policy. First Amendment, privacy, and distributional issues that copyrighthas treated only glancingly are central to any information policy.” See also JessicaLitman, “Revising Copyright Law for the Information Age,” Oregon Law Review
75 (1996): 19; and “The Exclusive Right to Read” ( Cardozo Arts and Entertain-
ment Law Journal 13 [1994]: 29, 48), in which Litman states that “much of theactivity on the net takes place on the mistaken assumption that any material onthe Internet is free from copyright unless expressly declared to be otherwise.”In “Copyright as Myth” ( University of Pittsburgh Law Review  53 [1991]: 235,
235–37), Litman provides a general overview of the issues of authorship andinfringement in copyright law, indicating that debate continues regarding thedeﬁnition of “authorship” (she deﬁnes “author” “in the copyright sense of any-
one who creates copyrightable works, whether they be books, songs, sculptures,buildings, computer programs, paintings or ﬁlms” [236, n.5]); she also discusses
why copyright law is counterintuitive to the authorship process. See also “ThePublic Domain” ( Emory Law Journal 39 [1990]: 965, 969), in which Litman
recommends a broad deﬁnition of the public domain (“originality is a keystone ofcopyright law” [974]). Neil Weinstock Netanel, “Asserting Copyright’s Demo-cratic Principles in the Global Arena,” V anderbilt Law Review 51 (1998): 217, 232
n.48, 299 n.322; Neil Netanel, “Alienability Restrictions and the Enhancement ofAuthor Autonomy in United States and Continental Copyright Law,” Cardozo
Arts and Entertainment Law Journal 12 (1994): 1, 42–43; in “[C]opyright and aDemocratic Civil Society” ( Y ale Law Journal 106 (1996): 283, 288, 324–36),
Netanel analyzes copyright law and policy in terms of its democracy-enhantingfunction: “Copyright is in essence a state measure that uses market institutions to
enhance the democratic character of society.” Margaret Jane Radin and PolkWagner, “The Myth of Private Ordering: Rediscovering Legal Realism in Cyber-
space,” Chicago–Kent Law Review 73 (1998); Margaret Jane Radin, Reinterpreting152
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
Property (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993), 56–63. Pam Samuelson,
“Encoding the Law into Digital Libraries,” Communications of the ACM 41
(1999): 13, 13–14; Pamela Samuelson, foreword to “Symposium: IntellectualProperty and Contract Law for the Information Age,” California Law Review 87
(1998): 1; Pamela Samuelson observes in “Embedding T echnical Self-Help inLicensed Software” ( Communications of the ACM 40 [1997]: 13, 16) that “licen-
sors of software or other information . . . will generally invoke self-help”; see alsothe criticism of the European database directive in J. H. Reichman and PamelaSamuelson, “Intellectual Property Rights in Data?,” V anderbilt Law Review 50
(1997): 51, 84–95; Samuelson, “The Copyright Grab,” 134; Pamela Samuelson,“Fair Use for Computer Programs and Other Copyrightable Works in DigitalForm: The Implications of Sony, Galonb and Sega,” Journal of Intellectual Property
Law 1 (1993): 49.
48 For a recent and compelling account of the general movement to propertize
information, see Debora J. Halbert, Intellectual Property in the Information Age: ThePolitics of Expanding Ownership Rights  (Westport, Conn.: Quorum, 1999). Seth
Shulman’s Owning the Future (Boston: Houghton Miﬄin, 1999) gives the story
its appropriate drama.
49“We favor a move away from the author vision in two directions; ﬁrst towardsrecognition of a limited number of new protections for cultural heritage, folkloricproductions, and biological ‘know-how.’ Second, and in general, we favoran increased recognition and protection of the public domain by means ofexperience, ‘fair use protection’ company licensing, and narrower initial coverage
of property rights in the ﬁrst place”; Boyle, Shamans, Software, and Spleens, 169.
50 James Boyle, “A Politics of Intellectual Property: Environmentalism for the
Net?,” Duke Law Journal 47 (1997): 87.THE PROMISE FOR INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY IN CYBERSPACE 153
3.5
Why software should not have owners,
by Richard Stallman
Digital information technology contributes to the world by making it easier to copy
and modify information. Computers promise to make this easier for all of us.
Not everyone wants it to be easier. The system of copyright gives software pro-
grams “owners,” most of whom aim to withhold software’s potential beneﬁt from the
rest of the public. They would like to be the only ones who can copy and modify thesoftware that we use.
The copyright system grew up with printing – a technology for mass production
copying. Copyright ﬁt in well with this technology because it restricted only the massproducers of copies. It did not take freedom away from readers of books. An ordinaryreader, who did not own a printing press, could copy books only with pen and ink, andfew readers were sued for that.
Digital technology is more ﬂexible than the printing press: when information has
digital form, you can easily copy it to share it with others. This very ﬂexibility makes abad ﬁt with a system like copyright. That’s the reason for the increasingly nasty and
draconian measures now used to enforce software copyright. Consider these fourpractices of the Software Publishers Association (SPA):
Massive propaganda saying it is wrong to disobey the owners to help yourfriend.
Solicitation for stool pigeons to inform on their coworkers and colleagues.
Raids (with police help) on oﬃces and schools, in which people are told theymust prove they are innocent of illegal copying.
Prosecution (by the U.S. government, at the SPA’s request) of people such asMIT’s David LaMacchia,
1 not for copying software (he is not accused of copying
any), but merely for leaving copying facilities unguarded and failing to censortheir use.
Originally written in 1994, this version is part of Free Software, Free Society: Selected Essays of Richard M.
Stallman, 2002, GNU Press (http://www.gnupress.org); ISBN 1-882114-98-1.
Verbatim copying and distribution of this entire article is permitted in any medium, provided this notice is
preserved
All four practices resemble those used in the former Soviet Union, where every
copying machine had a guard to prevent forbidden copying, and where individuals
had to copy information secretly and pass it from hand to hand as samizdat. There isof course a diﬀerence: the motive for information control in the Soviet Union waspolitical; in the U.S. the motive is proﬁt. But it is the actions that aﬀect us, not themotive. Any attempt to block the sharing of information, no matter why, leads to thesame methods and the same harshness.
Owners make several kinds of arguments for giving them the power to control
how we use information:
Name calling
Owners use smear words such as “piracy” and “theft,” as well as expert terminologysuch as “intellectual property” and “damage,” to suggest a certain line of thinking tothe public – a simplistic analogy between programs and physical objects.
Our ideas and intuitions about property for material objects are about whether it
is right to take an object away from someone else. They don’t directly apply to makinga copy of something. But the owners ask us to apply them anyway.
Exaggeration
Owners say that they suﬀer “harm” or “economic loss” when users copy programs
themselves. But the copying has no direct eﬀect on the owner, and it harms no one.The owner can lose only if the person who made the copy would otherwise have paidfor one from the owner.
A little thought shows that most such people would not have bought copies. Y et
the owners compute their “losses” as if each and every one would have bought a copy.That is exaggeration – to put it kindly.
The law
Owners often describe the current state of the law, and the harsh penalties they canthreaten us with. Implicit in this approach is the suggestion that today’s law reﬂects anunquestionable view of morality – yet at the same time, we are urged to regard thesepenalties as facts of nature that can’t be blamed on anyone.
This line of persuasion isn’t designed to stand up to critical thinking; it’s intended
to reinforce a habitual mental pathway.
It’s elementary that laws don’t decide right and wrong. Every American should
know that, forty years ago, it was against the law in many states for a black person tosit in the front of a bus; but only racists would say sitting there was wrong.
Natural rights
Authors often claim a special connection with programs they have written, and go onto assert that, as a result, their desires and interests concerning the program simplyoutweigh those of anyone else – or even those of the whole rest of the world. (TypicallyWHY SOFTWARE SHOULD NOT HAVE OWNERS 155
companies, not authors, hold the copyrights on software, but we are expected to
ignore this discrepancy.)
T o those who propose this as an ethical axiom – the author is more important
than you – I can only say that I, a notable software author myself, call it bunk.
But people in general are only likely to feel any sympathy with the natural rights
claims for two reasons.
One reason is an over-stretched analogy with material objects. When I cook
spaghetti, I do object if someone else eats it, because then I cannot eat it. His actionhurts me exactly as much as it beneﬁts him; only one of us can eat the spaghetti, so thequestion is, which? The smallest distinction between us is enough to tip the ethicalbalance.
But whether you run or change a program I wrote aﬀects you directly and me
only indirectly. Whether you give a copy to your friend aﬀects you and your friendmuch more than it aﬀects me. I shouldn’t have the power to tell you not to do thesethings. No one should.
The second reason is that people have been told that natural rights for authors is
the accepted and unquestioned tradition of our society.
As a matter of history, the opposite is true. The idea of natural rights of authors
was proposed and decisively rejected when the U.S. Constitution was drawn up.That’s why the Constitution only permits a system of copyright and does not requireone; that’s why it says that copyright must be temporary. It also states that the purposeof copyright is to promote progress – not to reward authors. Copyright does rewardauthors somewhat, and publishers more, but that is intended as a means of modifyingtheir behavior.
The real established tradition of our society is that copyright cuts into the natural
rights of the public – and that this can only be justiﬁed for the public’s sake.
Economics
The ﬁnal argument made for having owners of software is that this leads to production
of more software.
Unlike the others, this argument at least takes a legitimate approach to the subject.
It is based on a valid goal – satisfying the users of software. And it is empirically clearthat people will produce more of something if they are well paid for doing so.
But the economic argument has a ﬂaw: it is based on the assumption that the
diﬀerence is only a matter of how much money we have to pay. It assumes that“production of software” is what we want, whether the software has owners or not.
People readily accept this assumption because it accords with our experiences
with material objects. Consider a sandwich, for instance. Y ou might well be able to getan equivalent sandwich either free or for a price. If so, the amount you pay is the onlydiﬀerence. Whether or not you have to buy it, the sandwich has the same taste, thesame nutritional value, and in either case you can only eat it once. Whether you get thesandwich from an owner or not cannot directly aﬀect anything but the amount ofmoney you have afterwards.
This is true for any kind of material object – whether or not it has an owner does
not directly aﬀect what it is, or what you can do with it if you acquire it.156
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
But if a program has an owner, this very much aﬀects what it is, and what you can
do with a copy if you buy one. The diﬀerence is not just a matter of money. The
system of owners of software encourages software owners to produce something – butnot what society really needs. And it causes intangible ethical pollution that aﬀectsus all.
What does society need? It needs information that is truly available to its citizens
– for example, programs that people can read, ﬁx, adapt, and improve, not just oper-
ate. But what software owners typically deliver is a black box that we can’t study orchange.
Society also needs freedom. When a program has an owner, the users lose freedom
to control part of their own lives.
And above all society needs to encourage the spirit of voluntary cooperation in its
citizens. When software owners tell us that helping our neighbours in a natural way is“piracy,” they pollute our society’s civic spirit.
This is why we say that free software is a matter of freedom, not price.The economic argument for owners is erroneous, but the economic issue is real.
Some people write useful software for the pleasure of writing it or for admiration andlove; but if we want more software than those people write, we need to raise funds.
For ten years now, free software developers have tried various methods of ﬁnding
funds, with some success. There’s no need to make anyone rich; the median U.S.family income, around $35k, proves to be enough incentive for many jobs that are lesssatisfying than programming.
For years, until a fellowship made it unnecessary, I made a living from custom
enhancements of the free software I had written. Each enhancement was added to thestandard released version and thus eventually became available to the general public.Clients paid me so that I would work on the enhancements they wanted, rather thanon the features I would otherwise have considered highest priority.
The Free Software Foundation (FSF), a tax-exempt charity for free software
development, raises funds by selling GNU CD-ROMs, T-shirts, manuals, and deluxedistributions, (all of which users are free to copy and change) as well as from dona-tions. It now has a staﬀ of ﬁve programmers, plus three employees who handle mailorders.
Some free software developers make money by selling support services. Cygnus
Support,
2 with around 50 employees [when this article was written, in 1994], esti-
mates that about 15 per cent of its staﬀ activity is free software development – arespectable percentage for a software company.
A number of companies have funded the continued development of the free
GNU complier for the language C. Meanwhile, the GNU compiler for the Ada lan-guage is being funded by the U.S. Air Force, which believes this is the most cost-eﬀective way to get a high quality compiler [Air Force funding ended some timeago; the GNU Ada Compiler is now in service, and its maintenance is fundedcommercially].
All these examples are small; the free software movement is still small, and still
young. But the example of listener-supported radio in the U.S. shows it’s possible tosupport a large activity without forcing each user to pay.
As a computer user today, you may ﬁnd yourself using a proprietary program. IfWHY SOFTWARE SHOULD NOT HAVE OWNERS 157
your friend asks to make a copy, it would be wrong to refuse. Cooperation is more
important than copyright. But underground, closet cooperation does not make for agood society. A person should aspire to live an upright life openly with pride, and thismeans saying “No” to proprietary software.
Y ou deserve to be able to cooperate openly and freely with other people who use
software. Y ou deserve to be able to learn how the software works, and to teach yourstudents with it. Y ou deserve to be able to hire your favorite programmer to ﬁx it whenit breaks.
Y ou deserve free software.
Notes
1 On January 27th, 1995, David LaMacchia’s case was dismissed and has not yet
been appealed.
2 Cygnus Support continued to be successful, but then it accepted outside invest-
ment, got greedy, and began developing non-free software. Then it was acquiredby Red Hat, which has rereleased most of those programs as free software.158
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
PART 4
Politics of new media
technologies
In political science, politics is de ﬁned as the form of struggle that takes place in human
societies over such things as resources, territory and power. More subtly, but still
deriving from this originary dynamic, politics since the Enlightenment has also beenabout people, institutions and countries securing what are perceived to be their rightsand legitimate interests. Struggles take place where these perceptions and interestsclash; struggles take place when resources are scarce (or perceived to be); and strug-gles take place to secure the necessary power (military, ethical, economic) to achievethese political ends. Democracy, in its various philosophical interpretations and levelsof organisational complexity, evolved as the mechanics with which to manage politicalpower, and with such organisation comes the tendency towards systematisation androutine. However, widespread transformations of any kind in society tend to upset thepolitical balances and delicate compromises that have been worked out over a periodof time. A heightened form of politics comes to the fore during such times, and itsrealm extends to a wider section of society than is usual. New political actors are drawnin when change is seen to infringe upon their rights and interests. Others may bemotivated to act when the force of transformation gives them little alternative. Othersstill, may help contribute to the new turbulent political landscape when they pursueopportunities created by deep-level change. Examples of such transformative timescould be the economic crises of the 1930s or the ‘cultural crises ’ of the 1960s.
Since the 1980s ICTs have swept the world as waves of change that have
generated fresh political terrains and new dynamics of con ﬂict. The digital has become
political – precisely because the effects of computerisation have been felt in almost
every register of life. ICTs have created a new space: the virtual space of the network. Itis a space that is real, a ‘ real virtuality’  in terms of the effects that it has on the physical
world. You can, for example, earn your living in this virtual space, and millions do. Youcan shop in it, be entertained or informed in it. The virtual space of the networkcan shape your view of the world, and you can shape the views of others throughyour actions in it. Its constant turbulence is shaking the sociocultural and economicfoundations of the pre-digital way of life. This means that it is also an inherently politicalrealm. Moreover, the issues that have driven politics in the network society are the sameones that have driven politics for 200 years. Questions of governance, of citizenship, of
access and equity, of democracy and of the nature of political representation in the age
of information have all become salient and hotly disputed. New media technologies arecreating new environments, new political ﬁelds of contestation where old political ques-
tions are being fought anew. It is a ﬁeld created so rapidly that the principles of cause
and effect are not readily understood by the engineers, politicians, business leadersand the users who build it. And so it is here that theory has its use as a way to recognisethe processes at work more clearly, and the following authors are valuable contributorsto this understanding.
Andrew Barry’ s ‘On interactivity’  from his book Political Machines , assesses the
political possibilities of new information technologies from the perspective of Foucault ’s
concept of the ‘ disciplined subject ’, where societies are ordered through positive
systems of power. Barry looks in particular at the idea of ‘the revitalization of democracy
in its various forms ’ through a greater understanding of science. In a novel approach,
he discusses new media-based interactivity within science centres and museums ofscience as a means to a ‘ scientiﬁc and technological citizenship ’ where user/citizens
are able to understand the world around them more clearly. It is a model, he argues, thathas its ﬂaws and its detractors, but it is also one that is applicable in a positive form toother vital social realms such as broadcasting, education and the workplace. The roleof new media technologies in the building of a ‘strong democracy’  are sketched in three
future scenarios in a sobering essay by Benjamin R. Barber. He terms these thePangloss , the Pandora  and the Jeffersonian  scenarios. The ﬁrst is that through a naive
belief in neoliberal ideology we will leave our technological and democratic prospects inthe hands for the ‘free market’ , a recipe, he argues for our futures to be harnessed
primarily to undemocratic corporate interests. Under the Pandora  future, government
will use ICTs to encroach on privacy, restrict free information ﬂows and construct
what could be termed a ‘surveillance society ’. Lastly, the Jeffersonian  scenario is for
Barber the optimal future for governance in a highly technologised society. Here,governments, business and citizens will use ICTs for the bene ﬁt of all, to promote
democracy and strengthen civil society. Unfortunately, in Barber ’s analysis, this is the
least likely scenario.
Cass Sunstein’ s essay ‘ Citizens’  looks at the nature of freedom, choice, desires
and preferences in the networked society. He makes the important point that the con-cepts of ‘ consumer’  and ‘ citizen’  should not be conﬂated, although they frequently are.
The colossal ‘ freedom of choice’  for consumers on the internet, then, is not the same as
a political freedom of choice; indeed, consumer choice is a kind of ‘unfreedom’ . The
domination of the internet and the network society more generally by commercial inter-ests feeds a kind of accelerating ‘consumer treadmill’  where consumption is an always
unsatisfying and necessarily limited process – limited largely to the material. Authentic
‘citizens of democratic polity ’ he concludes, ‘may legitimately seek a communications
market that departs from consumer choices, in favour of a system that promotes goalsassociated with both freedom and democracy ’. This means that citizens in a networked
society must be engaged, active, re ﬂective, and able to function as a group which goes
beyond the limited world of our ‘options as individuals ’.
The ﬁnal extract in this chapter is from McKenzie Wark ’s A Hacker Manifesto .
‘Abstraction class’  paraphrases Marx in a manifesto that articulates the origins, aims
and interests of the ‘hacker class’ . Hackers in Wark’ s conception are those tech-savvy160
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
users who, through their technical expertise ( ‘their knowledge and their wits ’) are able to
develop relatively autonomous political realms in cyberspace. ‘To hack is to differ ’ is
their maxim. Here, Wark encapsulates the convergence of the political and the digital.
The manifesto is a conscious effort to ‘use the system’ s’ own tools –  information
technologies – to construct the new, ‘in art, in science, in philosophy and in culture ’. The
realm of abstraction is for Wark the workshop for ideas because ‘what makes life differ
in one age after another is the application of new modes of abstraction ’, the ‘ virtual
made actual’ .POLITICS OF NEW MEDIA TECHNOLOGIES 161
4.1
On interactivity,
by Andrew Barry
Technological citizenship
Much has been said in recent years about the declining rates of political participation
to be found in Western liberal democracies, whether on the basis of measures ofvoting or the membership of political parties or civic associations. In this context,many intellectuals and politicians have called for a revival and a reworking of aclassical ideal of citizenship; an idea which is taken to imply not just a set of politicaland social rights, but also a set of responsibilities and duties. According to politicalphilosophers and sociologists to be a citizen today entails accepting a moral demandto be active in, and informed about, public life.
1 However, such a tough morality does
not come naturally. Active, responsible and informed citizens have to be made. AsDavid Burchell has argued, modern political philosophy, ‘neglects the positive con-struction of the persona of the citizen, both as an historical process and a social fact’.
2
In this chapter I argue that the relation between technology and contemporary
forms of active and responsible citizenship has two dimensions. On the one hand, asI argue later in the chapter, interactive and networked technologies have come tobe seen as a key resource in the making up of citizens. New technology is reckonedby many to play a critical part in the revitalisation of democracy, in its variousforms. This is a period of a remarkable investment by many political and educationalorganisations in new technology. Interactive technology is expected to produce activecitizens.
3 On the other hand, along with a reinvention of ideal of active political
citizenship and the technological investment with which it has come to be associated,one can also talk about a moral preoccupation with the importance of scientiﬁc andtechnological citizenship. T oday, the individual citizen is increasingly expected, andincreasingly expects, to make his or her own judgements about scientiﬁc and techno-logical matters. These expectations have come from a variety of directions and obeyno simple logic. They are neither straightforwardly pro- nor anti-science. For politi-cians, business leaders and some educationalists, the problem is often diagnosedas one of the poor quality of science and maths education and a lack of ﬂexibilityin the workforce to adapt to new technological demands.
4 For many scientists there is
a weakness in ‘the public understanding of science’.5 For a few, this weakness is
compounded by the eﬀects of Romantic, ‘postmodern’, ‘relativist’ and ‘anti-scientiﬁc’
currents in intellectual and political life.6 For some consumer groups the problem
may be with science itself, its forms of knowledge and organisation. Patients campaign
for more access to medical records, or more choice concerning treatments. Pregnantmothers and their supporters argue for the importance of natural birth techniques.Others argue that the public would understand the virtues of organic farming noton the basis of a romantic attachment to nature, but on the basis of a scienti ﬁc
understanding of the risks of other methods. Still others call for a form of scientiﬁccitizenship which would be knowledgeable about the social relations of science andtechnology and the politics of expertise.
7 Such demands and concerns are not new,
even if they now take a new and more urgent form. Writing in the late 1930s, thebiologist and socialist, J. B. S. Haldane argued:
I am convinced that is the duty of those scientists who have a gift for writing tomake their subject intelligible to the ordinary man or woman. Without a muchbroader knowledge of science, democracy cannot be eﬀective in an age whenscience aﬀects all our lives continually.
8
T oday, few would believe that scientiﬁc writing, on its own, will be a suﬃcient
instrument with which to produce the kind of citizen required to meet the politicalrequirements of a modern technological democracy. Citizens and consumers have toomany other demands on their time, and too many other readily available forms of self-improvement and entertainment, and above all too many other available media to gainall they need to know from books. In this multimedia context, the idea of ‘interactive’
technology has acquired particular importance in discussions of public knowledgein general, and public knowledge of science, in particular. There is no doubt, asMark Poster notes, that the usage of the idea of interactivity can ‘ﬂoat and be appliedin countless contexts having little to do with telecommunications’.
9 Y et in relation
to discussions of scientiﬁc and technological citizenship, interactivity can have aremarkable signiﬁcance, drawing together concerns both with, for example, public‘participation’, ‘active citizenship’ and ‘empowerment’ and with more speciﬁc ques-
tions and anxieties about the proper way to bridge the gulf between popular cultureand the esoteric worlds of technical expertise.
10 If the health of advanced industrial
economies is to be measured, in part, in terms of their possession and acquisition ofintellectual and scientiﬁc capital, then at least one of the functions of interactivetechniques has been to improve and maintain this capital. Citizens, consumers,students and school children need to be actively engaged with science.
In exploring the contemporary politics of interactivity, this chapter focuses on
the modern museum of science. T o many this institution may seem somewhatmarginal to the discussion of interactivity, which is primarily associated todaywith the development of digital technologies. However, I argue that an analysis of themuseum of science may have some considerable signiﬁcance for those concernedwith understanding the wider phenomenon of interactivity. First, as we shall see,science museums have played a signiﬁcant part in the history of interactive techniqueand the idea of interactivity. Second, and more importantly, an analysis of themuseum of science is suggestive of the way in which interactivity is actually much164
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
more than a particular possibility inherent in the development of media. For the
museum of science, putting the interactive model into practice promises to turn theunfocused visitor-consumer into the interested, engaged and informed technologicalcitizen. Interactivity is more than a particular technological form. It provides whatDeleuze calls a diagram for organising the relations between objects and persons.
11
T oday, interactivity has come to be a dominant model of how objects can be used toproduce subjects. In an interactive model, subjects are not disciplined, they areallowed.
The second subsidiary theme of the chapter concerns what might call the histori-
cal geography of interactivity in science museums. This takes us from the Explora-torium in San Francisco to the National Museum of Science and Industry in Londonand the Cité des Sciences et de l’Industrie at la Villette in Paris.
12 My focus here is less
on the details of interactive exhibits, or the abstract concept of interactivity, than onthe ways in which the concern with interactivity circulates across diﬀerent museums,and how it becomes associated with quite distinct and local preoccupations, politicalrationalities and institutional forms.
13 There are continual movements of persons and
devices between American and European museums. Here, the movement of the ideaand the techniques of interactivity between institutions and countries tells us some-thing about the complexity of its invention. The ‘invention’ of interactivity was not asudden discovery, but was rather a history of episodes, in which the techniquesacquired ever-new forms and resonances.
14 The story also provides an indication of
the shape of the kinds of global ideoscapes and technoscapes suggested by ArjunAppadurai’s theory of global culture discussed in chapter two. In this case, the ideaand the techniques of interactivity link together diverse projects in the public displayof science and technology across national boundaries forming an international tech-nological zone. Interest in interactives is, to use Will Straw’s terms, a global scene.
15
Y et, at the same time, there is a marked disjuncture, to use Appadurai’s term, betweenthe technological zones of European integration discussed in earlier chapters and theabsence of an account of this technological formation in the major European sciencemuseums.
16 There is no European museum of science.
One way of understanding how a connection came to be forged between interac-
tivity, government and the agency and body of the museum visitor might be in termsof the place of interactivity in cybernetics and communications theory. Historically,the idea of interactivity is one of a number of terms (including noise, feedback andnetwork) which have acquired particular signi ﬁcance since the development of com-
munications theory, cybernetics and related ﬁelds in the 1940s with the work of,amongst others, Norbert Wiener. In the cybernetic account there is no essential dis-tinction between the capacities of the human and the non-human actor. Both thehuman and the machine act as sources and receivers of information, thereby function-ing as part of an interacting system. As Peter Galison reminds us, ‘according to thecyberneticist, the world is nothing more than the internal relations of these incomingand outgoing messages’.
17 Certainly, within the contemporary science museum, the
technology of interactivity can be intended, if not necessarily to obliterate, at least toreconﬁgure the distinction between the human visitor and the non-human exhibit.
Cybernetics does ﬁgure in this story. But I focus on a diﬀerent theme. One
which connects to a rather more long-standing concern with the body as a source ofON INTERACTIVITY 165
experimental knowledge and with what we might call, following Foucault, the political
anatomy of the museum visitor.18 As Simon Schaﬀer notes, in the eighteenth and early
nineteenth centuries the body of the natural philosopher, or of his audience, fre-quently functioned as an essential part of the experimental apparatus. Theeighteenth-century Parisian lecturer Jean Antoine Nollet, for example, ‘described“beatifying electricity”, when sparks were drawn from victims’ hair’.
19 In 1800 the
English chemist Humphry Davy reported on his experiments with the inhalation of gas.Davy ‘lost all connection with external things . . . I existed in a world of newly connected
and newly modiﬁed ideas. I theorised – I imagined that I made discoveries.’
20
Since the late nineteenth century, however, the signi ﬁcance of scientist’s body to
experiment has changed. The body of the practising scientist has become disciplined;capable of performing meticulous practical tasks and making exact observations butno longer serving as an experimental instrument in itself. The process of scienceeducation is, at least in part, a matter of turning the untutored body of the student intothat of a reliable technician. As John Law observes, the discipline of the scientist ’s
body can play an important role in laboratory work.
21 Experimental events are no
longer experienced by the scientist; they are recorded by the scientist’s instruments. By
contrast, the relatively undisciplined body of the visitor has an increasingly importantpart to play both in the contemporary science museum and what is often called ‘the
science centre’.
22 T oday, the visitor to the museum or the science centre is often
encouraged to interact or to ‘play’ with an exhibit. In eﬀect, the visitor is expectedto make scientiﬁc principles visible to themselves through the use of touch, smell,hearing or the sense of physical eﬀects on their own bodies.
23 In a manner foreign to
the practice of contemporary experimental science, the body is itself a source ofknowledge.
24 As we shall see, interactivity is expected to turn the visitor into an
experimental self. Self-experimentation becomes part of the solution to the anxiety ofgovernment.
Spirit and economy
In the ﬁrst annual A. W . Franks lecture given at the British Museum in London in1997, the former chair of the London stock exchange, and the then chair of theNational Art Collections Fund, Sir Nicholas Goodison, defended the importance ofobjects. Quoting Phillipe de Montebello, Director of the Metropolitan Museum inNew Y ork, Goodison urged his audience not to take ‘a headlong plunge into the stillsomewhat murky waters of the new technologies’. The interactive touchscreens whichhave become an increasingly ubiquitous feature of many contemporary museumswere to be shunned. The desire of the public to engage with exhibits hands-on was, hethought, problematic. For Goodison, objects ‘should be allowed to speak for them-selves and not be debased’. ‘The object is at the hub of a museum’s purpose . . . it is
not the role of the museum to ape Madame Tussaud’s or Disneyland’. Rather it has aspiritual purpose: to ‘inspire those who are receptive to inspiration’.
25
But Goodison was not simply a cultural conservative. An equally powerful theme
in his lecture was a concern that museums should conceive of themselves as busi-nesses. At one level, there was a need to develop ‘clear objectives, identify long-termliabilities, capital needs . . . develop robust management, measurements of success166
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
and on-going monitoring of standards’. Evidently museums needed to become fur-
ther embedded in what Michael Power has termed the audit society.26 At another
level, there was a need for a coherent national framework both for management andfor funding agreements. Even university-funded museums might want to come underthe same organisational umbrella as those that were under the control of the thenDepartment of National Heritage. Indeed, recognising them both as a spiritualresource and as a business could be, Goodison reckoned, an appropriate agenda for
the New Labour government – whose election he warmly welcomed. He hoped thatthe arts ministers of the new government could develop a bold approach towardsmuseums – and develop a new relationship between the spiritual and the economic
which Goodison saw in the vision of Prime Minister T ony Blair.
27
Goodison’s attacks against interactivity and his proposals for museum manage-
ment are perhaps an indication of what might be at stake in the museum world today –
not just in Britain. They might be contrasted with a statement put out in a di ﬀerent
setting – the web site of the British Interactives Group (BiG) – the organisation for
individuals involved in all aspects of hands-on exhibitions and activities. At the time ofGoodison’s speech the BiG web site listed more than twenty projects related to inter-activity in the UK receiving funding of no less than £500 million from the NationalLottery. These included the new Wellcome gallery at the Science Museum; what issaid to be the world’s ﬁrst geological visitor centre The Dynamic Earth, in Edinburgh
and the Newcastle International Centre for Life which is said to incorporate a hugestructure modelled on the DNA helix. In addition, Bristol 2000 would involve acomplex which will include amongst other things Science world (a hands-on presen-tation of science and technology) and an ‘electronic zoo’ called Widescreen world.
28
Goodison drew a line between interactivity and the business of museums. Elsewhere,as he recognised, this line was blurred. Goodison’s remarks provoked a lively responsefrom interactives designers. One questioned Goodison’s distinction between interac-tives and art. Clear rather than murky water was an appropriate image: ‘Like somepaintings and sculptures, the best interactive exhibits are, literally, wonderful andmaking them is an art. Try cupping your hands to divert a real tornado of watervapours, eight feet high, or touch the image of your own hand, out in the air in frontof a real image mirror.’
29
In Britain the debate on ‘interactivity’ intensiﬁed in the context of huge sums of
money made available through the National Lottery.30 But the debate is more than of
local interest. For it can also be understood, in part, in relation to earlier changes in thepublic function of the museum. The modern science museum originally developed inthe nineteenth century as a place where the successes of the imperial state could bedisplayed and where ‘European productive prowess was typically explained as a justi-ﬁcation for empire’.
31 But it was also intended to be a liberal space within which a
bourgeois public would participate, and be seen to participate, in their own culturaland moral improvement. Thus, the population would be managed, as T ony Bennettargues, ‘by providing it with the resources and contexts in which it might become self-
educating and self-regulating’.
32 As an institution of government, the museum would
act not so much through controlling and disciplining the public, but by enlisting itsactive support for liberal values and objectives. ‘Museums and expositions, in drawingon . . . techniques and rhetorics of display and pedagogic relations . . . provided aON INTERACTIVITY 167
context in which working-and middle-class publics could be brought together and the
former – having been tutored into forms of behaviour to suit them for the occasion –
could be exposed to the improving inﬂuence of the latter’.33 The complex of
museums developed at South Kensington in the 1850s became the paradigm of thisliberal exhibitionary strategy.
In recent years, however, the liberal conception of culture as a means of indi-
vidual improvement has had to run alongside – if not compete with – neo-liberalnotions of culture as a consumer product.
34 The traditional museum has been
accused of being too paternalist, too dominated by the concerns of curators and thefetishism of the artefact, and too dependent upon public subsidy.
35 What is said to be
required is a new recognition of the competitive character of the visitor business inaddition to the older preoccupations with scholarship and public education. Themuseum is but a ‘part of the leisure and tourist industries’.
36 For Neil Cossons, the
director of the London Science Museum in the late 1980s and 1990s, this was achallenge that should be welcomed for, with the decline of state funding, ‘spendingpower, and therefore choice, [would be put] into the hands of the people’. Theimplications for the museums he reckoned were clear: ‘The battleﬁeld will be themarketplace and the casualties will be those museums that fail to adapt’.
37 Such
rhetoric created enemies. One former curator resented the accusation of being called adinosaur.
38
Seen in this context, ‘interactivity’ was to have a double function. First, it is one of
a range of a range of technical methods – along with cost control, visitor research,quality assurance, marketing and customer relations – which would enable themuseum to forge a more ‘economic’ relation both with its visitors, and with privateindustry.
39 At the level of the institution, the museum was increasingly expected to
respond to the public’s demands rather than simply tell the public what it needs toknow – the public needed to understand science but, before this is possible, the
museum must ﬁrst understand what the public wants.
40 At the level of the gallery,
museum staﬀ aimed to design exhibits which enable visitors to make choices and toexperience a gallery ‘in their own way’.
41 And at the level of the individual display, the
museum sought to develop and employ techniques which encourage greater dialoguewith the visitor. As an inﬂuential Management Plan for London’s Science Museumnoted:
Passive and poorly interpreted attractions will suﬀer at the expense of those thatdevelop live demonstrations, provide participation, interactive displays, and givea quality of personal rather than institutional service to their visitors. Informalityand friendliness will be valuable attractions.
42
For one commentator interactive media had a particular role to play in such a
reorientation:
. . . for interactive media the combination of: 1. multiplexing as a delivery mode;2. interactivity as an intrinsically engaging form of media; 3. niche marketing asan advertising strategy; 4. the aﬄuent status of museum visitors as a demographicgroup; 5. museums’ status as pillars of respectability on scientiﬁc, environmental168
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
and heritage issues . . . will greatly increase the attractiveness of museums to
sponsors.43
Second, the technology of interactivity had a function in the context of broader
changes in political thinking on both the left and the right. Contemporary politicalthinking is sceptical of the political and economic competence of the state and, in itsstead, relies on the self-governing capacities of the individual, the family, the enter-prise or the community. As Nikolas Rose observes, the subject of what he calls‘advanced’ liberal forms of government is given unprecedented responsibility forgoverning his or her own aﬀairs. For advanced liberalism, the task of the publicauthorities is not to direct or provide for the citizen but to establish the conditionswithin which the citizen could become an active and responsible agent in his or herown government.
44 Seen in this context, interactive devices had a function, for
they might foster agency, experimentation and enterprise, thus enhancing the self-governing capacities of the citizen. Interactivity promised, in other words, to turn themuseum visitor into a more active self.
45
Empowerment
The association of the idea and techniques of interactivity with a broader conceptionof the public function of the science museum was not new. In 1969, the nuclearphysicist Frank Oppenheimer, who had been blacklisted from practising as a scientistby the House Un-American Activities Committee, established the Exploratorium inSan Francisco as an alternative to the traditional science museum. For Oppenheimer,existing museums in the United States often gloriﬁed the achievements of earlierscientists at the expense of enabling visitors to engage in a process of discoverythemselves. The radical message of the Exploratorium was one of democraticempowerment.
46 The public would be empowered through being able to interact with
objects as an experimental scientist does in the natural world of the laboratory, an ideawhich had been suggested to him following earlier visits to the Children’s gallery atthe Science Museum and the Palais de la Découverte in Paris.
47 According to Hilde
Hein ‘interactive pedagogic technique contains a key to empowerment that could
transform education on a broad scale and make an avenue of general self-determination’.
48 In short, visitors would be participants rather than mere observers.
Increasingly concerned about the growing interest in mysticism, drugs and Easternreligions in the younger generation, Oppenheimer himself expressed the intellectualand political aspirations of the Exploratorium in these terms:
The whole point of the Exploratorium is to make it possible for people to believethat they can understand the world around them. I think a lot of people have givenup trying to comprehend things, and when they give up with the physical world theygive up with the social and political world as well.
49
If the idea of interaction was central to what the Exploratorium was trying to do,
how was it possible to realise this in practice? What was an interactive technique andhow could interactivity empower? In the early years, the Exploratorium’s attempts toON INTERACTIVITY 169
develop participatory and interactive exhibits were, no doubt, rudimentary. The
Exploratorium staﬀ had, themselves, to learn how to embody Oppenheimer ’s radical
philosophy in a technical form. However, the centre was able draw on and translateother models of interactivity. One was a temporary exhibition of ‘Cybernetic Seren-dipity’ which had originally been shown at the Institute of Contemporary Arts (ICA)in London from August to October 1968 and which was designed to explore therelations between creativity and ‘cybernetic’ technologies such as computers, robotsand mechanical feedback systems. For Oppenheimer and the Exploratorium theorigins of the ‘Cybernetic Serendipity’ as an art exhibition accorded with the centre’smodernist philosophy. First, neither Oppenheimer nor the exhibition organisersperceived a fundamental distinction between art and science. For Oppenheimer, sci-ence had an ‘aesthetic dimension’ and art and science were united in the ‘humanquest for understanding’.
50 According to the exhibition organisers, ‘at no point was it
clear to any of the visitors walking around the exhibition, which of the various draw-ings, objects and machines were made by artists and which made by engineers; or,whether the photographic blow-ups of texts mounted on the walls were the works ofpoets or scientists’.
51 Blurring the boundaries of art and science was an important part
of the Exploratorium’s pedagogic strategy for by doing so it was hoped that thecentre’s visitor might begin to understand that science was a creative activity.
In terms of the Exploratorium philosophy, a second positive feature of the ICA
exhibition was that it engaged with science at the level of material practice rather thanmerely at the level of metaphorical association. Visitors could have a practical as wellas visual experience of technology. The instructions to one of exhibits of ‘CyberneticSerendipity’, for example, invited the museum visitor to interact with a machine byturning knobs that adjusted the phase and frequency of two wave oscillations relativeto one another in order to produce a variety of patterns.
52 Thus, the relationship
between scientiﬁc or mathematical truth and art would, through a process of inter-action, be revealed to the uninitiated. This philosophy still persists. Addressing whathe perceived to be the ‘crisis in science education’ the director of the Exploratorium,Dr Goéry D élacôte has created a ‘Center for Public Exhibition’ which ‘provides
informal science education through interactive exhibits which address and explore therelationship between science, art and human perception’.
53
A further intellectual rationale for the idea of the interactive exhibit in the
Exploratorium was found in the work of the psychologist, Richard Gregory. In hisRoyal Institution Christmas lectures of 1967–1968, Gregory had expounded a theorywhich held that visual perception entailed a complex integration of the perceiver’sinterpretative dispositions with external stimuli. According to Gregory, ‘perception isnot a matter of sensory information giving perception and guiding behaviour directly,but rather the perceptual system is a “look up” system; in which sensory informationis used to build gradually, and to select from, an internal repertoire of “perceptualhypotheses”’ .
54 Translating this into practical terms, the Exploratorium ‘let the visitor
be the laboratory subjects of their own perceptual experiments’.55 The intended
eﬀect of this pedagogic strategy was not just to teach perceptual theory, but toencourage the visitor to experience the process of discovery and thus to become anexperimenter.
The extraordinary enthusiasm for interactivity, which had been initiated by the170
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
Exploratorium in the late 1960s and subsequently spread across the United States,
ﬁnally arrived in Europe in the mid-1980s with the opening of Launch Pad gallery atthe London Science Museum, the Cité des Sciences et de l’Industrie in Paris andRichard Gregory’s own Exploratory in Bristol. One key ﬁgure in this movement was
Gillian Thomas, who set up the Cité des Enfants at La Villette, subsequently becamethe head of education at the Science Museum and then moved to lead the Bristol 2000project. For Thomas, particular historical objects such as a lunar-landing vehiclecould have an iconic value – as signiﬁers of technological progress in particular ﬁelds– but were of secondary importance to the development of interactives. In galleriessuch as the Earth Gallery of the Natural History Museum (1996) and the MaterialsGallery (1997) at the Science Museum, individual iconic objects form a part of adisplay which is substantially interactive. Hands-on experiments communicatescientiﬁc truths. Iconic objects merely signify the importance and beauty of science.Background information is largely provided through interactive touchscreencomputer terminals.
Certainly, by the early 1990s the growth of interactive science exhibits in Britain
had been phenomenal.
56 Indeed, a veritable interactives movement had emerged
with the formation of associations such as BiG and the European Collaborative forScience, Industry and T echnology Exhibitions (ECSITE). Curators, educationalistsand museum managers began to share their ideas about the function and design ofinteractives and encourage the use of interactives in exhibition spaces in which theyhad previously not been found, such as art galleries. Crudely, two tendencies in thismovement might be identiﬁed. On the one hand, at least one strand of the interactivesmovement extolled the virtues of the kind of experimental culture fostered by theExploratorium. The Exploratorium ’s own three-volume guide to the development of
interactives is called the ‘cookbook’ – stressing the informality of interactives design.
The ﬁrst BiG workshop for interactive fabricators held at the former home of the
Royal Greenwich Observatory at Herstmonceux castle had at least some Californianresonances: ‘If you’ve done hands-on and brains-on but want to try souls-on (what-
ever that may or may not be) this is the forum for you.’ ‘Mind, body and soul: the
holistic approach to hands-on learning.’ On the other hand, in conjunction with theuse of new media technologies, interactives design has become highly professionalisedand extraordinarily sophisticated and correspondingly expensive. Indeed, the ScienceMuseum considered selling its professional services in interactives design to manyof the other museums and centres in receipt of funding who do not have anywell-developed expertise in this area. Interactivity may become an industry and acommodity. One of the ways that the Science Museum distinguishes itself as anational museum from other well-funded science centres is as a centre of excellence ininteractive-exhibit design.
If the Exploratorium provided a model for the interactives movement in Britain, it
would be a mistake to imagine that interactivity in Britain was simply a copy of theAmerican original. As sociologists of technology have been at pains to argue, theprocess whereby a technology is ‘transferred’ from one place to another should bethought of as a form of translation or reinterpretation rather than merely a form ofdiﬀusion.
57 In the UK, the radical concerns of the American centre with the issue of
empowerment and freedom were marginalised and, with exceptions, Oppenheimer ’sON INTERACTIVITY 171
interests in the links between science and art were ignored. Some existing boundaries
needed to be maintained. Instead, interactivity came to operate in relation to thefailure of the traditional science museum to address a rather more mundane set ofconcerns with the public understanding of science and the attractiveness of themuseum to visitors.
58
Criticism of the traditional science museum was most forcefully made by Richard
Gregory, founder of the Bristol Exploratory and former advisor to the Exploratorium.For Gregory, ‘looking at the traditional museums of science we ﬁnd remarkably littlescience’.
59 For Gregory, the essential feature of science was experimentation, so that
in order to enable the public to get an ‘intuitive feel for . . . the principles of science’hands-on interactive experiences were, he believed, critical. ‘I suggest’, wroteGregory, ‘that the major aim of interactive science centres, after stimulating interest
and curiosity, should be setting up hand-waving explanations giving useful intuitiveaccounts’.
60 There was a particular need for such interest and curiosity. For the public
were thought to be ambivalent about the authority of science and, at the same time,were said to be uninformed.
61 The promotion of the public understanding of science
was, in this context, a necessary but insuﬃcient solution.62
The new interactive science centres were certainly popular. ‘Science centres
attract visitors like magnets’ noted the education oﬃcer at the Science Museumresponsible for Launch Pad.
63 Interactive exhibits, whether located within science
centres or in more traditional object-centred exhibitionary spaces were also consist-ently rated highly by the public according to visitor research. According to the ScienceMuseum’s own internal audit, Launch Pad received 714 visitors per square metre ofgallery space per year, while the entire museum received only 44 visitors per squaremetre per year.
64 This popularity has proved both a beneﬁt and problem for the
development of interactive exhibitions. Certainly the fact that interactives are popularis of considerable commercial and political signiﬁcance in a period when the museumor the science centre is increasingly understood as one part of a broader leisureindustry and when the traditional curatorial concern with collection has been downplayed. Accusations that interactive science centres are merely expensive playgroundswhich convey little of the tedious and diﬃcult reality of science can be met with theresponse that this is what the public wants.
65 If interactive galleries enable visitors to
have fun and to enjoy some kind of experience of science then, in this view, that issuﬃcient justiﬁcation for their development. In a period when visitor numbers aretaken to be one of the key performance indicators used in museums, and an importantsource of revenue, then the case for increasing the space given to interactive exhibitswithin the museum can appear unanswerable.
66
However, the recognition that visitors came to interactive science centres and
exhibitions to enjoy themselves created a problem for proponents of interactivity.67 In
the view of their designers, interactive exhibits were always expected to be as muchinstruments of informal education as a means of entertainment. The museum visitorwas conceived of as an active learner and not just as a consumer. In this context,critics pointed to the lack of historical or industrial contextualisation of manyinteractive exhibits and the frequent absence of any explanation of what scientiﬁcprinciples were supposed to be revealed through the process of interaction. Someexhibits, it was said, can be interpreted in ways which lead museum visitors to false172
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
conclusions.68 Indeed, it was unclear whether any of the scientiﬁc principles that many
interactives were meant to demonstrate would be grasped by any except those already
possessing a good scientiﬁc education.69 Moreover, some questioned whether many
interactive devices are really interactive. Many so-called interactive touch screencomputers, for example, simply allowed the visitor to select from a predetermined setof options. Far from providing the possibilities for experimentation such interactivedevices merely serve to create the illusion of choice.
70 Indeed, interactivity may, in
practice, be associated with what Slavoj Zizek has called interpassivity. The user of theinteractive device allows the machine to be active on the user’s behalf, thereby dis-placing any creative activity of his or her own. The activity of the user is projected intothe machine, but the machine ’s ‘activity’ is largely predictable.
71 We can contrast this
with the possibility of a more creative relation to museum exhibitions (or to works ofart) in general. In such a relation, the museum visitor may not be visibly ‘active’ at all,but will be open to the imaginary experience which allows the museum to act onher behalf. This is a diﬀerent kind of pleasure to the pleasure of interacting with aquasi-interactive device; it is ‘a pleasure in anticipating that the anticipation thatexpectations will be simply be met will be confounded’. This is a ‘creative passivity’.
72
There have been many diﬀerent responses to such criticisms. At the London
Science Museum large numbers of human ‘explainers’ are employed to make surethat the interactive exhibits do the job they are intended to do. New galleries such asHealth Matters and the temporary exhibition space, Science Box, incorporatedincreasingly sophisticated interactive exhibits as a matter of course. On the otherhand, one new gallery came to be marked by the absence of any interactives. The newgallery devoted to the remarkable scientiﬁc-instrument collection of King George III,for example, was accompanied by an exquisitely produced, well-researched book, butdid not incorporate any interactives. Senior museum managers determined that inter-actives would be inappropriate.
73 In this way the purity of the original objects would
be preserved. The lesson is a familiar one. The body is reckoned to be the site ofeducation and popular entertainment. But, as Bourdieu reminds us, serious forms ofaesthetic contemplation and historical appreciation are only thought to be possible ata distance.
74 The historical object is thus fetishised. Ironically, George III’s instru-
ments were, in their day, interactive, and it may have been particularly instructive tomake a working model for visitors to use. Interactivity is not a new development in thehistory of science and technology, but has been made new. What is involved here is notso much the invention of a tradition, but a denial of the connections that can andshould be made between the past and the present.
But along with the remarkable emphasis on interactivity in galleries of contempor-
ary science, what is perhaps striking is the diversity of forms new galleries came totake. Internally, the museum has come to as something like a television stationproducing diﬀerent programmes for diﬀerent audiences – a post-Fordist industrial
organisation to use the terminology of contemporary sociology.
75 Diﬀerent galleries
take diﬀerent forms depending on their intended audience, their subject matter, theavailability of commercial sponsorship and the philosophy and experience of theirdesigners. There is more emphasis on tailoring interactives to particular age ranges sothat it is possible to act on the speciﬁc technical competencies and interests of theyoung visitor. In these circumstances, gallery designers increasingly draw on theON INTERACTIVITY 173
diverse insights of visitor research, ergonomics, sociology, developmental psychology
and educational theory to ensure that the new interactive galleries prove to be edu-cational as well as entertaining and meet their speciﬁc objectives.
76 This has implications
for the relation between the museum and its visitors. T o an extent unparalleled inthe past, the museum visitor has become the object of investigation and an elementof the museum’s internal audit. If interactive technologies are expected to enhance theagency of the visitor and to channel it in the most productive direction, then thespeciﬁc dynamic of this agency must itself be known. The visitor, it seems, has beenincreasingly called on to interact with exhibits and respond to the growing number ofexplainers, actors and researchers who also inhabit the museum. Constant feedback isa requirement of the new regime.
77
A cyborg regime
In what follows I want to look at a museum where ‘interactivity’ has a rather diﬀerentset of resonances. At La Cité des Sciences et de l’Industrie at La Villette in Paris,‘interactivity’ functions not just in relation to notions of the visitor as active consumerand learner, but in terms of a project which centres around a particular vision of therelation between humans and machines. Opened in 1986, La Villette was one of anumber of other major construction projects – including the Bastille opera houseand the Beaubourg – which dominated Parisian cultural policy in the 1970s and1980s. Whereas in the UK, the imperatives of cultural policy became increasinglyunderstood in terms of notions of consumer demand and commercial viability, theostensible objective of the developments in Paris was to broaden public participationin culture. As Nathalie Heinich has noted, one goal of the Beaubourg project was to‘democratise culture’ and to somehow ‘reconcile the imperatives of mass consump-tion with “higher” cultural production’.
78 Likewise, a key aim of the development of
the site at La Villette was to enable a larger public to recognise the value and experi-ence the excitement of science. Thus, the public would come to place as much valuein science and technology as the French State itself.
79
In practice, the techniques used at La Villette to encourage public interest in
science have obeyed no simple logic and are, no doubt, contradictory. On theone hand, the Cité tries to go to meet the wider public’s taste not just through vulgari-sation, but, by blurring the traditional boundaries between education and popularculture. Echoing the philosophy of many late nineteenth-century exhibitions, scienceis presented not just as knowledge but also as spectacle and entertainment:
Above all the Cit é des Sciences et de l ’Industrie is a place to learn and a place to
have fun.
La Villette: a new way of seeing, listening, learning of amazement and emotion! A
place for creativity and leisure, for discovery and play.
80
On the other hand, La Villette is not entirely without its own marks of cultural
capital. In the park outside the Cité, there are a number of ‘deconstructionist’ archi-tectural follies designed by Bernard Tschumi,
81 an experimental postmodern garden,174 THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
a research centre for the history of science and technology, as well the new national
conservatory of music – ‘a complex conceived as a stimulating environment and
meeting place for the arts, sciences and music’.82 Even in the Cité itself there is a
multimedia library, an international conference centre and associated informationservices. In addition, mirroring the philosophy of the Exploratorium, there is the‘Experimental gallery’ which exhibits ‘initiatives in art’.
. . . the Experimental gallery exhibits artwork closely related to the ﬁelds of sci-ence, technology and industry. Though these works are neither illustrative noreducational in nature, they do represent a certain poetry, myth, humour and evencriticism. The artists do not share the same views on the world as do scientists butinstead provide an answer to these views.
83
At ﬁrst sight, La Villette’s gestures towards art and its ﬂirtations with post-
modernism appear to mirror the Beaubourg’s enthusiasm for technology. Since itsopening, for example, the Beaubourg has been associated with Pierre Boulez’s Institutde Recherche et de Coordination Acoustique/Musique (IRCAM), a centre whichcarries out research in avant-garde computer music.
84 And in 1984 to 1985 the Beau-
bourg supported experiments in collective computer writing in an exhibit entitled‘Les Immatériaux’ which provided a vehicle for the philosopher, Jean-FrançoisLyotard, to speculate about the impossibility of consensus through communication.
85
Y et despite the apparent parallels between the cultural strategies of the two insti-
tutions their broader ideological resonances are quite diﬀerent. In the case of theBeaubourg, the centre’s close relation to technology serves to legitimise its identity asan innovative cultural institution – reinforcing the image given to it by RichardRogers’s bold architectural design. By comparison, in the case of the Cité, ‘art’ will
always remain at the margins of an establishment which is dominated by a vision ofthe information age, and which tries too hard to be futuristic. Ironically, it is theCité which appears to be the more conventional of the two institutions: its high-techstructure immediately conjuring up not so much an image of innovation and creati-vity, but a history of so many earlier exhibitions and philosophies in which progress hasbeen equated with technological change.
Although the Cité’s relation to the future is only too familiar, its representation of
technology is nonetheless distinctive. Whereas the museums of the nineteenthand early twentieth centuries articulated the evolutionary metaphors of biology andpolitical economy, the Cité’s taxonomies draw on the new ahistorical sciences ofcommunications theory, cybernetics, psychology and ecology.
86 Exhibit areas are
devoted to whole series of topics concerned with the bodily and perceptual capacitiesof humans: sound, vision, light games, the representation of space, expression andbehaviour. Moreover, although the Cité does possess the shiny rockets and cars to befound in all traditional science museums, its dominant images are those associated,not so much with hardware, but with language, software and the metaphors of the‘information society’. This is a museum of information, networks, environment,multimedia, interfaces and participation.
87
In practice, these ideas are manifested in a number of diﬀerent ways. At the most
basic level, the Cité is full of ‘interactive exhibits and audiovisual presentations’,ON INTERACTIVITY 175
‘computer-based displays and games’, ‘participative, hands-on displays’ and ‘state-of-
the-art museum technology’. Each of these devices has, no doubt, a speciﬁc didactic
function and entertainment value. But collectively, the museum’s interactive mediaalso have a metonymic e ﬀect. As one curator put it to me, alluding to McLuhan, ‘the
medium is the message’. At La Villette, the future is interactive. Visitors to the
museum do not purchase a ticket, but a machine readable smart card on which iswritten the demand ‘Découvrez!’.
88
However, interactive technologies do not simply function as rhetorical tropes.
They also serve to organise the internal space of the museum. As Roger Silverstonehas argued, the visitor’s experience of a museum may be understood as a narrative inspace, the structure of which is governed, but not determined, by the spatial organisa-tion of the museum itself. This idea, derived from the work of Michel de Certeau,‘encourages us . . . to begin to analyse the rhetorical and narrative strategies which arepresent both in an exhibition’s layout and in the routes which individuals constructthrough it’.
89 In the case of the Cité, the internal space of the museum apparently
takes a quite conventional form: the visitor is guided around a three-dimensionalspace divided into exhibitions, shops, galleries and cafés. However, the existence of‘interactive’ devices and technologies creates discontinuities in this space, puncturingthe visitor’s route and establishing a further ‘fourth’ audiovisual dimension withinwhich the visitor is encouraged to place herself, to participate and to interact. Thus,the visitor is not simply an observer of the museum’s machines – she is positionedwithin them. In the ‘Sound’ exhibit area, for example, a computer game called a‘voice-actuated note-gobbler’ serves to display the tone of a person’s voice. The‘Light games’ area includes a section devoted to the explanation of interference whichbrings together a number of ‘hands-on’ displays. In the ‘Aeronautics’ area some of themost popular exhibits are ﬂight simulators. In the ‘Environment’ area computer basedinteractive multimedia allow the visitor to explore topics such as greenery, air andtrees. Interaction is compulsory and compulsive.
90
Just outside of the Cité, the position of the museum visitor in the museum’s
exhibitionary strategy is dramatically symbolised by a huge 3-D Omnimax cinema –
La Géode – in which ‘visual eﬀects combine with sound eﬀects to transport the
spectators into the midst of the action surrounding them’.91 Reﬂecting on the signiﬁ-
cance of La Géode, Paul Virilio reminds us that ‘the fusion/confusion of camera,projection system and auditorium in the Imax/Omnimax process, is part of a longtradition of “mobile framing” in cinema, dating from the invention of the trackingshot in 1898’.
92 Placing the Omnimax in relation to the early history of cinema is
certainly appropriate. Like the cinema of the 1890s and 1900s, contemporary Imax/Omnimax cinema is less concerned with narrative than with exhibition, spectacle andaﬀect.
93 However, the economic conditions of Imax and early cinema are quite diﬀer-
ent. Whereas small-scale production companies played an important role in thedevelopment of early cinema, the relative scarcity of Imax/Omnimax auditoria andthe expense of ﬁlm production has meant that the development of Imax/Omnimaxdepends on corporate sponsorship.
94 In la Géode, one popular programme is a ﬁlm of
the Space Shuttle produced by NASA and the Lockheed Corporation. The SpaceShuttle is a particularly appropriate subject at the Cité for its design is based on theview that it matters that research in space depends on the involvement of humans and176
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
does not just rely on the operation of remote controlled instruments. In the Shuttle,
humans are ‘explorers’ pushing back the ﬁnal frontier of space; they have the RightStuﬀ. However, equally signiﬁcantly, the physical and perceptual capacities of theirown bodies are the objects of the Shuttle scientists’ experiments. Thus, at least someof the experiments performed in the Shuttle bear some comparison to those thatmight be found in the main body of the museum.
In the Cité, the idea that science and technology reconﬁgure the boundaries
between humans and non-humans is a pervasive one – represented not just in theubiquity of ‘interactive’ techniques but in the vocabulary and taxonomy of themuseum’s exhibits. The Earth is understood as a ‘machine’ and as a ‘spaceship’.Computers can ‘talk’.
95 ‘Animal and vegetable kingdoms come to life in the form of
automatons.’ Robots and humans live in a ‘cybernetic zoo’. And marriage is pre-sented in terms of notions of ‘trade’ and ‘system’. The contrast between La Villette,on the one hand, and the Exploratorium and the Science Museum, on the other,is considerable. For whereas all three institutions use a mixture of mechanical, made-up and computer-based interactives, it is only La Villette which fully embraces thevision of an interactive information society. For the other two institutions, however,interactivity does not primarily connote information technology, but rather a morewide-ranging attempt to reinvent the contemporary museum
Have there been explicit contestations of the interactive model? At one level, a
series of questions has properly been asked about the use and eﬀectiveness of interac-tives, not least by museum professionals and interactive designers themselves.Experimentation in interactives design was, after all, a central feature of the Explora-torium philosophy. Do they possibly convey the scientiﬁc principles that they areintended to? Are they really cost eﬀective given the wear and tear to which they maybe subjected? How do visitors use them? Can they be brought together with objectsfrom the museum’s collections? However, the force of such questioning has not beenany decline in interest in interactives. On the contrary, criticism has provoked profes-sionals to improve the design of interactive devices, tailoring their design more closelyto the needs, capacities and behaviour of real museum visitors, and integratingthem more carefully with the more traditional text- and object-based exhibits. In brief,the notion of interactivity has come to be the centre of a rapidly expanding cycleof intellectual, ﬁnancial and psychological investments in the public presentation ofscience and technology.
At another level, a few historians and sociologists of science have proposed a very
diﬀerent model of the future of the museum of science. For many proponents ofinteractivity, museum collections are reckoned to have primarily an iconic value. Incomparison to the cluttered display cabinets of an earlier period in the history ofmuseums, there are relatively few historical objects in the interactive museum ofscience. In the model proposed by some historians of science, however, museumcollections acquire new signiﬁcance for they are illustrative of the critical importanceof technical devices in scientiﬁc practice.
96 The task of the museum curator, in this
view, is not to design ever-more-sophisticated interactives, but to forge a new politicalrhetoric of display. The purpose of such a rhetoric would not necessarily be toencourage the visitor to experiment or interact with custom-made interactive devices.Rather it would be to try to use the particular advantages of the museum as a mediumON INTERACTIVITY 177
to tell stories about the complexity and technicality of scientiﬁc practice, and the
radical diﬀerences between science as it is encountered in textbooks, school experi-ments, political arena and exhibitions and science as it encountered in the laboratoryand the ﬁeld.
97 Rather than excite interaction, such an approach might encourage
visitors to map some of the paths which lead between the messy imprecision anduncertainty of technical scientiﬁc work and the critical importance of notions ofscientiﬁc precision and certainty in public political and cultural life. Such an approachis certainly not the only one available for the contemporary museum of science. Y et, inits diﬀerence, it brings into focus the remarkable preoccupation with the virtues of theinteractive model today.
Political anatomy
Is the science centre and the museum of science an isolated case, only of interest tospecialists in the history and sociology of museums? I do not think so. Althoughscience centres and science museums were one of the ﬁrst institutions to develop anexplicit programme of interactive technological development, the interactive modelcan be, and has been, generalised to other sites and situations: to education andbroadcasting, marketing and the workplace. T oday, the promise of interactivity, is atthe centre of of a whole series of attempts to reinvent educational, political and broad-casting institutions.
98 We can now speak of the importance of interactive devices and
methods in the classroom, in marketing and in the mass media.99 At the same time, in
the ﬁeld of party politics and public service, an array of new technical methods such
as focus-group research and electronic democracy also take some elements of theinteractive model, in so far as they emphasise the importance of working with rather
than directing the political imagination of ordinary citizens. In this model of politicallife, intensive interaction with ‘the public’ in carefully managed environments isexpected both to maximise and intensify feedback between government and the gov-erned and to minimise the possibilities for unexpected political controversies andconﬂicts at a later date.
100
In his discussion of ‘docile bodies’ in Discipline and Punish, Foucault notes the
importance of what he terms ‘body-object articulation’ for the exercise of disciplinarypower. ‘Discipline deﬁnes each of the relations that the body must have with the
object that it manipulates’.
101 Reﬂecting on an eighteenth-century set of instructions
for handling a riﬂe, he speaks of the way in which the body and the riﬂe are broughtinto one functioning arrangement: ‘over the whole surface of contact between thebody and the object it handles, power is introduced, fastening one to another’. Inthis way, Foucault argues, the body is reconstituted as a ‘body-weapon, body-tool,body-machine complex’.
102 Discipline operates by ﬁxing the relations between body
and tool to form a uniﬁed apparatus.
In comparison to the instruments and codes of discipline, the various techniques
of interactivity imply a much less rigid articulation of bodies and objects, coupledwith a liberal sense of the limits of permissable control. There is a degree of playand ﬂexibility between the interactive device and the user’s body. Above all, the use
of interactives is not intended to regiment the body, but to turn it into a sourceof pleasure and experiment. ‘Present-day hands-on interactive science centres are178
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
delightful, full of the fun of surprises, and discovering new phenomena and seeing
how things work’.103 Whereas discipline is exhaustive in its application, interactivity is
speciﬁc, instantaneous and intensive. Whereas disciplinary technology manipulatesand manages the body in detail, interactive technology is intended to channel andexcite the curiousity of the body and its senses; resulting in anticipated e ﬀects on the
intellectual productivity, questioning and creativity of those who interact. Whereasdiscipline is direct and authorative, interactivity is intended to turn the user (visitor,school child, citizen or consumer) into a more creative, participative or active subjectwithout the imposition of a direct form of control or the judgement of an expertauthority.
104 Discipline implies normalisation; the injunction is ‘Y ou must!’ Interacti-
vity, by contrast, is associated with the expectation of activity; the injunction is, ‘Yo umay!’
105 We may draw up an ideal–typical set of contrasts:
Discipline106Interactivity
The time-table: ‘Precision and application are,
with regularity, the fundamental virtues of
disciplinary time’Flexible time: interactivity depends on thechoice of the user
The correlation of the body and the gesture:‘a well-disciplined body forms the operationalcontext of the slightest gesture’An orientation of creative capacity:Interactivity does not depend on disciplinebut on the potential of the undisciplinedbody and the unfocused mind. ‘For the child,or the aware but not especiallyknowledgeable adult, failed predictions cansignal the need for further experiment or tosee the phenomenon in a fresh way’
107
Body–object articulation: through rules andcodes. The constitution of ‘a body–weapon,body–tool, body–machine complex’ whichpersists over time.Body–object articulation: through guidancerather than rules. The constitution of a brief‘body–machine interaction’.
Exhaustive use: ‘Discipline . . . arranges a
positive economy; it poses the principle of atheoretically ever-growing use of time, evermore available moments and, from eachmoment, ever more useful forces’ Intensive use: the value of brief interactionsmust be maximised. Exhaustive use is likelyto be impossible
The authority of the expert: the scientist wholectures and who acts as an authorityThe concealment of expertise: theauthority of expertise is partially hidden inorder to maximise the possibilities forinteraction. The imagination and expertiseof the ordinary citizen is worked with ratherthan contradicted by the voice of authority.
Injunctions: Injunctions:Learn! Discover!You must! You may!ON INTERACTIVITY 179
In studying the relations between technology and government there is the tempta-
tion to take one of two approaches. One temptation is to write the history of tech-
nology as simply an adjunct to the history of political doctrines or ideas. Such anapproach would focus our attention on the texts of political theorists, intellectuals andpoliticians. It would concern itself with the great statements of liberalism and socia-lism, republicanism, communitarianism and conservatism concerning the conduct ofgovernment. A second temptation would be to associate grand transformations inpolitics and government with signiﬁcant developments in the history of technology.Seen in this context, writers such as Jean-François Lyotard and Mark Poster, atparticular moments in their writing, have placed the emergence of new informationsciences and technologies at the centre of their analysis of the political present. ForLyotard, ‘the postmodern condition’ was intimately associated with the emergence of
the new cybernetic and information sciences.
108 For Poster, the present era is marked
by a movement from the mode of production to the mode of information.109
One of the virtues of focusing on the topic of interactivity is that it displaces
both ‘political ideas’ and information technology from the centre of our analyses. On
the one hand, interactivity is both much less and yet, in a certain sense, much morethan media and information technology.
110 It is a diagram for the exercise of power
which will have the use of new media and information technologies. In this way,interactivity provides the model for a whole series of speciﬁc elaborations, innov-ations and investments across a range of media and institutions. On the other hand, afocus on interactivity cuts across the conventional terms of political theory, with allits endless preoccupation with the diﬀerences between liberalism, neo-liberalism andsocial democracy, pluralism, authoritarianism and conservatism. As we have seen, inorder to account for the signiﬁcance of interactivity in diﬀerent locations one mustexamine how the idea and the technology becomes associated with particular polit-ical strategies and ideas in speciﬁc circumstances. Through the use of interactivedevices, political doctrine can be rendered into technical form. Y et interactivity isalso both much less and much more than simply a political idea or doctrine. It ismuch less in so far as interactivity is not, in general, the subject of any politicalmanifesto, nor is it the object of political controversy. Explicit attacks on the idea ofinteractivity are rare. The public intervention of the Director of the British Museumwas exceptional in this respect. Y et it is political in the sense that it has become amodel for the exercise of political power which does not take a disciplinary form.Although the interactive model is not, as we have seen, a recent invention, it hasacquired a remarkable political currency today.
111 Politics does not circulate just
through the ﬂow of ideologies or rationalities of government, but through diagrams,instruments and practices.
Notes
1 For diﬀerent accounts see Mouﬀe 1992, Mulgan 1994a, chapter 3, Giddens
1998. The moralism of some recent talk of citizenship is suggested by GeoﬀMulgan’s claim that the idea of citizenship implies a ‘tough ethics’ (1994, p. 68).Anthony Giddens speaks of the association of such a tough ethics and the poli-tical project of the ‘third way’ associated with British Prime Minister, T ony Blair.180
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
According to Giddens: ‘One might suggest as a prime moto for the new politics,
no rights without responsibilities’ (1998, p. 65, emphasis in the original).
2 Burchell 1995, p.556. On this point see also Cruikshank 1996, 1999, Donald
1999.
3 According to Philip Gould, advisor to British Prime Minister, T ony Blair, on
‘public opinion’, the Internet should be used prevent parliament appearing‘impotent and irrelevant’ and to ‘ensure the people’s voice should always beheard’, Financial Times, 15 October 1999, p. 2.
4 Since the early 1990s, the European Commission has funded periodic investiga-
tions into the state of scientiﬁc literacy in Europe. Such studies have demon-strated that ‘scientiﬁc literacy in Europe is far from satisfactory and that a relationexists between an understanding [of science] and a responsible acceptance orrejection of new technologies’ (Fasella 1997, p. 166).
5 Irwin and Wynne 1996.6 This anxiety took many diﬀerent forms, reﬂecting diﬀerences in national
intellectual political cultures and preoccupations. In the United States it wasmanifested in the so-called ‘Science Wars’. On the ‘Science Wars’ and their rami-ﬁcations elsewhere see Social T ext 1996, Ross 1996, Latour 1999a, Hacking1999.
7 Alan Irwin (1995) develops the notion of scientiﬁc citizenship along these
lines. For an indication of how such debates have emerged in the realm ofparliamentary politics see House of Lords (2000).
8 Quoted in Irwin 1995, p. 11.9 Poster 1995, p. 33.
10 On the notion of the ‘boundary object’ which forms a bridge between diﬀerent
worlds, see Star and Grieserner 1989.
11 Deleuze 1988, p. 40.12 Throughout this chapter I refer to the National Museum of Science Museum
(NMSI) as the Science Museum.
13 Note Appadurai’s injunction: ‘It is only through the analysis of . . . trajectories
that we can interpret the human transactions and injunctions that enliven things’(Appadurai 1986, p. 5). Although there are some speciﬁc designs of interactiveexhibits shared between diﬀerent museums, here I am primarily concerned withthe circulation of the frame within which these diverse interactive exhibits areinscribed.
14 Cf. Foucault 1977, p. 138.15 Straw 1991.16 Bruno Latour and Mickes Coutouzis (1993) describe the failure of the Euro-
metrics project which was intended to involve the various national sciencemuseums in Europe in a joint venture to represent the process of technical har-monisation. In the case of the Expo ’92 exhibition studied by Penelope Harvey,diﬀerent national pavilions exhibited diﬀerent responses to the question ofwhether the importance of the nation-state could be assumed or not. The Euro-pean Community was ‘present as a classic example of the western egalitariannation-state’ (Harvey 1996, p. 76).
17 Galison 1994, pp. 255–256.ON INTERACTIVITY 181
18 Foucault 1977, 138, see also Schaﬀer 1992b, p. 329.
19 Schaﬀer 1992b, p. 333.20 Ibid., p. 359.21 Law 1986, p. 21.22 Unlike the traditional science museum, the typical science centre does not house
an historical collection but is likely to rely heavily on the use of interactiveexhibits. For a discussion of the diﬀerence see Durant (1992).
23 Durant 1992, p. 8.24 Gregory 1989, p. 4.25 In the version [obtained from the British Museum press oﬃce somebody had
pencilled ‘?!’ next to this statement.
26 Power 1997.27 The British Prime Minister’s christian education at Oxford has often been
remarked on by political commentators.
28 http://www.exploratory.org.uk/big/handbook/lot.proj.html. The Science Mu-
seum received £23 million from the heritage fund out of £44 million totalcosts, the Dynamic Earth centre received £15 million from the heritage fund; theNewcastle Centre and Bristol 2000 each received £27 million.
29 R. Johnson, letter to the Guardian, 27 May 1997.30 The weekly UK National Lottery was established during the last years of the
Conservative Government in the mid-1990s. Funds deriving from the lottery aregiven to ﬁve good causes, primarily for capital grants. Public museums have beenmajor recipients of lottery funding.
31 Bennett et al. 1993, p. 59. For a discussion of the history of the science museum in
the eighteenth century see Hooper-Greenhill (1992). According to Schaﬀer thepublic presentation of science sometimes involved an extraordinary level ofpublic debate: natural philosophers competed for patronage and audiences and“critics sought to subvert the status of the lecturer’s enterprise” (Schaﬀer 1993,p. 490).
32 Bennett 1995, p. 40.33 Ibid., p. 86.34 Silverstone 1992, p. 41.35 See for example the article by the Science Museum director Dr Neil Cossons in
the Listener (1987).
36 Kirby 1988, p. 91.37 Cossons 1987, p. 18.38‘The inference in the article that the staﬀ in the national museums are a load ofdinosaurs with uncaring attitudes to the public was not well received’ (letter to theauthor 30 June 1987).
39 A combination of increasing attention to marketing and the development of a
public controversy about imposing museum entry charges has given the ScienceMuseum a higher public proﬁle (cf. Cossons 1991, p. 185). However, its activitiesprobably draw much less public comment than other museums of comparablesize. As one museum curator noted: “what is done by the National Gallery, theV&A, the T ate etc is always subject to both media hype and informed comment,from layman and specialist alike. Alas the same cannot be said of the Science182
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
Museum” (letter to the author 18 June 1987). The silence of the media and the
public in relation to the politics of the Science Museum appears to be inverselyrelated to the noise generated by Museum visitors. According to one Museumsouvenir guide, “[The Science Museum] is somewhere where people feel free,and often excited; where they talk loudly (sometimes too loudly) and even laugh.It is diﬀerent from most museums” (van Riemsdijk 1980, p. 1).
40 Here, of course, one must not imagine that ‘the public’ has any homogeneity or
unity independently of the way that is constituted by the science museum. RecallRaymond Williams’s dictum, ‘there are no masses, only ways of seeing people asmasses’ (Williams 1989, p. 11).
41 Macdonald and Silverstone 1990, p. 184. According to one recent commentator:
“Museums are . . . inherently interactive multimedia. The visitor is in control ofthe paths along which they navigate through the artifacts, images, sounds andtexts and they are under no obligation to follow the linear structure imposed bythe curator” (Bearman 1993, p. 183).
42 Science Museum, 1986.43 Nash 1992, p. 184.44 Rose 1996b, Rose 1999, p. 139.45 Cf. Strathern 1992a, pp. 41–43, Macdonald 1993.46 On empowerment see Cruikshank 1996. The theme of the relation between polit-
ical and scientiﬁc empowerment has been taken up by more recent US writersand science. See, for example, Richard Sclove’s claim: ‘If it is vital that citizens beempowered to help shape legislative or electoral agendas, it is likewise vital thatthey have extensive opportunity to participate in technological research anddesign’ (Sclove 1995, p. 181).
47 According to Hein there were two important inﬂuences on Oppenheimer’s think-
ing. One was the London Science Museum Children’s Gallery (1936–1994),which contained exhibits which could be operated by the child. The other was thePalais de la Découverte, which unlike traditional science museums did not con-cern itself primarily with the preservation of artefacts. Created in 1937, the Palaisdescribed itself as ‘a scientiﬁc cultural centre’ in which a large number of scien-tiﬁc experiments were (and still are) demonstrated to visitors (Hudson 1987,p. 103). According to its founder, Jean Pettin, one of the objectives of the Palaiswas to realise the potential for scientiﬁc research which he hoped might be foundin the population at large. For Pettin, those young people who hadn’t beenfavoured by a good education, but who had a particular aptitude for researchand who had enough enthusiasm and energy to make it their vocation shouldbe recognised and encouraged by the National Research Service (Maury 1994,p. 24).
48 Hein 1990, p. xvi.49 Ibid., p. xv, my emphasis.50 Ibid., p.xvi.51 Reichardt 1971, p. 11.52 Hein 1990, p. 38.53 Délacôte 1992.54 Gregory 1970, p. 174.ON INTERACTIVITY 183
55 Hein 1990, p. 72.
56 Stevenson 1994, p. 30.57 Callon et al. 1986, de Laet and Mol 2000.58 On the public understanding of science see Wynne 1992, Irwin and Wynne 1996,
Michael 1996a.
59 Gregory 1989, p. 7.60 Ibid., p. 5.61 Wynne 1992, p. 281.62 The idea that there was a crisis in the public understanding of science had
become a political problem in Britain following the publication of a Royal Societyreport on the matter in 1985. There followed a substantial research programmeon the problem and the development of a variety of initiatives (such as ‘Nationalscience week’) to solve it. Despite these initiatives university science departmentscontinued to close and student interest in the natural sciences (in comparison tothe social sciences and humanities) continued to decline.
63 Stevenson 1987, p. 18.64 Thomas n.d., p. 3. For an overview of contemporary museum visitor studies see
Bicknell and Farmelo 1993.
65 One widely cited example of such an accusation is Shortland 1987. One feature
of this denigration of computer-based interactive museum exhibits is their associ-ation with interactive computer games. As Leslie Haddon observes ‘moral panicsabout games, including fears of addiction, the “eﬀects” of desensitisation andof escapism have spanned a range of political campaigns, media attention andacademic, mainly psychological analysis’ (Haddon 1993, p. 124).
66 Cf. Thomas n.d.67 Gregory 1989, p. 2.68 One member of the Science Museum education staﬀ remembered the example of
an interactive where a light signal was interpreted by many visitors as the causerather than the eﬀect of the phenomenon that the interactive was meant to dem-onstrate. Another suggested that many scientiﬁc principles which are supposed tobe revealed by interactives would only be comprehensible by A-level students andabove (Interviews conducted at the Science Museum, London, June 1995).
69 Macdonald 1992, p. 408.70 Strathern 1992a, p. 42. Allucqu ére Rosanne Stone outlines the terms of a debate
concerning what is really interactive which occured between programmers andmanagers in a research laboratory developing interactive game software. ‘Thereare ﬁve corollaries of Lippman’s deﬁnition [of interactivity]. One is interrupt-
ibility, which means that each participant must be able to interrupt the other,mutually and simultaneously. The second is graceful degradation, which meansthat unanswerable questions must be handled in a way which doesn’t halt theconversation . . . the third is limited look-ahead, which means that because bothparties can be interrupted there is a limit to how much of the shape of theconversation can be anticipated by either party. The fourth is no default, whichmeans that the conversation must not have a preplanned path, it must trulydevelop in an interaction. The ﬁfth is that participants must have the impressionof an inﬁnite database . . . Interactivity implied two conscious agencies in184
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
conversation . . . [by contrast] to the Ashibe management . . . interactivity meant
taking turns, not interruption; it meant that the user pushed a button and themachine did something as a result’ (Stone 1995, p. 182).
71 Zizek 1997, p. 111. Zizek poses the provocative question ‘What if the “subjec-
tive” gesture, the gesture constitutive of subjectivity, is not that of autonomously“doing something” but, rather, that of the primordial substitution, of withdrawingand letting another do it for me, in my place?’ (pp. 118–119). See also Zizek1998.
72 Born 2000. A creative passivity is one that implies the possibility of learning from
the other.
73 In the Science Museum there was considerable disagreement about whether
the juxtaposition of historical artefacts and interactives should be considered aproblem or not, Proponents of interactivity noted that the Museum had along-standing interest in interactivity from the opening of the Children’sGallery (1936) onwards, and moreover disputed the rival claims to have estab-lished the interactive model made on behalf of both the Exploratorium or thePalais de la Découverte (cf. Woolgar 1976). Many others thought that integra-tion of interactives with historical objects could be a problem as it raisedquestions, for example, about how to deﬁne the boundaries between objectswith which the public could and could not interact. More generally, the develop-ment of interactivity in the museum not only raised questions about the functionof interactive devices but also about the function of traditional objects. On thesepoints my thanks to Sharon Macdonald, Stephen Johnston and Gillian Thomas.
74 Bourdieu 1984.75 On post-Fordism see Amin 1994.76 In Lash and Utty’s (1994) terms the museum began to be engaged in a process of
reﬂexive modernisation. In this process, the museum visitor was not necessarilyconceptualised as an individual consumer. Many visitors came as part of familygroups or in school parties and visitor research and exhibition design has to takethis into account. In addition, the museum was aware that many of its adultvisitors were male and middle class and, in this context, issues of class and genderhave become a feature of exhibition design. A detailed examination of the ways inwhich diﬀerent designs of interactive exhibits addressed speciﬁc kinds ofmuseum visitor is beyond the scope of this chapter.
77 But see Macdonald 1997 for a discussion of the diﬃcult position of an anthro-
pologist working in the museum. A concern with feedback is not just a feature ofthe contemporary museum. Witness the increasing emphasis on feedback in theoperations of public service broadcasting and the universities.
78 Heinich 1988, pp. 199–200.79 The post-war French State has, at least at the level of political rhetoric, tended
to place great stress on the importance of science and technology for themodernisation of France. By contrast, in the UK, interest in interactivity amongstscientists and museum staﬀ developed at the height of what was perceived to begovernment hostility towards science in the mid-1980s.
80 Cité, n.d.81 Derrida 1986.ON INTERACTIVITY 185
82 Cité, n.d. The juxtaposition of scientiﬁc exhibitions and innovative architecture
was not new in Paris – see Stamper 1989.
83 Cité, 1988, p. 30.
84 Born 1995.85 Poster 1990, p. 114.86 Cf. Jordonova 1989, p. 23.87 Cité 1995, p. 23.88 Slavoj Zizek argues that in comparison to repressive political regimes, a charac-
teristic feature of contemporary liberal democratic societies is the demand toenjoy. Thou shall not is displaced by ‘Y ou may!’ Zizek 1999.
89 Silverstone 1988, p. 235.90 Donna Haraway notes the disjuncture that must be experienced by urban Amer-
ican children visiting the American Museum of National History in New Y ork,‘What is the experience of New Y ork streetwise kids wired to Walkman radiosand passing the Friday afternoon cocktail bat by the lion diorama? These are thekids who came to the museum to see the high-tech Nature-Max ﬁlms. But soon,for those not physically wired into the communication system of the late nine-teenth century, another time begins to form’ (Haraway 1989, p. 29). La Villetteby contrast was built during the period which saw the introduction of theWalkman into urban culture. Its interactive exhibits are, like the Walkman,compulsive.
91 Cité 1988, p. 54.92 Virilio 1990, p. 173.93 Elsaesser 1990.94 Wollen 1993.95 As Cornelius Castoriadis notes: ‘Ordinary mortals are ensnared together with
Nobel laureates in the coils of a new mythology (“machines which think”, or“thought as a machine”)’ (1984, p. 230).
96 On the technicality of scientiﬁc practice see, for example, Latour and Woolgat
1986, Gooding, Pinch and Schaﬀer 1989, Lynch 1993. ‘Many of our formercollection displays were uninspired, unimaginative and unchallenging . . . [but]collections are the foundations of all great museums’ and they should continue tohave a central place in museum display (Bennett 1998, p. 174).
97 Bennett 1998 describes one innovative attempt to do this in the Whipple
Museum of the History of Science in Cambridge. For accounts of the need torepresent controversy in science museums and the diﬃculties of doing so, seeLevidow and Y oung 1984; Macdonald and Silverstone 1992, M. Ross 1995 andSchaﬀer 1997.
98‘The new [interactive information services] represent a genuine opportunityfor the competitiveness of the European economy and the diﬀusion ofEuropean culture, and an opportunity to take full advantage of the diversityof European society’ M Monti, Member of the Commission, Debates of theEuropean Parliament, 4–500/260, 16 May 1997.
99 On the importance of interactives in the mass media see, for example, Birt 1999,
p. 5.
100 For one fantastic account of the potential for virtual democracy Budge 1996. For186
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
more nuanced analyses of the limitations as well as the advantages of new media
in particular political contexts see Tsagarousianou et al. 1998.
101 Foucault 1977, pp. 152–153.102 Ibid., p. 153.103 Gregory 1989, p. 1.104 According to Oppenheimer, ‘We do not want people to leave with the implied
feeling: “Isn’t somebody else clever.” Our exhibits are honest and simple... ’.
105 Zizek 1999.106 Foucault 1977, pp. 149–156.107 Gregory 1989, p. 6.108 Lyotard 1984, p. 3.109 Poster 1990.110 Cf. Foucault 1977, pp. 224–225 quoted in Deleuze 1988, p. 40. New media and
information technologies have an enormous empirical importance, and a speci-ﬁcity in comparison to other media such as photography and ﬁlm, but it isunclear why we would should characterise our era in terms of the presence ofsuch technologies. Interactivity is not the same as its speciﬁc technicalmanifestations.
111 Mulgan 1994b.ON INTERACTIVITY 187
4.2
Pangloss, Pandora or Jefferson? Three
scenarios for the future of technology andstrong democracy,by Benjamin R. Barber
Modernity may be deﬁned politically by the institutions of democracy, and socially
and culturally by the civilization of technology. The relationship between democracyand technology remains ambiguous, however. Proponents of classical participatorydemocracy such as Jean Jacques Rousseau have generally understood the progress ofscience to be corrosive to the intimacy and equality of political relations. Proponentsof the liberal open society such as Sir Karl Popper and Bertrand Russell, however,have posited a close connection between the spirit of science and the success of liberaldemocratic institutions.
About the future role of democracy in society we cannot be certain. Because it is a
fragile form of social organization, its prospects are clouded. But we do know, how-ever we organize our political world, that we shall live in a society dominated bytechnology. Indeed, the theme of technology and society has become suﬃcientlypopular to make it a favorite both with academics and after dinner speakers.
Notwithstanding it being in vogue, the relationship between technology and
democracy is a matter of genuine urgency for modern men and women. Will tech-nology nourish or undermine democratic institutions? Is technological growth likely tosupport or corrupt freedom? Are we ﬁnally to be mastered by the tools with which weaspire to master the world? The scientistic wisdom suggests that science and tech-nology, by opening up society and creating a market of ideas, foster more open politics;the Soviet experience with copying machines and computers is cited as an example.Y et technology coexisted with tyrannical government in Nazi Germany, and wasmade to expedite the liquidation of the Jews in a fashion that suggests its utility inrendering dictatorship more eﬃcient. And the inversion of control that attends tech-nocratic forms of society is well enough known to cause comment by the Prince ofWales: Prince Charles used his keynote address at the 350th anniversary of HarvardUniversity to caution against the domination of society by technology, issuing a call tohis listeners to restore “moral control over the things they make.”
Moreover, such generalizations as we can hazard about the connections between
technology and society must remain provisional in the face of the extraordinary rateof change typical of the evolution of modern science and technology. As ArthurSchlesinger, Jr., has noticed in his The Cycles of American History, if we assume
roughly 800 lifetimes separate us from the beginning of human life, there has been
more change in the last two lifetimes than in the 798 that preceded them. HenryAdams had already observed at the beginning of this century that between the years1800 and 1900, “measured by any standard known to science – by horsepower,calories, volts, mass in any shape – the tension and vibration and volume and so-calledprogression of society were fully a thousand times greater.” Whilst for thousandsof generations life for a cohort of grandchildren roughly resembled life for theirgrandparents, in our century there is enough change in a decade to confuse people inthe ﬁfteen years it takes to grow up.
The world’s population took 10,000 years to reach a billion, around 1800. The
second billion had arrived by 1900, the third by 1940, the fourth by 1960. Movabletype appeared only four centuries ago, the steam engine in the eighteenth century, thetelegraph in the nineteenth, and wireless at the beginning of the twentieth. Theinternal combustion engine, rocketry, and the typewriter came of age between the twoWorld Wars, and television, microchips, and lasers are still more recent. The ﬁrstcomputer built after the war ﬁlled a large room and performed less complex calcula-tions for its ardent cybernetic attendants than a handheld instrument performs forstudents today.
The overall impact of these stunning developments over the last half millennium
has been to shrink both time and space. Aristotle once observed that the ideal size fora democratic polity could be measured by the amount of land a man could traverse ina day – assuring that all citizens could attend a popular assembly. By this standard,Marshall McLuhan’s global village is a reality that is conﬁrmed anew each day byadvances in satellite and laser optic communication and computer information sys-tems and the spread of the internet. T echnology shrinks the world, foreshorteningspace and conquering time. News that once took months or years to cross an oceannow ﬂashes around the globe in seconds, and no people are more remote from the
political present than the distance from a transistor radio or a short wave telephone.Orbiting satellites leave “footprints” that encompass the globe, overstepping nationalboundaries and treating national sovereignty like some charming vestige of a decrepitstone wall. The Vatican has embraced the innovations: indulgences are now grantedvia television to pious viewers hundreds of miles away. And even Jihadic warriorsagainst modern technology use the worldwide web to get out their Luddite message.
We stand today on the threshold of a new generation of technology as potentially
important to society as the printing press or the internal combustion engine. Thistechnology is deﬁned by computer chips, video equipment, electromagnetic tape,lasers, ﬁber optics, satellites, low-frequency transmission and, more signiﬁcantly, by
the revolution in information and communications made possible by combiningthese several low-price, high-speed, high-volume innovations. The possibilities for themastery of time and space, and of knowledge and its transmission, oﬀered by thiscomplex, integrated technology seem almost limitless.
Can democracy, a form of government born in the ancient world and designed to
bring small numbers of individuals with consensual interests together into a self-governing community where they might govern themselves directly, survive the condi-tions of modern mass society? Does technology help replicate the ancient conditions?Or does it underscore the distinctiveness of the modern condition? In 1752, RousseauTHE FUTURE OF TECHNOLOGY AND STRONG DEMOCRACY 189
argued that the development of the arts and sciences had had a corrupting eﬀect on
politics and morals; has modern technology corrupted or improved our polity?
We know how profoundly simple innovations have aﬀected social and political
history in the past. Electric fences brought to an end two millennia of commongrazing in Switzerland and altered the communal character of Swiss liberty; gun-powder revolutionized and ultimately democratized warfare, which was freed fromthe special skills of a warrior caste; the printing press destroyed both ecclesiastic andworldly priesthoods based on privileged knowledge and so, in undermining hierarchy,created the conditions for the Protestant Reformation and the rise of the democraticstate; and, as George Ball said a decade ago in supporting the opening of a Fiat plantin the USSR, “the automobile is an ideology on four wheels.”
Y et this is not to say that technology is wholly determining, that it overrides the
plans, ideas, and institutions of man and writes its own history independent of humanintentions. Where technology takes our political and social institutions will depend, inpart, on where we take technology. Science and its products remain tools, andalthough the parable of the tools that come to enslave the tool-makers is an ancientone, it is not necessarily the only description of the modern technological dilemma.Rather, we must see technological determinism as one among a number of possiblescenarios that depend at least in part on the choices we make about technology’suse. If it enslaves us we will have chosen to act (or not act) in a fashion that permitsour enslavement. I certainly do not share the neo-Luddite posture which makes thesuccess of our free institutions depend on the suppression of technology. For better orworse, technology is with us; our fate will depend on how we use or abuse it. As withﬁre, gunpowder, and now atomic energy, all modern technology consists of dis-coveries that cannot be undiscovered, gifts of the gods that cannot be returned orexchanged. There is no way back to innocence for Prometheus; we are destined tolearn to live with the booty of his visionary theft – or to die with it.
There are, in fact, at least three prospects for the future of technology and dem-
ocracy – three scenarios of their relationship – that are within the realm of techno-
logical possibility. I will call them, rather fancifully, the Pangloss scenario, which isrooted in complacency and is simply a projection of current attitudes and trends; thePandora scenario, which looks at the worst possible case in terms of the inherentdangers of technological determinism; and the Jeﬀersonian scenario, which seeks outthe aﬃrmative uses of the new technology in the nurturing of modern democratic life.In terms of the psychological moods they evoke, the three may be described as theposture of complacency, the posture of caution, and the posture of hope. We canaspire to hope and we should cultivate caution, but it is, of course, complancency thatis most likely to attend and determine our actual future.
The Pangloss scenario
Anyone who reads good-time pop-futurology knows the penchant of the future mon-gers for Panglossian parody. Their view of the future is always relentlessly upbeat andahistorical, mindlessly naive about power and corruption as conditioners of all humanpolitics. Both former Speaker Newt Gingrich and Vice President Al Gore are techno-zealots who seem to believe that computers for the poor and hard-wired schools will190
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
solve real social problems – that the technological present and the future it will natur-
ally produce are wholly benevolent and without costs. Without either having con-sciously to plan to utilize technology to improve our lives, or having to worry aboutthe insidious consequences of such usage, we can rely on market forces to realize theperfect technological society. The invisible hand governs this scenario, carrying withit the presumption that market incentives such as proﬁtability and consumer interestwill take technology in socially useful directions without planning of any kind.
Now it is certainly true that market forces push the new technologies in directions
that serve corporate eﬃciency, media communications, and consumer entertainment,but it is not clear that they do anything for electoral eﬃciency, civic communication,or political education. The untoward fate of Warner-Amex’s now nearly ancient“Qube” system – an innovation in interactive television that ﬁrst promised interactivecommunication with the screen via a ﬁve-position module – o ﬀers a vivid illustration.
Warner-Amex introduced the device into its Columbus, Ohio, cable system back inthe 1980s but on a purely commercial basis. Its primary use was for quick question-answer polls, for so-called gong entertainment shows which permitted viewers to“gong” acts they did not like oﬀ the air; and for video shipping, banking, and homesurveillance. Although Warner-Amex originally planned to introduce Qube into all ofthe major cities they were cabling in the 1980s, lack of consumer interest led them tocancel the project. The possibilities of the interactive use of Qube for electronic townmeetings, voter education, and elections were never considered, and apparently willnot be. With deregulation, the giveaway of digitalized broadcast spectra, and theprivatizing Federal Communications Act of 1996, commerce has trumped civics andeducation. As private uses of the new technologies multiply, public uses vanish. Thus,although several Western nations have developed videotex services aimed at publicinformation and the public weal, the USA continues to develop them exclusively forcommercial (primarily corporate) purposes. Video teleconferences are regularfeatures of corporate communications, but are only rarely resorted to in the civicrealm (for example, the Los Angeles T elevote conducted in 1982 or MinnesotaE-Democracy, a popular civic web site in the 1990s). The privatization of the satellitebusiness and its attendant modes of world communication have also thrust thisimportant sector of the new technology into private hands. Recent failures in NASA ’s
space program point in the same direction, have also promoted pri-vate-sectordevelopment, and what was once a public research venture is rapidly becoming theshuttle payload business. What Bob Dole called the “giveaway ” of the century, placed
digitalized spectra in the hands of private broadcasters for free!
Despite the absence of explicit political applications, the new technologies have
had a certain market impact on political culture and economic and social structure.With the multiplication of communication spectra and the lowering of costs ofhardware over the last two decades, traditional views of the airwaves as limitedand therefore subject to private or (in the European case) public monopoly havebeen challenged. Spectrum scarcity meant government ownership in Europe andheavy government regulation in the USA. Spectrum abundance supposedly lessensthe dangers of private monopoly and thus the need for public monopoly. A 1979Supreme Court decision in the USA ruled that spectrum abundance had antiquatedcertain aspects of traditional Federal Communications regulations (the FederalTHE FUTURE OF TECHNOLOGY AND STRONG DEMOCRACY 191
Communications Act of 1934) rooted in the First Amendment – equal time, for
example, or the “Fairness Doctrine,” which has recently been abandoned. A newdoctrine to protect freedom of information and privacy in the cable/satellite/laser agehas yet to be developed. Combine the possibilities of over 200 discrete cable spectra,low frequency and satellite broadcasting, and laser and ﬁbre-optic technologies withthe vertical integration of the new global communications monopolies like Murdoch’sNews Corporation, Disney’s ABC, and Time-Warner’s CNN, and the hold ofgovernment broadcast corporations on the airwaves is patently loosened.
For a while in the USA it appeared as though new cable networks like T ed
Turner’s and superstations that utilized satellite broadcast capabilities would oﬀer amajor challenge to the monopoly-like networks, and create a genuinely competitivemarket. Increasingly, the problem faced by democracies seemed no longer to be BigBrother (George Orwell imagined two-way television surveillance in NineteenEighty-Four) but a host of complacent little cousins – a plethora of broadcastingsources that would inundate the public in programming and divide the populationinto a series of discrete markets, each one the particular target of new “narrowcast-ing” strategies. In a 1982 essay, I warned against the fragmenting eﬀect this mighthave on the integral American nation which heretofore had been protected fromregional parochialisms by the national hearthside of network television. At the sametime, I suggested that the new technological diversity might, for the ﬁrst time, allowinformation and communication sovereignty to pass from the hands of the producerswith monopolies over limited spectra to consumers who, because they now hadliterally hundreds of choices, could assume genuine responsibilities for what they sawand listened to. Indeed, the new plenitude appeared to challenge national sovereigntytoo, for anyone with a satellite dish was now able to tune into broadcasts from aroundthe world. Armed with a VCR, a cable hookup, a satellite dish, and a television set,consumers could construct a world of entertainment and information geared to theirown tastes, their own schedules, and their own needs. T o this degree, the new tech-nologies, by favoring decentralization, the multiplication of choice, and consumersovereignty, did inadvertently beneﬁt democratic political culture.
But in the last few years, other less benevolent market forces have conspired to
work against these developments. The theoretical availability of multiple spectra hasnot been matched by real program or information diversiﬁcation, or by any realincrease in the power of the consumer over programming. This is due in part to theuncompetitive character of the real markets in hardware, software, and programming,and a surge of corporate takeovers that has shrunk this market still more. A limitednumber of programming and software giants have emerged from the sorting outprocess as monopolistic purveyors of information, news, and entertainment. Despitethe fact that outlets for their product have multiplied, there has been little real substan-tive diversiﬁcation. Thus, despite the presence of hundreds of television channels,cable stations have remained content to mimic the networks, or run movies, ordevelop “narrowcast” programming aimed at special audiences (religious, Spanish-
speaking, sports, etc.) in search of certain proﬁts. Although consumers are freed fromtraditional time constraints by video recorders and can watch live, record programs towatch at a time of their choice, or rent or buy video cassettes or laser discs, the actualcontent available is pretty much identical with what was available on the networks ten192
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
years ago. Moreover, the development of programming remains in the hands of the
same few production companies that have always controlled ﬁlms and entertainment.Indeed, such independence as the networks possessed is being eroded by their cor-porate takeover and subordination to global companies that also own newspapers,magazines, publishing houses, ﬁlm studios, sports teams, and theme parks. Murdoch,Disney, and Turner each own baseball teams and networks on which to show games.And each has gone global, competing for spectators in T eheran and Beijing as well asNew Y ork and London.
Elsewhere in the world, television companies (mostly national) take their cue
from the English-speaking networks in the USA and the UK. Reruns of old suspenseand comedy programs lead the schedule on most such networks (including those incountries with radical ideologies). Contradictions abound – The Cosby Show (aboutan average American black family) was the most watched program in pre-liberatedSouth Africa; Dallas (about the sexual and business escapades of the rich and mere-tricious in T exas) is popular in the Third World; accented mini-series from the BBCand Thames T elevision continue to draw a rapt American viewing audience thatcannot get enough of the Royal Family it abandoned two hundred years ago; andviolent, racist ﬁlms like Rambo are regularly shown in Asia (where Rambo’s Asianenemies are made to seem Arab in the overdub) and, on easily available black marketcassettes, in Russia, Pakistan, and Indonesia. No wonder Thomas L. McPhail entitledhis book on international broadcasting Electronic Colonialism.
In fact, for all of its technological potential for diversiﬁcation, the domination of
these new technologies by the market (or by the corporate monopolies that the marketconceals) assures that to a growing degree, the pro ﬁt-making entertainment industry
in the Anglo-American world will control what is seen, felt, and thought around theglobe (the primary concern of my book Jihad versus McWorld). It is hardly surprisingthat nations elsewhere are demanding a new information order. Though this demandis often construed in the West (to a degree correctly) as resulting from the tyrannicalimpulse to control information, it must also be viewed as a desperate reaction tothe market tyranny already being exercised over world communication by Anglo-American programming and software monopolies.
None of this denies the potential of the new technology for eﬃcient planning and
information enhancement. T eleconferencing, videotex, and the interactive possi-bilities of this technology are being systematically exploited in the commercial worldby corporations bent on enhancing eﬃciency through enhancing information andcommunication. But this has meant that a technology whose cheapness and universa-lity promises a new communicative egalitarianism is, in fact, replicating in the domainof information the inequality that otherwise characterizes market relations in theWest. Increasingly a gap can be described between information-rich and information-poor segments of Western nations – the former, technologically literate and able toutilize the new technologies to gain mastery over their commercial and politicalenvironments; the latter, technologically illiterate and thrown more and more to theperiphery of a society where power and status are dependent on information andcommunication.
I do not mean to suggest here a conscious attempt at control or at the
sustaining of nonegalitarianism on the part of those who are major players in theTHE FUTURE OF TECHNOLOGY AND STRONG DEMOCRACY 193
“free” market – although the evidence presented here would not be inconsistent with
such an interpretation. I do mean to say that even at its most innocent, the market islikely to have an impact on free and developing societies in ways unforeseen by thehappy futurologists; that, at best, the market will do nothing for uses of the newtechnology that do not have obvious commercial or entertainment or corporatepayoﬀs, and, at worst, will enhance uses that undermine equality and, freedom. Norhas anything happened in the decade since I ﬁrst advanced this skeptical thesis tosuggest my pessimism was misplaced.
The Pandora scenario
Pangloss is a peril to every society, but the greater danger to democracy comes fromPandora’s scenario, which envisions what might happen if a government consciouslyset out to utilize the new technologies for purposes of standardization, control, orrepression. Clearly the new technology, which facilitates centralization of control overinformation and communication, enables government to retain ﬁles and “keep tabs”on all computer and telephonic communications, and makes new kinds of surveil-lance possible, can be a powerful weapon in the hands of a controlling political oreconomic elite, Brute tyrants must control, by brute force, which requires constantphysical control over subjects; subtle tyrants possess their subjects’ hearts and mindsthrough the control of education, information, and communication and, thereby, turnsubjects into allies in the enterprise of servitude. The new technologies enhance thissubtle form of control and give government instruments of indirect surveillance andcontrol unlike any known to traditional dictators.
Nor need abuses be planned by elites conspiring to repress. The citizens of
Sweden recently learned that a number of young men had been the unknowing sub-jects of a twenty year longitudinal surveillance that, in the name of a social scientiﬁcproject, “keeps tabs” on their economic, social, personal, and sexual lives – without
their knowledge (let alone permission). Credit and insurance organizations in theUSA and Europe are assembling mammoth information ﬁles on clients, ﬁles that arefor the most part held and used at the company’s own discretion without any govern-ment regulation. The Qube system oﬀered a surveillance mode that transmitted elec-tronic reports to a central oﬃce on the comings and goings of all residents; what andwhen they watched television, when lights went on and oﬀ, and so forth. Warner-Amex corporate oﬃcers “promised discretion” – a guarantee somewhat less ironclad
than the Bill of Rights. Computer banking, increasingly common throughout Europeand the USA, leaves a permanent trail of ﬁles on ﬁnancial transactions that permitthose with access to learn the details of an individual’s ﬁnancial life.
Clearly the costs to privacy of the eﬃcient operation of this new technology can
be very high; neither can the individual be secured by traditional print media protec-tions. The Fairness Doctrine, as developed by the Federal Communications Act of1934, was not adapted to the new technology and has thus been laid aside. A numberof commentators, including John Wicklein, Ithiel de Sola Pool, and David Burnham(erstwhile communications specialist for The New Y ork Times), have decried thedangers to privacy and the individual posed by technological innovations. FredFriendly, onetime head of CBS news, called for an “electronic bill of rights.” Twenty194
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
years after his appeal, no such bill is in sight. On the contrary, privacy issues seem
to have been privatized, left to the whims of bankers, merchandisers, and othercommercial users of the new technology.
Moreover, despite the diversiﬁcation of communications and information
channels made possible by the new technologies, control and ownership of the cor-porations that manufacture hardware and software and create news, information, andentertainment programming remain in the hands of a few super-corporations thatexercise an eﬀective monopoly or, as in France (and despite the recent accrediting ofa private television network), of a government monopoly. Between them, the con-glomerates that now control hardware, software, programming, and ﬁnancing controla preponderance of what is made and produced in the communications/informationﬁeld. These media giants make nonsense of the theoretical diversiﬁcation of the tech-nology. While minor players like Apple can still play the game, the large corporationsgenerally let them take the risks and then buy out or imitate the successes, or are takenover by them. The individual entrepreneur may still make a proﬁt on his risk-taking,but the public is deprived of genuine competition or a real market choice. This is theessence of the U.S. government’s current antitrust suit against Microsoft.
The entertainment business provides a powerful lesson. As the television industry
takes over the ﬁlm industry and the ﬁlm industry takes over Broadway and the WestEnd, the English-speaking theater ceases to exist as a cultural artifact and becomesanother small cog in the great proﬁt-making entertainment machine of the majormedia corporations. Shown on the hundreds of cable networks nowadays are mostlynetwork reruns, third-rate movies never released to the theater chains, and sportingevents. Innovation is commercially unviable and little supported. The “cultural”channels have mostly gone under for lack of funding, the public access channels areunderutilized and unwatched (cable franchisers are often asked to put aside a channelfor public access by the licensing municipality, but are never required to put asidefunds to train people in the use of television, or to make available directorial andproduction support for groups wishing to avail themselves of public air time). Thus;no one watches. That’s the market, say the cable companies (as if they would oﬀeramateur underfunded programming of that kind to their paying viewers). The UK’sChannel 4 is ingeniously ﬁnanced and has developed some new programming, butit also specializes in upscale American prime-time programming (Hill Street Blues,St. Elsewhere, and Cheers, for example).
If then we measure power by the potential for monopoly and control over infor-
mation and communication, it is evident that the new technology can become adangerous facilitator of tyranny. Even in the absence of conscious government abuse,this potential can constrict our freedom, encroach on our privacy, and damage ourpolitical equality. There is no tyranny more dangerous than an invisible and benigntyranny, one in which subjects are complicit in their victimization, and in whichenslavement is a product of circumstance rather than intention. T echnology need notinevitably corrupt democracy, but its potential for benign dominion cannot beignored.THE FUTURE OF TECHNOLOGY AND STRONG DEMOCRACY 195
The Jeffersonian scenario
Despite the potential of the telecommunications market for inequality and of the
technology it supports for abuse, the new technologies, in themselves, can also oﬀerpowerful assistance to the life of democracy. A free society is free only to the degreethat its citizens are informed and that communication among them is open andinformed. Although among the three scenarios sketched here, the Jeﬀersonian is theleast probable and, given current trends, unlikely to become more probable, it remainsboth technologically feasible and politically attractive. As Nicholas Johnson, formerchairman of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) noted some time ago,“the ultimate promise of the new technology is the rebuilding of community.” In thissense, a guarded optimism is possible about technology and democracy, but only ifcitizen groups and governments take action in adapting the new technology to theirneeds.
At the outset, I noted that democracy is a form of government that depends on
information and communication. It is obvious then that new technologies of informa-tion and communications can be nurturing to democracy. They can challenge passiv-ity, they can enhance information equality, they can overcome sectarianism andprejudice, and they can facilitate participation in deliberative political processes.
Traditional media emphasize active programming and passive spectatorship. The
new technology’s interactive capability permits viewers to become active both aschoosers of what they watch and respondents to programming (via interactive televi-sion, information network hookups, and public access cable channels). The oldpicture of passive television viewers glued to their sets for seven docile hours ofcomplacent viewing can now be challenged by active users of a complex computer/tele-phone/video set-up, who utilize the system to enhance their public and private lives.Linked together horizontally by a point-to-point medium like the internet, citizenscan subvert political hierarchy and nurture an unmediated civic communication.
The educational potential of computer information networks and interactive
television is very great and, when appropriately subsidized, allows equal access toinformation by all citizens. Computer terminals equipped with user-friendly pro-grams and manned by user-friendly technicians, if housed at public libraries, townhalls, and other public places, could place the world-wide-web’s enormous banks ofinformation available through computer networks at the disposal of the generalpublic. Governments could oﬀer their own networks providing information onemployment, housing, zoning regulation, small business laws, and other matters ofpublic concern. Private networks might be persuaded to oﬀer service to public ter-minals at cost as a pro bonum return on the proﬁts their use of public airwaves andwire make possible. Anyone can create a website and initiate communication.
The possibilities of using the interactive capabilities of recent television and
internet technology for civic education has been underexplored. Networks run instanttelephone polls on controversial debates (“are you for or against a nuclear freeze?”)after half an hour of opinionated sparring by warring “experts,” but have not tried tostructure several programs over time aimed at actually informing opinion and givingissues full deliberation. Y et the technology is there to do so. The few times that it hasbeen used, it has achieved unusual successes. The experiment with a civic network196
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
that began as a senior citizen and shut-in network in Reading, Pennsylvania; the
“televote” experiments in New Zealand, Hawaii, and Los Angeles; and the League ofWomen Voters’ three state teleconferences in New Y ork – New Jersey – Connecticutare but three examples of the technology’s civic possibilities. More recently, “ProjectVote Smart” has opened a much used internet voter information site.
A third use of the new technology has been implicit in electronic communications
from the start of the radio and television era: the overcoming of regional parochialism,local prejudice, and national chauvinism. T echnology has made the metaphor of theglobal village an electronic reality. Satellite “footprints” know no borders and indi-viduals or communities with a satellite dish (and perhaps a descrambler) can tune inon the world. The world-wide-web, unlike the World Series, is actually world wide. Itmakes closed societies diﬃcult to maintain, and information blackouts a contradictionin terms.
In order to be something more than the government of mass prejudice, democ-
racy must escape the tyranny of opinion. T elevision often merely reinforces opinionand prejudice, but its global character and capacity for interactive communicationalso enable it to overcome them and sustain rational discourse and citizen education.It can, to be sure, permit instant plebiscites of the most dangerous kind whereunthinking prejudices are numerically recorded to establish the momentary shape ofmass prejudice on an issue (these plebiscitary dangers have been noted by variousliberal critics of the new technology who, however, seem Luddite in their prejudiceagainst alternatives uses). But it also permits ongoing communication and deliber-ation among individuals and (via electronic town meetings) communities that caninform and improve democracy.
Imagine a situation in which the state of California wishes to oﬀer a referendum
to its citizens on a law banning Sunday retail commerce. Normally, the private sectorwould go to work on voters, plying them with expensive advertisements portrayingthe loss to the economy of Sunday closings, and church and the retail industry wouldindulge in a war of publicists. Voters, having passively received this bounty ofmisinformation, would eventually be constrained to vote their prejudices (religionversus convenience) and the matter would be “democratically” resolved. Y et with theassistance of the new technologies a very diﬀerent scenario can be imagined. Everytownship and municipality in California might, for example, call a town meeting todiscuss an issue initially. The state might fund a neutral documentary maker to pro-duce a one hour special on the issue, which might be shown on television prior to adebate by proponents of each side. A second set of town meetings would follow this,including a video hookup (teleconference) of urban and rural meetings to let diﬀerentparts of the state understand how the issue was being discussed elsewhere. This couldbe followed by a ﬁnal debate on television coupled with an interactive hookup permit-ting home viewers to pose questions to the “experts.” Such a multiple-phase processinvolving information, adversarial debate, and the direct engagement by citizenswithin their local communities, and among the communities and the experts wouldoﬀer genuine civic education. More public-regarding ways of looking at problemscould emerge, and the ﬁnal decision on the referendum would be both informedand more public-minded. The cumulative eﬀect on the political competence of theelectorate of a series of such procedures, replicated on diﬀerent issues over severalTHE FUTURE OF TECHNOLOGY AND STRONG DEMOCRACY 197
years, would be immense. The state of Oregon used a people’s parliament method to
develop a state health plan in the early 1990s: today we can technologically enhancethat method with the internet.
The institutional tools necessary to realize this scenario are not beyond our reach.
A “Civic Communicative Co-operative” in the USA would permit an independent
public corporation to oversee civic uses of the new media, and perhaps establisha model program channel. Local municipalities responsible for franchising cableoperators could insist on institutional networks, public access channels with personneland technical support, and public information terminals as a condition of a cablefranchise or a network license (most municipalities focus on the number and enter-tainment quality of program channels and rarely raise issues of civic education andinformation).
It is then the will and not the way that is missing at present. Certainly Thomas
Jeﬀerson would not be disappointed to learn that technology has made possible a
quality and degree of communication among citizens and between citizens and bur-eaucrats, experts, and their information banks he could not have dreamed of. It wasalways Jeﬀerson’s belief that the inadequacies of democracy were best remedied bymore democracy: that civic incompetence was not a reason to disempower citizens,but empowerment a remedy to redress incompetence.
Which democracy? Progress for whom?
The new technologies – not only television, including cable networks, but also com-puters and the internet – can potentially enhance lateral communication amongcitizens, can open access to information by all, and can furnish citizens with com-munication links across distances that once precluded direct democracy. Y et there isa formidable obstacle in the way of implementation of these technologies: unlesswe are clear about what democracy means to us, and what kind of democracywe envision, technology is as likely to stunt as to enhance the civic polity. Is it repre-sentative democracy, plebiscitary democracy, or deliberative democracy for whichwe seek technological implementation? The diﬀerences between the three are notonly theoretically crucial, but have radically diﬀerent entailments with respect totechnology.
Do we aspire to further the representative system, a democracy rooted in
the election of accountable deputies who do all the real work of governing? Mostadvocates of this form of indirect democracy are properly suspicious of the newtechnologies and their penchant for immediacy, directness, lateral communication,and undeliberativeness. Or is it plebiscitary majoritarianism we seek, a democracythat embodies majority opinions assembled from the unconsidered prejudices ofprivate persons voting private interests? New technology can be a dangerously facileinstrument of such unchecked majoritarianism: the net aﬀords politicians an instru-ment for perpetual polling that can aggravate the focus group mentality that many rueas Dick Morris’s political legacy. Will any politicians ever again gather the courage tolead in the face of a technology that makes following so easy?
Y et if we are in search of what I have called “strong democracy,” a democracy
that reﬂects the careful and prudent judgment of citizens who participate in delibera-198
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
tive, selfgoverning communities, we will need to tease out of the technology other
capabilities. If democracy is to be understood as deliberative and participatory activityon the part of responsible citizens, it will have to resist the innovative forms of dema-goguery that accompany innovative technology and that are too often overlooked byenthusiasts, and listen carefully to those like Theodore Becker and James Fishkin, whohave tried to incorporate deliberative constraints into their direct democratic uses ofthe technologies.
1 In other words, it turns out there is no simple or general answer to
the question “Is the technology democratizing?” until we have made clear what sort ofdemocracy we intend. Home voting via interactive television might further privatizepolitics and replace deliberative debate in public with the unconsidered instantexpression of private prejudices, turning what ought to be public decisions into pri-vate consumerlike choices; but deliberative television polling of the kind envisioned byJames Fishkin can oﬀset such dangers, while the use of the internet for deliberationacross communities can actually render decision making less parochial.
2 In politics,
fast is often bad, slow sometimes good.
Strong democracy calls not only for votes but for good reasons; not only for an
opinion but for a rational argument on its behalf. Those who once preferred open tosecret ballots, who preferred open debate about well-grounded viewpoints to closedvotes aggregating personal interests, will today prefer technologies that permit frankinteractive debate with real identities revealed to technologies that allow game playingand privately registered, unsupported opinions.
Traditional proponents of Madisonian representative democracy are likely to ﬁnd
much of the new interactive technology intimidating, since it threatens to overwhelmwhat they regard as a pristine system assuring government by expert politicians with afree-for-all among “ignorant” masses who swamp the polity with their endlessdemands and overheated prejudices. Such critics already complain that traditionalbroadcast television is destructive of party identity and party discipline, and they willproperly worry about technologies that further erode the boundaries between thegovernors and the governed. Plebiscitary democrats will be mindlessly enthralled byinteractive instant polling and imagine a time when private consumers makeprecedent-shattering public choices with no more serious thought than they give towhich button to hit when they are surﬁng a hundred-channel cable system. “Let’ssee,” mutters the glib new net surfer, “do I want to play checkers or outlaw abortion?Do I prefer Sylvester Stallone to Bill Clinton? Shall we download the ‘Playmate of theMonth’ or vote to expand NATO to the Russian border? Time for a mock battle withDarth Vader on my Star Wars simulation. . . . Or should I just declare war for real onLibya?” Deliberative democrats can only shudder at such prospects, insistingthat they do more to destroy than to enhance democracy. Deliberation, on the otherhand, does require intervention, education, facilitation, and mediation – all anathemato devotees of an anarchic and wholly user-controlled net whose whole point is tocircumvent facilitation, editing, and other “top-down” forms of intervention.
T echnology can then help democracy, but only if programmed to do so and only
in terms of the paradigms and political theories that inform the program. Left to themarket, it is likely only to reproduce the vices of politics as usual. How diﬀerent is theanonymous ﬂaming that typiﬁes certain kinds of internet chatter from the anonymous
viliﬁcation that characterizes talk radio and scream television? Will the newerTHE FUTURE OF TECHNOLOGY AND STRONG DEMOCRACY 199
technologies be any less likely to debase the political currency, any less likely to foster
sound-bite decision making rather than sound political judgment?
By the same token, if those who deploy the technologies consciously seek a more
participatory, deliberative form of strong democracy and a newly robust civil society,they can also ﬁnd in telecommunications innovation an extraordinarily eﬀective ally.The trouble with the zealots of technology as an instrument of democratic liberationis not that they misconceive technology but that they fail to understand democracy.They insist that market-generated technology can, all by itself and in the completeabsence of common human willing and political cooperation, produce liberty, socialresponsibility, and citizenship. The viruses that eat up our computer programs, likesarin in the T okyo subway, are but obvious symbols of technology’s ever-present darkside, the monster who lurks in Dr. Frankenstein’s miraculous creation.
With participatory interaction comes the peril of political and economic surveil-
lance.
3 With interactive personal preference modules comes the risk of majoritarian
tyranny. With digital reasoning comes the danger that adversarial modes of thoughtwill inundate consensus and obliterate common ground. Computer literacy cannotﬁnally exist independently of lifelong educational literacy. The age of information canreinforce extant inequalities, we have noted, making the resource- and income-poorthe information-poor as well.
4 The irony is that those who might most beneﬁt from
the net’s democratic and informational potential are least likely to have access to it, thetools to gain access, or the educational background to take advantage of the tools.Those with access, on the other hand, tend to be those already empowered in thesystem by education, income, and literacy.
And how easily liberating technologies become tools of repression. As consumers
tell shopping networks what they want to buy and tell banks how to dispense theircash and tell pollsters what they think about abortion, those receiving the informationgain access to an extensive computer bank of knowledge about the private habits,attitudes, and behaviors of consumers and citizens. This information may in turnbe used to reshape those habits and attitudes in ways that favor producers and sellersworking the marketplace or the political arena. Moreover, the current antiregulatoryfever has assured that the new data banks being compiled from interaction andsurveillance are subject neither to government scrutiny nor to limitation or control – asunset provision, for example, that would periodically destroy all stored information.
5
The model of Channel One, an invidious classroom network founded by ChrisWhittle’s Whittle Communications (and now owned by the K-III Corporation),which extorts classroom advertising time from needy schools in return for des-perately wanted hardware, suggests that the public is likely to be served by the newtechnologies only in as far as someone can make serious money oﬀ it.
6
It may be a cause of satisfaction, as Walter Wriston insists, that nowadays it is the
citizen who is watching Big Brother and not the other way around. But if Big Brotheris no longer watching you, nor is he watching those who are watching you, and evenadversaries of regulation may ﬁnd reason to be disturbed by that omission. If theclassical liberal question used to be, who will police the police? the pertinent liberalquestion in today’s McWorld ought to be, who will watch those who are watching thewatchers? Who will prevent the media from controlling their clients and consumers?Who will act in lieu of a government that has demurred from representing the public’s200
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
interests? These are issues for democratic deliberation and decision, not for techno-
logical resolution. For technology remains a tool allied to particular conceptionsof democracy; if we know what kind of democracy we want, it can enhance civiccommunication and expand citizen literacy. Left to markets, (and that is where it ispresently being left), it is likely to augment McWorld’s least worthy imperatives,including surveillance over and manipulation of opinion, and the cultivation ofartiﬁcial needs rooted in lifestyle “choices” unconnected to real economic, civic, orspiritual needs.
If democracy is to beneﬁt from technology then, we must start not with tech-
nology but with politics. Having a voice, demanding a voice, in the making ofscience and technology policy is the ﬁrst step citizens can take in assuring a demo-cratic technology.
7 The new technology is still only an instrument of communica-
tion, and it cannot determine what we will say or to whom we will say it. There is astory about the wireless pioneer Guglielmo Marconi who, when told by his associ-ates that his new wireless technology meant he could now “talk to Florida,” asked,presciently, “And do we have anything to say to Florida?” Enthusiasts exalt over the
fact that on the net we can talk to strangers throughout the world. But many oftoday’s problems arise from the fact that we no longer know how to talk to ourhusbands and wives, our neighbors and fellow citizens, let alone strangers. Will ourblockages and incivilities locally be overcome by the miracles of long-distance com-puter communication? Will virtual community heal the ruptures of real com-munities? Will we do on our keyboards what we have notably failed to do face toface?
If in the coming millennium – a millennium in which technology is likely to
dominate our lives as never before – we want democracy to be served, then thebittersweet fruits of science will have to be subordinated to our democratic ends andmade to serve as a facilitator rather than a corruptor of our precious democracy. Andwhether this happens will depend not on the quality and character of our technologybut on the quality of our political institutions and the character of our citizens.
Notes
1 See Theodore Becker, “T elevote: Interactive, Participatory Polling” in Becker and
R. A. Couto, T eaching Democracy by Being Democratic (Westport, CT: Praeger,1996).
2 James Fishkin has devised a deliberative technique that brings citizens together
for several days and permits them to interact with one another and with experts,so that their views are not merely registered but pondered and modiﬁed. In 1993,Channel Four in the United Kingdom broadcast an exemplary weekend ofFishkin’s project; a similar broadcast was shown on public television during the1996 American presidential elections. For details, see Fishkin’s Democracy andDeliberation (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1991).
3 Precisely because it is interactive, new telecommunications technology “learns”
about its users as its users learn about it. A system that “knows” what you buy,how you pay for it, what your consumer and political preferences are, and even(in programs providing home security) when you leave and when you comeTHE FUTURE OF TECHNOLOGY AND STRONG DEMOCRACY 201
home, and which then stores and disseminates such information in the absence of
any regulatory safeguards, is hardly a system political skeptics should trust.
4 Robert Reich has drawn an American portrait in which privileged information/
communication workers increasingly withdraw public support from the largersociety as they move to insular suburbs, with private recreational, schooling,security, and sanitation services for their own walled communities, which thepublic at large can no longer aﬀord. Their withdrawal (Reich labels it the politicsof secession) leaves the poor poorer, the public sector broke, and society evermore riven by economic disparities that technology reinforces. Robert Reich,“The New Community” in The Work of Nations (New Y ork: Knopf, 1991),chap. 23.
5 An early and prophetic book about the problems of electronic surveillance is John
Wicklein’s Electronic Nightmare: The Home Communications Set and Y ourFreedom (Boston: Beacon Press, 1981).
6 Channel One currently is in about twelve thousand junior high and high schools.
It loans free televisions, VCRs, and a satellite dish to schools (usually needy ones)willing to dish up two minutes of soft news, three minutes of commercials, andnine minutes of infotainment to its students during regular school hours. ChannelOne sells spots for up to $195,000 for a thirty-second ad, and has attracted manyof the corporations on McWorld’s frontier, including Pepsi and Reebok. In 1994,Chris Whittle sold the network for nearly $240 million to K-III, an “educational”
publisher.
7 This suggests that science and technology policy need themselves to be subjected
to democratic scrutiny. T echnology should not try to produce an appropriatedemocracy; democracy should try to produce an appropriate technology.Experts in technology are not experts in the appropriate public uses of tech-nology. Richard Sclove’s project on community science boards speaks to theseissues: Democracy and T echnology (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1995).202
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
4.3
Citizens,
by Cass Sunstein
The authors of the American Constitution met behind closed doors in Philadelphia
during the summer of 1787. When they completed their labors, the American publicwas, naturally enough, exceedingly curious about what they had done. A large crowdgathered around what is now known as Convention Hall. One of its members askedBenjamin Franklin, as he emerged from the building, “What have you given us?”Franklin’s answer was hopeful, or perhaps a challenge: “A republic, if you can keepit.” In fact we should see Franklin’s remark as a reminder of a continuing obligation.The text of any founding document is likely to be far less important, in maintaining arepublic, than the actions and commitments of the nation’s citizenry over time.
This suggestion raises questions of its own. What is the relationship between our
choices and our freedom? Between citizens and consumers? And how do the answersrelate to the question whether, and how, government should deal with people ’s
emerging power to ﬁlter speech content?
In this chapter my basic claim is that we should evaluate new communications
technologies, including the Internet, by asking how they aﬀect us as citizens, notmostly, and certainly not only, by asking how they aﬀect us as consumers. A centralquestion is whether emerging social practices, including consumption patterns, arepromoting or compromising our own highest aspirations. More particularly I maketwo suggestions, designed to undermine, from a new direction, the idea that consumersovereignty is the appropriate goal for communications policy.
The ﬁrst suggestion is that people’s preferences do not come from nature or from
the sky. They are a product, at least in part, of social circumstances, including existinginstitutions, available options, and past choices. Prominent among the circumstancesthat create preferences are markets themselves. “Free marketeers have little tocheer about if all they can claim is that the market is eﬃcient at ﬁlling desires that themarket itself creates.”
1 Unrestricted consumer choices are important, sometimes very
important. But they do not exhaust the idea of freedom, and they should not beequated with it.
The second suggestion has to do with the fact that in their capacity as citizens,
people often seek policies and goals that diverge from the choices they make in theircapacity as consumers. If citizens do this, there is no legitimate objection from the
standpoint of freedom – at least if citizens are not using the law to disfavor any
particular point of view or otherwise violating rights. Often citizens attempt to pro-mote their highest aspirations through democratic institutions. If the result is to pro-duce a communications market that is diﬀerent from what individual consumerswould seek – if as citizens we produce a market, for example, that promotes exposureto serious issues and a range of shared experiences – freedom will be promoted, notundermined.
The two points are best taken together. Citizens are often aware that their private
choices, under a system of limitless options, may lead in unfortunate directions, bothfor them as individuals and for society at large. They might believe, for example, thattheir own choices, with respect to television and the Internet, do not promote theirown well-being, or that of society as a whole. They might attempt to restructurealternatives and institutions so as to improve the situation.
At the same time, I suggest that even insofar as we are consumers, new purchas-
ing opportunities, made ever more available through the Internet, are far less wonder-ful than we like to think. The reason is that these opportunities are accelerating the“consumption treadmill,” in which we buy more and better goods not because theymake us happier or better oﬀ but because they help us keep up with others. Ascitizens, we might well seek to slow down this treadmill, so as to ensure that socialresources are devoted, not to keeping up with one another, but to goods and servicesthat really improve our lives.
Choices and circumstances: the formation and deformation of preferences
Many people seem to think that freedom consists in respect for consumptionchoices, whatever their origins and content. Indeed, this thought appears to underlieenthusiasm for the principle of consumer sovereignty itself. On this view, the centralgoal of a well-functioning system of free expression is to ensure unrestricted choice.A similar conception of freedom underlies many of the celebrations of emergingcommunications markets.
It is true that a free society is generally respectful of people’s choices. But freedom
imposes certain preconditions, ensuring not just respect for choices and the satisfac-tion of preferences, whatever they happen to be, but also the free formation of desiresand beliefs. Most preferences and beliefs do not preexist social institutions; they areformed and shaped by existing arrangements. Much of the time, people develop tastesfor what they are used to seeing and experiencing. If you are used to seeing storiesabout the local sports team, your interest in the local sports team is likely to increase.If news programming deals with a certain topic – say, welfare reform or a currentthreat of war – your taste for that topic is likely to be strengthened. And when peopleare deprived of opportunities, they are likely to adapt and to develop preferences andtastes for what little they have. We are entitled to say that the deprivation of opportuni-ties is a deprivation of freedom – even if people have adapted to it and do not wantanything more.
Similar points hold for the world of communications. If people are deprived of
access to competing views on public issues, and if as a result they lack a taste for thoseviews, they lack freedom, whatever the nature of their preferences and choices. If204
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
people are exposed mostly to sensationalistic coverage of the lives of movie stars, or
only to sports, or only to left-of-center views, and never to international issues, theirpreferences will develop accordingly. There is, in an important respect, a problemfrom the standpoint of freedom itself. This is so even if people are voluntarily choosingthe limited fare.
The general idea here – that preferences and beliefs are a product of existing
institutions and practices and that the result can be a form of unfreedom, one of themost serious of all – is hardly new. It is a longstanding theme in political and legalthought. Thus T ocqueville wrote of the eﬀects of the institution of slavery on thedesires of many slaves themselves: “Plunged in this abyss of wretchedness, the Negrohardly notices his ill fortune; he was reduced to slavery by violence, and the habit ofservitude has given him the thoughts and ambitions of a slave; he admires his tyrantseven more than he hates them and ﬁnds his joy and pride in servile imitation of hisoppressors.”
2 In the same vein, John Dewey wrote that “social conditions may restrict,
distort, and almost prevent the development of individuality.” He insisted that weshould therefore “take an active interest in the working of social institutions that havea bearing, positive or negative, upon the growth of individuals.” For Dewey, a justsociety “is as much interested in the positive construction of favorable institutions,
legal, political, and economic, as it is in the work of removing abuses and overtoppressions.”
3 More recently, Robert Frank and Philip Cook have urged that in the
communications market, existing “ﬁnancial incentives strongly favor sensational,lurid and formulaic oﬀerings” and that the resulting structure of rewards is “espe-cially troubling in light of evidence that, beginning in infancy and continuing throughlife, the things we see and read profoundly alter the kinds of people we become.”
4
Every tyrant knows that it is important, and sometimes possible, not only to
constrain people’s actions but also to manipulate their desires, partly by makingpeople fearful, partly by putting certain options in an unfavorable light, partly bylimiting information. And nontyrannical governments are hardly neutral with respectto preferences and desires. They hope to have citizens who are active rather thanpassive, curious rather than indiﬀerent, engaged rather than inert. Indeed, the basicinstitutions of private property and freedom of contract – fundamental to free soci-eties and indeed to freedom of speech – have important eﬀects on the development ofpreferences themselves. Thus both private property and freedom of contract havelong been defended, not on the ground that they are neutral with respect to prefer-ences, but on the ground that they help to form good preferences – by producing anentrepreneurial spirit and by encouraging people to see one another, not as potentialenemies, or as members of diﬀerent ethnic groups, but as potential trading partners.
5
The right to free speech is itself best seen as part of the project of helping to producean engaged, self-governing citizenry.
Limited options: of foxes and sour grapes
When government imposes restrictions on people’s opportunities and information, itis likely to undermine freedom not merely by aﬀecting their choices but also byaﬀecting their preferences and desires. Of course this is what concerned T ocquevilleand Dewey, and in unfree nations, we can ﬁnd numerous examples in the area ofCITIZENS 205
communications and media policy, as oﬃcial censorship prevents people from learn-
ing about a variety of ideas and possibilities. This was common practice in communistnations, and both China and Singapore have sought to reduce general access to theInternet, partly in an eﬀort to shape both preferences and beliefs. When informationis unavailable and when opportunities are shut oﬀ, and known to be shut oﬀ, peoplemay not end up not wanting them at all.
The social theorist Jon Elster illustrates the point through the old tale of the fox
and the sour grapes.
6 The fox does not want the grapes, because he believes them to
be sour, but the fox believes them to be sour because they are unavailable, and headjusts his attitude toward the grapes in a way that takes account of their unavail-ability. The fox cannot have the grapes, and so he concludes that they are sourand that he doesn’t want them. Elster says, quite rightly, that the unavailability ofthe grapes cannot be justiﬁed by reference to the preferences of the fox, when theunavailability of the grapes is the very reason for the preferences of the fox.
Elster’s suggestion is that citizens who have been deprived of options may not
want the things of which they have been deprived; and the deprivation cannot bejustiﬁed by reference to the fact that citizens are not asking for these things, when theyare not asking because they have been deprived of them. In the area of communica-tions and media policy, it follows that a system of few or dramatically limited options –including, for example, an oﬃcial government news program and nothing else– cannot reasonably be defended, even if there is little or no public demand for furtheroptions. The absence of the demand is likely to be a product of the deprivation. It doesnot justify the deprivation. This point holds with respect to television stations and theInternet as with everything else.
Thus far I have been making arguments for a range of opportunities, even in
societies in which people, lacking such opportunities, are not asking for more. Ofcourse the issue is very diﬀerent in the communications universe that is the maintopic of this book – one in which people have countless possibilities from which tochoose. But here too social circumstances, including markets, aﬀect preferences, notonly the other way around. From the standpoint of citizenship, and freedom as well,problems also emerge when people are choosing alternatives that sharply limit theirown horizons.
Preferences are a product not only of the number of options but also of what
markets accentuate and of past choices, and those choices can impose constraints oftheir own. Suppose, for example, that one person’s choices have been limited tosports, and lead him to learn little about political issues; that another person focusesonly on national issues, because she has no interest in what happens outside Americanborders; and that still another restricts himself to material that reaﬃrms his ownpolitical convictions. In diﬀerent ways, each of these person’s choices constrains bothcitizenship and freedom, simply because it dramatically narrows their ﬁeld of interestsand concerns. This is not a claim that people should be required to see things that donot interest them; it is a more mundane point about how any existing market, and ourown choices, can limit or expand our freedom.
Indeed people are often aware of this fact, and make choices so as to promote
wider understanding and better formation of their own preferences. Sometimeswe select radio and television programs and Websites from which we will learn206
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
something, even if the programs and the sites we choose are more demanding and less
fun than the alternatives. And we may even lament the very choices that we make, onthe ground that what we have done, as consumers, does not serve our long-terminterests. Whether or not people actually lament their choices, they sometimes havegood reason to do so, and they know this without saying so.
These points underlie some of the most important functions of public forums
and of general interest intermediaries. Both of these produce unanticipated exposuresthat help promote the free formation of preferences, even in a world of numerousoptions. In this sense, they are continuous with the educational system. Indeed theyprovide a kind of continuing education for adults, something that a free society cannotdo without. It does not matter whether the government is directly responsible for theinstitutions that perform this role. What matters is that they exist.
Democratic institutions and consumer sovereignty
None of these points means that some abstraction called “government” should feelfree to move preferences and beliefs in what it considers to be desirable directions.The central question is whether citizens in a democratic system, aware of the pointsmade thus far, might want to make choices that diverge from those that they make intheir capacity as private consumers. Sometimes this does appear to be their desire.What I am suggesting is that when this is the case, there is, in general, no legitimateobjection if government responds. The public’s eﬀort to counteract the adverseeﬀects of consumer choices should not be disparaged as a form of governmentmeddling or unacceptable paternalism, at least if the government is democratic andreacting to the reﬂective judgments of the citizenry.
What we think and what we want often depends on the social role in which we
ﬁnd ourselves, and the role of citizen is very diﬀerent from the role of consumer.Citizens do not think and act as consumers. Indeed, most citizens have no diﬃculty indistinguishing between the two. Frequently a nation’s political choices could not beunderstood if viewed only as a process of implementing people’s desires in theircapacity as consumers. For example, some people support eﬀorts to promote seriouscoverage of public issues on television, even though their own consumption patternsfavor situation comedies; they seek stringent laws protecting the environment orendangered species, even though they do not use the public parks or derive materialbeneﬁts from protection of such species; they approve of laws calling for social secur-ity and welfare even though they do not save or give to the poor; they support antidis-crimination laws even though their own behavior is hardly race- or gender-neutral.The choices people make as political participants seem systematically diﬀerent fromthose they make as consumers.
Why is this? Is it a puzzle or a paradox? The most basic answer is that people ’s
behavior as citizens reﬂects a variety of distinctive inﬂuences. In their role as citizens,people might seek to implement their highest aspirations in political behavior whenthey do not do so in private consumption. They might aspire to communicationssystem of a particular kind, one that promotes democratic goals, and they might try topromote that aspiration through law. Acting in the fashion of Ulysses anticipating theSirens, people might “precommit” themselves, in democratic processes, to a course ofCITIZENS 207
action that they consider to be in the general interest. And in their capacity as citizens,
they might attempt to satisfy altruistic or other-regarding desires, which diverge fromthe self-interested preferences often characteristic of the behavior of consumers inmarkets. In fact social and cultural norms often incline people to express aspirationalor altruistic goals more often in political behavior than in markets. Of course sel ﬁsh
behavior is common in politics; but such norms often press people, in their capacity ascitizens, in the direction of a concern for others or for the public interest.
Indeed, the deliberative aspects of politics, bringing additional information and
perspectives to bear, often a ﬀects people’s judgments as these are expressed through
governmental processes. A principal function of a democratic system is to ensure thatthrough representative or participatory processes, new or submerged voices, or noveldepictions of where interests lie and what they in fact are, are heard and understood. Ifrepresentatives or citizens are able to participate in a collective discussion of broad-casting or the appropriate nature of the Internet, they can generate a far fuller andricher picture of the central social goals, and of how they might be served, than can beprovided through individual decisions as registered in the market. It should hardly besurprising if preferences, values, and perceptions of what matters, to individuals andto societies, are changed as a result of that process.
Unanimity and majority rule
Arguments based on citizens’ collective desires are irresistible if the measure at issueis adopted unanimously – if all citizens are for it. But more serious diﬃculties areproduced if (as is usual) the law imposes on a minority what it regards as a burdenrather than a beneﬁt. Suppose, for example, that a majority wants to require freetelevision time for candidates or to have three hours of educational programming forchildren each week – but that a minority objects, contending that it is indiﬀerent tospeech by candidates, and that it does not care if there is more educational program-ming for children. Or suppose that in response to the danger of group polarization, amajority wants to require that Websites that propound one political view must pro-vide links to Websites promoting another view. It might be thought that those whoperceive a need to bind themselves to a duty, or a course of action of some kind,should not be permitted to do so if the consequence is to bind others who perceive nosuch need.
Any interference with the preferences of the minority is indeed unfortunate. But
in general, it is diﬃcult to see what argument there might be for an across-the-boardrule against the modest kind of democratic action that I will be defending here. If themajority is prohibited from promoting its aspirations or vindicating its consideredjudgments through legislation, people will be less able to engage in democratic self-government. The choice is between the considered judgments of the majority and thepreferences of the minority. I am not suggesting, of course, that the minority shouldbe foreclosed where its rights are genuinely at risk. As we shall see in chapter 8, theremedies that I will suggest do not fall in that category.208
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
Unhappy sovereigns: the consumption treadmill
Throughout the discussion I have assumed that insofar as people are indeed acting as
consumers, new communications technologies are an unambiguous boon. This is awidespread assumption, and it is easy to see why. If you want to buy anything at all, ithas become much easier to do so. If you’d like a T oyota Camry, or a Ford T aurus, or asports utility vehicle, many sites are available; wallets and watches and wristbands areeasily found on-line; shirts and sweaters can be purchased in seconds. Nor is conveni-ence the only point. As a result of the Internet, ordinary people have a much greaterrange of choices, and competitive pressures are, in a sense, far more intense forproducers. Just to take one example, priceline.com allows you to “Name Y our OwnPrice” for airline tickets, hotel rooms, groceries, new cars, mortgages, rental cars,sporting goods, strollers, swings, televisions, exercise equipment, and much more.
Indeed the growth of options for consumers has been a prime engine behind the
growth of the Internet.
Insofar as the number of .coms is growing, it might seem clear that consumers, as
consumers, are far better oﬀ as a result. But there is a problem: Extensive evidenceshows that our experience of many goods and services is largely a product of what otherpeople have, and when there is a general improvement in everyone’s consumer goods, people’swell-being is increased little or not at all.
7 Notwithstanding the evidence on its behalf,
this might seem to be a positively weird suggestion. Isn’t it obvious that better con-sumer goods are good for consumers? Actually it isn’t so obvious. The reason is thatpeople evaluate many goods by seeing how they compare to goods generally. If con-sumer goods as a whole are (say) 20 percent better, people are not going to be 20percent happier, and they may not be happier at all.
T o see the point, imagine that your current computer is the average computer
from ten years ago. Chances are good that ten years ago, that computer was entirelyﬁne, for you as for most other people. Chances are also good that if there had been noadvances in computers, and if each of us had the same computer, in terms of quality,as we had ten years ago, little would be amiss. But in light of the massive improvementin computers in the last decade, you would undoubtedly be disappointed by continu-ing to own a computer from ten years before. Partly this is because it would seemhopelessly slow and infuriatingly ineﬃcient, since the frame of reference has been setby much more advanced computers. Partly this is because your decade-old computerwill not be able to interact well with modern ones, and it will place you at a seriousdisadvantage in dealing with others, not least in the marketplace.
This point need not depend on a claim that people are envious of their neighbors
(though sometimes they are), or that people care a great deal about their status and onhow they are doing in comparison with others (though status is indeed important).For many goods, the key point, developed by the economist Robert Frank, is that theframe of reference is set socially, not individually.
8 Our experience of what we have is
determined by that frame of reference. What the Internet is doing is to alter the frameof reference, and by a large degree. This is not an unmixed blessing for consumers,even if it is a terriﬁc development for many sellers.
T o evaluate the Internet’s ambiguous eﬀects on consumers, it is necessary only to
see a simple point: When millions of consumers simultaneously ﬁnd themselves withCITIZENS 209
improved opportunities to ﬁnd goods, they are likely to ﬁnd themselves of a kind of
“treadmill” in which each is continually trying to purchase more and better, simply inorder to keep up with others and with the ever-shifting frame of reference. Indeed,what is true for computers is all the more true for countless other goods, includingmost of the vast array of products available on the Internet, such as sports utilityvehicles, CD players, and televisions. Computers are evaluated socially, to be sure, butat least it can be said that fast and eﬃcient ones might genuinely improve our lives, notleast by enabling us to improve the operation of our democracy. But for many con-sumer goods, where the frame of reference is also provided socially, what really mat-ters is how they compare to what other people have, and not how good they are inabsolute terms. What would be a wonderful car or television, in one time and place,will seem ridiculously primitive in another.
In sum, the problem with the consumption treadmill, moving ever faster as a
result of the Internet, is that despite growing expenditures, and improved goods, theshift in the frame of reference means that consumers are unlikely to be much happieror better oﬀ. Even if the Internet is making it far easier for consumers to get bettergoods, or the same goods at a better price, there is every reason to doubt that this isproducing as much of an improvement in life, even for consumers, as we like to think.
This argument should not be misunderstood. Some “goods” actually do improve
people’s well-being, independently of shifts in the frame of reference. Robert Frankargues that these goods tend to involve “inconspicuous consumption,” from whichpeople receive beneﬁts apart from what other people have or do.
9 When people have
more leisure time, or when they have a chance to exercise and keep in shape, or whenthey are able to spend more time with family and friends, their lives are likely to bebetter, whatever other people are doing. But when what matters is the frame set forsocial comparison, a society focused on better consumer goods will face a seriousproblem: People will channel far too many resources into the consumption “tread-mill,” and far too few into goods that are not subject to the treadmill eﬀect, or thatwould otherwise be far better for society (such as improved protection against crimeor environmental pollution, or assistance for poor people).
For present purposes my conclusions are simple. New technologies unquestion-
ably make purchases easier and more convenient for consumers. T o this extent, theydo help. But they help far less than we usually think, because they accelerate theconsumption treadmill without making life much better for consumers of most goods.If citizens are reﬂective about their practices and their lives, they are entirely aware ofthis fact. As citizens, we might well choose to slow down the treadmill, or to ensurethat resources that now keep it moving will be devoted to better uses. And insofar ascitizens are attempting to accomplish that worthy goal, the idea of liberty shouldhardly stand in the way.
Democracy and preferences
When people’s preferences are a product of excessively limited options, there is aproblem from the standpoint of freedom, and we do freedom a grave disservice byinsisting on respect for preferences. When options are plentiful, things are muchbetter. But there is also a problem, from the standpoint of freedom, when people’s210
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
past choices lead to the development of preferences that limit their own horizons and
their capacity for citizenship.
My central claim here has been that the citizens of a democratic polity may
legitimately seek a communications market that departs from consumer choices, infavor of a system that promotes goals associated with both freedom and democracy.Measures that promote these goals might be favored by a large majority of citizenseven if, in their capacity as consumers, they would choose a diﬀerent course. Con-sumers are not citizens and it is a large error to conﬂate the two. One reason for thedisparity is that the process of democratic choice often elicits people’s aspirations.When we are thinking about what we as a nation should do – rather than what each ofus as consumers should buy – we are often led to think of our larger, long-term goals.We may therefore seek to promote a high-quality communications market even if, asconsumers, we seek “infotainment.” Within the democratic process, we are also ableto act as a group, and not limited to our options as individuals. Acting as a group, weare thus in a position to solve various obstacles to dealing properly with issues that wecannot, without great diﬃculty, solve on our own.
These points obviously bear on a number of questions outside of the area of
communications, such as environmental protection and antidiscrimination law. Inmany contexts, people, acting in their capacity as citizens, favor measures that divergefrom the choices they make in their capacity as consumers. Of course it is importantto impose constraints, usually in the form of rights, on what political majorities maydo under this rationale. But if I am correct, one thing is clear: A system of limitlessindividual choices, with respect to communications, is not necessarily in the interest ofcitizenship and self-government. Democratic eﬀorts to reduce the resulting problemsought not to be rejected in freedom’s name.
Notes
1 Robert H. Frank and Philip J. Cook, The Winner-T ake-All Society 201 (1995).2 Alexis de T ocqueville, Democracy in America 317 (1987).3 John Dewey, The Future of Liberalism, in Dewey and His Critics 695, 697 (Sidney
Morgenbesser ed. 1977).
4 See Frank and Cook. Winner-T ake-All Society 19.5 See Albert Hirschmann, The Passions and the Interests (1967).6 See Jon Elster, Sour Grapes (1983).7 See Robert Frank, Luxury Fever (1998) for a good discussion.8 See id.9 See id.CITIZENS 211
4.4
Abstraction/class,
by McKenzie Wark
Abstraction
A double spooks the world, the double of abstraction. The fortunes of states and
armies, companies and communities depend on it. All contending classes, be theyruling or ruled; revere it – yet fear it. Ours is a world that ventures blindly into the newwith its ﬁngers crossed.
All classes fear this relentless abstraction of the world, on which their fortunes yet
depend. All classes but one: the hacker class. We are the hackers of abstraction. Weproduce new concepts, new perceptions, new sensations, hacked out of raw data.Whatever code we hack, be it programming language, poetic language, math ormusic, curves or colorings, we are the abstracters of new worlds. Whether we come torepresent ourselves as researchers or authors, artists or biologists, chemists or musi-cians, philosophers or programmers, each of these subjectivities is but a fragment of aclass still becoming, bit by bit, aware of itself as such.
And yet we don’t quite know who we are. That is why this book seeks to make
manifest our origins, our purpose and our interests. A hacker manifesto: Not the onlymanifesto, as it is in the nature of the hacker to diﬀer from others, to diﬀer even fromoneself, over time. T o hack is to diﬀer. A hacker manifesto cannot claim to representwhat refuses representation.
Hackers create the possibility of new things entering the world. Not always
great things, or even good things, but new things. In art, in science, in philosophyand culture, in any production of knowledge where data can be gathered, whereinformation can be extracted from it, and where in that information new possibilitiesfor the world produced, there are hackers hacking the new out of the old. While wecreate these new worlds, we do not possess them. That which we create is mortgagedto others, and to the interests of others, to states and corporations who monopolize themeans for making worlds we alone discover. We do not own what we produce – itowns us.
Hackers use their knowledge and their wits to maintain their autonomy. Some
take the money and run. (We must live with our compromises.) Some refuse tocompromise. (We live as best we can.) All too often those of us who take one of these
paths resent those who take the other. One lot resents the prosperity it lacks, the other
resents the liberty it lacks to hack away at the world freely. What eludes the hackerclass is a more abstract expression of our interests as a class, and of how this interestmay meet those of others in the world.
Hackers are not joiners. We’re not often willing to submerge our singularity.
What the times call for is a collective hack that realizes a class interest based on analignment of diﬀerences rather than a coercive unity. Hackers are a class, but anabstract class. A class that makes abstractions, and a class made abstract. T o abstracthackers as a class is to abstract the very concept of class itself. The slogan of thehacker class is not the workers of the world united, but the workings of the worlduntied.
Everywhere abstraction reigns, abstraction made concrete. Everywhere abstrac-
tion’s straight lines and pure curves order matters along complex but eﬃcientvectors. But where education teaches what one may produce with an abstraction,the knowledge most useful for the hacker class is of how abstractions are them-selves produced. Deleuze: “Abstractions explain nothing, they themselves have to beexplained.”
1
Abstraction may be discovered or produced, may be material or immaterial, but
abstraction is what every hack produces and aﬃrms. T o abstract is to constructa plane upon which otherwise diﬀerent and unrelated matters may be broughtinto many possible relations. T o abstract is to express the virtuality of nature, tomake known some instance of its possibilities, to actualize a relation out of inﬁniterelationality, to manifest the manifold.
History is the production of abstraction and the abstraction of production. What
makes life diﬀer in one age after the next is the application of new modes of abstrac-tion to the task of wresting freedom from necessity. History is the virtual made actual,one hack after another. History is the cumulative qualitative diﬀerentiation of natureas it is hacked.
Out of the abstraction of nature comes its productivity, and the production of
a surplus over and above the necessities of survival. Out of this expanding surplusover necessity comes an expanding capacity to hack, again and again, producingfurther abstractions, further productivity, further release from necessity – at least inpotential. But the hacking of nature, the production of surplus, does not make us free.Again and again, a ruling class arises that controls the surplus over bare necessity andenforces new necessities on those peoples who produce this very means of escapingnecessity.
What makes our times diﬀerent is the appearance on the horizon of possibility of
a new world, long imagined – a world free from necessity. The production of abstrac-tion has reached the threshold where it can break the shackles holding hacking fast tooutdated and regressive class interests, once and for all. Debord: “The world already
possesses the dream of a time whose consciousness it must now possess in order toactually live it.”
2
Invention is the mother of necessity. While all states depend on abstraction for the
production of their wealth and power, the ruling class of any given state has an uneasyrelationship to the production of abstraction in new forms. The ruling class seeksalways to control innovation and turn it to its own ends, depriving the hacker ofABSTRACTION/CLASS 213
control of her or his creation, and thereby denying the world as a whole the right to
manage its own development.
Class
A class arises – the working class – able to question the necessity of private property.A party arises, within the worker’s movement, claiming to answer to working classdesires – the communists. As Marx writes, “in all these movements they bring to the
front, as the leading question in each, the property question, no matter what its degreeof development at the time.” This was the answer communists proposed to the prop-erty question: “centralize all instruments of production in the hands of the state.”
3
Making property a state monopoly only produced a new ruling class, and a new andmore brutal class struggle. But is that our ﬁnal answer? Perhaps the course of the classstruggle is not yet over. Perhaps there is another class that can open the propertyquestion in a new way – and in keeping the question open end once and for all themonopoly of the ruling classes on the ends of history.
There is a class dynamic driving each stage of the development of this vectoral
world in which we now ﬁnd ourselves. The vectoral class is driving this world to thebrink of disaster, but it also opens up the world to the resources for overcoming itsown destructive tendencies. In the three successive phases of commodiﬁcation, quitediﬀerent ruling classes arise, usurping diﬀerent forms of private property. Each rulingclass in turn drives the world towards ever more abstract ends.
First arises a pastoralist class. They disperse the great mass of peasants who
traditionally worked the land under the thumb of feudal lords. The pastoralists sup-plant the feudal lords, releasing the productivity of nature that they claim as theirprivate property. It is this privatization of property – a legal hack – that creates theconditions for every other hack by which the land is made to yield a surplus. Avectoral world rises on the shoulders of the agricultural hack.
As new forms of abstraction make it possible to produce a surplus from the
land with fewer and fewer farmers, pastoralists turn them oﬀ their land, deprivingthem of their livelihood. Dispossessed farmers seek work and a new home in cities.Here capital puts them to work in its factories. Farmers become workers. Capital asproperty gives rise to a class of capitalists who own the means of production, and aclass of workers, dispossessed of it – and by it. Whether as workers or farmers, thedirect producers ﬁnd themselves dispossessed not only of their land, but of thegreater part of the surplus they produce, which accumulates to the pastoralists inthe form of rent as the return on land, and to capitalists in the form of proﬁt as thereturn on capital.
Dispossessed farmers become workers, only to be dispossessed again. Having lost
their agriculture, they lose in turn their human culture. Capital produces in its fac-tories not just the necessities of existence, but a way of life it expects its workers toconsume. Commodiﬁed life dispossess the worker of the information traditionallypassed on outside the realm of private property as culture, as the gift of one generationto the next, and replaces it with information in commodiﬁed form.
Information, like land or capital, becomes a form of property monopolized by a
class, a class of vectoralists, so named because they control the vectors along which214
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
information is abstracted, just as capitalists control the material means with which
goods are produced, and pastoralists the land with which food is produced. Thisinformation, once the collective property of the productive classes – the workingand farming classes considered together – becomes the property of yet anotherappropriating class.
As peasants become farmers through the appropriation of their land, they still
retain some autonomy over the disposition of their working time. Workers, eventhough they do not own capital, and must work according to the clock and its merci-less time, could at least struggle to reduce the working day and release free time fromlabor. Information circulated within working class culture as a public property belong-ing to all. But when information in turn becomes a form of private property, workersare dispossessed of it, and must buy their own culture back from its owners, thevectoralist class. The farmer becomes a worker, and the worker, a slave. The wholeworld becomes subject to the extraction of a surplus from the producing classes that iscontrolled by the ruling classes, who use it merely to reproduce and expand thismatrix of exploitation. Time itself becomes a commodiﬁed experience.
The producing classes – farmers, workers, hackers – struggle against the
expropriating classes – pastoralists, capitalists, vectoralists – but these successive rul-ing classes struggle also amongst themselves. Capitalists try to break the pastoralmonopoly on land and subordinate the produce of the land to industrial production.Vectoralists try to break capital’s monopoly on the production process, and sub-ordinate the production of goods to the circulation of information: “The privilegedrealm of electronic space controls the physical logistics of manufacture, since therelease of raw materials and manufactured goods requires electronic consent anddirection.”
4
That the vectoralist class has replaced capital as the dominant exploiting class can
be seen in the form that the leading corporations take. These ﬁrms divest themselvesof their productive capacity, as this is no longer a source of power. They rely on acompeting mass of capitalist contractors for the manufacture of their products. Theirpower lies in monopolizing intellectual property – patents, copyrights and trademarks– and the means of reproducing their value – the vectors of communication. Theprivatization of information becomes the dominant, rather than a subsidiary, aspect ofcommodiﬁed life. “There is a certain logic to this progression: ﬁrst, a select group ofmanufacturers transcend their connection to earthbound products, then, with market-ing elevated as the pinnacle of their business, they attempt to alter marketing’s socialstatus as a commercial interruption and replace it with seamless integration.”
5 With
the rise of the vectoral class, the vectoral world is complete.
As private property advances from land to capital to information, property
itself becomes more abstract. Capital as property frees land from its spatial ﬁxity.
Information as property frees capital from its ﬁxity in a particular object. Thisabstraction of property makes property itself something amenable to acceleratedinnovation – and conﬂict. Class conﬂict fragments, but creeps into any and every
relation that becomes a relation of property. The property question, the basis of class,becomes the question asked everywhere, of everything. If “class” appears absent tothe apologists of our time, it is not because it has become just another in a seriesof antagonisms and articulations, but on the contrary because it has become theABSTRACTION/CLASS 215
structuring principle of the vectoral plane which organizes the play of identities as
diﬀerences.
The hacker class, producer of new abstractions, becomes more important to
each successive ruling class, as each depends more and more on information as aresource. Land cannot be reproduced at will. Good land lends itself to scarcity, andthe abstraction of private property is almost enough on its own to protect the rents ofthe pastoral class. Capital’s proﬁts rest on mechanically reproducible means of pro-duction, its factories and inventories. The capitalist ﬁrm sometimes needs the hackerto reﬁne and advance the tools and techniques of productions to stay abreast of thecompetition. Information is the most easily reproducible object ever captured in theabstraction of property. Nothing protects the vectoralist business from its competitorsother than its capacity to qualitatively transform the information it possesses andextract new value from it. The services of the hacker class become indispensable toan economy that is itself more and more dispensable – an economy of property andscarcity.
As the means of production become more abstract, so too does the property
form. Property has to expand to contain more and more complex forms of diﬀerence,and reduce it to equivalence. T o render land equivalent, it is enough to draw up itsboundaries, and create a means of assigning it as an object to a subject. Complexitieswill arise, naturally, from this unnatural imposition on the surface of the world,although the principle is a simple abstraction. But for something to be represented asintellectual property, it is not enough for it to be in a diﬀerent location. It must bequalitatively diﬀerent. That di ﬀerence, which makes a copyright or a patent possible,
is the work of the hacker class. The hacker class makes what Bateson calls “thediﬀerence that makes the diﬀerence.”
6 The diﬀerence that drives the abstraction of
the world, but which also drives the accumulation of class power in the hands of thevectoral class.
The hacker class arises out of the transformation of information into property, in
the form of intellectual property. This legal hack makes of the hack a property pro-ducing process, and thus a class producing process. The hack produces the class forcecapable of asking – and answering – the property question, the hacker class. Thehacker class is the class with the capacity to create not only new kinds of object andsubject in the world, not only new kinds of property form in which they may berepresented, but new kinds of relation, with unforseen properties, which question theproperty form itself. The hacker class realizes itself as a class when it hacks theabstraction of property and overcomes the limitations of existing forms of property.
The hacker class may be ﬂattered by the attention lavished upon it by capitalists
compared to pastoralists, and vectoralists compared to capitalists. Hackers tend to allyat each turn with the more abstract form of property and commodity relation. Buthackers soon feel the restrictive grip of each ruling class, as it secures its dominanceover its predecessor and rival, and can renege on the dispensations it extended tohackers as a class. The vectoralist class, in particular, will go out of its way to court andcoopt the productivity of hackers, but only because of its attenuated dependence onnew abstraction as the engine of competition among vectoral interests. When thevectoralist act in concert as a class it is to subject hacking to the prerogatives of itsclass power.216
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
The vectoral world is dynamic. It puts new abstractions to work, producing new
freedoms from necessity. The direction this struggle takes is not given in the course
of things, but is determined by the struggle between classes. All classes enter intorelations of conﬂict, collusion and compromise. Their relations are not necessarilydialectical. Classes may form alliances of mutual interest against other classes, or mayarrive at a “historic compromise,” for a time. Y et despite pauses and setbacks, theclass struggle drives history into abstraction and abstraction into history.
Notes
1 Gilles Deleuze, Negotiations (New Y ork: Columbia University Press, 1995),
p. 145. Throughout A Hacker Manifesto, certain protocols of reading are appliedto the various textual archives on which it draws, and which call for some explan-ation. It is not so much a “symptomatic” reading as a homeopathic one, turningtexts against their own limitations, imposed on them by their conditions of pro-duction. For instance, there is an industry in the making, within the educationbusiness, around the name of Deleuze, from which he may have to be rescued. Hisis a philosophy not restricted to what is, but open to what could be. In Negotiations,
he can be found producing concepts to open up the political and cultural terrain,and providing lines along which to escape from state, market, party and othertraps of identity and representation. His tastes were aristocratic – limited to theeducational culture of his place and time – and his work lends itself to the trap ofpurely formal elaboration of the kind desired by the Anglo-American educationalmarket particularly. One does better to take Deleuze from behind and give himmutant oﬀspring by immaculate conception. Which was, after all, Deleuze’s ownprocedure. He can be turned away from his own sedentary habits.
2 Guy Debord, Society of the Spectacle (Detroit: Black and Red, 1983), 164. This
classic work in the crypto-Marxist tradition sets the standard for a criticalthought in action. Debord’s text is so designed that attempts to modify its thesesinevitably moderate them, and thus reveal the modiﬁer’s complicity with the“spectacular society” that Debord so (anti)spectacularly condemns. It is a workthat can only be honored by a complete reimagining of its theses on a moreabstract basis, a procedure Debord himself applied to Marx, and which forms thebasis of the crypto-Marxist procedure.
3 Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, “Manifesto of the Communist Party,” in The
Revolutions of 1848: Political Writings, vol. 1, ed. David Fernbach (Harmonds-worth: Penguin, 1978), pp. 98, 86. Karatani would see the property questioncoming from Marx, but the state ownership answer as belonging to Engels, and adistortion of Marx’s whole trajectory. See Kolin Karatani, Transcritique: On Kantand Marx (Cambridge MA: MIT Press, 2003). A Hacker Manifesto is clearlyneither an orthadox Marxist tract nor a post-Marxist repudiation, but rather acrypto-Marxist reimagining of the materialist method for practicing theorywithin history. From Marx one might take the attempt to discover abstraction atwork in the world, as an historical process, rather than as merely a convenientcategory in thought with which to create a new intellectual product. Crypto-Marxist thought might hew close to the multiplicity of the time of everyday life,ABSTRACTION/CLASS 217
which calls for a reinvention of theory in every moment, in ﬁdelity to the moment,
rather than a repetition of a representation of a past orthodoxy, or a self-serving“critique” of that representation in the interests of making Marx safe for theeducational process and its measured, repetitive time.
4 Critical Art Ensemble, The Electronic Disturbance (New Y ork: Autonomedia,
1994), pp. 16–17. See also Critical Art Ensemble, The Molecular Invasion (NewY ork: Autonomedia, 2002). This group discover, through their always-inventivepractice, just what needs to be thought at the nexus of information and property,and provide useful tools for beginning just such a project. Their work is particu-larly illuminating in regard to the commodiﬁcation of genetic information – afrontline activity for the development of the vectoral class. All that is required is adeepening of the practice of thinking abstractly. T ogether with groups, networksand collaborations such as Adilkno, Ctheory, EDT, Institute for Applied Auton-omy, I/O/D, Luther Blissett Project, Mongrel, Nettime, Oekonux, Old Boys’Network, Openﬂows, Public Netbase, subRosa, Rhizome, ark, Sarai, TheThing, VNS Matrix and The Y es Men, Critical Art Ensemble form a movementof sorts, where art, politics and theory converge in a mutual critique of each other.These groups have only a “family resemblance” to each other. Each shares acharacteristic with at least one other, but not necessarily the same characteristic. A
Hacker Manifesto is among other things an attempt to abstract from the practicesand concepts they produce. See also Josephine Bosma et al., Readme! Filtered byNettime (New Y ork: Autonomedia, 1999).
5 Naomi Klein, No Logo (London: Harper Collins, 2000), p. 35. See also Naómi
Klein, Fences and Windows (New Y ork: Picador, 2002). This exemplary work
of journalism discovers the nexus between the brand and logo as emblems ofthe hollowing out of the capitalist economy in the overdeveloped world, and therelegation of the great bulk of capitalist production to the sweatshops of theunderdeveloped world. We see clearly here that capital has been superseded as anhistorical formation in all but name. Klein stops short at the description of thesymptoms, however. She does not oﬀer quite the right diagnosis. But then thatisn’t the task she sets herself. There can be no one book, no master thinker forthese times. What is called for is a practice of combining heterogeneous modes ofperception, thought and feeling, diﬀerent styles of researching and writing,diﬀerent kinds of connection to diﬀerent readers, proliferation of informationacross diﬀerent media, all practiced within a gift economy, expressing and elab-orating diﬀerences, rather than broadcasting a dogma, a slogan, a critique or line.The division of genres and types of writing, like all aspects of the intellectualdivision of labor, are antithetical to the autonomous development of the hackerclass as class, and work only to reinforce the subordination of knowledge toproperty by the vectoral class.
6 Gregory Bateson, Steps T owards an Ecology of Mind (New Y ork: Ballantine, 1972).
Bateson grasped the link between information and nature on an abstract level,even as he shrank from examining the historical forces that forged just this link:And yet he is a pioneer in hacker thought and action in his disregard for theproperty rules of academic ﬁelds. He skips gaily from biology to anthropology toepistemology, seeing in the divisions between ﬁelds, even between statements, an218
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
ideological construction of the world as ﬁt only for zoning and development in
the interests of property. At the moment when the foundations of the ideology ofthe vectoral class were in formation, in information science, computer science,cybernetics, and when information was being discovered as the new essence ofsocial and even natural phenomena, Bateson alone grasped the critical use ofthese nascent concepts.ABSTRACTION/CLASS 219
PART 5
Time and space in the age of
information
A governing trope to describe the effects of the ICT revolution and the dynamics of
neoliberal globalisation which gave it its political and economic momentum is thatof ‘time– space compression’ . David Harvey coined it in his 1989 book The Condition of
Postmodernity , and deployed it to characterise what he saw as a de ﬁning feature of
an evolving post-Fordist, postmodernity (pp. 240 –242). Time– space compression, for
Harvey, was the effect of a rigid social and economic system of industrialisationmade (or forced to become) ‘ﬂexible’ . This occurred through the dismantling of post-war
Fordism beginning in the 1970s. Capitalism was then able to be true to its ‘essence’
and expand, relatively uncontrolled, to every corner of the earth in its historical project ofglobalisation. The effect was a rapid process of time –space compression where the
world increasingly became (and continues to become) a smaller place, with socialand cultural relations accelerating in synchrony with a fast-moving contemporarypostmodernity.
Around the same time, Anthony Giddens, in The Consequences of Modernity , was
developing a similar theory which was rooted more in sociology than Harvey ’s political
economy. Giddens termed it ‘time– space distantiation’  (1990). Essentially, for Giddens,
the concept means a separation  – or what he called the ‘ disembedding’  – of time and
space from localised place and its local contexts of interaction. Through the communi-
cative dynamism of modernity, social relations are stretched across time and space andsocial action is increasingly conducted beyond one ’s immediate physical presence
(in space or place). For Giddens, these processes – made possible through advances in
communications technologies – serve to ‘ empty out’  localised space to create a one-
world globalisation, a globalised space or ‘a single world where none existed previously ’
(1990:27).
In media theory, and in the social sciences more generally, these authors, with their
accounts of transformations in time and space through the increasingly complex andcomprehensive processes of modernity and industrialism, have been in ﬂuential. We
choose not to reprint them here, however. This is because they are not about mediatheory per se, and also because they are widely available either in their original form orin the various readers in which extracts have been reproduced (e.g. Cassell, 1993;Lechner and Boli, 2000). They nonetheless are recommended texts for anyone wishing
to investigate more deeply the issues of time and space and how our experience
of them can be transformed through technological innovation. They also provide anexcellent context through which the following texts may be explored.
James Carey begins this ﬁnal part by providing an historical context. The revo-
lutionary new innovation of the 19th century, he argues, was the telegraph, a technologythat ‘ushered in the modern phase of history and determined, even to this day, the
major lines of development of American communications ’. Most important for Carey
was that the telegraph ‘marked the decisive separation of “transportation ” and “ com-
munication” , terms that hitherto had been synonymous. He argues that the ‘media’  of
communication was transformed through this single technology. Not only did it in ﬁnitely
accelerate the process of ‘time– space compression’  – which corresponded exactly
with needs of an emerging industrialisation – but also ‘ reworked the nature of written
language [telegraph meaning “to write at a distance” ] and . . . the nature of awareness
itself’ . For Carey the telegraph was thus ideological  in its import. It served to ‘naturalize’
the spread of capitalism and of modernity and functioned to internalise the ‘rhetoric
of the technological sublime ’ that underscored them both. Moreover, the spread of
the telegraph, he argues, worked to rationalise the use of language into a modemore aligned to business and to science, ‘disembedding’  at the same time –  to use
Giddens’ s term –  the subtleties and variation of regional, local and colloquial forms of
language use.
The social, economic and cultural effects of the telegraph are considered in the
extract from Jeremy Stein. The full essay focuses on the Canadian town of Cornwall,Ontario, from the time of the introduction of the telegraph in the 1860s. Here we reprintthe preface to this discussion which is a useful observation on the various contem-porary theories of ‘ time– space compression’ . The fundamental question Stein asks is
whether our experience of space and time is revolutionised  by powerful new media
technologies in the ways that theorists such as Harvey and Giddens would argue, oris the process more evolutionary? Like Carey ’s work, Stein’ s concentration on the
historical context and the telegraphic media has powerful implications for contemporarytheories of new media.
Nicola Green brings us up to the present with her essay ‘On the move: technology,
mobility, and the mediation of social time and space ’, which looks at the experience of
time and space through the use of that most ubiquitous of new media technologies, themobile phone. Green ’s work is important because it recognizes a unique convergence
of technology use within time and space. For Green, the act of being ‘mobile’  and
communicating across time and space represents a qualitatively different experiencefrom that of other media technologies such as the telegraph, or television or the inter-net, where users are required, usually, to be ﬁxed in space. Using qualitative data
gathered from the experience of users themselves, she asks the crucial question: whatdoes it mean to be mobile in a mobile world?
And it is from the relatively ‘ﬁxed’ position of the online user that Lee and Liebenau,
in the next extract, consider the temporality of the internet. What time is it on theinternet, when the local times of users would span every time zone in the world? On theinternet, they observe ‘9PM is no longer different from 8:17PM ’. Instead of being
unthinkingly dependent on the clock for our understanding of time, the notion of tem-poral ‘duration’ , or our experience of the ‘passing’  of time or the ‘time it takes’  for a222
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
particular task, takes on a new signi ﬁcance. They argue that the ‘ﬁction’  of real time is
revealed through such a perspective, and that instead the internet generates its own
times through the activities of its users. With such a potential for an awareness ofduration, the ‘ fact’ that it is 12:16PM or whatever, becomes increasingly less relevant
on the internet and the inherently asynchronous ‘lags’ and ‘ cycles’  and ‘ rhythms’  of the
network space become more pronounced.
In the last extract from Thomas Hylland Eriksen ’s Tyranny of the Moment: Fast
and Slow Time in the Age of Information  the focus on temporality shifts from the times
of the internet to the speed of everyday life. Again, through new media innovation, we areforced to think beyond the metering of the clock to consider the force and origin ofcontemporary social acceleration or the effects on our temporal awareness by informa-tion technologies. ‘Speed is contagious ’, argues Eriksen, a pandemic spread by connec-
tion on connection in the digital network. The ‘carrier’  is new media technologies that
saturate time and space with an increasingly accelerated panoply of signs and symbols.These are rendered in the form of information  that acts as the guide with which we
increasingly orient ourselves in the world. But the constant blizzard of informationalisedsigns and symbols tends to confuse and bewilder, forcing us to fall back on an easilycognated and narrowly focused perception of the world. Social acceleration, Eriksenargues, means that in more and more realms of life, ‘context and understanding ’ are
diminished. Acceleration becomes a central technological process in almost whollytechnologised world. The ‘tyranny’  of the moment for Eriksen is the tyranny of the
present, a constant now where the past and the future recede and our ability to re ﬂect
and project is correspondingly reduced.
References
Cassell, P. (1993) The Giddens Reader, Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Giddens, A. (1990) The Consequences of Modernity, Cambridge: Polity Press.Harvey, D. (1989) The Condition of Postmodernity, Oxford: Blackwell.Lechner, F. J. and Boli, J. (eds) (2000) The Globalization Reader, Oxford: Blackwell.TIME AND SPACE IN THE AGE OF INFORMATION 223
5.1
Technology and ideology: the case of
the telegraph,by James Carey
In one of the most famous paragraphs of our most famous autobiography, Henry
Adams located the precise moment when “eighteenth-century troglodytic Boston”joined industrial America: “the opening of the Boston and Albany Railroad; theappearance of the ﬁrst Cunard Steamers in the bay; and the telegraphic messageswhich carried from Baltimore to Washington the news that Henry Clay and James K.Polk were nominated for the presidency. This was May, 1844” (Adams, 1931: 5).
Adams signaled the absorption of genteel New England into industrial America by
three improvements in transportation and communication. Y et for all the signiﬁcanceattached to the telegraph in that famous passage, it remains a product of one of theleast studied technologies, certainly the least studied communications technology. Theeﬀect of the telegraph on modern life and its role as a model for future developmentsin communications have scarcely been explored. The ﬁrst twenty-three volumes ofT echnology and Culture are virtually without reference to the telegraph. Robert L.Thompson’s Wiring a Continent, the principal history of the telegraph, is now more
than forty years old, takes the story only to 1866, and focuses almost exclusively onthe formation of Western Union (Thompson, 1947).
I take the neglect of the telegraph to be unfortunate for a number of reasons.
First, the telegraph was dominated by the ﬁrst great industrial monopoly – WesternUnion, the ﬁrst communications empire and the prototype of the many industrialempires that were to follow. The telegraph, in conjunction with the railroad, providedthe setting in which modern techniques for the management of complex enterpriseswere ﬁrst worked out, though for the telegraph in what was eventually monopolistic
circumstances.
1 Although the telegraph did not provide the site for the ﬁrst of the
titanic nineteenth-century patent struggles (that prize probably goes to Elias Howe’ssewing machine) it led to one of the most signiﬁcant of them in the rewriting ofAmerican law, particularly in the great “telegraph war” between Jay Gould and theVanderbilt interests for control of the Edison patents for the quadraplex telegraphsystem, the innovation that Gould rightly prized as the “nerve of industry.”
2
Second, the telegraph was the ﬁrst product – really the foundation – of the
electrical goods industry and thus the ﬁrst of the science- and engineering-basedindustries. David Noble’s American by Design: Science, T echnology and the Rise of
Corporate Capitalism (1977) implies throughout a sharp distinction between forms of
engineering, such as civil engineering, grounded in a handicraft and guild tradition,and chemical engineering and electrical engineering, which were science-based fromthe outset. Much that is distinctive about the telegraph, from the organization of theindustry to the rhetoric that rationalized it, derives from the particular nature of theengineering it brought into being. More to the point, the telegraph was the ﬁrstelectrical engineering technology and therefore the ﬁrst to focus on the centralproblem in modern engineering: the economy of a signal.
3
Third, the telegraph brought about changes in the nature of language, of ordinary
knowledge, of the very structures of awareness. Although in its early days the telegraphwas used as a toy – as was the computer, which it preﬁgured – for playing long-
distance chess, its implications for human knowledge were the subject of extended,often euphoric, and often pessimistic debate. Adams saw the telegraph as a demonicdevice dissipating the energy of history and displacing the Virgin with the Dynamo,whereas Thoreau saw it as an agent of trivialization. An even larger group saw thetelegraph as an agency of benign improvement – spiritual, moral, economic, andpolitical. Now that thought could travel by “the singing wire,” a new form of report-
ing and a new form of knowledge were envisioned that would replace traditionalliterature with a new and active form of scientiﬁc knowledge.
Fourth, and partly for the foregoing reasons, the telegraph was a watershed
in communication, as I hope to show later. Now, it is easy to overemphasize therevolutionary consequences of the telegraph. It is not an infrequent experience tobe driving along an interstate highway and to become aware that the highway isparalleled by a river, a canal, a railroad track, or telegraph and telephone wires. Inthat instant one may realize that each of these improvements in transportation andcommunications merely worked a modiﬁcation on what preceded it. The telegraphtwisted and altered but did not displace patterns of connection formed by naturalgeography: by the river and primitive foot and horse paths and later by the woodenturnpike and canal.
But the innovation of the telegraph can stand metaphorically for all the innov-
ations that ushered in the modern phase of history and determined, even to this day,the major lines of development of American communications. The most importantfact about the telegraph is at once the most obvious and innocent: It permitted for theﬁrst time the eﬀective separation of communication from transportation. This factwas immediately recognized, but its signiﬁcance has been rarely investigated. Thetelegraph not only allowed messages to be separated from the physical movementof objects; it also allowed communication to control physical processes actively. Theearly use of the telegraph in railroad signaling is an example: telegraph messagescould control the physical switching of rolling stock, thereby multiplying the purposesand eﬀectiveness of communication. The separation of communication from trans-portation has been exploited in most subsequent developments in communicationdown to computer control systems.
When the telegraph reached the West Coast eight years in advance of a trans-
continental railroad, the identity of communication and transportation was ended inboth fact and symbol. Before the telegraph, “communication” was used to describetransportation as well as message transmittal for the simple reason that the movement226
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
of messages was dependent on their being carried on foot or horseback or by rail. The
telegraph, by ending the identity, allowed symbols to move independently of andfaster than transportation. T o put it in a slightly diﬀerent way, the telegraph freedcommunication from the constraints of geography. The telegraph, then, not onlyaltered the relation between communication and transportation; it also changed thefundamental ways in which communication was thought about. It provided a modelfor thinking about communication – a model I have called a transmission model – anddisplaced older religious views of communication even as the new technology wasmediated through religious language. And it opened up new ways of thinking aboutcommunication within both the formal practice of theory and the practical con-sciousness of everyday life. In this sense the telegraph was not only a new tool ofcommerce but also a thing to think with, an agency for the alteration of ideas.
II
A thorough treatment of the consequences of the telegraph would attempt to demon-strate how this instrument altered the spatial and temporal boundaries of humaninteraction, brought into existence new forms of language as well as new conceptualsystems, and brought about new structures of social relations, particularly by foster-ing a national commercial middle class. These consequences were also displacements:older forms of language and writing declined, traditional social interactions waned,and the pattern of city-state capitalism that dominated the ﬁrst half of the nineteenthcentury was broken up (Carey and Sims, 1976: 219–41). I intend now to concentrateon the relationship between the telegraph and ideas, between, broadly, the telegraphand ideology. I hope also to insinuate throughout some observations on the broadermatters noted earlier.
There are three relationships between the telegraph and ideology. Two of them
have received some attention, and I will mention them only in passing in order toconcentrate on a relationship that has not as yet been investigated.
The ﬁrst is the relationship between the telegraph and monopoly capitalism, the
principal subject of Thompson’s Wiring a Continent. That is, the telegraph was a new
and distinctively diﬀerent force of production that demanded a new body of law,economic theory, political arrangements, management techniques, organizationalstructures, and scientiﬁc rationales with which to justify and make eﬀective the devel-opment of a privately owned and controlled monopolistic corporation. This problemcan be looked at as one of the relationships among a force of production, the organiza-tional forms and administrative techniques that realize it, and the explanatory andjustifying ideology that guides and legitimates its institutionalization. Unfortunately,even in this context the telegraph has not been investigated adequately, partly becauseof the tendency to eschew historical investigations and to treat forces of produc-tion, tout court, as all-encompassing rather than to investigate the particular con-
sequences and ideological implications of particular technologies. T echnology assuch is too abstract a category to support any precise analysis; therefore, changesin technology go unanalyzed except for classifying them within various stages ofcapitalist development.
Before the telegraph, business relations were personal; that is, they were mediatedTECHNOLOGY AND IDEOLOGY: THE CASE OF THE TELEGRAPH 227
through face-to-face relations, by personal correspondence, by contacts among people
who, by and large, knew one another as actual persons. The overall coordination ofthese atomic relations and transactions was provided by the “invisible hand” of themarket.
With the telegraph and, of course, the railroads and improvements in other
techniques of transport and communication, the volume and speed of transactionsdemanded a new form of organization of essentially impersonal relations – that is,relations not among known persons but among buyers and sellers whose only relationwas mediated through an organization and a structure of management. “The visiblehand of management replaced the invisible hand of market forces where and whennew technology and expanded markets permitted a historically unprecedented highvolume and speed of materials through the processes of production and distribution”(Chandler, 1977: 12). Through the telegraph and railroad the social relations amonglarge numbers of anonymous buyers and sellers were coordinated. But these newand unprecedented relations of communication and contact had themselves to beexplained, justiﬁed, and made eﬀective. What we innocently describe as theory, law,common sense, religion were means by which these new relations were carriedthrough to explicit consciousness and “naturalized” – made to seem merely of the
order of things.
The second connection between ideology and the telegraph resides in the popular
imagery, largely religious, that accompanied the latter’s introduction. This aspect ofthe problem has been rather more thoroughly investigated, at least in a general way,within American studies and particularly within what is called the “myth and symbol”school. The telegraph, widely hailed at the time of its introduction as the “noiselesstenant of the wilderness,” was clothed in the language of religious aspiration andsecular millenarianism, a language Leo Marx names the “rhetoric of the technologicalsublime.” John Quirk and I, thinking more directly of the telegraph and subsequentdevelopments, have called this same language the “rhetoric of the electrical sublime.”
There were other technological marvels of the mid-nineteenth century, but
the inscrutable nature of the telegraph made it seem more extraordinary than, andqualitatively diﬀerent from, other inventions. The key to the mystery was, of course,electricity – a force of great potency and yet invisible. It was this invisibility that made
electricity and the telegraph powerful impetuses to idealist thought both in religiousand philosophical terms. It presented the mystery of the mind–body dualism andlocated vital energy in the realm of the mind, in the nonmaterial world. Electricity was,in standard terms of the day, “shadowy, mysterious, impalpable. It lives in the skiesand seems to connect the spiritual and material” (Czitrom, 1982: 9).
4
Electricity, the Reverend Ezra S. Gannett told his Boston congregation, was
both the “swift winged messenger of destruction” and the “vital energy of materialcreation. The invisible, imponderable substance, force, whatever it be – we do noteven certainly know what it is which we are dealing with . . . is brought under ourcontrol, to do our errands, nay, like a very slave” (Czitrom, 1982: 19). Anotherpreacher of the era, Gardner Spring, exclaimed that we were on the “border of aspiritual harvest because thought now travels by steam and magnetic wires” (Miller,1965: 48). This new technology enters American discussions not as mundane fact butas divinely inspired for the purposes of spreading the Christian message farther and228
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
faster, eclipsing time and transcending space, saving the heathen, bringing closer and
making more probable the day of salvation.
There were dissenters, of course, but the general uniformity of reaction to the
telegraph demonstrated how it was able to fuse the opposite poles of the electricalsublime: the desire for peace, harmony, and self-suﬃciency with the wish for power,proﬁt, and productivity. The presumed “annihilation of time and space” heralded bythe telegraph promised to bind the country together just as the portents of the CivilWar were threatening to tear it apart. Here the organic metaphors, so easily attributedto German philosophy, ﬂoated into American thought as means to describe how thetelegraph would change life. As early as 1838, Morse anticipated twentieth-centurynotions of the “global village.” It would not be long, he wrote, “ere the whole surfaceof this country would be channeled for those nerves which are to diﬀuse with thespeed of thought, a knowledge of all that is occurring throughout the land; making infact one neighborhood of the whole country” (Czitrom, 1982: 11–12).
And ﬁnally, a piece of doggerel typical of the era, entitled “T o Professor Morse,
In Pleasant Memory of Oct. 9, 1856, at the Albion,” expresses the mixture of science,commerce, politics, and pious religious unity that surfaced in popular consciousnesswith the telegraph:
A good and generous spirit ruled the hour;
Old jealousies were drowned in brotherhood;
Philanthropy rejoiced that Skill and Power,
Servants to Science, compass all men’s good;And over all Religion’s banner stood,
Upheld by thee, true patriarch of the planWhich in two hemispheres was schemed to showerMercies from God on universal man.
Y es, this electric chain from East to West
More than mere metal, more than mammon can,
Binds us together – kinsmen, in the best,
As most aﬀectionate and frankest bond;Brethren as one; and looking far beyond
The world in an Electric Union blest!
(Martin F . Typper, in Prime, 1875: 648).
One ﬁnds in this rhetoric of the electrical sublime a central tenet of middle-class
ideology: that “communication, exchange, motion brings humanity, enlightenment,progress and that isolation and disconnection are evidence of barbarism and merelyobstacles to be overcome” (Schivelbusch, 1978: 40). The eighteenth-century ideal ofuniversalism – the Kingdom of God and the Brotherhood of Man – included a belief in
a universal Human Nature. People were people – everywhere the same. Communica-tion was the engine that powered this ideal. Each improvement in communication, byending isolation, by linking people everywhere, was heralded as realizing the UniversalBrotherhood of Universal Man.
The argument is not an abstract one. Charles F . Briggs and Augustus Maverick,
writing in 1858, made the equation precise:TECHNOLOGY AND IDEOLOGY: THE CASE OF THE TELEGRAPH 229
It has been the result of the great discoveries of the past century, to eﬀect a
revolution in political and social life, by establishing a more intimate connectionbetween nations, with race and race. It has been found that the old system ofexclusion and insulation are stagnation and death. National health can only bemaintained by the free and unobstructed interchange of each with all. How potenta power, then, is the telegraph destined to become in the civilization of the world!This binds together by a vital cord all the nations of the earth. It is impossible thatold prejudices and hostilities should longer exist, while such an instrument hasbeen created for an exchange of thought between all the nations of the earth(Briggs and Maverick, 1858: 21–22).
In another work of the era, Sir William P . Andrews, justifying the Euphrates
Valley Railroad connecting India to Africa, quotes an anonymous writer who got the
whole matter rather more correctly:
Nor can it for a moment be doubted that a line of electric telegraphs betweenEurope and India must be a successful commercial enterprise, putting altogetherout of sight the important moral eﬀects which such a means of rapid communica-tion must of necessity bring about. It may, on the contrary, be doubted whetherany more eﬃcient means could be adopted to develop the resources of India, andto consolidate British power and strengthen British rule in that country, thanby the formation of the proposed system of railways in central Asia and thecarrying out of the proposed telegraph communication with Europe.
(Andrews, 1857: 141)
An essentially religious view of communication – or one cloaked, at least, in
religious metaphors – is as a mediator – a progressively vanishing mediator – betweenmiddle-class aspiration and capitalist and, increasingly, imperial development.
5 Max
Weber’s tour de force retains its original signiﬁcance in this context; for Weber’sarchetype of the formation of the Protestant ethic, Benjamin Franklin, reappearsin the mid-nineteenth century as the ﬁrst electrician, the ﬁrst to release this newforce of moral and social progress. But what needs to be more closely investigatedis the relationship between a later stage of economic development, new forms ofelectrical technology, and a transposed body of religious belief. This is particularlytrue because, from the telegraph forward, technological development came to behoused in professional engineering societies, universities, and research laboratories.As technological development became more systematic, so did the development ofjustifying ideologies become more consciously planned and directed by these samegroups.
III
In the balance of this chapter I wish to concentrate on the eﬀect of the telegraph onordinary ideas: the coordinates of thought, the natural attitude, practical conscious-ness, or, less grandly, common sense. As I have intimated, I think the best way to graspthe eﬀects of the telegraph or any other technology is not through a frontal assault but,230
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
rather, through the detailed investigation in a couple of sites where those eﬀects can
be most clearly observed.
Let me suggest some of the sites for those investigations – investigations to be
later integrated and referred for elucidation to some general theoretical notions. First,much additional work needs to be done on the eﬀects of the telegraph on languageand journalism. The telegraph reworked the nature of written language and ﬁnally the
nature of awareness itself. There is an old saw, one I have repeated myself, that thetelegraph, by creating the wire services, led to a fundamental change in news. Itsnapped the tradition of partisan journalism by forcing the wire services to generate“objective” news, news that could be used by papers of any political stripe (Carey,1969: 23–38). Y et the issue is deeper than that. The wire services demanded a form oflanguage stripped of the local, the regional; and colloquial. They demanded some-thing closer to a “scientiﬁc” language, a language of strict denotation in which theconnotative features of utterance were under rigid control. If the same story were tobe understood in the same way from Maine to California, language had to be ﬂattenedout and standardized. The telegraph, therefore, led to the disappearance of forms ofspeech and styles of journalism and story telling – the tall story, the hoax, muchhumor, irony, and satire – that depended on a more traditional use of the symbolic, a
use I earlier called the ﬁduciary.
6 The origins of objectivity may be sought, therefore,
in the necessity of stretching language in space over the long lines of Western Union.That is, the telegraph changed the forms of social relations mediated by language. Justas the long lines displaced a personal relation mediated by speech and correspondencein the conduct of trade and substituted the mechanical coordination of buyer and seller,so the language of the telegraph displaced a ﬁduciary relationship between writer andreader with a coordinated one.
Similarly, the telegraph eliminated the correspondent who provided letters that
announced an event, described it in detail, and analyzed its substance, and replacedhim with the stringer who supplied the bare facts. As words were expensive on thetelegraph, it separated the observer from the writer. Not only did writing for thetelegraph have to be condensed to save money – telegraphic, in other words – but alsofrom the marginal notes and anecdotes of the stringer the story had to be reconsti-tuted at the end of the telegraphic line, a process that reaches high art with the newsmagazines, the story divorced from the story teller.
But as every constraint is also an opportunity, the telegraph altered literary style.
In a well-known story, “cablese” inﬂuenced Hemingway’s style, helping him to parehis prose to the bone, dispossessed of every adornment. Most correspondents chafedunder its restrictiveness, but not Hemingway. “I had to quit being a correspondent,”he told Lincoln Steﬀens later. “I was getting too fascinated by the lingo of the cable. ”
7
But the lingo of the cable provided the underlying structure for one of the mostinﬂuential literary styles of the twentieth century.
There were other eﬀects – some obvious, some subtle. If the telegraph made
prose lean and unadorned and led to a journalism without the luxury of detail andanalysis, it also brought an overwhelming crush of such prose to the newsroom. In theface of what was a real glut of occurrences, news judgment had to be routinized andthe organization of the newsroom made factory-like. The reporter who producedthe new prose moved into prominence in journalism by displacing the editor as theTECHNOLOGY AND IDEOLOGY: THE CASE OF THE TELEGRAPH 231
archetype of the journalist. The spareness of the prose and the sheer volume of it
allowed news – indeed, forced news – to be treated like a commodity: something that
could be transported, measured, reduced, and timed. In the wake of the telegraph, newswas subject to all the procedures developed for handling agricultural commodities. Itwas subject to “rates, contracts, franchising, discounts and thefts.
8
A second site for the investigation of the telegraph is the domain of empire. Again,
it is best not to assault the problem as an overarching theory of imperialism but,rather, to examine speciﬁc cases and speciﬁc connections: the role of the telegraph incoordinating military, particularly naval, operations; the transition from colonialism,where power and authority rested with the domestic governor, to imperialism, wherepower and authority were reabsorbed by the imperial capital; the new forms of polit-ical correspondence that came about when the war correspondent was obliged to usethe telegraph; and the rise of the ﬁrst forms of international business that could becalled multinational.
While the growth of empire and imperialism have been explained by virtually
every possible factor, little attention has been paid to telegraphy in generating theground conditions for the urban imperialism of the mid-nineteenth century andthe international imperialism later in the century.
9 It is probably no accident that the
words “empire” and “imperialism” entered the language in 1870, soon after the laying
of the transatlantic cable. Although colonies could be held together with printing,correspondence, and sail, the hold, as the American experience shows, was alwaystenuous over great distance. Moreover, in colonial arrangements the margin had asmuch power as the center. Until the transatlantic cable, it was diﬃcult to determinewhether British colonial policy was being set in London or by colonial governors inthe ﬁeld – out of contact and out of control. It was the cable and telegraph, backed, of
course, by sea power, that turned colonialism into imperialism: a system in which thecenter of an empire could dictate rather than merely respond to the margin.
10
The critical change lay in the ability to secure investments. There was no heavy
overseas investment until the control made possible by the cable. The innovationof the telegraph created, if not the absolute impetus for imperial expansion, then atleast the wherewithal to make the expansion theoretically tenable. But it also createda tension between the capability to expand and the capacity to rule.
With the development of the railroad, steam power, the telegraph and cable, a
coherent empire emerged based on a coherent system of communication. In thatsystem the railroad may be taken as the overland extension of the steamer or vice versa,and the telegraph and cable stood as the coordinating, regulating device governingboth.
11
Although the newspaper and imperial oﬃces are among the best sites at which to
look for the eﬀects of the telegraph, there are humbler locations of equal interest. Itsurely is more than an accident that many of the great nineteenth-century commercialempires were founded in the humble circumstances of the telegraph operator’s shack.The case of Richard B. Sears of North Redwood, Minnesota, is instructive. One mustnot forget that Edison and Carnegie began the same way and that the genius of JayGould lay in his integration of the telegraph with the railroad. The signiﬁcance of thetelegraph in this regard is that it led to the selective control and transmission ofinformation. The telegraph operator was able to monopolize knowledge, if only for a232
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
few moments, along a route; and this brought a selective advantage in trading and
speculation. But it was this same control of information that gave the telegraph acentral importance in the development of modern gambling and of the business ofcredit. Finally, it was central to the late nineteenth-century explosion in forms ofmerchandising, such as the mail-order house.
12
In the balance of this essay I want to cut across some of these developments and
describe how the telegraph altered the ways in which time and space were understoodin ordinary human aﬀairs and, in particular, to examine a changed form in which timeentered practical consciousness. T o demonstrate these changes I wish to concentrateon the developments of commodity markets and on the institutionalization of standardtime. But ﬁrst let me reiterate the basic argument.
The simplest and most important point about the telegraph is that it marked the
decisive separation of “transportation” and “communication.” Until the telegraphthese words were synonymous. The telegraph ended that identity and allowed symbolsto move independently of geography and independently of and faster than transport. Isay decisive separation because there were premonitions earlier of what was to come,and there was, after all, pre-electric telegraphy – line-of-sight signaling devices.
Virtually any American city of any vintage has a telegraph hill or a beacon hill
reminding us of such devices. They relied on shutters, ﬂaps, disks, or arms operatingas for semaphoric signaling at sea. They were optical rather than “writing at a distance”systems and the forerunners of microwave networks, which rely on relay stations ongeographic high points for aerial transmissions.
Line-of-sight telegraphy came into practical use at the end of the eighteenth
century. Its principal architect was a Frenchman, Claud Chappe, who persuaded theCommittee of Public Instruction in post-Revolutionary France to approve a trial.Joseph Lakanal, one of its members, reported back to the committee on the outcome:“What brilliant destiny do science and the arts not reserve for a republic which by itsimmense population and the genius of its inhabitants, is called to become the nation toinstruct Europe” (Wilson, 1976: 122).
The National Convention approved the adoption of the telegraph as a national
utility and instructed the Committee of Public Safety to map routes. The majorimpetus to its development in France was the same as the one that led to the waveof canal and railroad building in America. The pre-electric telegraph would providean answer to Montesquieu and other political theorists who thought France or theUnited States too big to be a republic. But even more, it provided a means wherebythe departments that had replaced the provinces after the Revolution could be tied toand coordinated with the central authority (Wilson, 1976: 123).
The pre-electric telegraph was also a subject of experimentation in America. In
1800, a line-of-sight system was opened between Martha’s Vineyard and Boston(Wilson, 1976: 210). Between 1807 and 1812, plans were laid for a telegraph tostretch from Maine to New Orleans. The ﬁrst practical use of line-of-sight telegraphywas for the transmission of news of arriving ships, a practice begun long before 1837(Thompson, 1947: 11). But even before line-of-sight devices had been developed,alterations in shipping patterns had led to the separation of information from cargo,and that had important consequences for international trade. I shall say more on thislater.TECHNOLOGY AND IDEOLOGY: THE CASE OF THE TELEGRAPH 233
Despite these reservations and qualiﬁcations, the telegraph provided the decisive
and cumulative break of the identity of communication and transportation. The great
theoretical signiﬁcance of the technology lay not merely in the separation but alsoin the use of the telegraph as both a model of and a mechanism for control of thephysical movement of things, speciﬁcally for the railroad. That is the fundamentaldiscovery: not only can information move independently of and faster than physicalentities, but it also can be a simulation of and control mechanism for what has beenleft behind. The discovery was ﬁrst exploited in railroad dispatching in England in1844 and in the United States in 1849. It was of particular use on the long stretchesof single-track road in the American West, where accidents were a serious problem.Before the use of the telegraph to control switching, the Boston and WorcesterRailroad, for one example, kept horses every ﬁve miles along the line, and they raced
up and down the track so that their riders could warn engineers of impending colli-sions (Thompson, 1947: 205–206). By moving information faster than the rollingstock, the telegraph allowed for centralized control along many miles of track. Indeed,the operation of the telegraph in conjunction with the railroad allowed for an integratedsystem of transport and communication. The same principle realized in these mun-dane circumstances governs the development of all modern processes in electricaltransmission and control from guided gun sights to simple servo mechanisms thatopen doors. The relationship of the telegraph and the railroad illustrates the basicnotion of systems theory and the catch phrase that the “system is the solution,” in thatthe integrated switched system is more important than any of its components.
The telegraph permitted the development, in the favorite metaphor of the day, of
a thoroughly encephalated social nervous system in which signaling was divorcedfrom musculature. It was the telegraph and the railroad – the actual, painful construc-tion of an integrated system – that provided the entrance gate for the organic metaphorsthat dominated nineteenth-century thought. Although German romanticism andidealism had their place, it is less to the world of ideas and more to the world of actualpractice that we need to look when trying to ﬁgure out why the nineteenth centurywas obsessed with organicism.
The eﬀect of the telegraph on ideology, on ordinary ideas, can be shown more
graphically with two other examples drawn from the commodities markets and thedevelopment of standard time. The telegraph, like most innovations in communica-tion down through the computer, had its ﬁrst and most profound impact on theconduct of commerce, government, and the military. It was, in short, a producer goodbefore it was a consumer good. The telegraph, as I said earlier, was used in its earlymonths for the long-distance playing of chess. Its commercial signiﬁcance was slowto be realized. But once that signiﬁcance was determined, it was used to reorganizecommerce; and from the patterns of usage in commerce came many of the telegraph’smost profound consequences for ordinary thought. Among its ﬁrst eﬀects was thereorganization of commodity markets.
It was the normal expectation of early nineteenth century Americans that the
price of a commodity would diverge from city to city so that the cost of wheat, corn, orwhatever would be radically diﬀerent in, say, Pittsburgh, Cincinnati, and St. Louis.This belief reﬂected the fact that before the telegraph, markets were independent ofone another, or, more accurately, that the eﬀect of one market on another was so234
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
gradually manifested as to be virtually unnoticed. In short, the prices of commodities
were largely determined by local conditions of supply and demand. One of the leadinghistorians of the markets has commented, “T o be sure in all articles of trade theconditions at all sources of supply had their ultimate eﬀect on distant values and yeteven in these the communication was so slow that the conditions might changeentirely before their eﬀect could be felt” (Emery, 1896: 106).
Under such circumstances, the principal method of trading is called arbitrage:
buying cheap and selling dear by moving goods around in space. That is, if prices arehigher in St. Louis than in Cincinnati, it makes sense to buy in Cincinnati and resell inSt. Louis, as long as the price diﬀerential is greater than the cost of transportationbetween the two cities. If arbitrage is widely practiced between cities, prices shouldsettle into an equilibrium whereby the diﬀerence in price is held to the diﬀerencein transportation cost. This result is, in turn, based on the assumption of classicaleconomics of perfect information – that all buyers and sellers are aware of the optionsavailable in all relevant markets – a situation rarely approached in practice before thetelegraph.
Throughout the United States, price divergence between markets declined during
the nineteenth century. Arthur H. Cole computed the average annual and monthlyprice disparity for uniform groups of commodities during the period 1816–1842, thatis, up to the eve of the telegraph. Over that period the average annual price disparityfell from 9.3 to 4.8; and the average monthly disparity, from 15.4 to 4.8 (Cole, 1938:94–96, 103). The decline itself is testimony to improvements in communicationbrought about by canal and turnpike building. The steepness of the decline is prob-ably masked somewhat because Cole grouped the prices for the periods 1816–1830and 1830–1842, whereas it was late in the canal era and the beginnings of large-scalerailroad building that the sharpest declines were felt.
Looked at from one side, the decline represents the gradual increase in the eﬀect-
ive size of the market. Looked at from the other side, it represents a decline in spatiallybased speculative opportunities – opportunities, that is, to turn trade into proﬁt bymoving goods between distinct markets. In a sense the railroad and canal regionalizedmarkets; the telegraph nationalized them.
The eﬀect of the telegraph is a simple one: it evens out markets in space. The
telegraph puts everyone in the same place for purposes of trade; it makes geographyirrelevant. The telegraph brings the conditions of supply and demand in all marketsto bear on the determination of a price. Except for the marginal exception here andthere, it eliminates opportunities for arbitrage by realizing the classical assumption ofperfect information.
But the signiﬁcance of the telegraph does not lie solely in the decline of arbitrage;
rather, the telegraph shifts speculation into another dimension. It shifts speculationfrom space to time, from arbitrage to futures. After the telegraph, commodity tradingmoved from trading between places to trading between times. The arbitrager tradesCincinnati for St. Louis; the futures trader sells August against October, this yearagainst next. T o put the matter somewhat diﬀerently, as the telegraph closed downspatial uncertainty in prices it opened up, because of improvements in communica-tion, the uncertainty of time. It was not, then, mere historic accident that the ChicagoCommodity Exchange, to this day the principal American futures market, openedTECHNOLOGY AND IDEOLOGY: THE CASE OF THE TELEGRAPH 235
in 1848, the same year the telegraph reached that city. In a certain sense the
telegraph invented the future as a new zone of uncertainty and a new region ofpractical action.
Let me make a retreat from that conclusion about the eﬀects of the telegraph on
time because I have overdrawn the case. First, the opportunities for arbitrage arenever completely eliminated. There are always imperfections in market information,even on the ﬂoor of a stock exchange: buyers and sellers who do not know of oneanother and the prices at which the others are willing to trade. We know this as wellfrom ordinary experience at auctions, where someone always knows a buyer who willpay more than the auctioned price. Second, there was a hiatus between arbitrage andthe futures market when time contracts dominated, and this was a development ofsome importance. An approximation of futures trading occurred as early as 1733,when the East India Company initiated the practice of trading warrants. The functionof a warrant was to transfer ownership of goods without consummating their physicaltransfer. The warrant did not represent, as such, particular warehoused goods; theywere merely endorsed from person to person. The use of warrants or time contractsevolved rapidly in the United States in the trading of agricultural staples. They evolvedto meet new conditions of eﬀective market size and, as importantly, their evolutionwas unrestrained by historic practice.
The critical condition governing the development of time contracts was also
the separation of communication from transport. Increasingly, news of crop condi-tions reached the market before the commodity itself. For example, warrant tradingadvanced when cotton was shipped to England by sail while passengers and informa-tion moved by steamer. Based on news of the crop and on samples of the commodity,time contracts or “to-arrive” contracts were executed. These were used principallyfor transatlantic sales, but after the Mississippi Valley opened up to agricultural trade,they were widely used in Chicago in the 1840s (Baer and Woodruﬀ, 1935: 3–5).
The telegraph started to change the use of time contracts, as well as arbitrage. By
widely transmitting knowledge of prices and crop conditions, it drew markets andprices together. We do not have good before-and-after measures, but we do haveevidence, cited earlier, for the long-run decline in price disparities among markets.Moreover, we have measures from Cincinnati in particular. In the 1820s Cincinnatilagged two years behind Eastern markets. That meant that it took two years fordisturbances in the Eastern market structure to aﬀect Cincinnati prices. By 1840 thelag was down to four months; and by 1857 – and probably much earlier – the eﬀect ofEastern markets on Cincinnati was instantaneous. But once space was, in the phraseof the day, annihilated, once everyone was in the same place for purposes of trade,time as a new region of experience, uncertainty, speculation, and exploration wasopened up to the forces of commerce.
A back-door example of this inversion of space and time can be drawn from a
later episode involving the eﬀect of the telephone on the New Y ork Stock Exchange.By 1894 the telephone had made information time identical in major cities. Buyersand sellers, wherever they were, knew current prices as quickly as traders did on theﬂoor of the exchange. The information gap, then, between New Y ork and Boston hadbeen eliminated and business gravitated from New Y ork to Boston brokerage ﬁrms.
The New Y ork exchange countered this movement by creating a thirty-second time236
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
advantage that ensured New Y ork’s superiority to Boston. The exchange ruled that
telephones would not be allowed on the ﬂoor. Price information had to be relayed bymessenger to an area oﬀ the ﬂoor of the exchange that had been set aside for tele-phones. This move destroyed the temporal identity of markets, and a thirty-secondmonopoly of knowledge was created that drew business back to New Y ork (Emery,1896: 139).
This movement of commodities out of space and into time had three other con-
sequences of great importance in examining the eﬀect of the telegraph. First, futurestrading required the decontexualization of markets; or, to put it in a slightly diﬀerentway, markets were made relatively unresponsive to local conditions of supply anddemand. The telegraph removed markets from the particular context in which theywere historically located and concentrated on them forces emanating from any placeand any time. This was a redeﬁnition from physical or geographic markets to spiritualones. In a sense they were made more mysterious; they became everywhere marketsand everytime markets and thus less apprehensible at the very moment they becamemore powerful.
Second, not only were distant and amorphous forces brought to bear on markets,
but the commodity was sundered from its representations; that is, the development offutures trading depended on the ability to trade or circulate negotiable instrumentsindependently of the actual physical movement of goods. The representation of thecommodity became the warehouse receipts from grain elevators along the railroadline. These instruments were then traded independently of any movement of theactual goods. The buyer of such receipts never expected to take delivery; the seller ofsuch receipts never expected to make delivery. There is the old joke, which is also acautionary tale, of the futures trader who forgot what he was up to and ended up withforty tons of wheat on his suburban lawn; but it is merely a joke and a tale. The futurestrader often sells before he buys, or buys and sells simultaneously. But the buyingand selling is not of goods but of receipts. What is being traded is not money forcommodities but time against price. In short, the warehouse receipt, which stands asa representation of the product, has no intrinsic relation to the real product.
But in order to trade receipts rather than goods, a third change was necessary. In
futures trading products are not bought or sold by inspection of the actual productor a sample thereof. Rather, they are sold through a grading system. In order to lenditself to futures trading, a product has to be mixed, standardized, diluted in order tobe reduced to a speciﬁc, though abstract, grade. With the coming of the telegraph,products could no longer be shipped in separate units as numerous as there wereowners of grain. “The high volume sales required impersonalized standards. Buyerswere no longer able personally to check every lot” (Chandler, 1977: 211). Con-sequently, not all products are traded on the futures market because some resist theattempt to reduce them to standardized categories of quality.
The development of the futures markets, in summary, depended on a number of
speciﬁc changes in markets and the commodity system. It required that informationmove independently of and faster than products. It required that prices be madeuniform in space and that markets be decontextualized. It required, as well, that com-modities be separated from the receipts that represent them and that commodities bereduced to uniform grades.TECHNOLOGY AND IDEOLOGY: THE CASE OF THE TELEGRAPH 237
These were, it should be quickly added, the conditions that underlay Marx’s
analysis of the commodity fetish. That concept, now used widely and often indis-
criminately, was developed in the Grundrisse and Das Kapital during the late 1850s,when futures trading became the dominant arena for the establishment of agriculturalvalues. In particular, Marx made the key elements in the commodity fetish the decon-textualization of markets, the separation of use value from exchange value broughtabout by the decline in the representative function of the warehouse receipt, and theabstraction of the product out of real conditions of production by a grading system.In the Grundrisse he comments, “This locational movement – the bringing of theproduct to market which is a necessary condition of its circulation, except whenthe point of production is itself a market – could more precisely be regarded as thetransformation of the product into a commodity” (Marx, 1973: 534).
Marx’s reference is to what Walter Benjamin (1968) would later call the “loss of
aura” in his parallel analysis of the eﬀect of mechanical reproduction on the work ofart. After the object is abstracted out of the real conditions of its production and useand is transported to distant markets, standardized and graded, and represented byfully contingent symbols, it is made available as a commodity. Its status as a commod-ity represents the sundering of a real, direct relationship between buyer and seller,separates use value from exchange value, deprives objects of any uniqueness (whichmust then be returned to the object via advertising), and, most important, masks to thebuyer the real conditions of production. Further, the process of divorcing the receiptfrom the product can be thought of as part of a general social process initiated by theuse of money and widely written about in contemporary semiotics; the progressivedivorce of the signiﬁer from the signiﬁed, a process in which the world of signiﬁersprogressively overwhelms and moves independently of real material objects.
T o summarize, the growth of communications in the nineteenth century had the
practical eﬀect of diminishing space as a diﬀerentiating criterion in human aﬀairs.What Harold Innis called the “penetrative powers of the price system ” was, in e ﬀect,
the spread of a uniform price system throughout space so that for purposes of tradeeveryone was in the same place. The telegraph was the critical instrument in thisspread. In commerce this meant the decontextualization of markets so that prices nolonger depended on local factors of supply and demand but responded to nationaland international forces. The spread of the price system was part of the attempt tocolonize space. The correlative to the penetration of the price system was what thecomposer Igor Stravinsky called the “statisticalization of mind”: the transformationof the entire mental world into quantity, and the distribution of quantities in space sothat the relationship between things and people becomes solely one of numbers.Statistics widens the market for everything and makes it more uniform and inter-dependent. The telegraph worked this same eﬀect on the practical consciousness oftime through the construction of standard time zones.
IV
Our sense of time and our activities in time are coordinated through a grid of timezones, a grid so ﬁxed in our consciousness that it seems to be the natural form of time,at least until we change back and forth between standard and daylight saving time. But238
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
standard time in the United States is a relatively recent invention. It was introduced on
November 18, 1883.
Until that date virtually every American community established its own time by
marking that point when the sun reached its zenith as noon. It could be determinedastronomically with exactitude; but any village could do it, for all practical purposes,by observing the shortest shadow on a sundial. Oﬃcial local time in a communitycould be ﬁxed, as since time immemorial, by a church or later by a courthouse, ajeweler, or later still the railroad stationmaster; and a bell or whistle could be rung orset oﬀ so that the local burghers could set their timepieces. In Kansas City a ball wasdropped from the highest building at noon and was visible for miles around, a practicestill carried out at the annual New Y ear’s Eve festivities in New Y ork City’s TimesSquare (Corliss, 1952).
Not every town kept its own time; many set their clocks in accord with the county
seat or some other nearby town of commercial or political importance. When the vastproportion of American habitats were, in Robert Wiebe’s (1967) phrase, “islandcommunities” with little intercourse with one another, the distinctiveness of local timecaused little confusion and worry. But as the tentacles of commerce and politicsspread out from the capitals, temporal chaos came with them. The chaos was sheerlyphysical. With every degree of longitude one moved westward, the sun reached itszenith four minutes later. That meant that when it was noon in Boston it was 11:48a.m. in Albany; when it was noon in Atlanta it was 11:36 a.m. in New Orleans. Putdiﬀerently, noon came a minute later for every quarter degree of longitude one movedwestward, and this was a shorter distance as one moved north: in general thirteenmiles equaled one minute of time.
The setting of clocks to astronomically local time or, at best, to county seat time
led to a proliferation of time zones. Before standard time Michigan had twenty-seventime zones; Indiana, twenty-three; Wisconsin, thirty-nine; Illinois, twenty-seven. Theclocks in New Y ork, Boston, and Philadelphia, cities today on identical time, wereseveral minutes apart (Corliss, 1952: 3). When it was 12:00 in Washington, D.C., itwas 11:30 in Atlanta, 12:09 in Philadelphia, 12:12 in New Y ork, 12:24 in Boston, and12:41 in Eastport, Maine.
As the railroads spread across the continent, the variety of local times caused
enormous confusion with scheduling, brought accidents as trains on diﬀerent clockscollided, and led to much passenger irritation, as no one could easily ﬁgure when a
train would arrive at another town. The railroads used ﬁfty-eight local times keyed tothe largest cities. Moreover, each railroad keyed its clocks to the time of a diﬀerent city.The Pennsylvania Railroad keyed its time to that of Philadelphia, but Philadelphia’sclocks were twelve minutes behind New Y ork’s and ﬁve minutes ahead of Baltimore’s.The New Y ork Central stuck to New Y ork City time. The Baltimore and Ohio keyedits time to three cities: Baltimore; Columbus, Ohio; and Vincennes, Indiana (Bartkyand Harrison, 1979: 46–53).
The solution, which was to establish standard time zones, had long attracted the
interest of scholars. The pressure to establish such zones was felt more strongly inNorth America, which averaged eight hours of daylight from Newfoundland towestern Alaska. Although standard time was established earlier in Europe, the prac-tical pressure there was less. There is only a half-hour variance in sun time acrossTECHNOLOGY AND IDEOLOGY: THE CASE OF THE TELEGRAPH 239
England; and France, while larger, could be run on Paris time. But England, for
purposes of empire, had long been interested in standard time. The control of timeallows for the coordination of activity and, therefore, eﬀective social control. In navi-gation, time was early ﬁxed on English ships according to the clock of the Greenwichobservatory; and no matter where a ship might be in the Atlantic, its chronometeralways registered Greenwich time. Similarly, Irish time was regulated by a clock seteach morning at Big Ben, carried by rail to Holyhead, ferried across the Irish sea toKingstown (now Dun Laoghaire), and then carried again by rail to Dublin, whereIrish clocks were coordinated with English time (Schivelbusch, 1978: 39).
And so it was no surprise when in 1870 a New Y orker, Charles Dowd, proposed
a system of standard time zones that ﬁxed Greenwich as zero degrees longitudeand laid out the zones around the world with centers 15 degrees east and west fromGreenwich. As 15 degrees equals one hour, the world was laid out in twenty-fourzones one hour apart.
Dowd’s plan was a wonderful example of crackpot realism. The lines were laid
out with geometric exactness and ignored geography, topography, region, trade, ornatural aﬃnity. Maine and Florida were put in separate time zones. It is a wonderfulexample of the maxim that the grid is the geometry of empire. Dowd recommendedthe plan to the railroads, which adopted it provisionally and created an index out of itso that the traveler could convert railroad time to local time by adding or subtractingso many minutes to or from the railroad schedule.
For thirteen years the Dowd system was debated but never oﬃcially adopted by
the General Time Convention. The railroads tried during that period to get Congressto adopt it as a uniform time system, but Congress would not and for an obviousreason: standard time oﬀended people with deeply held religious sentiments. It vio-lated the actual physical working of the natural order and denied the presence of adivinely ordained nature. But even here religious language was a vanishing mediatorfor political sentiments; standard time was widely known as Vanderbilt’s time, andprotest against it was part of the populist protest against the banks, the telegraph, andthe railroad.
In 1881, the Philadelphia General Time Convention turned the problem over
to William Frederick Allen, a young civil engineer; two years later he returned a plan.It was based on Dowd’s scheme but with a crucial diﬀerence: it allowed for theadjustment of time zones for purposes of economy and ecology. In his scheme timeboundaries could be shifted up to 100 miles away from the geometric lines in orderto minimize disruption. Most important, he recommended that the railroads abandonthe practice of providing a minute index and that they simply adopt standard time forregulating their schedules and allow communities and institutions to adjust to the newtime in any manner they chose.
In the Allen plan the United States was divided into four time zones, with centers
on the 75th, 90th, 105th, and 120th meridians: Philadelphia, St. Louis, Denver, andReno were the approximate centers. The zones extended seven and a half degrees toeither side of the center line. November 18, 1883, was selected as the date for thechangeover from local to standard time, and an ambitious “educational” campaignwas mounted to help citizens adjust to the new system. On that date Chicago, therailroad hub, was tied by telegraph to an observatory in Allegheny, Pennsylvania.240
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
When it reached one o’clock over the center of the Eastern time zone, the clocks were
stopped at noon in Chicago and held for nine minutes and thirty-two seconds untilthe sun centered on the 90th meridian. Then they were started again, with the railroadsystem now integrated and coordinated through time.
The changeover was greeted by mass meetings, anger, and religious protest but to
no avail. Railroad time had become standard time. It was not made oﬃcial U.S. timeuntil the emergency of World War I. But within a few months after the establishmentof railroad time, the avalanche of switches to it by local communities was well underway. Strangely enough, the United States never did go to 24-hour time and thusretained some connection between the diurnal cycle of human activity and the cycleof the planets.
The boundaries of the time zones have been repeatedly adjusted since that time.
In general they have been made to follow state borders, but there are a number ofexceptions. The western edge of the Eastern time zone was once in eastern Ohio, butnow it forms a jagged line along the Illinois–Indiana border. Boise, Idaho, was movedfrom Paciﬁc to Mountain time, and recently twelve thousand square miles of Arizonawas similarly moved. The reasons for such changes tell us much about America’spurposes. One gets the distinct feeling, for example, that the television networkswould prefer a country with three time zones: east, central, and west.
Standard time zones were established because in the eyes of some they were
necessary. They were established, to return to the point of this chapter, because of thetechnological power of the telegraph. Time was sent via the telegraph wire; but today,thanks to technical improvements, it is sent via radio waves from the Naval observatoryin Maryland. The telegraph could send time faster than a railroad car could move;and therefore it facilitated the temporal coordination and integration of the entiresystem. Once that was possible, the new deﬁnitions of time could be used by industryand government to control and coordinate activity across the country, inﬁltrate intothe practical consciousness of ordinary men and women, and uproot older notions ofrhythm and temporality.
The development of standard time zones served to overlay the world with a grid
of time in the same way the surveyor’s map laid a grid of space on old cities, the newterritories of the West, or the seas. The time grid could then be used to control andcoordinate activities within the grid of space.
V
When the ecological niche of space was ﬁlled, ﬁlled as an arena of commerce and
control, attention was shifted to ﬁlling time, now deﬁned as an aspect of space, acontinuation of space in another dimension. As the spatial frontier was closed, timebecame the new frontier. Let me mention, in closing, two other dimensions of thetemporal frontier.
An additional time zone to be penetrated once space was exhausted was sacred
time, in particular the sabbath. The greatest invention of the ancient Hebrews was theidea of the sabbath, though I am using this word in a fully secular sense: the inventionof a region free from control of the state and commerce where another dimension oflife could be experienced and where altered forms of social relationship could occur.TECHNOLOGY AND IDEOLOGY: THE CASE OF THE TELEGRAPH 241
As such, the sabbath has always been a major resistance to state and market power.
For purposes of communication, the eﬀective penetration of the sabbath came in the1880s with the invention of the Sunday newspaper. It was Hearst with his New Y orkSunday W orld who popularized the idea of Sunday newspaper reading and created,
in fact, a market where none had existed before – a sabbath market. Since then thepenetration of the sabbath has been one of the “frontiers” of commercial activity.Finally, when the frontier in space was oﬃcially closed in 1890, the “new frontier”became the night, and since then there has been a continuous spreading upward ofcommercial activity. Murray Melbin (1987) has attempted to characterize “night as afrontier.” In terms of communication the steady expansion of commercial broadcast-ing into the night is one of the best examples. There were no 24-hour radio stations inBoston, for example, from 1918 through 1954; now half of the stations in Bostonoperate all night. T elevision has slowly expanded into the night at one end and at theother initiated operations earlier and earlier. Now, indeed, there are 24-hour televisionstations in major markets.
The notion of night as frontier, a new frontier of time that opens once space is
ﬁlled, is a metaphor, but it is more than that. Melbin details some of the featurescommon to the spatial and temporal frontiers: they both advance in stages; the popu-lation is more sparsely settled and homogeneous; there is solitude, an absence of socialconstraints, and less persecution; settlements are isolated; government is decentral-ized; lawlessness and violence as well as friendliness and helpfulness increase; newbehavioral styles emerge. That is, the same dialectic between centralization anddecentralization occurs on the temporal frontier as on the spatial frontier. On the onehand, communication is even more privatized at night. On the other hand, socialconstraints on communication are relaxed because the invasive hand of authorityloosened.
The penetration of time, the use of time as a mechanism of control, the opening
of time to commerce and politics has been radically extended by advances in com-puter technology. Time has been redeﬁned as an ecological niche to be ﬁlled downto the microsecond, nanosecond, and picosecond – down to a level at which time canbe pictured but not experienced. This process and the parallel reconstruction ofpractical consciousness and practical activity begins in those capacities of the tele-graph which preﬁgure the computer. The telegraph constructed a simulacrum ofcomplex systems, provided an analogue model of the railroad and a digital modelof language. It coordinated and controlled activity in space, often behind the backs ofthose subject to it.
E. P . Thompson ﬁnds it ominous that the young Henry Ford should have created
a watch with two dials: one for local time and another for railroad time. “Attentionto time in labour depends in large degree upon the need for the synchronizationof labour” (Thompson, 1967: 70). Modern conceptions of time have rooted intoour consciousness so deeply that the scene of the worker receiving a watch at hisretirement is grotesque and comic. He receives a watch when the need to tell timeis ended. He receives a watch as a tribute to his learning the hardest lesson of theworking man – to tell time.
As the watch coordinated the industrial factory; the telegraph via the grid of
time coordinated the industrial nation. T oday, computer time, computer space, and242
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
computer memory, notions we dimly understand, are reworking practical conscious-
ness coordinating and controlling life in what we glibly call the postindustrial society.Indeed, the microcomputer is replacing the watch as the favored gift for the middleclass retiree. In that new but unchanging custom we see the deeper relationshipbetween technology and ideology.
Notes
1 See Chandler (1977), esp. Part II.2 Among the most readable, accessible sources on the patent struggles is Josephson
(1959).
3 See Wiener (1948: 38–44).4 Whereas I have commented on the essentially religious metaphors that greeted
the telegraph in the essays cited, Czitrom (1982) brings this material together in asystematic way.
5 By a vanishing mediator – a concept borrowed from Fredric Jameson – I mean a
notion that serves as a bearer of change but that can disappear once that change isratiﬁed in the reality of institutions. See Jameson (1974: 111–149).
6 See chapter 1. On changes in styles of journalism, see Sims (1979).7 Steﬀens (1958: 834). For a memoir that discusses the art and adversity of writing
for the cable, see Shirer (1976: 282 ﬀ.).
8 The quotation is from an as yet unpublished manuscript by Douglas Birkhead of
the University of Utah. Birkhead develops these themes in some detail.
9 On urban imperialism, see Schlesinger (1933) and Pred (1973).
10 Among the few studies on the telegraph and empire, the most distinguished is
Fortner (1978); see also Field (1978: 644–68).
11 In making these remarks I am much indebted to the work of Fortner and Field.12 On these matters there are useful suggestions in Boorstin (1973).TECHNOLOGY AND IDEOLOGY: THE CASE OF THE TELEGRAPH 243
5.2
Reﬂections on time, time–space
compression and technology in thenineteenth century,by Jeremy Stein
Introduction
Social scientists have long been aware of the signiﬁcance of developments in transport
and communication for the reorientation of temporal and spatial relationshipsbetween places (Janelle, 1968; Falk and Abler, 1980). The concepts ‘time–space con-vergence’ and ‘time–space compression’ were developed by geographers to describethe cumulative eﬀects of historical improvements in the speed of movement of goods,services and information. The former concept refers to the increased velocity ofcirculation of goods, people and information, and the consequent reduction in relativedistances between places. The latter concept describes the sense of shock and dis-orientation such experiences produce (Harvey, 1989, 1990). As Harvey describes it,time–space compression refers to:
processes that so revolutionise the objective qualities of space and time that we areforced to alter, sometimes in quite radical ways, how we represent the world toourselves. I use the word ‘compression’ because a strong case can be made thatthe history of capitalism has been characterised by speed-up in the pace of life,while so overcoming spatial barriers that the world sometimes seems to collapseinwards upon us.
(Harvey, 1989: 240)
Harvey’s discussion of time–space compression relates mainly to contemporary
capitalism. He views new ways of experiencing time and space as coinciding withintense periods of technological change, a consequence of capitalism ’s need to speed
up the circulation of capital and information. Other writers emphasise how newcommunications technologies shape contemporary economic, social and politicalprocesses. These writers point to the increasing speed, volume and signiﬁcance ofcapital and information ﬂows in recent times (Castells, 1989; Leyshon, 1995). Enabledby instantaneous communication between places, organisations are increasingly ableto integrate and co-ordinate their activities on a global basis, captured by the term‘globalisation’. At their most extreme, writers suggest that an era of ceaseless global
ﬂows of money, capital and information heralds the end of geography (O’Brien,
1991). However, as Thrift and others argue, ﬂows of capital and information rarelylack a geography of their own, and because communities of experts are required tointerpret their signiﬁcance, this often reinforces traditional national, institutional andurban geographies (Thrift, 1995, 1996; Michie, 1997).
The main aim of this chapter is to show that contemporary notions and experi-
ences of time–space compression were preﬁgured in the nineteenth century. In thenext section, I will brieﬂy summarise these experiences and their signiﬁcance. I sug-gest that these accounts of changing experiences of time and space may need revisionin at least two ways. First, interpretations of time–space compression typically rely onaccounts of privileged social observers, and are thereby elitist. Is it right to assume thatthe experiences of time and space documented by privileged travellers were equallyfelt by the general population, or that the rapidity of change was the same for every-one? Second, changing experiences of time and space are often assumed to resultfrom the advent of new technologies. This is a form of technological determinism.The danger here is to assume and to exaggerate the consequences of technology. Arenew technologies always faster and more eﬃcient than earlier ones? Moreover, dointerpretations of time–space compression that see it resulting from improvementsin technology risk ignoring the social processes in which technology is embedded?After reviewing historical accounts of time–space compression, I will draw on my ownresearch on a nineteenth-century Canadian textile town to develop a more nuancedinterpretation of the historical experiences of time and space.
A shrinking world
As Harvey and other writers have suggested, experiences of time–space compressionare not limited to the contemporary period. Giddens’ interpretation of modernity, forexample, emphasises the role of technology and institutions associated with it (stateagencies, businesses, news media) in extending economic, social and political inﬂuenceover time and space during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries (Giddens, 1990).Berman stresses the unifying role of technology, deﬁning nineteenth-century modern-ity as the shared experience of unity and disunity (Berman, 1991). For several writersthe period between 1880 and the end of the First World War witnessed an intensephase of time–space compression. Marvin describes how the introduction of electriﬁ-cation at the end of the nineteenth century led to intense cultural anxiety concerningthe eﬀects of these technologies on Victorian and Edwardian societies, governed bystrict systems of hierarchy and social etiquette (Marvin, 1988). Kern demonstrateshow during this period a set of new technologies, including the telephone and thewireless telegraph, generated intense feelings of simultaneity coincident with novelways of thinking about time and space in areas of social thought as diverse as physicsand psychology, contemporary art and music (Kern, 1983).
The rapid introduction of a set of new technologies at the end of the nineteenth
century no doubt contributed to intense feelings of simultaneity during this period.However, this does not mean that a revolution occurred in the experience of timeand space. It is more appropriate to see these changes in the context of on-goingprocesses of change occurring from at least the late eighteenth century. In the nextTIME, TIME– SPACE COMPRESSION, TECHNOLOGY IN THE 19TH CENTURY 245
few paragraphs I will summarise the most salient aspects of these changes and their
consequences. Before doing so it is worth noting that authors such as Kern have beencriticised for other reasons: for their overreliance on elite sources, such as the electricaltrade literature that not surprisingly gloriﬁes technological advances; and for theirtechnological determinism. Kern, for example, argues that, because of its immediacyand democratic qualities, technologies such as the telephone invaded privacy, result-ing in nervous dispositions and undermining social and spatial barriers. Criticsquestion whether the consequences of technology are inevitable or predictable, andwhether the characteristics of a technology can automatically be assumed to beimpressed on to its users (Fischer, 1985, 1992; Marx, 1997a, 1997b).
Without doubt, the cumulative eﬀects of technological change, especially over
the past century and a half in the ﬁeld of transport and communication, have beenimpressive. This was particularly the case in Europe and North America during thenineteenth century when the introduction of railway, telegraph and steamship ser-vices radically reoriented geographic and temporal relationships. ‘The annihilationof space and time’ was a common mid-nineteenth century phrase used to describe theexperience and signiﬁcance of these changes. Karl Marx, writing in the 1850s, usedsimilar terminology to describe the signiﬁcance of improved transport and communi-cations for the circulation and reproduction of capital. In the Grundrisse he wrote that‘while capital must on one side strive to tear down every spatial barrier to intercourse. . . it strives on the other side to annihilate this space with time, i.e. to reduce to aminimum the time spent in motion from one place to another’ (Marx, 1973: 539).
Developments in transport and communications in Britain during the eighteenth
and nineteenth centuries had profound consequences for the economy, society andculture. The railway’s impact, for example, was noticeable by the 1830s and 1840s,most signiﬁcantly in the increased speed of the trains with consequent dramaticreductions in travel times between places (Perkin, 1970; Thrift, 1990a: 463). Theeﬀect was to shrink national space. The ‘annihilation of space and time’ was a com-mon term used to characterise the experience of railway travel in the mid-nineteenthcentury. The metaphor of ‘annihilation’ evoked the sudden impact and violence ofthe railway as it overturned existing notions of time and distance. On the one hand,the railway opened up new spaces and made them much more accessible. On theother, the railway seemingly destroyed space and diminished the uniqueness ofindividual places (Schivelbusch, 1977: 41). The uniqueness of place was furthereroded by the introduction of uniform railroad time. Growth of the railway network,the consequent complexity of railway scheduling and the wish to avoid accidents,gradually made the existence of multiple local times untenable, and led railway com-panies to introduce ‘standard time’ along their routes (Bartky, 1989; Kern, 1983;Stephens, 1989; Thrift, 1981).
The railway was intimately associated with developments in communications
technology, particularly the electric telegraph and the telephone. These technologiesinaugurated simultaneous communication and a phase of ‘time–space convergence’(Janelle, 1968; Falk and Abler, 1980; Harvey, 1989, 1990). Railway companiesrequired ﬁrst class communications and from an early phase in railway development
the telegraph was used as a safety device and as a means of traﬃc control. The GreatWestern Railway used the telegraph experimentally in 1839. It was used throughout246
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
on the Norfolk Railway in 1844 and during the same period on the South Eastern
Railway. The telegraph, and later the telephone, was an important means of internalcommunication allowing railway companies to better manage their staﬀ and complexoperations. T elephone systems allowed the central oﬃce of a railway company to be inconstant and immediate communication with every signal box, station, yard, oﬃce orother point in its organisation. The railway companies were also quick to take advan-tage of teleprinters and exchange switching technology, giving them greater ﬂexibilityand capacity to handle information (Ellis, 1959; Parris, 1965; Kieve, 1973).
Elsewhere, authors have speculated on the cultural and ideological consequences
of new communications technologies. Carey, for example, argues that the introduc-tion of the telegraph in America had profound ideological signiﬁcance. The telegraphin America was dominated by Western Union, the ﬁrst great industrial monopoly,which established the principles upon which modern businesses were managed.Carey suggests that the telegraph had a set of ideological consequences. Culturally,it brought changes in language, knowledge and awareness, leading, for example, to‘scientiﬁc’ newspaper reporting, with news stripped of its local and regional context.By separating communication from transportation it changed the ways in whichcommunication was thought about, for example, contributing to organic and system-atic modes of thinking. Politically, it made the idea of ‘empire’ practically possible byallowing distant colonies to be controlled from the centre. Economically, it evened outcommodity markets, diminished the signiﬁcance of local conditions of supply anddemand, made geography seemingly irrelevant, and shifted speculation from spaceto time, making possible the emergence of a futures market (Carey, 1983). Crononusefully extends this argument and the metaphor of ‘annihilating space’ to the Chicagograin and meat-packing industries. He demonstrates how, in conjunction with therailway and the introduction of grain elevators and new technology in the abattoirs,the telegraph speeded up the delivery of goods to urban markets. The result wasregional integration of the wheat and meat markets and the emergence of standardabstract product qualities, for example, September wheat, that could be easily tradedon Chicago’s stock market (Cronon, 1992).
As this last example suggests, it was a combination of technologies that gave
nineteenth-century commentators the sense of a shrinking world. Hobsbawm de-scribes, for example, how in the middle decades of the nineteenth century the world wasuniﬁed by a combination of land and subterranean telegraphs, the construction oftrans-continental railroads, steamship services and the completion of major construc-tion projects such as the Suez canal (opened in 1869) (Hobsbawm, 1975: 49–67). Itwas these tremendous mid-century improvements in transport and communicationsthat enabled Jules Verne to envisage his ﬁctional character, Phileas Fogg, circumnavi-gating the globe in eighty days (a feat that would have taken eleven months in 1848)and for the results of the 1871 Derby to be transmitted from London to Calcutta inﬁve minutes (Hobsbawm, 1975: 52–3). Improved communications in the nineteenthcentury were accompanied by greater global interdependency. The upside to thiswas the creation of a genuinely world market and signiﬁcant reductions in the speedof movement of goods, people and information. The downside was the increaseduncertainty of events and the threat of global slumps. The acceleration in the speedof communications intensiﬁed the contrast between those areas of the globe havingTIME, TIME– SPACE COMPRESSION, TECHNOLOGY IN THE 19TH CENTURY 247
access to improved technology and those that did not: ‘in widening the gap between
the places accessible to the new technology and the rest, it intensiﬁed the relativebackwardness of those parts of the world where horse, ox, mule, human bearer orboat still set the speed of transport’ (Hobsbawm, 1975: 60). Greater global inter-dependency, a consequence of improved communications, increased the frequencyof contact and the apparent contrast between technologically advanced and techno-logically backward regions of the globe, contributing to emerging nineteenth centuryideologies of Western dominance (Headrick, 1981; Adas, 1989).
T o summarise, time–space compression was apparent in Britain from at least the
late eighteenth century. By the mid-nineteenth century, with the coming of the rail-way to Europe and North America, it was commonly experienced, and its eﬀects wereincreasingly global. However the changes described above took place over severaldecades so that it would be wrong to view experiences of time–space compression inany one period as being revolutionary. It is also questionable how widely felt theseexperiences were. Writers, such as Schivelbusch, typically dwell on the dramatic epi-sodes of technological change such as the coming of the railway (Schivelbusch, 1977).We learn that contemporaries’ reﬂections on these events were captured by themetaphor of ‘annihilation’: symbolising, on the one hand, technological and societalprogress, and on the other, the downside of rapid social and technological transform-ation. However Schivelbusch does not indicate how widespread these reﬂectionswere, whether they varied along gender and class lines, and whether the ideology ofprogress was espoused by speciﬁc social groups.
Advances in transport and communication were not limited to communications
between places. This was equally a feature within cities. Beginning in the earlynineteenth century European and North American cities constructed an infra-structure of pipes and wires for the systematic centralised distribution of fuel, light,power and information (T arr and Dupuy, 1988). These early ‘networked’ or ‘wired’cities may be regarded as forerunners of today’s electronic or informational cities(Castells, 1989; Stein, 1996, 1999). Improved intra-urban communication is typicallynot discussed in academic treatments of time–space compression, and is generallyunder-researched and poorly understood. Moreover, detailed studies of the di ﬀusion
of new communications technologies often challenge exaggerated accounts of theeﬀects of these technologies. During the nineteenth century, for example, the major-ity of telegraphic and telephonic communication remained local (Stein, 1999: 47–51).Similarly, Fischer’s study of the diﬀusion of the motor car and the telephone inearly-twentieth-century America shows that far from undermining localism, thesetechnologies sustained it, by extending the volume of local and extra-local contacts(Fischer, 1992: 193–221).248
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
5.3
On the move: technology, mobility, and
the mediation of social time and space,by Nicola Green
The spaces and experiences of modern social life
One of the most signiﬁcant developments of modernization across the 20th century
has been the construction of the modern urban metropolis. In the modern city, theconstruction of urban spaces transforms previously continuous geographical loca-tions into a series of ﬂeeting places, images, and encounters in crowds (Simmel,1997). The construction of modern urban space (including telecommunicationsinfrastructures), by concentrating population and allowing for dense copresent butever-changing interactions amongst centralized infrastructures, has contributed to achanging experience of time-bound social relationships. These have shifted fromthose of durable copresent interactions to fragmented and disconnected spatial andtemporal connections. The spaces of the city separate “the private” from “the pub-lic,” and institute locations (geographically deﬁned spaces) and places (subjectively,socially, culturally, and geographically deﬁned spaces) that have little connectionwith each other. Public social life therefore becomes an experience of discontinuity,where activities became compartmentalized in a series of ﬂeeting encounters andimpressions of little duration (Simmel, 1997; Frisby, 1985). Private social life, bycontrast, becomes that of copresence, continuity, and proximity, instituting a dividebetween geographically deﬁned public and private spaces.
Social and organizational activities in the newly emerging city required new
forms of coordination, and technologies to manage it. Travel was one such set oftechnologies, as people became newly mobile and needed to coordinate times to meetor organize activities (Lash & Urry, 1994). The coordination of copresent activitiesvia the technologies of travel required greater attention or orientation to (and discip-line by) “clock time” as the prevailing organization of temporally based activities,including attention to measurable, calculable, and linear units of standardized time.The development of new production processes in industrialization and the role ofclock time in new forms of work organization all helped institute new forms of time,centered around changes in interval, sequencing, and duration. The main thrustof these arguments is the move toward measurable, calculable units of clock time,standardized and shifting toward ever shorter time periods (Lash & Urry, 1994).
Lash and Urry (1994, p. 229) argue that the ascendence of clock time is attributable
to such interacting changes as
the disembedding of time from social activities as it becomes signiﬁcantly strippedof meaning; the breakdown of time into a larger number of small units; the emer-gence of the disciplinary power of time; the increasing timetabling and hencemathematization of social life; and the emergence of a synchronized measure oflife ﬁrst across national territories and later across the globe with the development
of Greenwich and “world time.”
Simmel (1997) implies that the public life of the city in this case becomes an
aggregation of privatized and individualized activities and agendas, bearing little rela-
tion to others. This particular development is detailed in du Gay et al. (1997) in theirresearch on the Sony Walkman. In the case of the Walkman, private, subjective, andemotional geographies are mapped on to the public spaces of the city, transformingpublic space into a continuation of private, subjective experiences, rather than acollective of shared experiences. Cooper et al. (forthcoming, p. 4) suggest that “it isworth considering whether the increasing development and use of mobile technologiesrepresents a kind of accentuation of the fragmented and individualized experience ofmodernity. Whereas it could be argued that the development of new tools and tech-nologies are driving these changes, they reﬂect changing social notions of time moregenerally across the twentieth century.”
As Lash and Urry (1994) note, it is not only the individual moving through
city streets who experiences the changed times and spaces of modern urban life, butalso the car, train, and bus travelers, who “transcend” what was formally understood
as the “tyranny” of distance. Raymond Williams (1974, p. 26) identiﬁes “mobile
privatisation” as the contemporary experience of car travel:
at most active social levels people are increasingly living as private small-familyunits, or . . . as private and deliberately self-enclosed individuals, while at thesame time there is a quite unprecedented mobility of such restricted privacies . . .what is experienced inside them . . . is movement, choice of direction, the pursuitof self-determined private purposes. All the other shells are moving, in compar-able ways but for their own diﬀerent private ends. They are not so much otherpeople, in any full sense, but other units which signal and are signalled to, so thatprivate mobilities can proceed safely and relatively unhindered.
The increase in mobility, the development of temporal coordination, and the
emergence of technologies designed to address the problem of “distance” in the
city contributed to changing relations of physical presence and absence in newlyformed urban spaces, and a changing subjective understanding of what Giddens(1990) calls “presence-availability.” This includes both distance and proximityas related to physical copresence, as well as presence and availability as newlymediated via emerging technologies. The central argument is that throughout the20th century, changes in physical proximity and distance – including the eﬀects oftechnologies designed to address time and distance, as well as a shifting consciousness250
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
of temporality – have “dislocated,” “disembedded,” and “disembodied” individuals
from local, collective and copresent understandings of, and activities in, time, by
“stretching” social relations.
However, if we turn to examine speciﬁc contemporary communications and
information technologies, and the social relations that attend them, the general anduniversalizing arguments around changes in “presence availability” begin to lookmore problematic.
Spatial mobility, time, and telecommunications technologies
Marshall McLuhan (1964, p. 271) wrote, “The telephone is an irresistible intruder intime and space.” Historical analyses have indicated that changes in temporal organ-ization across the 20th century have involved changing relationships between natural,social, clock, and subjective time, as well as changes in space, mobility, and theboundaries of the public and private in the construction of the modern city. Otherrecent research has traced the speciﬁc transformations that have taken place with theintroduction of diﬀerent kinds of telecommunications and new information technolo-gies. Social investigations of the “tele-presence” that the telegraph (Standage, 1998),the telephone (Fischer, 1988), and more recently the Internet (Boden & Molotch,1994) have made possible have pointed to the central role these technologies haveplayed in changing relationships across geographical space and time. Indeed, tech-nologies such as the telephone are speciﬁcally spatial: Their sole function is to supportsocial communication at a distance, and their ability to collapse distance has madepossible many spatial features of contemporary urban life. The oﬃce towers of latemodernity, for example, could not exist without the telecommunications technologiesto coordinate their internal spaces (Pool, 1977; T ownsend, 2001).
It is a well-established premise in social thought that the dominant technologies of
a particular historical period deﬁne temporal organization and cultural understand-ings of it. Recent investigations of capital, industrial, and labor times (Thompson,1967; Thrift, 1996; Rifkin, 1987; Adam, 1990), or “internet time” (Lee & Liebenau,
2000), are cases in point. According to some researchers (Ling & Yttri, 1999), mobiledevices again reconﬁgure the spaces of urban social life. If mobile devices are “space-adjusting technologies” that provide resources for understanding a sense of place andrelationship in both professional and private life, as Frissen (1995) suggests, then thechanging times that attend changing spaces are also at issue. In research on the socialaspects of mobile technologies thus far, for example, the notion of time ﬂexibilityhas been a recurring theme, as has the “compression” of activities and relationshipsinto more periods of shorter duration of communication (T ownsend, 2001). Therealso seems to be an unprecedented level of simultaneous copresent and tele-presentinteraction made possible through mobile technologies (Cooper et al., forthcoming).
These concerns about duration, interval, and sequencing, as well as issues of
presence, absence, and availability, are sometimes explained via analytical projectsthat concentrate on the speciﬁc changing temporal organization of new informationand communication technologies (see, e.g., Lee & Liebenau, 2000). These projectsdescribe changes in the context of spatial proximity and distance, such that changingactivities are said to intensify to the extent that the subjective experience of time isTECHNOLOGY , MOBILITY , MEDIATION OF SOCIAL TIME AND SPACE 251
“fast” or “speeding” (an intensiﬁcation of more and diﬀerent activities of a shorter
duration) (Virilio, 2000; T ownsend, 2001). The decentralization of communicationcreates new webs of potential interaction between atomized individuals, which on theone hand increases the communication activities carried out, while at the same timefragmenting that communication into more numerous communications of shorterduration. According to T ownsend (2001, p. 4), this is “dramatically speeding themetabolism of urban systems, increasing capacity and eﬃciency. The ‘realtime city,’in which system conditions can be monitored and reacted to instantaneously, hasarrived.” Some theorists, such as Virilio (2000), therefore note the ways that the“speed” of electronic communications involves an immediacy of action such thatmovement in physical space becomes no longer even necessary. Lash and Urry(1994) also cite Nowotny (1994), who argues that the immediacy presented by newtechnologies of information and communication result in an experience of “instant-aneous time.” As Adam (1990, p. 140) notes, if all multiple activities in time areexperienced as “instant” in this way, the future conﬂates with the present, concentrat-ing and intensifying social action, entailing panic about and distrust of “the future”(Adam, 1990, p. 140).
For those who accept that the experience of time is “intensifying,” “speeding
up,” or becoming “instantaneous,” this type of change is attributable to a number of
diﬀerent factors. Harvey (1990), for example, attributes the “space–time compres-sion” just outlined to the acceleration of the activities of capital over the 20th century,in which time and space both become abstractions and cease to have meaning or valuein themselves; their meaning and value are instead determined by the circulation ofcapital, especially in commodiﬁcation and representation. Giddens’s (1990) viewlargely echoes Harvey’s, but also considers how time and space “distanciate” as wellas “compress.” Although time–space compression (or “convergence” in Giddens’s
argument) describes shrinking distance in time (the span of time it takes to move fromone location to another), “time–space distanciation” describes “the processes bywhich societies are ‘stretched’ over shorter or longer spans of time and space ” (Lash
& Urry, 1994). The structuring of time–space distanciation relies on such socialrelations as “presence-availability” – the organization of presence, absence proximity
and availability, and the degree of copresent activities in relation to “tele-present”activities. It also relies on mediating technologies, such as information and communi-cations technologies, and the control and storage capacity of them. These relations areinterlinked, such that the relation of time and space may be routinized in diﬀerentways depending on forms of urban structure, the interaction of diﬀerent transportationand communication technologies, the role of the state and surveillance of populations(Green, 2001), and the commodiﬁcation of time in labor, industry, leisure, andconsumption.
As Lash and Urry (1994) note, however, Giddens’s and Harvey’s theories rely
on a largely generalized and universalized approach to “western societies” that tendto ignore the role of the speciﬁc and the local, and how changing times becomeroutinised in mundane and habitual daily life. Several points in Thrift ’s (1996,
pp. 1468–1469) critique of theories of new information and communication technol-ogies are salient here: Thrift argues that these theories tend to argue from extremes;that the technologies are assumed to replace the ones that had gone before; that the252
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
technologies are described as seamless systems without interruptions or limits, pre-
sented as coherent and consistent, without diﬀerence or locality; that the technologiesare assumed to be likely to spread everywhere, quickly; that they are “rarely seen as alinked repertoire of practices”; that they are positioned in opposition to a distancedand controlled nature; and that they are mainly comprised of representation, ratherthan technical repertoires in use.
Doreen Massey (1993, pp. 61–62) adds that “power-geometries” are also crucial
in the construction of space–time relations, and can be drawn out by asking whosemobility, whose times and spaces are under discussion:
For diﬀerent social groups and diﬀerent individuals are placed in very distinctways in relation to the ﬂows and interconnections. This point concerns notmerely the issue of who moves and who doesn’t . . . it is also about power relationto the ﬂows and the movement. Diﬀerent social groups have distinct relationshipsto this anyway – diﬀerentiated mobility: some are more in charge of it than others;some initiate ﬂows and movement, others don’t; some are more on the receivingend of it than others; some are eﬀectively imprisoned by it. . . . This is, in otherwords, a highly complex social diﬀerentation. There is the dimension of the degreeof movement and communication, but also dimensions of control and initiation.
Massey argues coherently for analytical sensitivity to both geographical space
and social and cultural locality in considering the relations of space–time. She argues
for attention to the complex relations between space, locality, time, social organiza-tion, and culture, so that the heterogeneous eﬀects of changing social institutionsalongside changing technologies can be understood and “mapped.” This argumentemerges from a concern to (re)introduce notions that describe social and culturaldiﬀerence, such as gender, ethnicity, and sexuality, to analyses of time and space. Asan illustration, one story that we were told in the course of ﬁeldwork pertained to thecase of India, and was related by an educational anthropologist. After traveling severaldays to reach a small village in northern India, she spent time in the village looking ateducational systems. While there, she came across the one person in the village whoowned a mobile phone. This individual had made a business out of calling friends andrelatives of villagers elsewhere (in the absence of any ﬁxed line services), taking on therole once held by village letter writers. The notion of “changing mobile temporalities”has very diﬀerent origins, and very diﬀerent implications for these villagers, than theydo for the “ﬂexible schedulers” (like myself) in the West.
In summary then, sociologists have identiﬁed a number of overlapping times that
both reﬂect and contribute to social organization, including various “natural” timesand cycles such as diurnal, lunar and seasonal times, the calendar, clock, universal/standardized, and regional times that emerged with the development of the moderncity, as well as the locally organized and lived times of the public and the private (suchas “on time” and “oﬀ time”) (Adam, 1990; Lash & Urry, 1994). They have also
traced how various technologies have historically mediated these rhythms, andhow technologies can have multiple temporal eﬀects. As Massey (1992) and Thrift(1996) suggest, setting out the connections between presence, absence, proximity,distance, and “time–space adjusting technologies” entails attention to local andTECHNOLOGY , MOBILITY , MEDIATION OF SOCIAL TIME AND SPACE 253
situated temporal organization, as well as global and extended times. It therefore
entails empirical research as well as theoretical pronouncements. While social activ-ities mediated by mobile technologies potentially encourage fragmentation and theindividualization of the experience of time, extending time–space “compression,”
“convergence,” and “distanciation,” and the speed and intensity of modern, Westernlife, locally shared rhythms and the social activities of lived times must also beaccounted for. The emerging mobile times in their local and situated, as well as“global” incidence, can be usefully accessed via ethnographic materials.
The next section therefore outlines the relations we have encountered in our
ethnography of mobile phones. They demonstrate emerging “mobile times” that must(increasingly) be considered in any theoretical discussion of temporal organization incontemporary Western societies.
Mobile temporality
I suggest in the discussion that follows that we might diﬀerentiate three sets ofrhythms salient to “mobile time.” It is the speciﬁc character of these rhythms that areimportant in the emerging organization of mobile times: the rhythms of mobile use;the rhythms of integrating mobile use into everyday life; and the rhythms of relationbetween use in everyday life and institutional social change. Rhythms of mobile userelate to the time taken interacting with a mobile device, and refers primarily to theduration and sequencing of interaction between an individual and that device (inthis case, a mobile phone). Rhythms of mobile use in everyday life refer to thelocal temporalities associated with social and cultural relationships in which speciﬁcdevice use is embedded. Rhythms of institutional change refer to the historical andinfrastructural elements that enable mobile use, including such dimensions as theinstitutionalization of travel, cycles of technological development, or the time takento establish and maintain network technologies.
Lee and Liebenau (2000, pp. 50–51) suggest, in a study of the times of Internet
use, that analytical attention should focus on the multiple “actors” of Internet systems– “the users (and uses), the publishers (and their servers), and the powers (including
economic powers and regulatory or governance authorities).” If we are to account forpotential social change brought about by mobile technologies, issues of access to andcontrol over the temporal rhythms of mobility should also be addressed. Lee andLiebenau (2000) identify six dimensions of focus, including duration, temporal loca-tion, sequence, deadlines, cycles, and rhythms. I would add that these dimensionsmight also include the cultural and political dimensions of mobile use in everyday life.Our ethnography has been carried out over the past 2 years, and has involved ﬁeld-work with groups such as those mobile in their working life, students, teenagers andtheir parents, as well as observation in main streets, in malls, on trains, and at trainstations. Drawing on this research, I would like to illustrate such an analysis.
Rhythms of device use
The ﬁrst dimension of analysis pertinent to the temporal organization of mobile
devices is that of the temporal rhythms of the use of devices and their applications.254 THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
Most obvious here are the changing durations of device use for users. On the one
hand, there is some evidence that mobile phones presently encourage short conversa-tions, and introduce new opportunities for more conversation unavailable before.According to one teenager:
It gets really confusing if you’re talking to more than one person at a time.Cause if you forget what you said . . . Or you start writing to one person . . .Say like you’re talking to one person and they’re friends with one person thatyou’re not . . . It gets into a big mess! And then someone phones you and whenyou’re on the phone you can hear the beep as the message comes in. And you ’re
like “I have to go. My bath’s run.” And you really just want to check your
message. (A)
Ling and Yttri (1999) describe this as “micro coordination” and suggest that
temporalities change as individuals engage in a kind of instant coordination when
mobile, which could contribute to a subjective sense of speed, the intensiﬁcation oftasks, and the fragmentation of communication. T eenagers use mobile phones in thesame ways as adults for these coordinating activities:
Just like cause I always ring my mum to tell her whether I’m walking home orwhether I want her to pick me up. Just like pick up times and stu ﬀ and whether I’m
staying late cause sometimes I help out and I teach. And also I use it at breaktimes, and when I’m at work as well. (J1)
The use of short text messaging (SMS), especially among young people, might
also support these arguments. Language in which words and phrases are abbreviated
might contribute to interactions of much shorter duration than previously available,adding to a subjective sense of temporal fragmentation. T eenagers describe their useof language in these circumstances:
Y ou know, instead of “you are” you just put “u r,” or “2” instead of “to.” (G)
With abbreviations it’s more like a colloquial thing. As in who you’re in with
...  I t ’s the way you guys speak together anyway. (A)
Like if you were talking to your Mum, you wouldn’t write “CU.” Yo u ’d have
to write “See you.” But if you’re talking to your friends then you write “cul8r,”because they understand it as well, they’re like the same sort of . . . they understandthe phones more than the parents do. (J)
The relatively short duration taken to read the messages is also involved. One
mobile phone professional commented:
I use it at work . . . but then when I message, it’s to my friends, especially if I’m on
the train or something . . . mostly its just one-liners . . . like a competition aboutwho can come up with the best one-liner. (M)
At the same time, however, many teenagers reported that they spend many hoursTECHNOLOGY , MOBILITY , MEDIATION OF SOCIAL TIME AND SPACE 255
a day (and night), sometimes hours at a time, short text messaging among their peers.
These long durations act to consolidate their peer relationships, diﬀerentiate themfrom family or household relations, and contribute to a growing sense of bothindependence (from family) and collectivity (among peers).
I’m just text messaging all the time . . . like the longest time I spent was aboutthree hours. (G)
It’s a bit like text messages, they’re addictive. (A)I can’t sleep so I have to send a message to people. And then I get moody
if they don’t reply. I’ve got ones that are recorded at like three o’clock in themorning. (J)
T ext messages are things that you store . . . they’re kind of memories you
want to keep. It would be really cool to have like a memory card for each personso I can put all their text messages in there so I can retrieve them one at a timewhen I want them. (L)
Diﬀerent forms of communication or device use also take on diﬀerent meanings
depending on the context of the communication in shifting peer relationships.
I’d much rather phone someone, but you don’t, because . . . you say things
that you really want to say to them in text messages. (J)
Y eah, there are some things that you don’t really want to say to someone’s
face or on the phone to them. Y ou just send a text. (A)
Y esterday a friend of mine was asking me if I still had feelings for his brother.
And it’s like the minute he asked the question I knew it was going to be one ofthose text messages that keeps going to go on and on and on. (A)
[Dumping people by text message] That is the worst way. That is like a
bitchy thing to do. (J)
It’s worse than being a coward. Its worst when calling someone when you
know they’re a thousand miles away and going “oh yeah, by the way, you’redumped.” It’s terrible. (A)
This is supported by impressions from some of the parents:I suspect, I may be totally wrong on this one, but I think what is happening is that
kids will sometimes say things in a message that they won’t, like the heart signand things like that. Y ou don’t go like “I Love you.” She had this boyfriend inLiverpool . . . I suspect a lot of the messages were more like greeting cards, orsoppy . . . I think if you want to say something like “Pick me up at the station,”I’m not sure you would really message that, would you? It is something you needto get an answer to straight away.
Other features of device interaction reinforce this, such as time spent adjust-
ing and sharing mobile phone address book entries (on a “who’s got whose
number” basis), or spending time showing friends messages that have been sent andreceived.256
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
People will always just look at your phone . . . (A)
. . . and read your messages. (J)
But everyone does it. But the thing is it’s like someone’s diary. (J)Y eah, I think its personal. I don’t read anyone’s messages. (A)Only unless they show you. If they say “oh, look at this,” then I’ll look at it. (J)It’s the way you interact with each person individually, I think. So it reﬂects
with the way you use their phones as well. . . . Even when they give you textmessages to read I think that’s boring when I don’t know who’s sent it. So, if it’s asweet message, I don’t get it because I don’t know the other person so it’s justwasted on you. But if it’s a funny one you go “ha ha! That was funny, who sentit?” (A)
As these examples show, the duration spent in interaction with the device, with
other people, acts to both functionally and symbolically cement the durability of social
relationships in local communities. In this case, the duration of “clock time” becomesa less salient feature of ongoing interaction with signiﬁcant others through the device,than subjective time. The act of using the device, and the time spent doing so, might inthis way contribute to a sense of social memory among groups. As Connerton (1989)notes, the minutiae of bodily habits with objects reinforce social and cultural memory.He argues that the use of artifacts literally “incorporates” those memories and rela-tionships in the habits of the body. Time spent using devices makes relationshipsdurable and ongoing, rather than “fragmented.”
The durations and sequencing of device use also have durable meanings for
organizations such as device manufacturers. Certainly, device manufacturers studythe “usability” of their devices in terms of the actions of the body and the duration of
time taken to complete speciﬁc tasks. This temporal measurement contributes to thedesign of devices, and these times become durable, literally “objectiﬁed” in thedevices themselves (such as measurements of the time taken to write text messageson a mobile device, leading to the development of predictive text software).
The results from teens just cited indicate that in the case of design, the measure of
duration of activity as a measure of signiﬁcance for the “usability” of devices may notbe as salient as previously thought. Located practical action also has bearing on theduration and sequencing of functions: In many settings for example, we observedpedestrians on main streets or in malls coming to a standstill in order to use some ofthe functions on their mobile. They were compelled to become immobile to use theirmobile device.
Moreover, our interviews with sales and marketing personnel in network operator
organizations indicated that network operators record times and intensities of networkactivities both for billing purposes, and thereafter use the information to build a pictureof their consumers. If duration is signiﬁcant in local ways, network activity, the math-ematization of categorization of users into high-use/high-value, low-use/low-valuegroups as an indicator of consumer practices, might belie changing social patterns ofcommunication and changing patterns of sociality. Perhaps what is more salient is therelationship being maintained through those time-bound activities.TECHNOLOGY , MOBILITY , MEDIATION OF SOCIAL TIME AND SPACE 257
Rhythms of everyday life
These aspects of device use are integrated into emerging patterns of organizing mobile
communications and relations in everyday life. One aspect of temporal location sig-niﬁcant for users (and for service providers) is the “anytime, anywhere” availabilityprovided by mobile devices, which integrates microcordination and device use dis-cussed earlier with the rhythms of work, family, and leisure times (Green & Harvey,1999). For users, the always-availability implied by mobile time and space a ﬀects the
sequencing of life tasks, deadlines organized around work and home activities, thecycles of work, leisure, and family life, and the rhythms of diurnal, lunar, seasonal, andcalendar change – all of which have social implications. The case of Catherine, a salesrepresentative whose work communications are primarily conducted via her mobilephone, is illustrative.
My mobile is my life . . . well, my car and my mobile. I live in the car. I’ll use themobile for work calls at home in the morning, and then when I’m driving as well,to report back to the oﬃce about visits, or to make queries on orders, or whatever. . . I use it to call friends when I’m on the road, but mostly when I’m stuck intraﬃc jams. If someone rings I’ll take the call . . . but mostly, if I ’m stuck, I’ll ring
my Mum. My Mum and I talk quite a lot most days.
Although Catherine’s life remains, at least in part, structured through formal or
clock time (for example, she regulates work time into compartments of daily and weekly
duration), decentralization of both her work and home life prompts ﬂexibility andindividualized scheduling. The mobile phone interrupts the time-based coordinationof communication and information activities required for scheduling from ﬁxed loca-tions. Individuals may thus organize their activities around ﬂexible compartments oftime, rather than compartments of time associated with particular geographical spaces.
At a mundane level, there has been signiﬁcant research on the “always-availability”
of mobile temporality (Green, 2001; Green & Harvey, 1999; Brown et al., 2001.) – tobe always and at every time “on call” – and its potential to transform the ways that
individuals organize their activities in time and the ways they arrange their “sched-ules.” A kind of spatial and temporal “boundary rearrangement” becomes possible,and has begun to appear in our research. This involves both the case of “public”
activities and responsibilities (as in the case of work) that become embedded in thetemporal rhythms of the home, as well as “private” relationships becoming integratedinto the public sphere in mobile relations.
In the former case, research has tended to concentrate on how mobile teleworkers
organize their work and home life, and Ellen Ullman’s (1997, p. 136) work echoes theﬁndings of our own research:
It’s not surprising to me . . . [m]y work hours have leaked into all parts of the dayand week. Eight in the morning, ten at night, Saturday at noon, Sundays: I amnever not working. Even when I’m not actually doing something that could becalled work, I might get started at any minute. So everything is an interruption . . .everything must be refused because it is possible that from one moment to the258
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
next I will get back to something. . . . The building I live in . . . is full of little
one- and two-person companies. . . . In the afternoons, I see us virtuals emergeblinking into the sunlight. In the dead hours after 3 p.m., we haunt cafés and localrestaurants. We run into each other at the FedEx drop-box or the copy shop.They, like me, have a freshly laundered look, just come out of pajamas or sweatpants, just showered and dressed.
It is this time-based (rather than space-based) organization of activities that
deﬁnes “accessibility,” a redeﬁnition of “public” and “private” time into “on time”
and “oﬀ time. ” Laurier (1999) suggests that using the technology to its full potential
can, precisely, help individuals to control time, and thus to control the organizational
relationships of which they are a part. The decentralization of work activities, and thepractices of “assembling the mobile oﬃce” on the part of “nomadic workers,” entailthe simultaneous management of private activities, as when mobile teleworkerscoordinate their work life from/at home (Steward, 2000). “Public” work activities aredrawn into “private” spaces, with a variety of eﬀects on an individual’s home andfamily life. Nevertheless, while this temporal boundary rescheduling might positivelyproduce spatial and temporal ﬂexibility for users, this is not necessarily the case(Steward, 2000).
Some research, including our own, has indicated that mobile teleworking can
have negative eﬀects for workers and families when they have been compelled, ratherthan chosen, to work in this manner. Hill, Hawkins, and Miller (1996), for example,investigated the domestic eﬀects of mobile telework. In a quantitative and qualitativesurvey, the private contexts of mobile use for telework were examined, and teleworkersreported that the ﬂexibility to be permanently available for work impacted on theirpersonal and domestic life such that they had less time for their home and family. Theadvantages of mobility and “telepresence” were, for those surveyed, sometimes oﬀsetby the drawbacks of permanent availability for work. Debbie, a student who is also amother, and works for a charity, says:
I always try to turn my mobile oﬀ on the train. I mean, its like, if you don’t thenthere’s always something . . . always someone trying to get hold of you. . . . I meanapart from it being really boring having to listen to other people’s conversations. . . and I like having that journey, it ’s time to myself, on the train. If you ’re going
to places, on your way to places, then people can’t get hold of you if you don’twant them to.
These eﬀects were also strongly inﬂuenced by their degree of choice in “becom-
ing mobile.” Mobility was perceived negatively when individuals had not chosen to
undertake their work via mobile and telepresent means, but were required to do so bytheir employer. It seems that mobile teleworking and the temporal rhythms as well asgeographical locations involved have diﬀerent eﬀects for users depending on theirlevels of access to and control over mobile work activities and their status as mobileteleworkers.
Such issues of access and control of mobile activities draw attention to the di ﬀer-
ential eﬀects of mobile technologies for diﬀerent users. If we are to consider Massey’sTECHNOLOGY , MOBILITY , MEDIATION OF SOCIAL TIME AND SPACE 259
(1993) notion of power geometries, we need to ask who has access, who has control
of time, and who doesn’t, in emerging mobile temporalities. This is also at issue ininstances where the temporalities of private relations are potentially shifted via mobiletechnologies into public life.
We have encountered numerous instances in our research where the use of
mobiles in public space has been employed to maintain “private,” family, or com-munity relations. Y oung people, especially young women, will use devices to maintainrelationships with signiﬁcant others both while traveling alone (to avoid encounterswith strangers) and at speciﬁc times (such as late night, or “when it’s dark”). Theirmarginalization in public space, at speciﬁc times, leads to their increased use to thedevice to maintain contact with signiﬁcant others. The mobile therefore has diﬀerentuses and eﬀects for these groups than for others.
It’s a security thing, kind of. (S)
Y eah, whenever I’m walking somewhere and I’m really scared I have like
999 [the UK emergency number] dialed already. I just have my ﬁnger on thebutton. (L)
When I used to ﬁnish work and I’d be walking to Claire’s house or something,
...  I’d always phone Paul so I could speak to him while I’m walking so I’m not
quite so scared. (S)
I mean a lot of parents buy their phones for their daughters anyway . . . or
maybe sons, ’cause they want to know where they are, keep in contact and theycan ring whenever. (P)
This theme of mobile technologies creating the subjective experience of being “in
touch” or connected when alone at speciﬁc times is beginning to loom large, and also
indicates that a gender analysis is crucial in the experience of everyday rhythms ofmobile temporality.
At the same time, relationships between teens and parents can also become
fraught with anxiety when mobility becomes mapped on to the teenager’s strugglesover autonomy, and this often has speciﬁc temporal aspects (such as curfews).T eenagers who buy pagers to stay in contact with their friends (at any time) becomefrustrated when parents use those technologies to contact the teenager and monitortheir activity in space and time:
My mum used to be like that, and hates them, but she always wanted to knowwhere I was, so . . . that’s what I don’t like. Everyone knows where you are all thetime, that’s why I don’t like them. (D)
Y ou don’t tell them where you are! (G)I’ll be out, and I’ll go to my friend’s house . . . until really late, and mum
would get worried, and I won’t phone home . . . and so they’re all getting allstressed, and “you’re not going anywhere again,” and with the phone they canjust say “oh, what time are you coming home, are you all right, blah blah.” (G)
Sometimes they [ask where I am]. If I say “I’m going there,” they’ll think I’m
still there, and stuﬀ like that. . . . Or I won’t say, I’ll say “I’m just out with one ofmy friends.” (H)260
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
If you say you’re at a friend’s house then they know you’re there, they think
its better . . . because they can try and call you on the house phone ’cos that’s
where you’re supposed to be, so they’ll try and call there, ’cos then they knowwhere you are. (G)
Y ou just lie. It’s just lying. (H)
For parents then, mobile technologies may assist in the temporal ordering and
regulation of individual and family activities. Parents have also, however, talkedabout disruptions to the temporal rhythms of domestic life caused by mobile phonesin our research. Some are convinced that teenagers who call their children in theearly hours of the morning would not do so on a ﬁxed-line phone for fear of disrupt-ing the temporal rhythms of the household. There might also be diﬀerences in thesocial implications of “always-availability” on the part of parents. When we considerthat women have demonstrably invested more time in the maintenance of familialand intimate relationships via telecommunications devices (Rakow, 1992; Rakow &Navarro, 1993), it would seem that being “always available” for home as well as workactivities via mobile devices may have signiﬁcantly diﬀerent eﬀects for women andmen. One mother says:
I like to feel, not that I can instantly get hold of her, but that she can get hold ofme. . . . But having said that I think I get more calls like can I go and pick her up,“I’ve just missed the last bus.” In that sense I think it creates more work forparents.
In summary then, the personalization of mobile device – their attachment to an
individual person/body and their temporal rhythms, rather than to speciﬁc loca-
tions, the personalized nature of the technologies and the attendant atomizationof communications – can then potentially fragment both “public” and “private”communication activities, collapsing each into the other. Being available, being con-nected may be seen as a strategic form of social behavior that enables participation ina preferred and familiar social space no matter what the immediate surroundings maybe. At the same time, when all social activities become coordinated through the samedevice, what time is on and oﬀ, and when, for what, becomes a primary site ofnegotiating social relationships and conﬂicting roles in everyday life. The issues ofwho has access to and control of mobile devices (or not), and when, seem the centralissues in the local organization of mobile temporality.
The relations of everyday life just described should be seen in the context of the
temporal rhythms that regulate and inform the practices of network operators, serviceproviders, and governmental and regulatory authorities. On the one hand, there are thespeciﬁc temporal cycles of the present cellular (and potential satellite) infrastructures.Cellular networks go through regular cycles of call loads, regular times when thenetwork is “busy.” Furthermore, the temporal location of the cellular infrastructure inany particular place will also aﬀect who can call whom, where, and when. Long-termcycles of infrastructural development, including decisions about where to locate phys-ical cell sites (masts/antennae), how many, and when, go through regular cycles ofstrategic planning and development, which depend on the diﬀerent contingencies ofTECHNOLOGY , MOBILITY , MEDIATION OF SOCIAL TIME AND SPACE 261
the network operators’ schedules. The rhythms of the technical infrastructure do not
depend only on technology development, however. They are also determined by themonthly, quarterly, and yearly rhythms of the ﬁnancial calendar, and how particularorganizations organize strategic analysis, market development, and the (sometimesoverlapping, sometimes contradictory) programs of business planning and manage-ment. While linked to longer term technical and social change (discussed later), thesetemporal aspects of mobile organization aﬀect how mobility takes place in everydaylife for users (who gets to connect and when), and also determine the daily, monthly,and yearly scheduling and deadlines within operator organizations.
Rhythms of institutional change
The temporal locations, the deadlines, cycles, and sequences of the technical infra-structure, and the organizational temporalities related to its planning and develop-ment draw attention to the time scales involved in the relationship between technicaldevelopment in industry organizations and government and policymaking processes.
Although ostensibly in competition, industry actors often coordinate their inter-
action with public authorities in time, aﬀecting both the nature of technical infra-structures and the networks and services available to consumers. The process offormulating network standards and the governmental regulation of business activityand auctions of network bands are examples of standards setting, regulation, andpolicymaking processes that are situated in time. The yearly schedules of when gov-ernments meet and policy is set, the regular cycles of civil service regulation, and theproduct and service development attendant upon them in corporate organizations allhave impact on the technical and economic times of mobile development.
Certainly for industry players, time is money, in this sense. Or perhaps, as
Barbara Adam suggests, money is time (1990, p. 114). One thing that is certain in themobile industry, as elsewhere, is that time itself has become a commodity – hence thevalue of mobile devices and services in markets. Once time becomes a commodiﬁedresource (we can “save” and “invest” time, for example), it becomes not only disem-bedded from related value, but disembodied from any speciﬁc activities in daily life.It is only in this culturally speciﬁc connection between time and money, for example,that cultural perceptions of “wasting” time, of “dead time,” become inﬂuential. Perryet al. (2001) have suggested, for example, that mobile devices act as “Lazarus”devices – devices that “resurrect” mobile time that would have previously been con-
sidered “dead,” “economically unproductive” (such as time taken to travel from one
place to another). This implies that an emerging mobile temporality is “Lazarustime,” productive time that has been resurrected from unproductive “dead time” via
the use of mobile technologies. The implication that time is money is relevant not onlyfor those in the mobile business, therefore, but also for the mobile temporalities ofusers. According to T ownsend (2001),
time becomes a commodity to buy, sell, and trade over the phone. The oldschedule of minutes, hours, days, and weeks becomes shattered into a constantstream of negotiations, reconﬁgurations, and rescheduling. One can be inter-rupted or interrupt friends and colleagues at any time. Individuals live in this262
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
phonespace – they can never let it go, because it is their primary link to the
temporally, spatially fragmented network of friends and colleagues they have
constructed for themselves. It has become their new umbilical cord. (p. 70)
“Institutional change” in the form of mobile temporality, therefore, is not only
related to the governance of social institutions or the dominance of corporate busi-
ness, and the “convergence” or “distanciation” to the infrastructural elements ofwhole societies (although the importance of these elements has, I hope, becomeapparent). Nor does it only lie in changing technical infrastructures and the socialimplications they might have for changing temporality when mobile. Nor is socialchange simply related to the changing daily activities of individuals as they rescheduleand become ﬂexible. T o consider the implications of mobile temporality for socialpractices, understandings, and organization of time is also crucially to consider ques-tions of value. Who gains what through mobile temporalities? Where, and under whatlocal and collective conditions?
Conclusions
Many sociological arguments have been made for new temporal formations throughthe use of new and mobile information and communication technologies – the“timeless time” of Castells (1996, p. 433), Nowotny’s (1994) “instantaneous time,”Virilio’s “speed” (2000), and Giddens’s “time–space distanciation” and “con-
vergence” (1990). The logic of these arguments would suggest that a reconﬁgurationof space and time is taking place, a rearrangement that entails the individualiza-tion and fragmentation of availability, duration, cycles, and rhythms, such that theforms and purposes of the communication and the social relationships mediated andmaintained through them are reconﬁgured.
Certainly, arguments about mobile work, ﬂexible scheduling, changes in the dur-
ation and cycles of activities, proximity, distance, and presence might suggest thatwidespread social and cultural change in the practice and understanding of temporal-ity is occurring. While the “speed” of modern urban life and potential fragmentationin social relationships via temporal changes can certainly be noted, mobile tech-nologies also introduce opportunities for new continuities across space and time,previously disjoined through centralization. The ethnographic data presented herehave been one means to address these new temporal continuities.
Furthermore, I have argued here that if attention is paid to local and situated
times, to the rhythms of daily life as well as the cycles of social organization betweengroups of social actors detailed in analyses such as those of Giddens and Harvey,many temporalities (the social practices and understandings that form them, theactivities and relationships they mediate and maintain) can be demonstrated to berelatively enduring. At least some of the relationships that comprise mobile temporal-ities – including those of organization and regulation – are not dissimilar (or have not
changed) from well-established temporal patterns in the production and reproductionof technical and social infrastructure. What is at issue is how diﬀerent temporalrhythms intersect in new ways as they are conﬁgured in diﬀerent locations, and ineveryday, situated action.TECHNOLOGY , MOBILITY , MEDIATION OF SOCIAL TIME AND SPACE 263
If we can think of social “space–time” as the network of relationships within
which individuals and groups operate in everyday life, social time is comprised of the
social (rather than geographical) proximity of those relationships, as they are shapedby resources, location, value, and knowledge. The simultaneity of copresence andtelepresence becomes the mechanism for connection with others. The device and itsfunctionalities can stand in for, but can also create, a community or network. On theone hand, social space and time are “extended,” and on the other, they remain locallycontinuous. Communities are being formed in highly contradictory ways, whichreﬂect new disjunctures, as well as new continuities, in the relationship between space,time, and location.
What seems most at issue is not only the fact or extent of temporal change in the
face of mobile technologies, but also the situated, diﬀerential eﬀects of those changesfor diﬀerent individuals and social groups. These are not only descriptive questions(what has changed and how?) but also qualitative questions (with what consequences,for whom?). When the value of (mobile) time is taken into account, these questionsbecome more pressing. The connection between mobile space and time, as articulatedin multiple, heterogeneous places and rhythms, is not constant and does not haveequal eﬀects for all. Access to and control of time and mobility are always shaped bythe context of situated social practice, as collectively created and maintained by anumber of diﬀerent individuals and social groups. In asking who beneﬁts from theseheterogeneous causes and eﬀects, we are asking questions about the power geometriesof mobile time.
References
Adam, Barbara. 1990. Time and social theory. Cambridge: Polity Press, Blackwell.
Boden, Deirdre, and Molotch, Harvey L. 1994. The compulsion of proximity. In NowHere:
Space, time and modernity, eds. Roger Friedland and Deidre Boden, pp. 257–286. Berkeley,University of California Press.
Brown, Barry, Green, Nicola, and Harper, Richard, eds. 2001. Wireless world: Social and
interactional implications of wireless technology. London: Springer Verlag.
Castells, Manuel. 1996. The rise of the network society. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.Connerton, Paul. 1989. How societies remember. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Cooper, Geoﬀ, Green, Nicola, Harper, Richard, and Murtagh, Ged. Forthcoming. Mobile
society? T echnology, distance and presence. In Virtual society? Get real!, ed. Steve Woolgar.Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Du Gay, Paul, Hall, Stuart, Janes, L., Mackay, H., Negus, Keith, and Tudor, A. 1997. Doing
cultural studies: The story of the Sony W alkman. London: Sage.
Fischer, Claude. 1988. America calling: A social history of the telephone to 1940. Berkeley:
University of California Press.
Frisby, David. 1985. Fragments of modernity. Cambridge: Polity.Frissen, Valerie. 1995. Gender is calling: Some reﬂections on past, present and future uses
of the telephone. In The gender-technology relation, eds. Keith Grint and Rosalind Gill,pp. 79–94. London: T aylor & Francis.
Giddens, Anthony, 1990. The consequences of modernity. Cambridge: Polity.Green, Nicola. 2001. Who’s watching whom? Monitoring and accountability in mobile relations.
In Wireless world: Social and interactional implications of wireless technology, eds. Barry
Brown, Nicola Green, and Richard Harper, pp. 32–45. London: Springer Verlag.264 THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
Green, Sarah, and Harvey, Penny. 1999. Scaling place and networks: An ethnography of ICT
“innovation” in Manchester.” Internet and Ethnography Conference, Hull, December.
Harvey, David. 1990. The condition of postmodernity: An enquiry into the conditions of cultural
change. Oxford: Blackwell.
Hill, E. Jeﬀrey, Hawkins, Alan J., and Miller, Brent C. 1996. Work and family in the virtual
oﬃce: Perceived inﬂuences of mobile telework. Family Relations 45: 293–301.
Lash, Scott, and Urry, John. 1994. Economies of signs and space. London: Sage.
Laurier, Eric. 1999. Converzations in the corridor (M4): Assembling the mobile oﬃce. BSA
Conference Proceedings, Glasgow.
Lee, Heejin, and Liebenau, Jonathan. 2000. Time and the Internet at the turn of the millennium.
Time and Society 9(1):43–56.
Ling, Richard, and Yttri, Birgitte. 1999. “Nobody sits at home and waits for the telephone to ring ”:
Micro and hyper-coordination through the use of the mobile telephone. Perpetual ContactWorkshop, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ, December.
Massey, Doreen. 1992. Politics and space/time. New Left Review 196:65–84.Massey, Doreen. 1993. Power-geometry and a progressive sense of place. In Mapping the
futures, local cultures, global change, eds. J. Bird, B. Curtis, T. Putnam, G. Robertson, andL. Tickner, pp. 59–69. London: Routledge.
McLuhan, Marshall. 1964. Understanding media: The extensions of man . London: Routledge and
Kegan Paul.
Nowotny, H. 1994. Time. The modern and postmodern experience. Cambridge: Polity.Perry, Mark, O’Hara, Kenton, Sellen, Abigail, Brown, Barry, and Harper, Richard. 2001.
Dealing with mobility: Understanding access anytime, anywhere. Transactions on ComputerHuman Interaction 8(4):323–347.
Pool, Ithiel del Sola, ed. 1977. The social uses of the telephone. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Rakow, Lana F . 1992. Gender on the line: W omen, the telephone and community life. Urbana:
University of Illinois Press.
Rakow, Lana, and Navarro, Vija. 1993. Remote mothering and the parallel shift: Women meet
the cellular telephone. Critical Studies in Mass Communication 10:144–157.
Rifkin, J. 1987. Time wars: The primary con ﬂict in human history. New Y ork: Henry Holt.
Simmel, Georg. 1997. The metropolis and mental life. In Simmel on culture, eds. David Frisby
and Mike Featherstone, pp. 174–185. London: Sage.
Standage, Tim. 1998. The Victorian Internet. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson.Steward, Barbara. 2000. Changing times: The meaning, measurement and use of time in
teleworking. Time and Society 9(1): 57–74.
Thompson, E. P . 1967. Time, work discipline and industrial capitalism. Past and Present
38:56–97.
Thrift, Nigel. 1996. New urban eras and old technological fears: Reconﬁguring the good will of
electronicthings. Urban Studies 33(8):1463–1493.
T ownsend, Anthony. 2001. Mobile communications in the twenty-ﬁrst century city. In Wireless
world: Social and interactional implications of wireless technology, eds. Barry Brown, NicolaGreen, and Richard Harper, pp. 62–77. London: Springer Verlag.
Traweek, Sharon. 1988. Beamtimes and lifetimes: The world of high energy physicists. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Ullman, Ellen. 1997. Close to the machine: T echnophilia and its discontents. San Francisco: City
Lights Books.
Virilio, Paul. 2000. Polar inertia (trans. Patrick Camiller). London: Sage.Williams, Raymond. 1974. T elevision: T echnology and cultural form. London: Fontana.TECHNOLOGY , MOBILITY , MEDIATION OF SOCIAL TIME AND SPACE 265
5.4
Time and the internet,
by Heejin Lee and Jonathan Liebenau
3 Time and computers
There is not much research that addresses time and computers substantially. How-
ever, the topic is already attracting the attention of researchers from various academicdisciplines. Negroponte (1995) mentions the impact of electronic mail on work time.Electronic mail changes the rhythm of work and play:
Nine-to-ﬁve, ﬁve days a week, and two weeks oﬀ a year starts to evaporate as
the dominant beat to business life. Professional and personal messages start tocommingle: Sunday is not so diﬀerent from Monday. (p. 193)
Electronic mail also can make people less sensitive to international time-zone
diﬀerences (Failla and Bagnara, 1992: 672). Negroponte gives another example
(p. 49). The ‘nine o’clock news’ has a special meaning in everyday life over almost allthe world. Some people are keen to arrive home by then, especially when a big issue isin the news. The time of 9 p.m. functions as a reference time for them in organizingtheir day. Cable TV news networks such as CNN cause the time 9 p.m. increasinglyto lose its meaning as a temporal reference point because they repeat updated newsevery 15 or 30 minutes. The Internet can accelerate this trend. On the Internet, onecan retrieve and watch news when one wants, not when it is delivered by broadcastingcompanies. Once this practice is generalized among the population, 9 p.m. is nolonger diﬀerent from 8:17 p.m. Then the lifestyle which employs it as one of itsimportant temporal anchors (e.g. 9 a.m. for starting work, noon or 1 p.m. for lunch,and 5 p.m. for calling it a day) will be transformed. In these ways both the seven-dayweek and the currently patterned day are weakened by the Internet.
According to Failla and Bagnara (1992), information technology causes profound
changes in the time-frame patterns of the decision-making process. It also eliminatesrigidity in work rhythms, giving ﬂexibility. The organization of work is becomingless and less rigid in terms of time-patterns. This is especially true of professionalwork performed in oﬃces with information technology support. The application ofinformation technologies to knowledge-based activities
. . . generates work methods that cut across the ‘traditional’ sequence of events,
changing the durations customarily regarded as ‘appropriate’ and reducing theneed to ‘program’ activities, and hence to resort to rigid timetables. The eﬀect ofthese changes is to disrupt the traditional work rhythms. In this sense, informationtechnologies help to eliminate or diminish the importance of time-frames gener-ally accepted as appropriate for performing a given activity.
(Failla and Bagnara, 1992: 678)
The impacts of information technology on time assume diﬀerent patterns depend-
ing on the stages in the development of information technology. Failla and Bagnaraclassify its development into three stages: the automation of routine activities, deci-sion support technologies, and virtual reality technologies. Each stage has a diﬀerentmeaning in terms of time.
In the automation of routine activities at the early stages of computerization,
there still remains the same high degree of rigidity in work rhythms. Such highrigidity characterized the mechanical technologies of the ﬁrst industrial revolution.In this phase users complain that computers dictate the rhythm of work. They arerequired to adapt to machine time. Some attitudes of resistance to computers canbe attributed to the disorientating eﬀect of the ‘new’ rigid time-frames imposedby the technology. The next stage is characterized by the proliferation of directusers of information technology generated by the advent of the personal computer.This phase sees the development of information technology for individual decision-making such as spreadsheets, databases and packages for statistical analysis. Althoughthese technologies for decision support systems result in changes in decision-makingprocesses, the most signi ﬁcant transformation is their disruptive eﬀect on rigid time-
frames. Due to the decentralization of processing capacity through the personalcomputer and the subsequent development of speciﬁc applications to support indi-vidualized decision-making, a new relationship with technology has been generated.The relationship is no longer subject to the time constraints of centralized systems.When the technology evolves from supporting individual decision-making, to aidingorganizational decision-making such as group decision support systems (GDSS)or computer supported cooperative work (CSCW), bigger impacts on time areexpected. At present, information technology is experiencing another phase of devel-opment which is likely to have a qualitative impact on time. The new technologiesmake it possible to project a virtual reality environment, and help us to simulatethe consequences in advance. The decision-making process has always been basedon past experiences. With this technology, however, we can gain experience of
scenarios or events that have never been encountered in real life. Virtual realitytechnology therefore allows ‘future’ or unexperienced experiences to be experienced.We can reconstruct the experience needed to generate alternatives with the helpof information technology. It allows simulation of the future and thereby modiﬁesthe time-frames which are no longer relegated to repetitions of the past with littlevariation.
There are empirical studies on time and information technology in organizations.
Barley (1988) investigated the impacts of computer-based radiology equipmenton temporality and social relations in hospital radiology departments. He found aTIME AND THE INTERNET 267
dichotomy in ways of organizing time: monochronic and polychronic ways (Hall,
1959, 1966, 1983). In the former, people do one thing at a time; in the latter, severalthings are done at once. Barley found that the new computer-based equipmentincreased the monochronicity of radiologists’ work by restructuring the duration,sequence, temporal location and rate of recurrence of events. It in turn enhancedthe symmetry of temporal organization between radiologists’ and technicians’ work.Furthermore the increased symmetry contributed to decreased conﬂict betweenradiologists and technicians.
Lee (1997, 1999) further developed the points made by Barley. He suggested
six dimensions of temporality in business processes: duration, temporal location,sequence, deadline, cycle and rhythm. They were used to describe and analyse tem-poral changes in the work under study. In his case study, information technologytransformed temporal proﬁles of work and also created a temporal symmetry betweenwork groups interacting with each other. Unlike in Barley’s study, however, the maindirection of change was polychronic.
4 Temporal dimensions of the Internet and corporate intranets
We can simplify the features of the Internet and other networks such as internalcorporate networks that can be analysed for a new temporal view. These features canbe described in terms of the users (and uses), the publishers (and their servers), andthe powers (including economic powers and regulatory or governance authorities).
Users have the opportunity to alter their temporal perceptions by virtue of
having access at any time. That access gives the illusion of being instantaneous.Users are assumed to have short attention spans, and this has inﬂuenced the designof much material. The experience of television holds strong sway over the style ofpresentation.
Internet servers are (supposed to be) always switched on. Their constant presence
means that all materials are always available, and in aggregate the Internet is as access-ible in the middle of the night as at the height of the working day. The burden of costsis shifted from consumers to publishers, the owners of infrastructure, and those whoattempt to govern the Internet. This current state is not symmetrical with the distribu-tion of powers, which is more diﬃcult to assess, since they are spread among suppliersof hardware and software, other standards setters, and a small number of companies,including the largest Internet service providers and search engines.
We can apply the analytical dimensions of temporality to the Internet and other
networks to discern a structure in the confusing variety of features. This then providesus with the opportunity to diﬀerentiate researchable features, some of which lendthemselves to measurement or direct comparison across situations where diﬀerentusers or distinct uses can be assessed.
Duration
The notion that the Internet provides instantaneous access to a world of informationis a useful ﬁction. There are, however, two ways in which we might regard the conceptof duration as applying: in the ways in which users typically go about locating and268
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
browsing materials, and in the real experience of viewing identiﬁed sites. It would be
better to recognize that there are lag times in accessing and downloading sought-aftermaterial and that this often causes frustration and sometimes expense. In that sensewe can regard the experience of using the Internet as one of pseudo-instantaneousaccess.
The style of web surﬁng that is currently common is another sense in which
duration plays a role. As we have learned from our behaviour with television, theshortening of attention spans and the preference for short bursts of superﬁcialmaterial have altered the way we regard material on the Internet. We are unlikely tofeel the same need to sustain our attention for long periods, as we do when we reada book.
Temporal location
The Internet is ‘always on’. We can access it at any time and real business can betransacted independently of any cycle or working period. This is not a unique featureof the Internet but since it is the case with all users, unlike, say, automatic tradingsystems, it stands out as a distinct shift. Increasingly, dedicated networks are alsobeing used independently of their location and corporate intranets have been espe-cially useful for geographically dispersed companies as well as temporally dispersedusers. This has been interpreted by some to mean that employees will face 24-hourdemands to work, but this is not yet discernible as a real trend.
Sequence
One of the most vexing problems of the early days of the world wide web wasthe confusion of sequencing which users experienced. The concept of ‘navigationaids’ was the means to address this problem of users feeling lost, and other commonfeatures include ﬁles which show the ‘history’ of a search. However, the funda-mental problem of sequence appears mainly because of the facility of ‘hypertext’,which was designed to provide an alternative to linear reading. This loss of linearityis both a physical and a temporal change because, although searching is still tem-porally linear in a concrete sense, it loses that feeling of continuity for users much ofthe time.
Deadlines
Deadlines are a constant, static presence in our working lives. Usually dictated byprocedure and governed by traditional practice, they solidify our schedules. We canobserve, however, that Internet applications shift the concept and allow us, at least, torenegotiate our structure of deadlines. It is largely the features described above, thediﬀerences in duration, temporal location and sequence, which provide the opportun-ity to place deadlines at diﬀerent positions in the course of a task. This was studied indetail in the case of temporal shifts at the Korean electronic trading system, KTNET(Lee, 1999) where daily routines were radically shifted by the changes in deadlinesthat were applied to business procedures.TIME AND THE INTERNET 269
Cycles
Interaction among collaborators is traditionally cycled by a combination of day/week/
month/year demarcations and task cycles. As duration, sequence and deadlines shift,new cycles are allowed to appear in using networks. These can be constantly renegoti-ated as beﬁts the task, and there are possibilities of charting and managing numeroussimultaneously operating cycles.
There are also cases where the concept of cycle is radically altered, as when global
organizations engage in the continuous production of products such as software.Some developers have structured production such that procedures are smoothlyhanded over from workers in Hong Kong at the end of their working day to theircolleagues in London, who then hand over to colleagues in California. This allows foralmost constant work on a single product, uninterrupted by normal daily work cycles(Gorton and Motwani, 1996).
Rhythms
The rhythms which guide us, the alternations between work and play and theways in which we split the day, set up patterns which inculcate themselves into ourlives. Such rhythms of ‘busy-ness’ also shift when we use electronic media to takeadvantage of the opportunity to condense or disperse our working eﬀort. Sincediﬀerent people are ‘busy’ at di ﬀerent times, the collaborative character of elec-
tronic work can be controlled by each individual. E-mail provides a similar oppor-tunity because it allows us to change our working rhythms. We can accumulatemessages, or even messages of one particular type, and become ‘busy’ with them at achosen time.
References
Adam, B. (1994) ‘Perceptions of Time’, in T. Ingold (ed.) Companion Encyclopedia of
Anthropology: Humanity, Culture and Social Life, pp. 503–26. London: Routledge.
Barley, S. R. (1988) ‘On T echnology, Time, and Social Order: T echnologically Induced
Change in the T emporal Organization of Radiological Work’, in F .A. Dubinskas (ed.)
Making Time: Ethnographies of High-T echnology Organizations, pp. 123–69. Philadelphia,PA: T emple University Press.
Blyton, P ., Hassard, J., Hill, S. and Starkey, K. (1989) Time, W ork and Organization. London:
Routledge.
Bohannan, P . (1967) ‘Concepts of Time among the Tive of Nigeria’, in J. Middleton (ed.) Myth
and Cosmos, pp. 315–30. New Y ork: Natural History Press.
Bolter, J. D. (1984) Turing’s Man: W estern Culture in the Computer Age. London: Duckworth.Boorstin, D. J. (1983) The Discoverers. New Y ork: Random House.Castells, M. (1996) The Rise of the Network Society. Oxford: Blackwell.Coveney, P . and Highﬁeld, R. (1990) The Arrow of Time: A V oyage Through Science T o Solve
Time’s Greatest Mystery. New Y ork: Fawcett Columbine.
Durkheim, E. (1965) The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life. New Y ork: The Free Press.Evans-Pritchard, E. E. (1940) The Nuer: A Description of the Modes of Livelihood and Political
Institutions of a Nilotic People. London: Oxford University Press.270 THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
Failla, A. and Bagnara, S. (1992) ‘Information T echnology, Decision, Time’, Social Science
Information 31(4): 669–81.
Gorton, I. and Motwani, S. (1996) ‘Issues in Co-operative Software Engineering Using Globally
Distributed T eams’, Information and Software T echnology 38: 647–55.
Hall, E. T. (1959) The Silent Language. Garden City, NY: Doubleday.
Hall, E. T. (1966) The Hidden Dimension. New Y ork: Anchor Press.Hall, E. T. (1983) The Dance of Life: The Other Dimension of Time. Garden City, NY: Anchor
Press/Doubleday.
Hallowell, A. I. (1955) ‘T emporal Orientation in Western Civilization and in a Pre-literate
Society’, in A. I. Hallowell (ed.) Culture and Experience, pp. 216–35. Philadelphia: Universityof Pennsylvania Press.
Hassard, J. (1989) ‘Time and Industrial Sociology’, in P . Blyton, J. Hassard, S. Hill and
K. Starkey (eds) Time, W ork and Organization, pp. 13 –34. London: Routledge.
Hassard, J. (ed.) (1990) The Sociology of Time. Basingstoke: Macmillan.Hassard, J. (1996) ‘Images of Time in Work and Organization’, in S. R. Clegg, C. Hardy and
W . R. Nord (eds) Handbook of Organization Studies, pp. 581–98. London: Sage.
Landes, D. (1983) Revolution in Time: Clocks and the Making of the Modern W orld . Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Lee, H. (1997) ‘T emporal Implications of Electronically Mediated Business Procedures on
Organisational Work: EDI Applications in Trade’, unpublished doctoral dissertation,London School of Economics and Political Science.
Lee, H. (1999) ‘Time and Information T echnology: Monochronicity, Polychronicity and
T emporal Symmetry’, European Journal of Information Systems 8(1): 16–26.
Macey, S. L. (1980) Clocks and the Cosmos: Time in W estern Life and Thought. Hamden, CT:
Archon Books.
Moore, W . (1963) Man, Time and Society. New Y ork: John Wiley.Mumford, L. (1934) T echnics and Civilization. New Y ork: Harcourt, Brace & Co.Negroponte, N. (1995) Being Digital. London: Hodder & Stoughton.Pocock, D. F . (1967) ‘The Anthropology of Time Reckoning’, in J. Middleton (ed.) Myth and
Cosmos, pp. 303–14. New Y ork: Natural History Press.
Pronovost, G. (1989) ‘The Sociology of Time’, Current Sociology 37(3).
Rifkin, J. (1987) Time W ars: The Primary Con ﬂict in Human History. New Y ork: Henry Holt &
Co.
Thompson, E. P . (1967) ‘Time, Work-Discipline, and Industrial Capitalism’, Past and Present
38: 56–97.
Whitrow, G. J. (1988) Time in History: Views of Time from Prehistory to the Present Day. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Zerubavel, E. (1977) ‘The French Republican Calendar: A Case Study in the Sociology of
Time’, American Sociological Review 42: 868–77.
Zerubavel, E. (1979) Patterns of Time in Hospital Life. Chicago and London: The University
of Chicago Press.
Zerubavel, E. (1982) ‘The Standardization of Time: A Sociohistorical Perspective’, American
Journal of Sociology 88(1): 1–23.TIME AND THE INTERNET 271
5.5
Speed is contagious,
by Thomas Hylland Eriksen
This holds true in the media, as elsewhere. The fastest media, at the moment televi-
sion and Internet newspapers, are being imitated by the printed media. The articlesbecome shorter and shorter, with clearer ‘messages’ and less analysis. Dedicated newschannels on radio, for their part, boast that they update their news every hour, whilethe WAP format epitomises everything that is fast in contemporary mass communica-tion. WAP phones and similar devices have a ‘screen’ which is about twice as large asthe display of an ordinary mobile phone, as well as direct access to limited sectors ofthe Internet. One can, for example, check the stock exchange rates, the evening’scinema programme, the news headlines and the e-mail on a WAP telephone, and thesuperbrief news items are updated virtually continuously. In the bad old days, one hadto wait until the TV news in the early evening for an update.
It is not unlikely that this kind of technology will become widespread. In a situ-
ation with an information surplus, everyone has 10 seconds to spare, but veryfew have a whole minute. This gives a competitive edge to the fastest and mostcompact media. A general rule of the information revolution is that in a ‘free and fair’
competition between a slow and a fast version of ‘the same thing’, the fast versionwins. The question is what gets lost on the way. The short answer to this questionis context and understanding; the longer one involves credibility. It is hard enough to
edit a credible daily newspaper, which, among other things, attracts readers throughbeing ﬁrst with the latest. But, as a senior editor of a major broadsheet mentioned
to me during a fast and fragmentary conversation on a streetcorner: just imaginebeing managing editor for the WAP edition of a newspaper, which demands con-tinuous updating! One would scarcely have the time to type the news before it waspublished and therefore in need of revision. This situation is just around the corneras I write this.
Ramonet claims that during the last 30 years, more information has been
produced than during the previous 5,000 years! He illustrates the point with anexample: ‘A single copy of the Sunday edition of the New Y ork Times contains more
information than a cultivated person in the eighteenth century would consume duringa lifetime.’
I have no way of knowing whether performances of Beethoven’s sixth symphony,
the idyllic Pastoral symphony, are much faster today than the performances of 200
years ago. But as already mentioned, plays have accelerated very noticeably during thetwentieth century. A political scientist recently studied the development of the annualﬁnancial debate in the Norwegian parliament, comparing the speed of speech inselected years from 1945 to 1995. He shows that the members of parliament spoke atan average velocity of 584 phonemes per minute in 1945. In 1980, the number ofsounds had risen to 772, and in 1995 it had reached 863. In other words, the averagepolitician spoke 50 per cent faster in 1995 than his or her predecessors did in themid-1940s.
Or one could put it like this: it is as if one lives in an old, venerable but slightly
dilapidated house and decides to refurbish the bathroom. Having ﬁnally done this,a poorer but hopefully happier person following a budgetary deﬁcit worthy of theUnited Nations, one discovers for the ﬁrst time that the kitchen is really quite run-down. So one begins to tear out the old kitchen ﬁttings, and soon enters a newfrustrating round of phone calls to plumbers and masons. Then one is bound todiscover, almost immediately, how old and worn the hall is, and really, wouldn’t itbe a terriﬁc idea to give the living room a coat of paint and a new ﬂoor? Speed iscontagious in an analogous way.
If one gets used to speed in some areas, the desire for speed will tend to spread to
new domains. Five minutes spent waiting for the bus lasts longer the faster the airportexpress train takes you from the terminal to the bus stop. As computer networks havebecome faster, many of us have grown accustomed to an Internet connection wherewaiting time is in principle, and often in practice, minimal. Still, we will not restcontent until the web pages are accessed the very same moment we press the button.Two seconds of waiting time today is as unacceptable as 10 seconds would have beena couple of years ago.
This principle has a general validity. If the plane from Oslo to Copenhagen takes
40 minutes, 15 minutes’ delay makes a lot of diﬀerence. If, on the other hand, onechooses to take the boat, which takes an evening and a night to cross the Skagerrak,15 minutes lost or saved makes little diﬀerence, since the rhythm of the boat militatesagainst petty time-saving schemes. Other activities can wait. Fast time, in other words,is contagious both between persons and between life domains.
Gains and losses tend to equal each other out
In 1965, the engineer Gordon Moore spelled out the principle that has come to beknown as ‘Moore’s Law’. It states that the capacity (read: speed) of microprocessorsis doubled every 18 months. (Recently, it has been supplemented by ‘Gilder’s Law’,which states that the transmission speed – bandwidth – on the Net is doubled everyyear.) So far, Moore has been right. However, a computer scientist at my universitysupplemented Moore with ‘Knut’s Law’. It states that Moore’s law is correct, but thatcomputer software doubles in complexity and size every 16 months. According toKnut, then, the daily chores performed by any computer nowadays take longer thanbefore.
Knut is obviously a witty man, and he exaggerates. (Actually his law reminds me
of a newspaper story from a few years back, on the assumed health beneﬁts of jogging.SPEED IS CONTAGIOUS 273
It noted that people who jog do live longer than others – on average, exactly as much
longer as the time they spend jogging.) But in a general sense, Knut is right. Allow meto illustrate with a few examples from my own computer world, which is calledMacintosh. The ﬁrst version of the word processor MacWrite, launched in 1984, tooka little more than 50 Kb of disk space (disks back then, remember, took all of 400 Kb).The program I am using to write this book, WriteNow 4 (that is, the 1994 version),takes 348 Kb of disk space. The latest version of the world’s most popular wordprocessor, which is Microsoft Word, requires 5.1 Mb, in other words well over 5,000Kb. And for the program to function properly, a heap of additions are needed. Someof them are shared with the sister programs Excel and PowerPoint. Altogether,Microsoft’s oﬃce package requires more than 100 Mb, and most people install allprograms.
In the old days, that is a little over a dozen years ago, the total capacity of an
ordinary hard disk was 20 Mb. We felt we had a lot of space back then, we who hadgrown up with computers without hard disks! We might have a word processor suchas MacWrite (50 Kb), a presentation program like More (384 Kb in the last and bestversion) and a spreadsheet such as CricketGraph (200 Kb) at our disposal, and wereable to perform the same tasks that an average user of Microsoft Word now needsmore than 100 Mb of disk space to perform. Naturally, he or she also needs a muchfaster computer than we could even dream of at the time.
So the software has been improved? That depends on what one is after. Personally
I prefer the simple and stable programs. They are easy to learn and straightforward torelate to, and although I write hundreds of pages every year, I never seem to needmore than what humble WriteNow is able to oﬀer. Y es, Word does make it possible tomake tables of contents and fancy templates, and to run a number of functionsautomatically through macros; but in my experience, it is easier to tailor documents toone’s special needs as one goes along. The simpler a computer program is, the lesstime and energy is spent on relating to the actual technology and trying to read thethoughts of the programmers, and more concentration can be expended on the task athand. The larger and more complex a program is, the greater the risk of crashes andbreakdowns. Irritating macro viruses have in recent years become widespread amongcomputer users, but only among Word users.
This is to do with too much complexity of the wrong kind. Increased speed does
not even necessarily make us more eﬃcient – a point to which I shall return later. The
magazine WIRED ran a story a few years ago about the new CEO of mighty Sun
Microsystems, and how he wanted to improve the e ﬃciency of his staﬀ. He came up
with several ideas, but one in particular took the computer addicts on the staﬀ bysurprise. Now, many of the employees routinely made transparencies for use inexternal and internal presentations of what they were up to. As an aid, they had loadsof templates, illustrations, suggestions and previously used presentations lying aroundon the shared hard disks of the company. While working on a particular presentation,people would browse these ﬁles to look for ideas, suitable templates, etc. The CEOfound out that there were altogether 12.9 gigabytes of PowerPoint stuﬀ on the servers.He deleted everything. From now on, the staﬀ had to make their own presentationsfrom scratch. And indeed, they now worked more eﬃciently, and spent less time oneach transparency than before.274
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
Technological change leads to unpredicted side-effects
All technology has unintended consequences, and whenever one gets more of a
particular kind of technology, the result is not necessarily ‘more of the same’. It couldjust as well be ‘something entirely diﬀerent’. One telling example is the transition fromsingle-channel (or, at any rate, two- or three-channel) television to multi-channeltelevision operated by a remote control. In most European countries, this change hastaken place since around 1980. National television is a fantastic tool for propaganda –or, put diﬀerently, it can create a very powerful, shared national identity. It communi-cates directly, simultaneously and emotionally to literates as well as illiterates. Itsynchronises large segments of the population, and presents a particular version ofreality to all – from Leningrad to Vladivostok, or from Munich to Kiel. Research hasindicated that the dialect variation in several European countries was reduced duringthe twentieth century thanks to national radio and television, where a few nationallyacknowledged variants were dominant.
After a generation of single-channel television, satellite TV was introduced in
remote Norway in 1983. T o begin with, dedicated satellite channels such as Sky andSuper were dominant, and the ﬁeld was still so scantily populated that certain ofSky’s video jockeys were able to achieve megastar status in some European countries,since a large percentage of the target group followed them. (Anyone remember PatSharp?) There were only a few alternatives. Eventually, TV viewers got access to newNorwegian channels (around ﬁve or six at the latest count), in addition to a growingselection of satellite channels. Not everyone has access to everything, and many of thechannels operate on the basis of subscriptions. Nonetheless, media research showsthat the old national monopoly, the Norwegian poor cousin of the BBC, has lost itsgrip on the population. The good old days when the majority of the populationgathered around the screen when the evening news was on, are gone never to return.In other words: television (and radio) functioned in an immensely integrating man-ner, creating a shared ﬁeld of discourse on a national level, so long as it was dominatedby one or a few, often state-controlled channels. Then we got a little more of the sametechnology (more channels, and some more, and some more still), and suddenlytelevision no longer creates integration, but fragmentation.
We have still only seen the beginning. Digital TV, which at the time of writing has
graduated from the grapevine to the pipeline, entails that each household can inprinciple develop its own, unique pattern of viewing. I can watch jazz concerts andpoetry recitals until I fall over, while my neighbour can concentrate his attentionon classical Westerns, only interrupted by weather reports presented by young andbeautiful women.
It is easy to ﬁnd examples from cultural history to indicate that the introduction
of new technology has led to consequences other than those anticipated. I havealready suggested that some of the technologies of speed, intended to boost eﬃciency,may have grave side-eﬀects – and that it cannot even be taken for granted that they do
boost eﬃciency. This is going to be a major theme later, and I shall leave it for now.But take eyeglasses, for example. Although their exact origin is unknown, the ﬁrstknown reference to optical lenses is from Roger Bacon, writing in 1268. Spectaclesmade it possible for learned persons, monks and others, to continue reading for manySPEED IS CONTAGIOUS 275
years after their eyesight had begun to deteriorate. For several centuries, only convex
glasses, to aid farsightedness (hyperopia), existed. This is the common form of eye-sight deterioration among people above 40. The importance of this modest inventionfor the Renaissance and the beginning of the modern era should not be under-estimated. The cumulative growth in knowledge was boosted enormously whenmembers of the learned community of Europe could continue to expand their ﬁelds
of learning throughout their lives.
Far-fetched example? Perhaps, but there are also excellent examples of wide-
ranging unintended consequences of technological change to be found in mainstreamcultural history. The clock, as noted earlier, was originally constructed to synchroniseprayer times for monks working the ﬁelds during the day; today, it is a pillar of themodern way of life, and has become indispensable for industrial production, masscommunication and large chunks of people’s everyday life everywhere. When movabletype was invented by Gutenberg, scarcely anyone thought that it would be decisivein the development of democracy and nationalism. And neither Gottlieb Daimler norHenry Ford would have expected the car to lead to inner-city decay since it movedresidential areas to the suburbs and shops to consumption reservations near majorhighways. On a minor note, it might be added that nobody would have thought, whencommercial air traﬃc was introduced in a small way in the 1930s – as a luxurious treat
for the wealthy and powerful – that intercontinental ﬂights would be a backbone in themigration process from poor to rich countries.
New technology cannot be used for anything at all, but it is also never known how
it will be used. T echnological changes, no matter how dazzling, are always put to useby particular societies with particular needs. They also bring subtle, but often highlyconsequential side-eﬀects with them. Writing, as mentioned in the previous chapter,impairs the faculty of memory.
Who would have believed, in the mid-1990s, that the most active users of mobile
phones would be adolescents, and that they largely use them to send SMS messages inorder to stay in touch with their friends hour by hour? (At the latest count, 9 billionSMS messages are sent annually in the world, a billion of them in Germany alone.)When personal computers were ﬁrst marketed around 1980, reasonably well-informedjournalists wrote in a deeply serious mode how they would be used to make shoppinglists and inventories of the contents of the freezer. The new information technologythat lurks in the background of this entire book, is still at a trial stage, and there is noway of knowing how it will be put to use in three, ﬁve or 20 years. It is nonetheless easyto see some consequences of information technology: it removes distance, shortenstime and ﬁlls the gaps with cascades of information. Like the car and the jet plane,new information technology leads to acceleration and demands for further informa-tion, until time – seen as duration – approaches zero. But as complexity increases, sodo the side-eﬀects. Roads, for instance, have a curious tendency to be ﬁlled by cars,no matter how many lanes they have at their disposal. And a given computer networkmay function well for 1,000 users who run e-mail software and Netscape/Explorer,but badly for 10,000 users who are up to the same thing; just as it would functionbadly if the 1,000 users demanded transmissions of high-resolution video ﬁlm in real
time. Just as traﬃc jams occur worldwide in the rush hour, annoying delays and jamsoccur on the Net.276
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
The proposed solutions are the same in both cases: we require more capacity and
higher speed, as if that would solve anything in the long run. But let us not forget how
happy we were when we ﬁnally got hard disks with a storage capacity of all of 20 Mb;at that time, we then had no idea that those devices would be ripe for the museum inless than four years.
The contagious nature of speed, and its intimate relationship to eﬃciency as a
value in itself, is brought out clearly in a well-known story which exists in manyversions. In the variant told by Heinrich Böll, a German tourist visits Spain anddiscovers, to his horror, a Spaniard dozing in the shade of a tree on the beach. TheGerman approaches the man, a ﬁsherman, and lectures him on the virtues of eﬃ-ciency: ‘If you had gone out ﬁshing now instead of wasting your time, he explains,
you might have caught three times as much ﬁsh and bought yourself a better boat.’Eventually, he fantasises, the Spaniard might employ others and build a factory. Hecould become a rich man! ‘What for?’, asks the Spaniard. ‘Well’, says the German,‘you could have gone into early retirement, living oﬀ the proﬁts and spent your daysdozing on the beach.’ ‘That’, says the Spaniard before turning over, ‘is exactly what
I am doing.’
Something has run out of control. Time-saving technology has made time more
scarce than ever. The wealth of available information has not made most of us moreenlightened, but less enlightened. In the next chapter, I shall explain how this can be,and approach the question of what this ‘something’ is that seems to be out of control.SPEED IS CONTAGIOUS 277
Biographical notes
Benjamin R. Barber is the Gershon and Carol Kekst Professor of Civil Society and
Distinguished University Professor at the University of Maryland. Barber’s 17 booksinclude Strong Democracy (1984) reissued in 2004 in a twentieth anniversary edition;
the recent international best-seller Jihad vs. McW orld and Fear’s Empire (2003),also published in eight foreign editions. His collected American essays, A Passion forDemocracy, were published by Princeton University Press in 1999, and his book TheTruth of Power was published in 2001.
Andrew Barry teaches Geography at Oxford University where he is a Fellow of St
Catherine’s College. He is the author of Political Machines: Governing a T echnologicalSociety (Athlone, 2001) and co-editor of The T echnological Economy’ (Routledge,2005) and Foucault and Political Reason (Chicago University Press, 1996).
James Boyle is William Neal Reynolds Professor of Law at Duke Law School and
co-founder of the Center for the Study of the Public Domain. He is the author ofShamans, Software and Spleens: Law and the Construction of the Information Society. Hewrites widely on issues of intellectual property, internet regulation and legal theory.He is one of the founding Board Members of Creative Commons, which is working tofacilitate the free availability of art, scholarship, and cultural materials by developinginnovative, machine-readable licences that individuals and institutions can attach totheir work, and of Science Commons, which aims to expand the Creative Commonsmission into the realm of scientiﬁc and technical data. He is also a member of theacademic advisory boards of the Electronic Privacy and Information Center, theConnexions open-source courseware project, and of Public Knowledge. He recentlystarted writing as an online columnist for the Financial Times ’ New Economy Policy
Forum.
James Carey was journalism and communications professor at Columbia University.
Carey wrote several books and more than one-hundred articles and essays on masscommunications and media. His best-known work is Communication as Culture(1989).
S.D. Noam Cook is a professor of philosophy at San Jose State University. His
publications, research and consulting interests focus on social and technological
change, particularly the roles of specialized knowledge, professional practice andvalues. Over the years, his work in applied philosophy has entailed involvement withseveral academic and professional ﬁelds, including education, social work, business,public policy, creative arts, and various areas of science and engineering. He has giveninvited presentations on his work for academic, industrial and governmental institu-tions in the US and abroad, including MIT, UCLA, Virginia T ech, T exas A&M,Leiden University in The Netherlands, the University of Westminster in London,MITRE Corporation, Xerox research centers in the US, UK and France, the nationalgovernment of The Netherlands, and various US federal agencies. He holds B.A. andM.A. degrees in philosophy from San Francisco State University, and a Ph.D. inplanning and social philosophy from M.I.T. After receiving his doctorate, he spenttwo years on the research staﬀ of Harvard Business School doing research and cur-riculum development in the area of Business Ethics. He was for ten years a consultingresearcher at Xerox PARC (Palo Alto Research Center). Since 1997 he has been amember of the San Francisco Symphony Chorus.
Ben Compaine is a researcher and writer on issues related to the economic, social
and cultural policy implications of changing information technologies. He has been aconsultant and director for research programs at MIT and Harvard University. From1994 to 1997 he was the Bell Atlantic Professor of T elecommunications at T empleUniversity. He is the author, co-author or editor of 10 books, including the award-winning Who Owns The Media? as well as The Digital Divide: Facing a Crisis or Creat-
ing a Myth? His articles have appeared in trade, popular, and scholarly journals,including T elecommunications Policy, Foreign Policy, Reason, and the Journal of Com-
munication. A graduate of Dickinson College, he received his MBA from HarvardUniversity and PhD from T emple University. He has been a consultant and invitedspeaker in Europe, South America, Asia, and Australia as well as in the United Statesand Canada. His website is www.compaine.com.
Thomas Hylland Eriksen is Professor of Social Anthropology at the University of
Oslo and the Free University of Amsterdam. His main research has been concernedwith ethnicity, cultural complexity and globalisation, and he has published widely inthis ﬁeld. His other work includes textbooks, essays and a novel. Some of his books
are Ethnicity and Nationalism (1993), Small Places, Large Issues (1995), A History of
Anthropology (2001), T yranny of the Moment (2001) and Engaging Anthropology(2006).
Andrew Graham is the Master of Balliol College, Oxford, a Trustee of the Scott
Trust (that oversees the Guardian and the Observer) and Chairman of the AdvisoryBoard of the Oxford Internet Institute (which he largely created). He was EconomicAdviser to the Prime Minister, 1967–69 and, 1974–76; and, from 1988–94, to theLeader of the Labour Party, John Smith. From 1998 to 2005, he was a non-executivedirector of Channel 4 T elevision. He is an expert on the principles underlying publicservice broadcasting. In 2003, Oxford University made him an Honorary Doctor ofCivil Law. His partner, Peggotty, was until recently Dean of Social Sciences at theOpen University. He is a passionate windsurfer.280
BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES
Nicola Green is a Lecturer in the Department of Sociology, University of Surrey.
Her research in recent years has focussed on how media, technology, culture, genderand embodiment intersect across a range of socio-technical practices. She is par-ticularly interested in the development of methodological approaches aligned tofeminist, poststructuralist and actor-network theory in the domain of media and tech-nology relations. Her major research projects have included an ethnographic studyof virtual reality technologies, a project on the social shaping of mobile multimediaand mobile personal communications, a fellowship in qualitative social research andtechnology design practice, and a study investigating notions of risk, trust, privacyand accountability in personal and location-based technologies. At present, she isengaged in projects related to the emergence and intensiﬁcation of mobile personaldata ﬂows, and the transformation of interpersonal, collective and institutional
memory in digital culture.
Ian Hunter is a research professor in the Centre for the History of European
Discourses at the University of Queensland. He works in the history of political,philosophical and religious thought, with a particular focus on early modernEurope. Professor Hunter is the author of numerous works on these topics, includingRival Enlightenments: Civil and Metaphysical Philosophy in Early Modern Germany(Cambridge, 2001), and ‘Christian Thomasius and the Desacralisation ofPhilosophy’ ( Journal of the History of Ideas, 2000). He has completed two collabora-
tive works with David Saunders: a collection of papers on Natural Law and CivilSovereignty, and a critical edition of the ﬁrst English translation of SamuelPufendorf ’s De oﬃcio hominis et civis, both of which were published in 2002. He has
also just completed a book on the early enlightenment thinker Christian Thomasius,and is currently working on the theme of the ‘persona’ of the philosopher.
Kevin Kelly is Senior Maverick for Wired magazine, which he co-founded. Before
that he was editor and publisher of the Whole Earth Review, and on the board of theWELL, a pioneering online community in the 1980s. He is the author of New Rules for
the New Economy (1998) and Out of Control (1994). He currently publishes thepopular COOL TOOLS on the web, and is writing a book about the long-term trendsin technology called What T echnology W ants. His homepage is www.kk.org.
Heejin Lee is a senior lecturer in the Department of Information Systems at the
University of Melbourne. He completed his PhD on time and information technologyat London School of Economics. He has published extensively on broadband Inter-net, standardisation, time and IT and IT/IS in developing countries. He is currentlyan Associate Editor of the European Journal of Information Systems and an editorialboard member of Information T echnology for Development.
Lawrence Lessig is a Professor of Law at Stanford Law School and founder of the
school’s Center for Internet and Society. He is the author of Free Culture (2004),The Future of Ideas (2001) and Code and other Laws of Cyberspace (1999). Hechairs the Creative Commons project, and serves on the board of the Free SoftwareFoundation, the Electronic Frontier Foundation, the Public Library of Science, andPublic Knowledge.BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES 281
Jonathan Liebenau teaches at the London School of Economics in the Department
of Management and is an aﬃliate of the Columbia Institute for T ele-Information,Columbia University. He specialises in two areas: fundamental concepts of informa-tion, and the problems and prospects of information and communication technologyin economic development. He has previously worked in academic administration,technology policy, and the economic history of science-based industry, all positions inwhich he has emphasised the use of information in organisations. He is the authoror editor of several books and over 70 other major publications and has providedconsultancy services to leading companies and strategic government agencies,including BT, IBM, Nortel, EDS, Lloyd Thompson, the UK Department of Tradeand Industry and the Home Oﬃce.
Jessica Litman teaches copyright law, Internet law, and trademarks and unfair com-
petition law at the University of Michigan Law School. She is the author of DigitalCopyright (Prometheus 2001) and the co-author with Jane Ginsburg and Mary LouKevlin of Trademarks and Unfair Competition: Cases and Materials (Foundation 2001).Litman is a trustee of the Copyright Society of the USA, a member of the IntellectualProperty and Internet Committee of the ACLU, and the chair-elect of the Associationof American Law Schools Section on Intellectual Property Law. She has publishedmany articles on intellectual property topics.
Lev Manovich (www.manovich.net) is the author of Soft Cinema: Navigating the
Database (MIT Press, 2005), and The Language of New Media (MIT Press, 2001)which is hailed as ‘the most suggestive and broad ranging media history sinceMarshall McLuhan.’ He is a Professor of Visual Arts, University of California,San Diego (visarts.ucsd.edu) and a Director of The Lab for Cultural Analysis atCalifornia Institute for T elecommunications and Information T echnology.
Michael Marien is founder and editor of Future Survey, a review of books,
reports and articles published monthly by the World Future Society since 1979(www.wfs.org).
Robert W . McChesney is Research Professor in the Institute of Communications
Research (ICR) at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. McChesney is thePresident and co-founder of Free Press, a national media reform organisation(www.freepress.net). He has written or edited fourteen books, including: with JohnNichols, Tragedy and Farce: How the American Media Sell W ars, Spin Elections, and
Destroy Democracy; and The Problem of the Media: U.S. Communication Politics inthe 21st Century, published in 2004. McChesney has also written some 150 journalarticles and book chapters. His work has been translated into fourteen languages.
David E. Nye is the author of ten books on technology and culture, including Electri-
fying America, American T echnological Sublime, and most recently, T echnology Matters:Questions to Live With. In 2005 he received the Leonardo da Vinci Medal, the lifetimeachievement award of the Society for the History of T echnology.
Bruce M. Owen is the Morris M. Doyle Centennial Professor in Public Policy and
Director of the Public Policy Program in the School of Humanities and Sciences,282
BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES
Stanford University, Stanford, California. Mr. Owen is also the Gordon Cain Senior
Fellow in Stanford’s Institute for Economic Policy Research. He is the author or co-author of numerous articles and several books, including T elevision Economics,1974, Economics and Freedom of Expression, 1975, The Regulation Game, 1978, and The
Political Economy of Deregulation, 1983. He is co-author with Steven Wildman of VideoEconomics, published by Harvard University Press in 1992, with M. W . Franken a of
Electric Utility Mergers: Principles of Antitrust Analysis, Praeger, 1994, and with severalothers of Economics of a Disaster: The Exxon V aldez Oil Spill, Praeger, 1995. His mostrecent book, The Internet Challenge to T elevision, was published by Harvard UniversityPress in 1999.
Ithiel de Sola Pool was a pioneer media theorist. His book T echnologies of Freedom
(1983) is still a deﬁning study of communications and human freedom, both a historyof older systems of communication and a visionary account of the ways in whichemerging digital technologies might transform social and political life.
Richard Stallman launched the development of the GNU operating system (see
www.gnu.org) in 1984. The GNU does the technical jobs of any operating system,but its speciﬁc purpose is to give computer users the freedom to cooperate and tocontrol the software they use. The GNU is free software: everyone has the freedomto copy it and redistribute it, as well as to make changes either large or small. TheGNU/Linux system, basically the GNU operating system with Linux added, is usedon tens of millions of computers today.
Kevin Robins is Professor of Sociology at City University, London. He has recently
been involved in an EU Fifth Framework project, Changing City Spaces: NewChallenges to Cultural Policy in Europe. He has also been working with the Councilof Europe on questions of cultural diversity, and has recently published TheChallenge of Transcultural Diversities (Council of Europe, 2006).
David Saunders is an Honorary Professor in the Centre for the History of European
Discourses at the University of Queensland. His research concerns the historicalrelations of law, politics and religion. His publications in this ﬁeld include Anti-lawyers: Religion and the Critics of Law and State (London and New Y ork:Routledge, 1997). With Professor Ian Hunter, he has completed a re-edition ofAndrew T ooke’s 1691 The Whole Duty of Man According to the Law of Nature, theﬁrst English translation of Samuel Pufendorf’s De oﬃcio hominis et civis of 1673(Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 2003). This volume also includes his translations ofearly eighteenth-century writings by Jean Barbeyrac, here appearing in English for theﬁrst time. Also with Ian Hunter, he has edited the recent collection of papers NaturalLaw and Civil Sovereignty: Moral Right and State Authority in Early Modern Polit-ical Thought (London and New Y ork : Palgrave Macmillan, 2002).
Jeremy Stein is employed at the Business School at the University of Birmingham.
He is Research fellow on the ‘Dilemmas of a Maturing T echnology’, a projectfunded by the Leverhulme Trust. His research interests focus on technological andorganisational innovation, corporate strategy and the history of technology.
Cass R. Sunstein teaches at the University of Chicago. His many books includeBIOGRAPHICAL NOTES 283
Infotopia: How Many Minds Produce Knowledge (2006), Republic.com (2001), and
Democracy and the Problem of Speech (1993).
McKenzie Wark teaches media and cultural studies at the New School for Social
Research and Eugene Lang College, in New Y ork City. He is the author of A HackerManifesto (Harvard University Press, 2004) and many other works.
Frank Webster is Professor of Sociology, City University London. He was Professor
of Sociology at Oxford Brookes University from 1990 to 1998, and Professor ofSociology at the University of Birmingham from 1999 to 2002. He has been Docentin the Department of Journalism and Mass Communications, University of T ampere,Finland since 1997. He is the author or editor of many articles and books. Recentpublications include: The Virtual University?, with Kevin Robins (Oxford UniversityPress, 2002), The Intensiﬁcation of Surveillance, with Kirstie Ball (Pluto, 2003), TheInformation Society Reader (Routledge, 2004), Theories of the Information Society3rd edition (Routledge, 2006), Journalists under Fire: Information W ar and JournalisticPractices, with Howard Tumber (Sage, 2006).
Dugald Williamson is an Associate Professor in the School of English, Communica-
tion and Theatre at the University of New England, Australia. He has publishedwidely in media studies and is currently researching contemporary documentary andpolitical communication.284
BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES
Bibliography
Adam, B (1990) Time and Social Theory, Polity/Blackwell, Cambridge.
Adam, J A (1993) ‘Virtual reality is for real’, IEEE Spectrum, vol. 30, no. 10, pp. 22–9.
Adas, M (1989) Machines as the Measure of Men: Science, T echnology and Ideologies of W estern
Dominance, Cornell University Press, Ithaca, New Y ork.
Adler, P (ed.) (1992) T echnology and the Future of W ork, Oxford University Press, New Y ork.Albig, W (1939) Public Opinion, McGraw-Hill, New Y ork.American Geophysical Union v T exaco (2d Cir. 1995) 60 F .3d 913.American Library Association (1995) Information for a New Age: Redeﬁning the Librarian,
Library Instruction Round T able, Libraries Unlimited, Englewood, Colorado.
Amin, A (1994) Post-Fordism, Basil Blackwell, Oxford.Aoki, K (1993) ‘Authors, inventors, and trademark owners: Private intellectual property and
the public domain’, Columbia-VLA Journal of Law and the Arts, vol. 18.
Aoki, K (1996) ‘(Intellectual) property and sovereignty: Notes toward a cultural geography of
authorship’, Stanford Law Review, vol. 48.
Aoki, K (1996) Foreword to ‘Innovation and the information environment: Interrogating the
entrepreneur’, Oregon Law Review, vol. 75.
Appadurai, A (1986) The Social Life of Things: Commodities in Cultural Perspective, Cambridge
University Press, New Y ork.
Archer, P (1956) The Queen’s Courts, Penguin, Harmondsworth.Aronowitz, S & DiFazio, W (1994) The Jobless Future: Sci-T ech and the Dogma of W ork,
University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis.
Arrow, K J (1962) ‘Economic welfare and the allocation of resources for invention’, in The
Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity: Economic and Social Factors , conference of the
Universities–National Bureau Committee for Economic Growth of the Social ScienceResearch Council, Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey.
Aukstakalnis, S & Blatner, D (1992) Silicon Mirage: The Art and Science of Virtual Reality,
Peachpit, Berkeley, California.
Bagdikian, B H (1992) The Media Monopoly, 4th edn, Beacon, Boston, Massachusetts.Ball, H (1944) The Law of Copyright and Literary Property, Bender, New Y ork.Bankes, S & Builder, C (1992) ‘Seizing the moment: Harnessing the information society’, The
Information Society, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 1–59.
Banta, M (1987) Imaging American W omen: Ideas and Ideals in Cultural History, Columbia
University Press, New Y ork.
Barley, S R (1988) ‘On technology, time, and social order: T echnologically induced change in
the temporal organization of radiological work’, in Dubinskas, F A (ed.) Making Time:
Ethnographies of High-T echnology Organizations, T emple University Press, Philadelphia,Pennsylvania, pp. 123–69.
Barnet, R J & Cavanagh, J (1994) Global Dreams: Imperial Corporations and the New W orld
Order, Simon & Schuster, New Y ork.
Barry, A, Osborne, T & Rose, N (1996) Foucault and Political Reason: Liberalism, Neo-Liberalism
and Rationalities of Government, Chicago University Press, Chicago, Illinois.
Barry, J A (1991) T echnobabble, MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.Bartky, I R (1989) ‘The adoption of standard time’, T echnology and Culture, vol. 30, pp. 25–56.
Bateson, G (1972) Steps T owards An Ecology of Mind, Ballantine, New Y ork.Bazelon, D (1979) ‘The First Amendment and the new media’, Federal Communications Law
Journal, vol. 31, no. 2.
Bazelon, D (1982) ‘The First Amendment’s second chance’, Channels, Feb. –Mar., pp. 16–17.
Bearman, D (1993) ‘Interactivity in American museums’, Museums Management and
Curatorship, vol. 12, pp. 183–93.
Becker, J (1989) ‘The concept of a university of the world’, The Information Society, vol. 6, no. 3,
pp. 83–92.
Becker, T (1996) ‘T elevote: Interactive, participatory polling’, in Becker, T and Couto, R A
(eds) T eaching Democracy by Being Democratic, Praeger, Westport, Connecticut.
Bell, D (1975) The Cultural Contradictions of Capitalism, Basic, New Y ork.Bell, D (1989) ‘The third technological revolution and its possible socioeconomic con-
sequences’, Dissent, vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 164–76.
Bell, T W (1998) ‘Fair use vs. fared use: The impact of automated rights management on
copyright’s fair use doctrine’, North Carolina Law Review, vol. 76.
Belsie, L (1993) ‘Smart cards connect customers’, Christian Science Monitor, Aug. 13, p. 8.
Benkler, Y (1998) ‘Overcoming agoraphobia: Building the commons of the digitally networked
environment’, Harvard Journal of Law and T echnology, vol. 11.
Benkler, Y (1999) ‘Free as the air to common use: First Amendment constraints on enclosure
of the public domain’, NYU Law Review, vol. 354.
Bennett, J (1992) ‘The English quadrant in Europe: Instruments and the growth of consensus
in practical astronomy’, Journal of the History of Astronomy, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 1–14.
Bennett, J (1998) ‘Can science museums take history seriously?’, in Macdonald, S (ed.) The
Politics of Display: Museums, Science, Culture, Routledge, London.
Bennett, J, Brain, R, Bycroft, K, Schaﬀer, S, Sibum, H & Staley, R (1993) Empires of Physics,
Whipple Museum of the History of Science, Cambridge.
Bennett, T (1995) The Birth of the Museum: History, Theory, Politics, Routledge, London.Berman, M (1991) All That is Solid Melts into Air: The Experience of Modernity, Verso, London.Bernays, L (1923) Crystallizing Public Opinion, Boni and Liveright, New Y ork.Bianculli, D (1992) T eleliteracy: T aking T elevision Seriously, Continuum, New Y ork.Bicknell, S & Farmelo, G (1993) Museum Visitor Studies in the 1990s, Science Museum,
London.
Bikson, T K & Law, S A (1993) ‘Electronic mail use at the World Bank: Messages from users’,
The Information Society, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 89–124.
Birdsall, W F (1994) The Myth of the Electronic Library: Librarianship and Social Change in
America, Greenwood, Westport, Connecticut.
Birkerts, S (1994) The Gutenberg Elegies: The Fate of Reading in an Electronic Age, Faber & Faber,
New Y ork.
Birt, J (1999) The Prize and the Price: The Social, Political and Cultural Consequences of the Digital
Age, New Statesman Media Lecture, May, London.286 BIBLIOGRAPHY
Blackman, C & Schoof, H (1994) ‘Competition and convergence’, T elecommunications Policy,
vol. 18, no. 8, pp. 571–667.
Boden, D & Molotch, H, L. (1994) ‘The compulsion of proximity’, in Friedland, R and Boden,
D (eds) NowHere: Space, Time and Modernity, University of California Press, Berkeley,
California, pp. 257–86.
Bogart, L (1995) Commercial Culture: The Media System and the Public Interest, Oxford
University Press, New Y ork.
Boorstin, D (1973) The Americans: The Democratic Experience, Random House, New Y ork.Bordwell, D & Thompson, K (1997) Film Art: An Introduction, 5th edn, McGraw-Hill,
New Y ork.
Borg, M (1990) ‘An economic comparison of gambling behaviour in Atlantic City and Las
Vegas’, Public Finance Quarterly, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 291–312.
Born, G (1995) Rationalizing Culture: IRCalifM, Boulez and the Institutionalisation of the
Musical Avant-Garde, University of California Press, Berkeley, California.
Born, G (2000) ‘Inside television: T elevision research and the sociology of culture’, Screen,
vol. 41, no. 4, pp. 68–96.
Bosma, J (1999) Read Me! Filtered by Nettime: ASCII Culture and the Revenge of Knowledge,
Autonomedia, New Y ork.
Boulding, K E & Senesh, L (1983) The Optimum Utilisation of Knowledge: Making Knowledge
Serve Human Betterment, Westview, Boulder, Colorado.
Bourdieu, P (1984) Distinction, Routledge, London.Boyle, J (1987) ‘Thomas Hobbes and the invented tradition of positivism: Reﬂections on
language, power, and essentialism’, University of Pennsylvania Law Review , vol. 135.
Boyle, J (1996) Shamans, Software and Spleens: Law and the Construction of the Information
Society, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Boyle, J (1997) ‘A politics of intellectual property: Environmentalism for the net?’, Duke Law
Journal, vol. 47.
Bradley, S P , Hausman, J A & Nolan, R L (1993) Globalization, T echnology, and Competition: The
Fusion of Computers and T elecommunications in the 1990s, Harvard Business School Press,Boston, Massachusetts.
Branscomb, A W (1994) Who Owns Information? From Privacy to Public Access, Basic, New
Y ork.
Breyer, S (1970) ‘The uneasy case for copyright: A study of copyright in books, photocopies,
and computer programs’, Harvard Law Review, vol. 84, no. 2, pp. 281–351.
Bridges, W (1994) Job Shift: How to Prosper in a W orkplace Without Jobs, Addison-Wesley,
Reading, Massachusetts.
Brody, H (1993) ‘Information highway: The home front’, T echnology Review, vol. 96, no. 6,
pp. 30–40.
Brook, J & Boal, I A (1995) Resisting the Virtual Life: The Culture and Politics of Information, City
Lights, San Francisco.
Brown, B, Green, N & Harper, R (2002) Wireless W orld: Social and Interactional Aspects of the
Mobile Age, Springer, London.
Bruno, M (1987) ‘Printing’, in McGraw-Hill Encyclopedia of Science and T echnology, vol. 14,
McGraw-Hill, New Y ork.
Budge, I. (1996) The New Challenge of Direct Democracy, Polity, Cambridge.Burchell, D (1995) ‘The attributes of citizens: Virtue, manners and the activity of citizenship’,
Economy and Society, vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 540–58.
Burke, J (1978) Connections, Little Brown, Boston, Massachusetts.Burstein, D & Kline, D (1995) Road W arriors: Dreams and Nightmares along the Information
Highway, Dutton/Penguin, New Y ork.BIBLIOGRAPHY 287
Cairncross, F (1997) The Death of Distance: How the Communications Revolution Will Change
Our Lives, Harvard Business School Press, Boston, Massachusetts.
Callon, M, Law, J & Rip, A (1986) Mapping the Dynamics of Science and T echnology, Macmillan,
London.
Carey, J (1983) ‘T echnology and ideology: The case of the telegraph’, in Salzman, J (ed.)
Prospects: An Annual of American Cultural Studies, Cambridge University Press, New Y ork,
pp. 303–25.
Cartwright, G F (1994) ‘Virtual or real? The mind in cyberspace’, Futurist, vol. 28, no. 2,
pp. 22–6.
Casmir, F (1991) Communication in Development, Ablex, Norwood, New Jersey.Castells, M (1989) The Informational City: Economic Restructuring and Urban Development,
Blackwell, Oxford.
Castells, M (1996) The Rise of the Network Society, 2nd edn, Blackwell, Cambridge,
Massachusetts.
Castoriadis, C (1984) Crossroads in the Labyrinth, MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.Castoriadis, C (1984/85) ‘Reﬂections on “rationality” and “development”’ , Thesis Eleven,
no. 10/11.
Caudill, M (1992) In Our Own Image: Building an Artiﬁcial Person, Oxford University Press,
New Y ork.
Cauﬁeld, C (1990) Multiple Exposures, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, Illinois.Chaﬀee, Z. (1945) ‘Reﬂections on the law of copyright’, Columbia Law Review, vol. 45.
Chandler, A (1977) The Visible Hand: The Managerial Revolution in American Business, Harvard
University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Chaum, D (1992) ‘Achieving electronic privacy’, Scientiﬁc American, vol. 267, no. 2,
pp. 96–101.
Childs, H L (1965) Public Opinion: Nature, Formation and Role, Van Nostrand, Princeton, New
Jersey.
Cité des Sciences et de l’Industrie (1988) Direction de la Communication et du Développement,
Cité des Sciences et de l’Industrie, Paris.
Cité des Sciences et de l’Industrie (1995) Explora: Guide to the Permanent Exhibitions, 6th edn,
Direction de la Communication et de la Promotion, Paris.
Cité des Sciences et de l’Industrie (nd) ‘Visitor information’, Cité des Sciences et de l’Industrie,
Paris.
Clinton, B (1997) speech to National Press Club, March 11.Clinton, B & Gore, A (1997) A Framework for Global Electronic Commerce, White House,
Washington, District Columbia.
Coates, J F (1994) ‘The highly probably future: 83 assumptions about the year 2025’, Futurist,
vol. 28, no. 4.
Coates, J F (1995) ‘Work and pay in the twenty-ﬁrst century: An impending crisis’, Employment
Relations T oday, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 17–22.
Coates, J F & Jarratt, J (1994) ‘White collar productivity: Key to future competitiveness’, The
Future at W ork, vol. 9, Nov.
Coates, J F , Mahaﬃe, J B & Hines, A (1994) ‘T echnological forecasting: 1970–1993’,
T echnological Forecasting and Social Change, vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 23–33.
Cohen, J E (1995) ‘Reverse-engineering and the rise of electronic vigilantism: Intellectual
property implications of “lock-out” programs’, Southern California Law Review, vol. 68.
Cohen, J E (1996) ‘A right to read anonymously: A closer look at “copyright management” in
cyberspace’, Connecticut Law Review, vol. 28.
Cohen, J E (1997) ‘Some reﬂections on copyright management systems and laws designed to
protect them’, Berkeley T echnology Law Journal, vol. 12.288 BIBLIOGRAPHY
Cohen, J E (1998) ‘Copyright and the jurisprudence of self-help’, Berkeley T echnology Law
Journal, vol. 13.
Cohen, J E (1998) ‘Lochner in cyberspace: The new economic orthodoxy of “rights manage-
ment”’ , Michigan Law Review, vol. 97.
Committee on Obscenity and Film Censorship (1979) Report, Her Majesty’s Stationery Oﬃce,
London.
Compaine, B M & Gomery, D (2000) Who Owns the Media? Competition and Concentration in
the Mass Media, 3rd edn, Erlbaum, Mahwah, New Jersey.
Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility (1993) Serving the Community: A Public
Interest Vision of the National Information Infrastructure, Computer Professionals for Social
Responsibility, Palo Alto, California.
Computer Software Rental Amendments Act 1990 (United States).Connerton, P (1989) How Societies Remember, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.Connors, M (1993) The Race to the Intelligent State: T owards the Global Information Economy of
2005, Blackwell Business, Oxford.
Cook, P S, Gomery, D & Lichty, L W (1992) The Future of News: T elevision, Newspapers,
Wire Services, Newsmagazines, Woodrow Wilson Center Press, Washington, DistrictColumbia.
Cooper, G, Green, N, Harper, R & Murtagh, G (2002) Mobile Society? T echnology, Distance and
Presence, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Corrigan, P & Sayer, D (1985) The Great Arch: English State Formation as Cultural Revolution,
Blackwell, Oxford.
Cossons, N (1987) ‘Adapt or die: Dangers of a dinosaur mentality’, Listener, April, pp. 18–20.
Cossons, N (1991) ‘Scholarship or self-indulgence’, RSA Journal, vol. 139, Feb., pp. 184–91.
Crevier, D (1993) AI: The Tumultuous History of the Search for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Basic,
New Y ork.
Critical Art Ensemble (1994) The Electronic Disturbance, Autonomedia, New Y ork.Critical Art Ensemble (2002) The Molecular Invasion, Autonomedia, New Y ork.Cronon, W (1992) Nature’s Metropolis: Chicago and the Great W est, Norton, New Y ork.Cruikshank, B (1996) ‘Revolutions within: Self-government and self-esteem’, in Barry,
A, Osborne, T and Rose, N (eds) Foucalt and Political Reason: Liberalism, Neo-Liberalismand Rationalities of Government, Chicago University Press, Chicago, Illinois.
Cruikshank, B (1999) The Will to Empower: Democratic Citizens and Other Subjects, Cornell
University Press, Ithaca, New Y ork.
Cunningham, S & Porter, A L (1992) ‘Communication networks: A dozen ways they’ll change
our lives’, Futurist, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 19–22.
Czitrom, D (1982) Media and the American Mind: From Morse to McLuhan , University of
North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill, North Carolina.
Davies, D, Bathurst, D & Bathurst, R (1990) The T elling Image: The Changing Balance between
Pictures and W ords in a T echnological Age, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Davis, S & Botkin, J (1994) The Monster Under the Bed: How Business Is Mastering the Opportun-
ity of Knowledge for Proﬁt, Simon & Schuster, New Y ork.
Day, J (1995) The V anishing Vision: The Inside Story of Public T elevision, University of California
Press, Berkeley, California.
de Laet, M & Mol, A (2000) ‘The Zimbabwe bush pump: Mechanics of a ﬂuid technology’,
Social Studies of Science, vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 225–63.
de T ocqueville, A (1945) Democracy in America, Knopf, New Y ork.Debord, G (1983) Society of the Spectacle, Black and Red, Detroit, Michigan.Deleuze, G (1987) Foucault, Athlone, London.Deleuze, G (1995) Negotiations, Columbia University Press, New Y ork.BIBLIOGRAPHY 289
Deleuze, G & Guattari, F (1988) A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia , Athlone,
London.
Demsetz, H (1967) ‘T oward a theory of property rights’, American Economics Review,
vol. 57.
Dent, H (1995) Job Shock: Four New Principles Transforming Our W ork and Business,
St Martin’s, New Y ork.
Department of the Interior (1986) Aircraft Management Plan Environmental Assessment: Grand
Canyon National Park, DoI, Washington, District Columbia.
Derrida, J (1986) ‘Point de folie: Maintenant l’architecture’, AA Files, no. 12, pp. 65–75.
Dertouzos, M L (1991) ‘Building the information marketplace’, T echnology Review, vol. 94,
no. 1, pp. 28–40.
Dertouzos, M L (1991) ‘Communications, computers and networks’, Scientiﬁc American,
vol. 265, pp. 62–9.
Desurvire, E (1992) ‘Lightwave communications: The ﬁfth generation’, Scientiﬁc American,
vol. 266, no. 1, pp. 114–21.
Dewey, J (1977) ‘The future of liberalism’, in Morgenbesser, S (ed.) Dewey and His Critics:
Essays from the Journal of Philosophy, Journal of Philosophy, New Y ork.
Diebold Institute for Public Policy Studies (1995) Transportation Infrastructures: The
Development of Intelligent Transportation Systems, Praeger, Westport, Connecticut.
Donald, J (1999) The City and the Modern Imagination, Athlone, London.
Donaldson, M S & Lohr, K N (1994) Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and
Privacy, National Academy Press, Washington, District Columbia.
Dordick, H S & Wang, G (1993) The Information Society: A Retrospective View, Sage, Newbury
Park, California.
Dow, C M (1921) Anthology and Bibliography of Niagara Falls, State of New Y ork, New Y ork.Drucker, P (1994) ‘The age of social transformation’, Atlantic Monthly, vol. 274, no. 5,
pp. 53–80.
Drucker, P (1995) Managing in a Time of Great Change, T alley/Dutton, New Y ork.Du Gay, P , Hall, S, Janes, L, Mackay, H, Negus, K & Tudor, A (1997) Doing Cultural Studies:
The Story of the Sony W alkman, Sage, London.
Dunn, S L (1994) ‘The challenge of the nineties in US higher education: From Camelot to the
21st century’, Futures Research Quarterly, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 35–55.
Durant, J (1992) ‘Introduction’, in Durant, J (ed.) Museums and the Public Understanding of
Science, Science Museum, London.
Durlach, N I & Mavor, A S (1995) Virtual Reality: Scientiﬁc and T echnological Challenges,
National Academy Press, Washington, District Columbia.
Dutton, W H (1992) ‘The social impact of emerging telephone services’, T elecommunications
Policy, vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 377–87.
Dyson, E (1995) ‘Friend and foe’, Wired, vol. 3, no. 8.
Dyson, E (1995) ‘Intellectual value’, Wired, vol. 3, no. 7.
Dyson, E, Gilder, G, Keyworth, J & T oﬄer, A (1994) ‘A Magna Carta for the knowledge age’,
New Perspectives Quarterly, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 26–37.
Eames, C (1990) A Computer Perspective: Background to the Computer Age, Harvard University
Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Easterbrook, F H (1990) ‘Intellectual property is still property’, Harvard Journal of Law and
Public Policy, vol. 13.
Eﬀross, W A (1997) ‘The legal architecture of virtual stores: World wide web sites and the
uniform commercial code’, San Diego Law Review, vol. 34.
Eldred v Reno (1999) DDC, ﬁled Jan. 4.Elkin-Koren, N (1995) ‘Copyright law and social dialogue on the information superhighway:290 BIBLIOGRAPHY
The case against copyright liability of bulletin board operators’, Cardozo Arts and
Entertainment Law Journal, vol. 13.
Elkin-Koren, N (1996) ‘Cyberlaw and social change: A democratic approach to copyright law
in cyberspace’, Cardozo Arts and Entertainment Law Journal, vol. 14.
Elkin-Koren, N (1996) ‘Goodbye to all that: A reluctant (and perhaps premature) adieu to a
constitutionally grounded discourse of public interest in copyright law’, V anderbilt Journal
of Transnational Law, vol. 29.
Elkin-Koren, N (1997) ‘Copyright policy and the limits of freedom of contract’, Berkeley
T echnology Law Journal, vol. 12.
Elkin-Koren, N (1998) ‘Contracts in cyberspace: Rights without laws’, Chicago-Kent Law
Review, vol. 73.
Elkin-Koren, N (2002) ‘It’s all about control’, in Elkin-Koren, N. and Netanel, N. (eds) The
Commodiﬁcation of Information, Kluwer, The Hague.
Ellis, H (1959) British Railway History: An Outline from the Accession of William IV to the
Nationalisation of the Railways 1877–1947, Allen & Unwin, London.
Ellul, J (1990) The T echnological Bluﬀ, William B Eerdmans, Grand Rapids, Minnesota.
Elsaesser, T (1990) Early Cinema: Space, Frame, Narrative, British Film Institute, London.Elster, J (1983) Sour Grapes: Studies in the Subversion of Rationality, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.
Engelberger, J F (1989) Robotics in Service, MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.Estabrooks, M (1988) Programmed Capitalism: A Computer-Mediated Global Society, M E
Sharpe, Armonk, New Y ork.
Failla, A & Bagnara, S (1992) ‘Information technology, decision, time’, Social Science Informa-
tion, vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 669–81.
Falk, T & Abler, R (1980) ‘Intercommunications, distance and geographical theory’,
Geograﬁska Annaler, no. 62, pp. 59–67.
Fasella, F (1997) ‘The role of the European Commission in supporting research’, European
Review, vol. 5, pp. 161–84.
Feigenbaum, E A (1989) ‘T oward the library of the future’, Long Range Planning, vol. 22, no. 1,
pp. 118–23.
Feist Publications Inc. v Rural T elephone Service Co. (1991) 499 US 340, 346.Ferris, C D (1980) quoted in The Report, Nov. 14, p. 11.Field, J (1978) ‘American imperialism: The worst chapter in almost any book’, American Histor-
ical Review, vol. 83, no. 3, pp. 644–83.
Findlay, J (1986) People of Chance: Gambling in American Society from Jamestown to Las V egas ,
Oxford University Press, New Y ork.
Finley, M (1991) ‘The best of all possible meetings’, Across the Board, vol. 28, no. 9,
pp. 40–5.
Fischer, C S (1985) ‘Studying technology and social life’, in Castells, M (ed.) T echnology, Space
and Society, vol. 28, Urban Aﬀairs Annual Reviews, Sage, Beverly Hills, California,pp. 284–300.
Fischer, C, S. (1992) America Calling: A Social History of the T elephone to 1940, University of
California Press, Berkeley, California.
Fischer, D H (1989) Albion’s Seed: Four British Folkways in America , Oxford University Press,
New Y ork.
Fisher, W (1988) ‘Reconstructing the fair use doctrine’, Harvard Law Review, vol. 101.
Fisher, W (1998) ‘Compulsory terms in internet-related contracts’, Chicago-Kent Law Review,
vol. 73.
Fisher, W (1998) ‘Property and contract on the internet’, Chicago-Kent Law Review, vol. 74.
Fisher, W (ed.) (1993) American Legal Realism, Oxford University Press, New Y ork.BIBLIOGRAPHY 291
Fishkin, J (1991) Democracy and Deliberation, Yale University Press, New Haven, Connecticut.
Flaherty, D H (1989) Protecting Privacy in Surveillance Societies: The Federal Republic of
Germany, Sweden, France, Canada and the United States, University of North CarolinaPress, Chapel Hill, North Carolina.
Folsom v Marsh (1841) 9 Fed Cas. 342.Forester, T (1992) ‘Megatrends or megamistakes? What ever happened to the information
society?’, The Information Society, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 133–46.
Forester, T & Morrison, P (1994) Computer Ethics: Cautionary T ales and Ethical Dilemmas in
Computing, 2nd edn, MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Fortner, R (1978) Messiahs and Monopolists: A Cultural History of Canadian Communication
Systems, 1846–1914, PhD dissertation, Institute of Communications Research, Universityof Illinois, Urbana, Illinois.
Foucault, M (1977) Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison, Penguin, Harmondsworth.Fowles, J (1992) Why Viewers W atch: A Reappraisal of T elevision ’s Eﬀects, revised edn, Sage,
Newbury Park, California.
Frank, R (1998) Luxury Fever: Why Money Fails to Satisfy in an Era of Excess , Free Press,
New Y ork.
Frank, R & Cook, P (1995) The Winner T ake All Society: How More and More Americans
Compete for Ever Fewer and Bigger Prizes, Encouraging Economic W aste, Income Inequality,and an Impoverished Cultural Life, Free Press, New Y ork.
Franklin, B (1994) Packaging Politics: Political Communications in Britain’s Media Democracy,
Edward Arnold, London.
Frey, M G (1998) ‘Unfairly applying the fair use doctrine: Princeton University Press v
Michigan Document Services, 99 F3d 1381 (6th Cir 1996)’, University of Cincinnati Law
Review, vol. 66.
Fried, B H (1998) The Progressive Assault on Laissez Faire: Robert Hale and the First Law and
Economics Movement, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Frisby, D (1985) Fragments of Modernity: Theories of Modernity in the W ork of Simmel, Kracauer,
and Benjamin, Polity, Cambridge.
Frissen, V (1995) ‘Gender is calling: Some reﬂections on past, present and future uses of the
telephone’, in Grint, K and Gill, R (eds) The Gender–T echnology Relation, T aylor & Francis,London, pp. 79–94.
Froomkin, M (1998) ‘Article 2B as legal software for electronic contracting: Operating system
or Trojan horse?’, Berkeley T echnology Law Journal, vol. 13.
Galison, P (1994) ‘The ontology of the enemy: Norbert Wiener and the cybernetic vision’,
Critical Inquiry, vol. 21, Autumn, pp. 228–66.
Gallucci, C (1994) ‘How many votes did TV change?’, L’Espresso, 11 Nov.
Ganley, G D (1992) The Exploding Political Power of Personal Media , Ablex, Norwood,
New Jersey.
Garnham, N (1986) ‘The media and the public sphere’, in Golding, P , Murdock, G and
Schlesinger, P (eds) Communicating Politics: Mass Communications and the Political Process,Leicester University Press, Leicester, pp. 37–53.
Gates, B (1995) The Road Ahead, Viking, New Y ork.Gavit, Bernard C (1932) The Commerce Clause of the United States Constitution, Principia,
Bloomington, Indiana.
Gelernter, D (1992) Mirror W orlds, or, The Day Software Puts the Universe in a Shoebox: How It
Will Happen and What It Will Mean, Oxford University Press, New Y ork.
Geller, H (1998) ‘Public interest regulation in the digital TV era’, in Noll, R G and Price, M E
(eds) A Communications Cornucopia: Markle Foundation Essays on Information Policy,
Brookings Institution, Washington, District Columbia.292 BIBLIOGRAPHY
Gergen, K J (1991) The Saturated Self: Dilemmas of Identity in Contemporary Life, Basic,
New Y ork.
Gibbons v Ogden (1824) 22 US 1.
Gibbs, D (1993) ‘T elematics and urban economic development policies: Time for caution?’,
T elecommunications Policy, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 250–6.
Giddens, A (1981) A Contemporary Critique of Historical Materialism: Power, Property and the
State, vol. 1, Macmillan, London.
Giddens, A (1990) The Consequences of Modernity, Polity, Cambridge.Giddens, A (1998) The Third W ay: The Renewal of Social Democracy, Polity, Cambridge.Gilder, G (1989) Microcosm: The Quantum Revolution in Economics and T echnology, Simon &
Schuster, New Y ork.
Gilder, G (1994) Life After T elevision, Whittle, Knoxville, T ennessee.Gimbel, M (1998) ‘Some thoughts on the implications of trusted systems for intellectual
property law’, Stanford Law Review, vol. 50.
Ginsburg, J C (1990) ‘A tale of two copyrights: Literary property in revolutionary France and
America’, Tulane Law Review, vol. 64.
Ginsburg, J C (1997) ‘Authors and users in copyright’, Journal of the Copyright Society of the
USA, vol. 45.
Ginsburg, J C (2000) ‘From having copies to experiencing works: The development of an
access right in US copyright law’, in Hansen, H (ed.) US Intellectual Property: Law andPolicy, Sweet & Maxwell, London.
Glastonbury, B & LaMendola, W (1992) The Integrity of Intelligence: A Bill of Rights for the
Information Age, St Martin’s, New Y ork.
Gleick, J (1995) ‘Making Microsoft safe for capitalism’, New Y ork Times Magazine, vol. 5, Nov.,
pp. 50–7.
Goldstein, P (1982) ‘Derivative rights and derivative works in copyright’, Journal of the
Copyright Society of the USA, vol. 30.
Gonzalez-Manet, E (1992) Informatics and Society: The New Challenges, Ablex, Norwood,
New Jersey.
Gordon, W (1982) ‘Fair use as market failure: A structural and economic analysis of the
Betamax case and its predecessors’, Columbia Law Review, vol. 82.
Gordon, W (1989) ‘An inquiry into the merits of copyright: The challenges of consistency,
consent, and encouragement theory’, Stanford Law Review, vol. 41.
Gordon, W (1990) ‘T oward a jurisprudence of beneﬁts: The norms of copyright and the
problem of private censorship’, University of Chicago Law Review, vol. 57.
Gordon, W (1992) ‘On owning information: Intellectual property and restitutionary impulse’,
Virginia Law Review, vol. 78.
Gordon, W (1992) ‘Reality as artifact: From Feist to fair use’, Law and Contemporary Problems,
vol. 55.
Gorton, I & Motwani, S (1996) ‘Issues in co-operative software engineering using globally
distributed teams’, Information and Software T echnology, vol. 38, pp. 647–55.
Gouldner, A (1976) The Dialectic of Ideology and T echnology, Macmillan, London.Green, N (2002) ‘Who’s watching whom? Monitoring and accountability in mobile relations’,
in Brown, B, Green, N and Harper, R (eds) Wireless W orld: Social and Interactional Aspectsof the Mobile Age, Springer, London, pp. 32–45.
Green, S & Harvey, P (1999) Scaling Place and Networks: An Ethnography of ICT ‘Innovation’
in Manchester, paper presented to Internet and Ethnography conference, Hull, Dec.13–14.
Haber, S (1964) Eﬃciency and Uplift: Scientiﬁc Management in the Progressive Era, 1890–1920,
University of Chicago Press, Chicago, Illinois.BIBLIOGRAPHY 293
Habermas, J (1989) The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere: An Inquiry into a
Category of Bourgeois Society, Polity, Cambridge.
Hacking, I (1999) The Social Construction of What?, Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
Massachusetts.
Haddon, L (1993) ‘Interactive games’, in Hayward, P and Wollen, T (eds) Future Visions: New
T echnologies of the Screen, British Film Institute, London, pp. 10–30.
Halal, W E (1993) ‘The information technology revolution: Computer hardware, software, and
services into the 21st century’, T echnological Forecasting and Social Change, vol. 44, no. 1,
pp. 69–86.
Halal, W E & Liebowitz, J (1994) ‘T elelearning: The multimedia revolution in education’,
Futurist, vol. 28, no. 6, pp. 21–6.
Halbert, D J (1999) Intellectual Property in the Information Age: The Politics of Expanding
Ownership Rights, Quorum, Westport, Connecticut.
Hall, E T (1959) The Silent Language, Doubleday, New Y ork.
Hall, E T (1966) The Hidden Dimension, Doubleday, New Y ork.Hall, E T (1983) The Dance of Life: The Other Dimension of Time, Doubleday, New Y ork.Hamelink, C J (1988) The T echnology Gamble: Informatics and Public Policy: A Study of
T echnology, Ablex, Norwood, New Jersey.
Hamm, I & Harmgarth, F (1995) ‘Responsibility of television: An introduction’, in Bertels-
mann Foundation and European Institute for the Media (eds) T elevision Requires Responsi-bility: International Studies on the Structural Factors Ensuring Responsible T elevision , vol. 2,
Bertelsmann Foundation, Gütersloh.
Harasim, L (1993) Global Networks: Computers and International Communication, MIT Press,
Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Haraway, D (1989) ‘T eddy bear patriarchy: T axidermy and the garden of Eden, New Y ork City
1908–1936’, in Haraway, D (ed.) Primate Visions, Verso, London.
Hart, R P (1994) Seducing America: How T elevision Charms the Modern V oter, Oxford University
Press, New Y ork.
Harvey, D (1990) ‘Between space and time: Reﬂections on the geographical imagination’,
Annals of the Association of American Geographers, vol. 80, no. 3, pp. 418–34.
Harvey, D (1990) The Condition of Postmodernity: An Enquiry into the Conditions of Cultural
Change, Blackwell, Oxford.
Harvey, P (1996) Hybrids of Modernity: Anthropology, the Nation-State and the Universal
Exhibition, Routledge, London.
Hawaii Housing Authority v Midkiﬀ (1984) 467 US229.Haywood, T (1995) Info-Rich/Info-Poor: Access and Exchange in the Global Information Society,
Bowker Saur, East Grinstead.
Headrick, D R (1981) The T ools of Empire: T echnology and European Imperialism in the
Nineteenth Century, Oxford University Press, New Y ork.
Heaton, J A & Wilson, N L (1995) Tuning in Trouble: T alk TV’s Destructive Impact on Mental
Health, Jossey-Bass, San Francisco.
Heim, M (1993) The Metaphysics of Virtual Reality, Oxford University Press, New Y ork.Hein, H (1990) The Exploratorium: The Museum as Laboratory, Smithsonian Institution Press,
Washington, District Columbia.
Heinich, N (1988) ‘The Pompidou Centre and its public: The limits of a utopian site’, in
Lumley, R (ed.) The Museum Time-Machine: Putting Cultures on Display, Routledge,London.
Hill, C (1964) Society and Puritanism in Pre-Revolutionary England, Secker & Warburg, London.Hill, E J, Hawkins, A J & Miller, B C (1996) ‘Work and family in the virtual oﬃce: Perceived
inﬂuences of mobile telework’, Family Relations, vol. 45, pp. 293–301.294 BIBLIOGRAPHY
Hiltz, S R (1994) The Virtual Classroom: Learning Without Limits via Computer Networks,
Ablex, Norwood, New Jersey.
Hines, A (1994) ‘Jobs and infotech: Work in the information society’, Futurist, vol. 28, no. 1,
pp. 9–13.
Hirschman, A O (1967) The Passions and the Interests: Political Arguments for Capitalism Before
Its Triumph, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Hobbes, T (1976) Leviathan, accessed Feb. 13 2006 from http://etext.library.adelaide.edu.au/
h/hobbes/thomas/h68l/.
Hobsbawm, E J (1975) The Age of Capital 1848–75, Weidenfeld & Nicolson, London.
Hooper-Greenhill, E (1992) Museums and the Shaping of Knowledge, Routledge, London.Horner, V M (1991) ‘Electronic links for learning’, Annals of the American Academy of Political
and Social Science, vol. 514 (special issue), pp. 1–174.
Horrocks, R J & Scarr, R W A (1993) Future Trends in T elecommunications, John Wiley,
New Y ork.
House of Commons (2000) Science and Society, Select Committee on Science and T echnology,
3rd report, session 1999–2000, Her Majesty’s Stationery Oﬃce, London.
Howard, A (1995) The Changing Nature of W ork, Jossey-Bass, San Francisco.Huber, P (1994) Orwell’s Revenge: The 1984 Palimpsest, Free Press, New Y ork.Hudson, H E (1990) Communication Satellites: Their Development and Impact, Free Press,
New Y ork.
Hudson, K (1987) Museums of Inﬂuence, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.Hughes, J (1988) ‘The philosophy of intellectual property’, Georgetown Law Journal,
vol. 77.
Hyde, H, M. (1964) A History of Pornography, Heinemann, London.Ihde, D (1990) T echnology and the Life-W orld: From Garden to Earth, Indiana University Press,
Bloomington, Indiana.
‘Intellectual property and contract law for the information age: The impact of Article 2B of
the Uniform Commercial Code on the future of information and commerce’ (1999)symposium, California Law Review, vol. 87.
Irwin, A (1995) Citizen Science, Routledge, London.Irwin, A & Wynne, B (1996) Misunderstanding Science: the Public Reconstruction of Science and
T echnology, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Iyengar, S (1991) Is Anyone Responsible? How T elevision Frames Political Issues, University of
Chicago Press, Chicago, Illinois.
Jackson, C, Shooshan, H M & Wilson, J L (1982) Newspapers and Videotex: How Free a Press?,
Modern Media Institute, St Petersburg, Florida.
Jameson, F (1974) ‘The vanishing mediator’, W orking Papers in Cultural Studies, vol. 5,
pp. 111–49, Centre for Contemporary Cultural Studies, Birmingham.
Janelle, D (1968) ‘Central place development in a time-space framework’, Professional
Geographer, vol. 20, pp. 5–10.
Jaszi, P A (1991) ‘T oward a theory of copyright: The metamorphoses of “authorship”’, Duke
Law Journal, vol. 1991, pp. 455–502
Jaszi, P A (1992) ‘On the author eﬀect: Contemporary copyright and collective creativity’,
Cardozo Arts and Entertainment Law Journal, vol. 10.
Jesitus, J (1991) ‘Growing gambling Mecca reacts to dwindling supply of water’, Hotel and
Motel Management, vol. 206, Nov. 4.
Jones, M G (1995) Electronic House Calls: 21st Century Options, Consumer Interest Research
Group, Washington, District Columbia.
Jones, S G (ed.) (1995) Cybersociety: Computer Mediated Communication and Community , Sage,
Thousand Oaks, California.BIBLIOGRAPHY 295
Jordonova, L (1989) ‘Objects of knowledge: An historical perspective on museums’, in Vergo,
P (ed.) The New Museology, Reaktion, London.
Josephson, M (1959) Edison: A Biography, Oxford University Press, New Y ork.
Kahin, B & Abbate, J (eds) (1995) Standards Policy for Information Infrastructure, MIT Press,
Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Kahin, B & Keller, J (1995) Public Access to the Internet, MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.Kaniss, P (1995) The Media and the Mayor’s Race: The Failure of Urban Political Reporting,
Indiana University Press, Bloomington, Indiana.
Kaplan, B (1967) An Unhurried View of Copyright, Columbia University Press, New Y ork.Karatani, K (2003) Transcritique: On Kant and Marx, MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.Karjala, D (1995) ‘Copyright in electronic maps’, Jurimetrics Journal, vol. 35.
Kegan, R (1994) In Over Our Heads: The Mental Demands of Modern Life, Harvard University
Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Kelly, K (1994) Out of Control: The Rise of Neo-Biological Civilization, Addison-Wesley,
Reading, Massachusetts.
Kennedy, D (1979) ‘The structure of Blackstone’s commentaries’, Buﬀalo Law Review, vol. 28,
pp. 209–21.
Kennedy, J L & Morrow, T J (1994) Electronic Job Search Revolution: Win with the New
T echnology that’s Reshaping T oday’s Job Market, John Wiley, New Y ork.
Kern, S (1983) The Culture of Time and Space 1880–1918, Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Kernan, A (1990) The Death of Literature, Yale University Press, New Haven, Connecticut.Kernochan, J M (1987) ‘Imperatives for enforcing authors’ rights’, Columbia-VIA Journal of
Law and the Arts, vol. 11.
Kernochan, J M (1989) ‘The distribution right in the United States of America: Review and
reﬂections’, V anderbilt Law Review, vol. 42.
Kewanee Oil Company v Bicron Corporation (1974) 416 US 470, 476.Kieve, J (1973) The Electric T elegraph: A Social and Economic History, David & Charles,
London.
Kimball, P (1994) Downsizing the News: Network Cutbacks in the Nation’s Capital, Woodrow
Wilson Center Press, Washington, District Columbia.
Kingston, J A (1989) ‘Where information is all, pleas arise for less of it’, New Y ork Times, July 9.
Kirby, S (1988) ‘Policy and politics: Charges, sponsorship and bias’, in Lumley, R (ed.) The
Museum Time Machine, Routledge/Comedia, London.
Klapp, O E (1986) Overload and Boredom: Essays on the Quality of Life in the Information Society,
Greenwood, Westport, Connecticut.
Klein, N (2000) No Logo, HarperCollins, London.Klein, N (2002) Fences and Windows, Picador, New Y ork.Kling, R (1994) ‘Reading “all about” computerization: How genre conventions shape
nonﬁction social analysis’, The Information Society, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 147–72.
Kobrak, F & Luey, B (1992) The Structure of International Publishing in the 1990s, Transaction,
New Brunswick, New Jersey.
Koch, T (1991) Journalism for the 21st Century: Online Information, Electronic Databases, and the
News, Greenwood/Praeger, Westport, Connecticut.
Koelsch, F (1995) The Infomedia Revolution: How It is Changing Our W orld and Y our Life,
McGraw-Hill Ryerson, T oronto.
Kroes, R (1991) ‘Flatness and depth’, in Nye, D and Pedersen, C (eds) Consumption and
American Culture, Free University Press, Amsterdam.
Kroker, A & Weinstein, M A (1994) Data Trash: The Theory of the Virtual Class, St Martin’s,
New Y ork.296 BIBLIOGRAPHY
Kuhn, T (1962/1996) The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions, University of Chicago Press,
Chicago, Illinois.
Kurtzman, J (1993) The Death of Money: How the Electronic Economy has Destabilized the W orld’s
Markets and Created Financial Chaos, Simon & Schuster, New Y ork.
Lalli, S (1991) ‘Big projects boost Vegas’, Hotel and Motel Management, vol. 206, Nov. 4.
Lande, N (1991) ‘T oward the electronic book’, Publishers W eekly, vol. 238, Sept. 20, pp. 28–30.
Landes, W M & Posner, R A (1989) ‘An economic analysis of copyright law’, Journal of Legal
Studies, vol. 18.
Lange, B P & Woldt, R (1995) ‘The results and main conclusions of the international compar-
isons’, in Bertelsmann Foundation and European Institute for the Media (eds) T elevision
Requires Responsibility: International Studies on the Structural Factors Ensuring ResponsibleT elevision, vol. 2, Bertelsmann Foundation, Gütersloh.
Lange, D (1981) ‘Recognizing the public domain’, Law and Contemporary Problems, vol. 44.
Lanham, R A (1993) The Electronic W ord: Democracy, T echnology, and the Arts, University of
Chicago Press, Chicago, Illinois.
Las Vegas Chamber of Commerce (1993) ‘Las Vegas perspective’, Las V egas Review Journal.
Lash, S & Urry, J (1994) Economies of Signs and Space, Sage, London.Lasswell, H D (1941) Democracy Through Public Opinion, George Banta, Menasha, Wisconsin.Lasswell, H D (1977) ‘The vocation of propagandists’, in Lasswell, H D (ed.) On Political
Sociology, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, Illinois, pp. 234–5.
Latman, A (1963) ‘Study # 14: Fair use 6–7’, Studies on Copyright, vol. 778, pp. 784–5.
Latour, B (1999) Pandora’s Hope: Essays on the Reality of Science Studies, Harvard University
Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Latour, B & Coutouzis, M (1993) Should W e Have T aken the Measure of Europe?, Science
Museum, London.
Latour, B & Woolgar, S (1986) Laboratory Life: The Construction of Scientiﬁc Facts, Princeton
University Press, Princeton, New Jersey.
Laudon, K (1986) Dossier Society: V alue Choices in the Design of National Information Systems,
Columbia University Press, New Y ork.
Laurier, E (1999) Conversations in the Corridor (M4): Making Up the Mobile O ﬃce, paper
presented to British Sociological Association conference, Glasgow, April 6–9.
Law, J (1986) ‘On power and its tactics: A view from the sociology of science ’, Sociological
Review, vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 1–35.
Lee, H (1997) T emporal Implications of Electronically Mediated Business Procedures on Organisa-
tional W ork: EDI Applications in Trade, PhD thesis, Department of Information Systems,London School of Economics and Political Science, London.
Lee, H (1999) ‘Time and information technology: Monochronicity, polychronicity and
temporal symmetry’, European Journal of Information Systems, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 16–26.
Lee, H & Liebenau, J (2000) ‘Time and the internet at the turn of the millennium’, Time and
Society, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 43–56.
Leebaert, D (ed.) (1991) T echnology 2001: The Future of Computing and Communications, MIT
Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Leebaert, D (ed.) (1995) The Future of Software, MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.Lemley, M A (1995) ‘Intellectual property and shrink-wrap licenses’, Southern California Law
Review, vol. 68.
Lemley, M A (1997) ‘The economics of improvement in intellectual property law’, T exas Law
Review, vol. 75.
Lemley, M A (1999) ‘Beyond preemption: The federal law and policy of intellectual property
licensing’, California Law Review, vol. 87.
Lessig, L (1996) ‘Translating federalism’, 1995 Supreme Court Review, vol. 125.BIBLIOGRAPHY 297
Lessig, L (1999) ‘Pain in the OS’, Industry Standard, Feb. 5.
Levidow, L & Y oung, R (1984) ‘Exhibiting nuclear power: The science museum cover-up’,
Radical Science, vol. 14, pp. 53–79.
Levy, S (1994) ‘E-money’, Wired, vol. 2, no. 12, pp. 174–9.
Lewis, P H (1995) ‘Security is lost in cyberspace’, New Y ork Times, Feb 22.
Leyshon, A (1995) ‘Annihilating space? The speed-up of communications’, in Allen, J and
Hamnett, C (eds) A Shrinking W orld? Global Unevenness and Inequality, Open University
Press, Milton Keynes.
Library of Congress Copyright Oﬃce (1961) Report of the Register of Copyrights on the General
Revision of the US Copyright Law, vol. 6, Washington, District Columbia.
Ling, R & Yttri, B (2002) ‘Hyper-coordination via mobile phones in Norway’, in Katz, J A and
Aakhus, M (eds) Perpetual Contact Mobile Communication, Private T alk, Public Performance,Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Linowes, D F (1989) Privacy in America: Is Y our Private Life in the Public Eye?, University of
Illinois Press, Urbana, Illinois.
Lippmann, W (1922) Public Opinion, Allen & Unwin, London.Lippmann, W (1925) The Phantom Public, Harcourt, Brace, New Y ork.Litman, J (1990) ‘The public domain’, Emory Law Journal, vol. 39, pp. 977–92.
Litman, J (1991) ‘Copyright as myth’, University of Pittsburgh Law Review , vol. 53.
Litman, J (1992) ‘Copyright and information policy’, Law & Contemporary Problems, vol. 55.
Litman, J (1994) ‘The exclusive right to read’, Cardozo Arts and Entertainment Law Journal,
vol. 13.
Litman, J (1996) ‘Revising copyright law for the Information Age’, Oregon Law Review,
vol. 75.
Litman, J (1997) ‘Reforming information law in copyright’s image’, Dayton Law Review,
vol. 22.
Litman, J (1998) ‘The tales that Article 2B tells’, Berkeley T echnology Law Journal, vol. 13.
Lloyd, P (ed.) (1994) Groupware in the 21st Century: Computer Supported Cooperative W orking
T oward the Millennium, Praeger, Westport, Connecticut.
Lochner v New Y ork (1905) 198 US 45.London v Biograph (1916) 231 F . 696.Loren, L P (1997) ‘Redeﬁning the market failure approach to fair use in an era of copyright
permission systems’, Journal of intellectual Property Law, vol. 5.
Louw, E & Duﬀy, N (1992) Managing Computer Viruses, Oxford University Press, Oxford.Lundberg, O (1991) ‘The perils of being a visionary: One man’s vision’, InterMedia, vol. 19, no.
1, pp. 33–9.
Lyotard, J-F (1984) The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge, Manchester University
Press, Manchester.
Macdonald, S (1992) ‘Cultural imagining among museum visitors’, Museum Management and
Curatorship, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 401–9.
Macdonald, S (1993) ‘Un nouveau “corps des visiteurs”: Musées et changements culturels’,
Publics et Musées, vol. 3, pp. 13–27.
Macdonald, S (1997) ‘The museum as mirror: Ethnographic reﬂections’, in James, A, Hockey,
J and Dawson, A (eds) After Writing Culture: Epistemology and Praxis in ContemporaryAnthropology, Routledge, London.
Macdonald, S & Silverstone, R (1990) ‘Rewriting the museums’ ﬁctions: T axonomies, stories
and readers’, Cultural Studies, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 176–91.
Macdonald, S & Silverstone, R (1992) ‘Science on display: The representation of scientiﬁc
controversy in museum exhibitions’, Public Understanding of Science , vol. 1, no. 1,
pp. 69–87.298 BIBLIOGRAPHY
MacLachlan, S L (1993) ‘Pagers’ sophistication keeps sales growing’, Christian Science
Monitor, Aug. 7.
Madison, M J (1998) ‘Legal war: Contract and copyright in the digital age’, Fordham Law
Review, vol. 67.
Maes, P (1995) ‘Intelligent software’, Scientiﬁc American, vol. 273, no. 3, pp. 84–6.
Makridakis, S (1995) ‘The forthcoming information revolution: Its impact on society and
ﬁrms ’, Futures, vol. 27, no. 8, pp. 799–821.
Marien, M (1984) ‘Some questions for the Information Society’, The Information Society,
vol. 3, no. 2.
Markoﬀ, J (1991) ‘Is the electronic book closer than you think?’, New Y ork Times, Dec. 29.
Markoﬀ, J (1995) ‘Discovery of internet ﬂaws is setback for on-line trade’, New Y ork Times,
Oct. 11.
Martin, B (1992) ‘Symbolic knowledge and market forces at the frontiers of postmodernism:
Qualitative market researchers (Britain)’, in Kellner, H and Berger, P (eds) Hidden T echno-
crats: The New Class and New Capitalism, Transaction, New Brunswick, New Jersey,pp. 111–56.
Marvin, C (1988) When Old T echnologies W ere New: Thinking About Electric Communication in
the Late Nineteenth Century, Oxford University Press, New Y ork.
Marx, G T (1994) ‘New telecommunications technologies require new manners’,
T elecommunications Policy, vol. 18, no. 7, pp. 538–51.
Marx, K (1973) Grundrisse: Foundations of the Critique of Political Economy, Penguin,
Harmondsworth.
Marx, K & Engels, F (1978) ‘Manifesto of the Communist Party’, in Fernbach, D (ed.) The
Revolutions of 1848: Political Writings, Penguin, Harmondsworth.
Marx, L (1997) ‘In the driving-seat? The nagging ambiguity in historians’ attitudes to the rise
of technology’, Times Literary Supplement, Aug. 29, pp. 3–4.
Marx, L (1997) ‘T echnology: The emergence of a hazardous concept’, Social Research,
vol. 64, no. 3, pp. 965–88.
Maryland v Wirtz (1968) 392 US 183,201.Mason, R O, Mason, F M & Culnan, M J (1995) Ethics of Information Management, Sage,
Thousand Oaks, California.
Massey, D (1992) ‘Politics and space/time’, New Left Review, vol. 196, pp. 65–84.
Massey, D (1993) ‘Power-geometry and a progressive sense of place’, in Bird, J, Curtis, B,
Putnam, T, Robertson, G and Tickner, L (eds) Mapping the Futures: Local Cultures, GlobalChange, Routledge, London, pp. 59–69.
Masuda, Y (1990) Managing in the Information Society: Releasing Synergy Japanese Style, Basil
Blackwell, Oxford.
Mattelart, A (1991) Advertising International: The Privatisation of Public Space, Routledge,
London.
Maury, J-P (1994) Le Palais de la Découverte, Gallimard, Paris.Mayer-Kress, G & Barczys, C (1995) ‘The global brain as an emergent structure from the
worldwide computing network, and its implications for modeling’, The Information Society,
vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 1–28.
Mayo, J S (1990) ‘The telecommunications revolution of the 1990s’, Vital Speeches of the Day,
vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 151–5.
Mayo, J S (1992) ‘R&D in the third millennium: Requirements and challenges ’, Vital Speeches
of the Day, vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 26–9.
McCain, N (1980) ‘Field news service’, Boston Globe, Aug. 31.
McCulloch v Maryland (1819) 17 US 316.McKibben, B (1992) The Age of Missing Information, Random House, New Y ork.BIBLIOGRAPHY 299
McLuhan, M (1964) Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man , Routledge, London.
McManis, C R (1999) ‘The privatization (or “shrink-wrapping”) of American copyright law’,
California Law Review, vol. 87.
McManus, J H (1994) Market-Driven Journalism: Let the Citizen Beware?, Sage, Thousand
Oaks, California.
McNerney, W J & Bezold, C (1995) Health Care Innovation: A Vision for the 21st Century,
Institute for Alternative Futures, Alexandria, Virginia.
Merges, R P , Lemley, M A & Menell, P S (1997) Intellectual Property in the New T echnological
Age, Aspen Law and Business, New Y ork.
Michael, D N (1993) ‘Governing by learning: Boundaries, myths and metaphors’, Futures,
vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 81–9.
Michael, M (1996) Constructing Identities: The Social, the Nonhuman and Change, Sage, London.
Michie, R C (1977) ‘Friend or foe? Information technology and the London Stock Exchange
since 1700’, Journal of Historical Geography, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 304–26.
Mill, J S (1975) On Liberty, W W Norton, New Y ork.Minoli, D (1995) Video Dialtone T echnology: Digital Video over ADSL, HFC, FTTC, and ATM,
McGraw-Hill, New Y ork.
Minow, N N & LaMay, C L (1995) Abandoned in the W asteland: Children, T elevision, and the
First Amendment , Hill and Wang, New Y ork.
Mitchell, W J (1992) The Reconﬁgured Eye: Visual Truth in the Post-Photographic Era, MIT
Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Mitchell, W J (1995) City of Bits: Space, Place, and the Infobahn, MIT Press, Cambridge,
Massachusetts.
Mitroﬀ, I I & Bennis, W (1989) The Unreality Industry: The Deliberate Manufacturing of
Falsehood and What It Is Doing to Our Lives, Carol, New Y ork.
Moore, R H (1995) ‘Twenty-ﬁrst century law to meet the challenge of twenty-ﬁrst century
organized crime’, Futures Research Quarterly, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 23–46.
Moore, R H. (1994) ‘Wiseguys: Smarter criminals and smarter crime in the 21st century’,
Futurist, vol. 28, no. 5, pp. 33–7.
Morton, M (1991) The Corporation of the 1990s: Information technology and Organizational
Transformation, Oxford University Press, New Y ork.
Mouﬀe, C (1992) Dimensions of Radical Democracy: Pluralism, Citizenship, Community, Verso,
London.
Mowshowitz, A (1994) ‘Virtual organization: A vision of management in the information age’,
The Information Society, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 267–88.
Mulgan, G (1994) ‘Networks for an open society’, Demos, vol. 4, pp. 2–6.
Mulgan, G (1994) Politics in an Anti-Political Age, Polity, Cambridge.Mumford, L (1964) ‘Authoritarian and democratic technics’, T echnology and Culture, vol. 5,
no. 2.
Naisbitt, J (1982) Megatrends: T en New Directions Transforming Our Lives, Warner, New Y ork.Nash, C (1992) ‘Interactive media in museums: Looking backwards, forwards and sideways’,
Museum Management and Curatorship, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 171–84.
National Park Service (1984) Grand Canyon Natural and Cultural Resource Management Plan,
National Park Service, Washington District Columbia.
National Research Council: Computer Science and T elecoms Board (1994) Information
T echnology in the Service Society: A T wenty-First Century Lever, National Academy Press,Washington, District Columbia.
National Research Council: NRENAISSANCE Committee (1994) Realizing the Information
Future: The Internet and Beyond, National Academy Press, Washington, District Columbia.
National Research Council: Oﬃce of International Aﬀairs (1993) Global Dimensions of300 BIBLIOGRAPHY
Intellectual Property Rights in Science and T echnology, National Academy Press, Washington,
District Columbia.
National Research Council: System Security Study Committee (1991) Computers at Risk: Safe
Computing in the Information Age, National Academy Press, Washington, DistrictColumbia.
Negri, A (1989) The Politics of Subversion: A Manifesto for the T wenty-First Century, Polity,
Cambridge.
Negroponte, N (1995) Being Digital, Hodder & Stoughton, London.Netanel, N W (1994) ‘Alienability restrictions and the enhancement of author autonomy in
United States and continental copyright law’, Cardozo Arts and Entertainment Law Journal,
vol. 12.
Netanel, N W (1996) ‘[C]opyright and a democratic civil society’, Y ale Law Journal, vol. 106.
Netanel, N W (1998) ‘Asserting copyright’s democratic principles in the global arena’,
V anderbilt Law Review, vol. 51.
Neuman, S B (1991) Literacy in the T elevision Age: The Myth of the TV Eﬀect, Ablex, Norwood,
New Jersey.
Newhall, B (1964) The History of Photography from 1839 to the Present Day, 4th edn, Museum
of Modern Art, New Y ork.
Nimmer, D, Brown, E & Frischling, G (1999) ‘The metamorphosis of contract into expand’,
California Law Review, vol. 87.
Nowotny, H (1994) Time: The Modern and Postmodern Experience, Polity, Cambridge.O’Brien, R (1991) Global Financial Integration: The End of Geography, Pinter, London.O’Neil, J (1991) Plato’s Cave: Desire, Power, and the Specular Functions of the Media, Ablex,
Norwood, New Jersey.
O’Rourke M A (1997) ‘Copyright preemption after the pro-CD Case: A market based
approach’, Berkeley T echnology Law Journal, vol. 12.
Oamich, E J (1988) ‘The right of personality: A common law basis for the protection of the
moral rights of authors’, Georgia Law Review, vol. 23.
Obscene Publications Act 1857 (United Kingdom).Obscene Publications Act 1959 (United Kingdom).Oﬃce of T echnology Assessment (1985) Federal Government Information T echnology: Electronic
Surveillance and Civil Liberties, Government Printing Oﬃce, Washington, DistrictColumbia.
Oﬃce of T echnology Assessment (1986) Electronic Record Systems and Individual Privacy,
Government Printing Oﬃce, Washington, District Columbia.
Oﬃce of T echnology Assessment (1991) Rural America at the Crossroads: Networking for the
Future, Government Printing Oﬃce, Washington, District Columbia.
Oﬃce of T echnology Assessment (1993) Adult Literacy and New T echnologies: T ools for a
Lifetime, Government Printing Oﬃce, Washington, District Columbia.
Oﬃce of T echnology Assessment (1994) Electronic Enterprises: Looking to the Future,
Government Printing Oﬃce, Washington, District Columbia.
Oﬃce of T echnology Assessment (1995) T eachers and T echnology: Making the Connection,
Government Printing Oﬃce, Washington, District Columbia.
Ogden, M R (1994) ‘Politics in a parallel universe: Is there a future for cyberdemocracy?’,
Futures, vol. 26, no. 7, pp. 713–29.
Ohmae, K (1995) The End of the Nation State: The Rise of Regional Economies, Free Press,
New Y ork.
Olmstead v United States (1928) 277 US 438,474.‘One voice on Italy TV’ (1995) Free Press: Journal of the Campaign for Press and Broadcasting
Freedom, July/Aug., London.BIBLIOGRAPHY 301
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (1981) Information Activities, Elec-
tronics and T elecommunications T echnologies: Impact on Employment, Growth and Trade,
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, Paris.
Paley, W (1980) ‘Press freedom: A continuing struggle’, speech to Associated Press
Broadcasters Convention, June 6, in New Y ork Times, July 7, sec. B, p. 3.
Palmer, E L (1988) T elevision and America’s Children: A Crisis of Neglect, Oxford University
Press, New Y ork.
Palmer, E L (1993) T oward a Literate W orld: T elevision in Literacy Education – Lessons from the
Arab Region, Westview, Boulder, Colorado.
Papert, S (1993) The Children’s Machine: Rethinking School in the Age of the Computer, Basic,
New Y ork.
Parker, R (1995) Mixed Signals: The Prospects for Global T elevision, Twentieth Century Fund
Press, New Y ork.
Parris, H (1965) Government and the Railways in Nineteenth Century Britain, Routledge and
Kegan Paul, London.
Patterson, D A (1995) ‘Microprocessors in 2020’, Scientiﬁc American, vol. 273, no. 3, pp. 62–7.
Patterson, R (1992) ‘Understanding fair use’, Law and Contemporary Problems, vol. 55.
Pelton, J N (1989) ‘T elepower: The emerging global brain’, Futurist, vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 9–14.
Pensacola T elegraph Company v W estern Union T elegraph Company (1877) 96 US 1, 9.Penzias, A (1995) Harmony: Business, T echnology & Life After Paperwork, Harper Business,
New Y ork.
Perelman, L J (1992) School’s Out: Hyperlearning, the New T echnology, and the End of Education,
William Morrow, New Y ork.
Perkin, H (1970) The Age of the Railway, Panther, London.Perry, M, O ’Hara, K, Sellen, A, Brown, B & Harper, R (2001) ‘Dealing with mobility: Under-
standing access anytime, anywhere’, Transactions on Computer Human Interaction, vol. 8,
no. 4, pp. 323–47.
Philbrick, F (1938) ‘Changing conceptions of property in law’, University of Pennsylvania Law
Review, vol. 691.
Piccone, P (1976) ‘Paradoxes of reﬂexive sociology’, New German Critique, no. 8, Spring.
Pickover, C A (ed.) (1995) Future Health: Computers and Medicine in the T wenty- ﬁrst Century,
St Martin’s, New Y ork.
Poems of Ralph Waldo Emerson (1904) Collected W orks, vol. 9, Houghton Miﬄin, Boston,
Massachusetts.
Poletown Neighborhood Council v Detroit (1981) 304 N. W .2d 455, United States.Pollack, A (1992) ‘“ Fifth generation” became Japan’s lost generation’, New Y ork Times, June 5.
Pool, I de Sola (1977) The Social Uses of the T elephone, MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.Pool, I de Sola (1978) ‘From Gutenberg to electronics: Implications for the First Amendment’,
Key Reporter, vol. 43, no. 3.
Porat, M U & Rubin, M R (1977) The Information Economy, Government Printing Oﬃce,
Washington, District Columbia.
Posner, R A (1988) Law and Literature: A Misunderstood Relation, Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Poster, M (1990) The Mode of Information: Poststructuralism and Social Context, Polity,
Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Poster, M (1995) The Second Media Age, Polity, Cambridge, Massachusetts.Postman, N (1992) T echnopoly: The Surrender of Culture to T echnology, Knopf, New Y ork.Powell, T R (1918) ‘The Child Labor Law, the T enth Amendment, and the Commerce
Clause’, Southern Law Quarterly, vol. 3.
Power, M (1997) The Audit Society: Rituals of V eriﬁcation, Oxford University Press, Oxford.302 BIBLIOGRAPHY
Pred, A (1973) Urban Growth and the Circulation of Information: The United States System of
Cities, 1790–1840, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Price, D J de S (1975) Science Since Babylon, Yale University Press, New Haven, Connecticut.
Provenzo, E F (1991) Video Kids: Making Sense of Nintendo, Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, Massachusetts.
R v Curl (1727) 93 E.R. 849.R v Hicklin (1868) L.R. 3Q. B. 360.R v Read (1708) 11 Mod. Rep. 142.R v Sedley (1663) 1 Sid. 168.Radin, M J (1993) Reinterpreting Property, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, Illinois.Radin, M J & Wagner, P (1998) ‘The myth of private ordering: Rediscovering legal realism in
cyberspace’, Chicago-Kent Law Review, vol. 73.
Raine, L P & Cilluﬀo, F J (eds) (1994) Global Organized Crime: The New Empire of Evil, Center
for Strategic and International Studies, Washington, District Columbia.
Rakow, L F (1992) Gender on the Line: W omen, the T elephone and Community Life, University of
Illinois Press, Urbana, Illinois.
Rakow, L & Navarro, V (1993) ‘Remote mothering and the parallel shift: Women meet the
cellular telephone’, Critical Studies in Mass Communication, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 144–57.
Ramonet, I (1995) ‘La pensée unique’ (editorial), Le Monde Diplomatique, Jan.Raphael, A (1990) ‘What price democracy?’, Observer, Oct. 14, pp. 7–47.
Record Rental Amendment of 1984 (codiﬁed as amended at 17 USCalif §§ 109, 115).Reich, R. (1991) The W ork of Nations: Preparing Ourselves for 21st-century Capitalism, Knopf,
New Y ork.
Reichardt, J (1971) Cybernetics, Art and Ideas, Studio Vista, London.Reichman, J H & Samuelson, P (1997) ‘Intellectual property rights in data’, V anderbilt Law
Review, vol. 50.
Reidenberg, J R (1996) ‘Governing networks and rule-making in cyberspace’, Emory Law
Journal, vol. 45.
Reynolds, R (1975) ‘Our misplaced reliance on early obscenity cases’, American Bar Association
Journal, vol. 61, Feb., pp. 220–2.
Rheingold, H (1993) The Virtual Community: Homesteading on the Electronic Frontier, Addison-
Wesley, Reading, Massachusetts.
Rice, P O & Robillard, J A (1991) The Future of Serials: Proceedings of the North American Serials
Interest Group, Haworth, Binghamton, New Y ork.
Rifkin, J (1987) Time W ars: The Primary Con ﬂict in Human History, Henry Holt, New Y ork.
Rifkin, J (1995) The End of W ork: The Decline of the Global Labor Force and the Dawn of the
Post-Market Era, T archer/Putnam, New Y ork.
Ritzer, G (1995) Expressing America: A Critique of the Global Credit Card Society, Sage,
Thousand Oaks, California.
Robertson, G (1979) Obscenity: An Account of Censorship Laws and Their Enforcement in
England and W ales, Weidenfeld & Nicolson, London.
Robinson, D C, Buck, E B & Cuthbert, M (1991) Music at the Margins: Popular Music and
Global Cultural Diversity, Sage, Newbury Park, California.
Roe, D B & Wilpon, J G (1994) V oice Communication Between Humans and Machines, National
Academy Press, Washington, District Columbia.
Rolph, C H (1969) Books in the Dock, Deutsch, London.Ronfeldt, D (1992) ‘Cyberocracy is coming’, The Information Society, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 243–96.
Rose, N (1996) ‘Governing “advanced” liberal democracies’, in Barry, A, Osborne, T and
Rose, N (eds) Foucalt and Political Reason: Liberalism, Neo-Liberalism and Rationalities ofGovernment, Chicago University Press, Chicago, Illinois.BIBLIOGRAPHY 303
Rose, N (1999) Powers of Freedom: Reframing Political Thought , Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.
Rosell, S A (1992) Governing in an Information Society, Institute for Research on Public Policy,
Montreal.
Rosen, H (2000) T estimony to Music on the Internet: Is There an Upside to Downloading?,
Hearings of the Senate Judiciary Committee, 106th Congress, 2nd session, July 11,
Washington, District Columbia.
Rosenbaum, D (1992) ‘Resorts: Precast as big winner in Vegas’, ERN, vol. 229, July 13.
Rosenberg, R (1991) ‘Debunking computer literacy’, T echnology Review, vol. 94, no. 1,
pp. 58–65.
Ross, A (1996) Science W ars , Duke University Press, Durham, North Columbia.
Ross, G (1995) Jacques Delors and European Integration , Polity, Cambridge.
Rossman, P (1992) The Emerging W orldwide Electronic University: Information Age Global Higher
Education, Greenwood, Westport, Connecticut.
Roszak, T (1994) The Cult of Information: A Neo-Luddite Treatise on High-T ech, Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence, and the True Art of Thinking, 2nd edn, University of California Press, Berkeley,California.
Rourke, F E (1961) Secrecy and Publicity: Dilemmas of Democracy, Johns Hopkins Press,
Baltimore, Maryland.
Rovizzi, L & Thompson, D (1991) Price-Cap Regulated Public Utilities and Quality Regulation
in the UK, Centre for Business Strategy, London Business School, London.
Rule, J B (1973) Private Lives and Public Surveillance, Allen Lane, London.Rust v Sullivan (1991) 500 US 354.Sale, K (1995) Rebels Against the Future: The Luddites and Their W ar on the Industrial Revolution;
Lessons for the Computer Age, Addison-Wesley, Reading, Massachusetts.
Salomon, J J (1994) The Uncertain Quest: Science, T echnology, and Development, United Nations
University Press, T okyo.
Samuelson, P (1988) ‘Modifying copyrighted software: Adjusting copyright doctrine to
accommodate a technology’, Jurimetrics Journal, vol. 28, pp. 179, 188–9.
Samuelson, P (1993) ‘Fair use for computer programs and other copyrightable works in digital
form: The implications of Sony, Galoob and Sega’, Journal of Intellectual Property Law,
vol. 1.
Samuelson, P (1996) ‘The copyright grab’, Wired, vol. 4, no. 1.
Samuelson, P (1997) ‘Embedding technical self-help in licensed software’, Communications of
the ACM, vol. 40.
Samuelson, P (1999) ‘Encoding the law into digital libraries’, Communications of the ACM,
vol. 41.
Samuelson, P (1999) ‘Intellectual property and contract law for the Information Age:
Foreword’, California Law Review, vol. 87.
Sanders, B (1994) A is for Ox: Violence, Electronic Media, and the Silencing of the Written W ord,
Pantheon, New Y ork.
Sardar, Z & Ravetz, J R (1995) ‘Cyberspace: T o boldly go’, Futures, vol. 27, no. 7, pp. 695–796.
Schaﬀer, S (1992) ‘Self evidence’, Critical Inquiry, vol. 18, pp. 327–62.
Schaﬀer, S (1993) ‘The consuming ﬂame: Electrical showmen and T ory mystics in the world of
goods’, in Brewer, J and Porter, R (eds) Consumption and W orld of Goods, Routledge,London.
Schaﬀer, S (1997) ‘T emporary contemporary: Some puzzles of science in action’, in Farmelo,
G and Carding, J (eds) Here and Now: Contemporary Science and T echnology Museums andScience Centres, Science Museum, London.
Schement, J R & Curtis, T (1995) T endencies and T ensions of the Information Age: The Production304 BIBLIOGRAPHY
and Distribution of Information in the United States, Transaction, New Brunswick, New
Jersey.
Schepp, D & Schepp, B (1995) The T elecommuter’s Handbook: How to Earn a Living Without
Going to the Oﬃce, 2nd edn, McGraw-Hill, New Y ork.
Schiller, H I (1989) Culture, Inc.: The Corporate T akeover of Public Expression, Oxford University
Press, New Y ork.
Schiller, H I (1992) Mass Communications and American Empire, 2nd edn, Westview, Boulder,
Colorado.
Schivelbusch, W (1977) The Railway Journey: Trains and Travel in the 19th Century, Urizen,
New Y ork.
Schlegel, J H (1995) American Legal Realism and Empirical Social Science, University of North
Carolina Press, Chapel Hill, North Carolina.
Schlesinger, A S (1933) The Rise of the City, 1878–1898, Macmillan, New Y ork.Science Museum (1986) Management Plan, National Museum of Science and Industry,
London.
Scientiﬁc American (1991) ‘Communications, computers and networks: Special issue’,
Scientiﬁc American, vol. 265, no. 3, pp. 62–166.
Sclove, R (1995) Democracy and T echnology, Guilford, New Y ork.Sheridan, T B (1992) T elerobotics, Automation, and Human Supervisory Control, MIT Press,
Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Sheth, J N & Sisodia, R S (1993) ‘Information mall’, T elecommunications Policy, vol. 17, no. 5,
pp. 376–89.
Shirer, W (1976) 20th Century Journey: The start: 1904–1930, Simon & Schuster, New
Y ork.
Shortland, M (1987) ‘No business like show business’, Nature, vol. 328, p. 213.
Shrader, W K (1992) Media Blight and the Dehumanizing of America, Praeger, New Y ork.Shulman, S (1999) Owning the Future, Houghton Miﬄin, Boston, Massachusetts.Silverstone, R (1988) ‘Museums and the media: A theoretical and methodological exploration’,
International Journal of Museum Management and Curatorship, vol. 7, pp. 231–41.
Silverstone, R (1992) ‘The medium is the museum: On objects and logics in times and spaces’,
in Durant, J (ed.) Museums and the Public Understanding of Science, Science Museum,London.
Simmel, G (1997) ‘The metropolis and mental life’, in Frisby, D and Featherstone, M (eds)
Simmel on Culture, Sage, London, pp. 174–85.
Sims, N (1979) The Chicago Style of Journalism, PhD dissertation, University of Illinois,
Chicago, Illinois.
Sinclair, J (1987) Images Incorporated: Advertising as Industry and Ideology, Croom Helm,
London.
Singer, J (1982) ‘The legal rights debate in analytical jurisprudence from Bentham to Hohfeld’,
Wisconsin Law Review, vol. 975.
Slaton, C D (1992) T elevote: Expanding Citizen Participation in the Quantum Age, Praeger,
New Y ork.
Slouka, M (1995) W ar of the W orlds: Cyberspace and the High-T ech Assault on Reality , Basic,
New Y ork.
Smith, A (1991) The Age of Behemoths: The Globalization of Mass Media Firms, Twentieth
Century Fund Paper Priority Press, New Y ork.
Smith, H J (1994) Managing Privacy: Information T echnology and Corporate America, University
of North Carolina Press Chapel Hill, North Carolina.
Smith, M H (1993) ‘The limits of copyright: Property, parody, and the public domain’, Duke
Law Journal, vol. 42.BIBLIOGRAPHY 305
Snider, J (1994) ‘Democracy on-line: T omorrow’s electronic electorate’, Futurist, vol. 28, no. 5,
pp. 15–19.
Snider, J & Ziporyn, T (1992) Future Shop: How New T echnologies Will Change the W ay W e Shop
and What W e Buy, St Martin’s, New Y ork.
Social T ext (1996) vol. 14, no. 1/2 (Special issue, ‘Science wars’).
Spanier, D (1992) W elcome to the Pleasure Dome: Inside Las V egas, University of Nevada Press,
Reno, Nevada.
Speier, H (1950) ‘Historical development of public opinion’, American Journal of Sociology,
vol. 55, Jan.
Sproull, L & Kiesler, S (1991) Connections: New W ays of W orking in the Networked Organization,
MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
St John-Stevas, N (1956) ‘Obscenity, literature and the law’, Dublin Review, vol. 230,
pp. 41–56.
Stamper, J W (1989) ‘The galerie of machines of the 1889 Paris World’s Fair’, T echnology and
Culture, vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 330–53.
Standage, T (1998) The Victorian Internet, Weidenfeld & Nicolson, London.Star, S & Griesemer, J (1989) ‘Institutional ecology, “translations” and boundary objects:
Amateurs and professionals in Berkeley’s museum of vertebrate zoology, 1907–39’, Social
Studies of Science, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 387–420.
State Board of Insurance v T odd Shipyards Corporation (1962) 370 US 451, 456.Steﬀens, L (1958) The Autobiography of Lincoln Steﬀens, Harcourt, Brace and World, New Y ork.Steﬁk, M (1996) ‘Letting loose the light: Igniting commerce in electronic publication’, in Steﬁk,
M (ed.) Internet Dreams: Archetypes, Myths, and Metaphors, MIT Press, Cambridge,Massachusetts.
Steﬁk, M (1997) ‘Shifting the possible: How trusted systems and digital property rights
challenge us to rethink digital publishing’, Berkeley T echnology Law Journal, vol. 12.
Stein, J (1996) ‘Annihilating space and time: The modernisation of ﬁre-ﬁghting in late
nineteenth-century Cornwall, Ontario’, Urban History Review, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 3–11.
Stein, J (1999) ‘The telephone: Its social shaping and public negotiation in late nineteenth- and
early twentieth-century London’, in Crang, M, Crang, P and May, J (eds) VirtualGeographies: Bodies, Space and Relations, Routledge, New Y ork, pp. 44–62.
Stephens, C (1989) ‘“ The most reliable time”: William Bond, the New England railroads, and
time awareness in 19th-century America’, T echnology and Culture, vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 1–24.
Stephens, G (1995) ‘Crime in cyberspace: The digital underworld’, Futurist, vol. 29, no. 5,
pp. 24–8.
Stevenson, J (1987) ‘The philosophy behind launch pad’, Journal of Education and Museums,
vol. 8, pp. 18–20.
Stevenson, J (1994) ‘Getting to grips’, Museums Journal, May, pp. 30–2.
Steward, B (2000) ‘Changing times: The meaning, measurement and use of time in telework-
ing’, Time and Society, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 57–74.
Stock, G (1993) Metaman: The Merging of Humans and Machines into a Global Superorganism,
Simon & Schuster, New Y ork.
Stoll, C (1995) Silicon Snake Oil: Second Thoughts on the Information Highway, Doubleday,
New Y ork.
Stone & McCarrick v Dugan Piano (1914) 210 F . 399.Stone, A (1995) ‘Innocence and awakening: Cyberdammerung at the Ashibe Research Labora-
tory’, in Marcus, G (ed.) T echnoscientiﬁc Imaginaries, Chicago University Press, Chicago,Illinois.
Stonier, T (1986) ‘Intelligence networks, overview, purpose and policies in the context of
global social change’, Aslib Proceedings, vol. 38, no. 9.306 BIBLIOGRAPHY
Strathern, M (1992) Reproducing the Future: Anthropology, Kinship and the New Reproductive
T echnologies, Manchester University Press, Manchester.
Straw, W (1991) ‘Systems of articulation, logics of change: Communities and scenes in popular
music’, Cultural Studies, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 368–88.
Sussman, V (1995) ‘Gold rush in cyberspace’, US News & W orld Report, Nov. 13, pp. 72–83.
Sussman, G & Lent, J A (eds) (1991) Transnational Communications: Wiring the Third W orld,
Sage, Newbury Park, California.
T albott, S L (1995) The Future Does Not Compute: Transcending the Machines in Our Midst ,
O’Reilly, Sebastopol, California.
T arr, J A & Dupuy, G (1988) T echnology and the Rise of the Networked City in Europe and North
America, T emple University Press, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Thomas, D (1969) A Long Time Burning: The History of Literary Censorship in England,
Routledge & Kegan Paul, London.
Thomas, G (nd) The National Museum of Science and Industry: Facing the future, mimeo.
Thompson, E P (1967) ‘Time, work discipline and industrial capitalism’, Past and Present,
vol. 38, pp. 56–97.
Thrift, N (1981) ‘Owners’ time and own time: The making of a capitalist time consciousness,
1300–1880’, in Pred, A (ed.) Space and Time in Geography, University of Lund, Lund,Sweden, pp. 56–84.
Thrift, N (1990) ‘Transport and communication’, in Dodgson, R A and Butlin, R A (eds)
An Historical Geography of England and W ales, Academic, London, pp. 453–86.
Thrift, N (1995) ‘A hyperactive world’, in Johnston, R J, T aylor, P J and Watts, M J (eds)
Geographies of Global Change: Remapping the W orld in the Late T wentieth Century, Blackwell,Oxford, pp. 18–35.
Thrift, N (1996) ‘New urban eras and old technological fears: Reconﬁguring the goodwill of
electronic things’, Urban Studies, vol. 33, no. 8, pp. 1463–93.
Tierney, J (1992) ‘Sound bites become smaller mouthfuls’, New Y ork Times, Jan. 23, A1.
Tiﬃn, J & Rajasingham, L (1995) In Search of the Virtual Class: Education in an Information
Society, Routledge, London.
Time Magazine (1995) ‘Welcome to cyberspace’, Time, special issue, Spring.
Toﬄer, A (1980) The Third W ave, Morrow, New Y ork.
Toﬄer, A & T oﬄer, H (1993) ‘Societies at hyper-speed’, New Y ork Times, Oct. 31, E17.
Toﬄer, A & T oﬄer, H (1993) W ar and Anti-W ar: Survival at the Dawn of the 21st Century, Little
Brown, Boston, Massachusetts.
Toﬄer, A & T o ﬄer, H (1995) ‘Getting set for the coming millennium’, Futurist, vol. 29, no. 2,
pp. 10–15.
T omlinson, J (1991) Cultural Imperialism: A Critical Introduction, Johns Hopkins University
Press, Baltimore, Maryland.
T ownsend, A (2002) ‘Mobile communications in the twenty-ﬁrst century city’, in Brown, B,
Green, N and Harper, R (eds) Wireless W orld: Social and Interactional Aspects of the MobileAge, Springer, London, pp. 62–77.
Trachtman, J P (1996) ‘The international economic law revolution’, University of Pennsylvania
Journal of International Economic Law, vol. 17.
Traweek, S (1988) Beamtimes and Lifetimes: The W orld of High Energy Physicists, Harvard
University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Tsagarousianou, R, T ambini, D & Bryan, C (1998) Cyberdemocracy: T echnology, Cities and
Civic Networks, Routledge, London.
Tuman, M C (1992) W ord Perfect: Literacy in the Computer Age, University of Pittsburgh Press,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
Tunstall, J (1985) ‘Deregulation is politicisation’, T elecommunications Policy, vol. 9, no. 3.BIBLIOGRAPHY 307
Tyack, D & Cuban, L (1995) Tinkering T oward Utopia: A Century of Public School Reform,
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Ullman, E (1997) Close to the Machine: T echnophilia and its Discontents, City Lights, San
Francisco.
United States v Goss (1989) 803 F2d 638.
USCA (1987) Constitution of the United States Annotated: First Amendment, West Publishing,
St Pauls, Minnesota.
Vajda, S A (1993) ‘The growth and expansion of telecoms in Mexico’, InterMedia, vol. 21,
no. 4–5, pp. 8–13.
Valenti, J (1995) T estimony to the Copyright T erm Extension Act: Hearing on H.R. 989 before
the Subcommittee On Courts and Intellectual Property of the House Committee on theJudiciary, 104th Congress, 1st session, June 1, Motion Picture Association of America.
van Riemsdijk, J (1980) The Science Museum, Science Museum, London.Vandevelde, K (1980) ‘The new property of the nineteenth century: The development of the
modern concept of property’, Buﬀalo Law Review, vol. 29.
V ault Corp. v Quaid Software Ltd. (1988) 847 F2d 255.Venturi, R (1991) Learning from Las V egas: The Forgotten Symbolism of Architectural Form, MIT
Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Vinge, V (1993) ‘T echnological singularity’, Whole Earth Review, no. 81, pp. 88–95.
Virilio, P (1990) ‘Cateract surgery: Cinema in the year 2000’, in Kuhn, A (ed.) Alien Zone:
Cultural Theory and Contemporary Science Fiction Cinema, Verso, London.
Virilio, P (2000) Polar Inertia, Sage, London.von Hayek, F A (1978) Law, Legislation, and Liberty, vol. 2, University of Chicago Press,
Chicago, Illinois.
Ware, W H (1993) ‘The new faces of privacy’, The Information Society, vol. 9, no. 3,
pp. 193–211.
Warwick, D R (1992) ‘The cash-free society’, Futurist, vol. 26, no. 6, pp. 19–22.
Washington, H A (ed.) (1854) Writings of Thomas Jeﬀerson, 1790–1826, vol. 6.Weatherford, M (1993) ‘Where dreams come true’, Nevada, Jan./Feb., pp. 10–14.
Weaver, R R (1991) Computers and Medical Knowledge: The Di ﬀusion of Decision Support
T echnology, Westview, Boulder, Colorado.
Webster, F & Robins, K (1986) Information T echnology: A Luddite Analysis, Ablex, Norwood,
New Jersey.
Weinreb, L (1990) ‘Commentary: Fair’s fair: A comment on the fair use doctrine’, Harvard
Law Review, vol. 105.
Weiser, M (1991) ‘The computer for the 21st century’, Scientiﬁc American, vol. 265, no. 3,
pp. 94–104.
Weizer, N (1991) The Arthur D. Little Forecast on Information T echnology and Productivity:
Making the Integrated Enterprise W ork, John Wiley, New Y ork.
Wesley-T anakovic, I (1994) Expanding Access to Science and T echnology: The Role of Information
T echnologies, United Nations University Press, T okyo.
Wicklein, J (1981) Electronic Nightmare: The New Communications and Freedom, Viking,
New Y ork.
Widmer, K & Widmer, E (1961) Literary Censorship: Principles, Cases, Problems, Wadsworth,
San Francisco.
Wiener, N (1948) Cybernetics, MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.Williams, R (1974) T elevision: T echnology and Cultural Form, Fontana, London.Williams, R (1989) Resources of Hope, Verso, London.Williams, R (1996) Normal Service W on’t Be Resumed: The Future of Public Broadcasting, Allen
& Unwin, Sydney.308 BIBLIOGRAPHY
Wines, M (1994) ‘Washington really is in touch. We’re the problem’, New Y ork Times, Oct. 16,
E1.
Winston, B (1986) Misunderstanding Media, Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
Massachusetts.
Woherem, E E (1991) ‘Expert systems as a medium for knowledge transfer to less developed
countries’, Science & Public Policy, vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 301–9.
Wollen, T (1993) ‘The bigger the better: From cinemascope to IMAX’, in Hayward, P and
Wollen, T (eds) Future Visions: New T echnologies of the Screen, British Film Institute,
London, pp. 10–30.
Woolgar, S (1976) ‘Writing an intellectual history of scientiﬁc development: The use of
discovery accounts’, Social Studies of Science, vol. 6, no. 3/4, pp. 395–422.
Wright, R (1995) ‘Hyper-democracy’, Time, Jan. 23, pp. 15–21.
Wriston, W B (1992) The T wilight of Sovereignty: How the Information Revolution is Transforming
Our W orld, Scribner, New Y ork.
Wynne, B (1992) ‘Misunderstood misunderstandings: Social identities and the public uptake
of science’, Public Understanding of Science , vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 281–304.
‘Wynn’s world: White tigers, blackjack, and a Midas touch’ (1992) Business W eek, March 30.Y en, A C (1991) ‘When authors won’t sell: Parody, fair use and eﬃciency in copyright law’,
University of Colorado Law Review, vol. 62.
Zizek, S (1989) The Sublime Object of Ideology, Verso, London.Zizek, S (1997) The Plague of Fantasies, Verso, London.Zizek, S (1998) ‘The inherent transgression’, Cultural V alues, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1–17.
Zizek, S (1999) ‘Y ou may!’, London Review of Books, March 18, pp. 3–6.
Zysman, G I (1995) ‘Wireless networks’, Scientiﬁc American, Sept., pp. 68–71.BIBLIOGRAPHY 309
Index
Abbate, J., 42, 43, 56
Abbott, Dianne, 83Abler, R., 244, 246Adam, Barbara, 251, 252, 253, 262Adam, J.A., 42Adams, Henry, 189, 225Adas, M., 248Adler, P ., 48Age of Aquarius, 40Allen, William Frederick, 240Amazon, xxiiiAmerican by Design: Science, T echnology and the
Rise of Corporate Capitalism(Noble), 225–226
American Library Association (ALA), 49American T echnological Sublime (Nye), vThe American Scholar (journal), 41Andrews, Sir William P ., 230AOL Time Warner, 103, 107, 109Appadurai, Arjun, 165Apple, 195Aranovitz, S., 48Aristotle, 189artiﬁcial intelligence (AI), 43Artiﬁcial Life Conference (1987), 39Audio Home Recording Act, 129Augusta, A., 7Aukstakalnis, S., 42
Babbage, Charles, 6, 7, 11
Babbage Analytical Engine, 6–7Bacon, Roger, 275Bagdikian, B.H., 47Bagnara, S., 266, 267Ball, George, 190Bankes, S., 44Barber, Benjamin R., vi, xiii, 160, 188, 279Barczys, C., 43Barley, S.R., 267, 268Barnet, R.J., 50Barrin, Jean, 67Barry, Andrew, vi, xiii, 46, 63, 160, 163, 279Bartky, I.R., 239, 246Bateson, G., 216Beaubourg, 174, 175Becker, J., 49Becker, Theodore, 199Bell, D., 42Bell Laboratories, 45Belsie, L., 43Benedict, Ruth, 22Benjamin, Walter, 238Bennis, W ., 48Berman, M., 245Bertelsmann, 79, 88, 103, 106, 109Bianculli, D., 46Bikson, T.K., 48Bill of Rights for the Information Age, 44Birdsall, W .F ., 49Birkerts, S., 45, 46Blackman, C., 42, 43Blackstone, W ., 119, 120Blair, T ony, 167Blatner, D., 42Boal, I.A., 45, 46Boden, Deidre, 251
Bogart, L., 47
Boli, J., 221, 223Boston and Albany Railroad, 225Boston News Letter, 15Botkin, J., 49Boulez, Pierre, 175Bourdieu, P ., 173Boyle, James, vi, xii, 112, 119, 136, 145, 279Bradley, S.P ., 42Branscomb, A.W ., 51Bridges, W ., 48Briggs, Charles F ., 229, 230Bristol Exploratory, 171, 172British Interactives Group (BiG), 167, 171British Museum, 166, 180Brody, H., 43Brook, J., 45, 46Brown, B., 258Builder, C., 44Burchell, David, 163Burke, J., 12, 29Burnham, David, 194Burstein, D., 43
Carey, James, vii, xiv, 222, 225, 227, 231, 247
Cartwright, G.F ., 52Casmir, F ., 50Cassell, P ., 221Castells, Manuel, xxiii, xxiv, 244, 248, 263Castoriadis, C., 94Caudill, M., 43Cavanagh, J., 50CBS Inc, 106, 107Census Bureau, 8Centenniel Exposition (1876), 30Chandler, A., 228, 237Chappe, Claud, 233Charles, Prince of Wales, 188Chaum, D., 51Cilluﬀo, F .J., 48Cité des Sciences et de l’Industrie, La Villette,
Paris, 165, 171, 174, 175, 176,177, 178
Clay, Henry, 225Clinton, Bill, 77, 81Coates, J.F ., 42, 43, 48Code and Other Laws of Cyberspace (Lessig),
vi
Cohen, Julia, 143, 144Cohen Theorem, 144, 145Cole, A.H., 235Columbia Broadcasting System (CBS), 19Committee of Public Safety, 233Communication as Culture (Carey), viiCompaine, Ben, vi, xi, 64, 106computers and communications (C&C), 42The Condition of Postmodernity (Harvey), 221,
223
Congress, 126, 138, 139, 141, 144, 240Connerton, Paul, 257Connors, M., 41Constitution, 21, 74, 87, 116, 138, 139, 156,
203
contents of this reader, xxv–xxvi
governing new media, xxvmedia transitions, xxvpolitics of new media technologies, xxviproperties and commons, xxvtime and space in the age of information,
xxvi
The Consequences of Modernity (Giddens),
221, 223
Cook, Philip, 205Cook, Scott D.N., v, xiii, 2, 3, 11, 47Cooper, Geoﬀ, 250, 251Copyright in Historical Perspective (Patterson),
vi
Corliss, G.F ., 239Corliss Engine, 30, 36Cornwall, Ontario, 222Cossons, Neil, 168Coster, Laurens Janszoon, 12Couhghlin, Father, 76Crevier, D., 43Cronon, W ., 247Cuban, L., 49The Cult of Information (Roszak), xxiCunningham, S., 46Curll, Edmond, 67, 69Curtis, T., 41cyberocracy, 47cyberspace see information society
The Cycles of American History (Schlesinger),
188
Czitrom, D., 228, 229
Daguerre, Louis, 6
daguerrotype, 6, 7Darwin, Charles, 40Das Kapital (Marx), 238
312 INDEX
Davies, D., 41
Davis, S., 49Davy, Humphry, 166Day, J., 47, 52De Certeau, Michel, 176De Montebello, Phillipe, 166De T oqueville, Alexis, 21, 23, 205De Zengotita, T., xxivDebord, G., 213Délacote, Goéry, 170Deleuze, G., 165, 213Dent, H.S., 48Department of National Heritage, 167Dertouzos, M.L., 44Desurvire, E., 43Deutsch, David, 40Dewey, John, 205Diebold Institute, 50DiFazio, W ., 48digital audio technology (DAT), 133Digital Broadcasting and the Public Interest
(Firestone and Garmer), vi
Digital Copyright: Protecting Intellectual
Property on the Internet (Litman),vi
Discipline and Punish (Foucault), 178Disney, 34, 36, 103, 104, 192, 193Dole, Bob, 73, 191Donaldson, M.S., 51Dordick, H.S., 50Dowd, Charles, 240Drucker, P .F ., 41Du Gay, Paul, 250Duﬀy, N., 48Dupuy, G., 248Durlach, N.I., 42Dutton, Clarence, 33Dutton, W .H., 51The Dynamic Earth, Edinburgh, 167Dyson, E., 44, 47
e-mail, 43, 270, 272, 276
Easterbrook, Frank, 140Ebay, xxiiiEdison, Thomas, 225Edwards, P .N., xixElectronic Colonialism (McPhail), 193Ellis, H., 247Ellul, J., 45, 46Elster, John, 206The Emerging W orldwide Electronic University
(Dunn), 49
Empire State Building, 34The End of the Nation State (Ohmae), 50Engelberger, J.F ., 43English Utilitarians, 92Eriksen, Thomas Hylland, vii, xvi, 223, 272,
280
Estabrooks, M., 45, 46European Collaborative for Science, Industry
and T echnology Exhibitions(ECSITE), 171
expert systems, 43Exploratorium, San Francisco, 165, 169, 170,
171
extracts of the articles in this reader, viii–xvi
governing new media, x–xi
Broadcasting policy in the digital age
(Graham), x
Historicising obscenity law (Saunders,
Hunter and Williamson), x
The myths of encroaching global media
ownership (Compaine), xi
Policing the unthinkable (McChesney),
xi
From public sphere to cybernetic state
(Robins and Webster), xi
The tragedy of broadcast regulation
(Owen), x
media transitions, viii–x
The computational metaphor (Kelly), ixThe consumer’s sublime (Nye), ixNew comunications technology: a survey of
impacts and issues (Marien), ix–x
A shadow darkens (de Sola Pool), ixT echnological revolutions and the
Gutenberg Myth (Cook), viii
What is new media ? (Manovich), viii
politics of new media technologies, xiii–xiv
Abstraction/class (Wark), xivCitizens (Sunstein), xivOn interactivity (Barry), xiiiThree scenarios for the future of technology
and strong democracy (Barber), xiii
properties and commons, vii–xiii
Choosing metaphors (Littman), xiiCopyright in historical perspective
(Patterson), xii
Intellectual property and the liberal state
(Boyle), xiiINDEX 313
extracts of the articles in this reader – cont.
properties and commons – cont.
The promise for intellectual property in
cyberspace (Lessig), xiii
Why software should not have owners
(Stallman), xiii
time and space in the age of information,
xiv–xvi
On the move: technology, mobility, and the
mediation of social time and space
(Green), xv
Reﬂections on time, time-space compression
and technology in the nineteenthcentury (Stein), xv
Speed is contagious (Eriksen), xviT echnology and ideology: the case of the
telegraph (Carey), xiv–xv
Time and the internet (Lee and
Liebenau), xvi
Failla, A., 266, 267’Fairness Doctrine,’, 192, 194Falk, T., 244, 246Federal Communications Act:
(1934), 192, 194(1996), 191
Federal Communications Commission
(FCC), 19, 20, 21, 72, 73, 74, 75,76, 85, 86, 196
Feigenbaum, E.A., 49Financial Interest and Syndication Rule
(FISR), 76–77
Finlay, M., 48Firestone, Charles M., viFischer, Claude, 246, 248, 251Fishkin, James, 199Flaherty, D.H., 51Fogg, Phileas, 247Ford, Henry, 242Fordism, xxii, 221Forester, T., 46Foucault, M., xxvi, 166, 178Fowles, J., 46Fox News, 102, 109Frank, Barney, 73Frank, Robert, 205, 209, 210Frankfurter, Felix, 76Franklin, Benjamin, 203, 230Franks, A,W ., 166Free Software: Free Society, viFree Software Foundation (FSF), 157Freud, Sigmund, 39Frisby, David, 249Frissen, Valerie, 251Fuller, Buckminster, 41Fuller, Margaret, 33The Futurist (journal), 48Future Shock (T oﬄer), 46Futures (journal), 42
Galison, Peter, 165
Ganley, G.D., 47Gannett, 107Gannett, Rev. Ezra S., 228Garmer, Amy Korzick, viGates, Bill, 44, 45, 51Gateway Arch, 34Gelertner, D., 43Geller, Henry, 88General Time Convention, 240George III, King, 173Gergen, K.J., 45, 46Gibbs, D., 50Giddens, Anthony, 92, 94, 221, 223, 245,
250, 252, 263
The Giddens Reader (Cassell), 223Gilder, G., 42, 44, 45, 47Gilder’s Law, 273Gilmore, John, 63Gingrich, Newt, 47, 190Glastonbury, B., 44Gleick, J., 43Global Brain, 43global information utility, 42global village, 44The Globalization Reader (Lechner and Boli),
223
Gonzalez-Manet, E., 50Goodison, Sir Nicholas, 166, 167Google, xxiiiGore, Al, 190Gorton, I., 270Gould, Jay, 225Gouldner, A., 93, 94governing new media, 63–110
broadcasting, 64, 72–91
policy in the digital age, 79–91
citizenship, culture and community,
79–81
fragmentation of audiences, 81
314 INDEX
role of citizens, 79
socially responsibl television, 79–80television and commonality, 80
democracy and the mass media, 81–84
commercial broadcasting and
politics, 82
free speech and responsibility,
83–84
inﬂuence of common knowledge,
82–83
public service broadcasting, 82
policy suggestions, 88–90
legal background, 88need for institution, such as the
BBC, 88
public ﬁnance, 88
public interest moderators, 89web-based TV, 89
rule-based intervention, 85–88
censorship and choice, 87–88eﬀects olf technological change, 86necessary but not suﬃcient, 85public service broadcasting
provides quality, community anddemocracy, 87
regulation, 72–78
central planning not workable, 75–76Financial Interest and Syndication
Rule (FISR), 76–77
formal and political roles of Federal
Communications Commission(FCC), 72–76
internet and reasons for government
regulation, 77–78
Prime Time Access Rule (PTAR),
76–77
problems of digital television, 73Radio Act, 72T elecommunications Act (1996), 76,
78
censorship, 63–64control of the public sphere, 92–100
Age of Ignorance, 97Enlightenment faith in Reason, 93, 94history of information resources in the
political sector, 92–93
Information Revolution, 96, 97, 98meaning of propaganda, 95–96Scientiﬁc Management of politics, 93,
94, 95, 96, 97, 98global media ownership, 106–110
changes in ownership of media
organisations, 106
cultural bias of media critics, 110Internet eﬀect, large impact in small
ways, 108
more channels, more choice, more
owners, 107
restraint of the market, 109
only global media enterprise is News
Corporation, 109
publicly owned companies, 109
goverment control of cultural goods, 63obscenity law, 67–71
distinction between books and
photographs, 69
english translation for V enus dans le
cloitre, 68
pattern of historiography, 70–71precedents for action were Rex v. Sir
Charles Smedley (1663) andRegina v. Read (1707), 68
printer ﬁrst to be convicted in Rex v.
Curll (1727), 67–68
policing the thinkable, 101–105
commercial pressure on newsrooms, 102global commercial media system,
103–104
major corporations given frequencies,
103
newsrooms have been run by
professional journalists, 102
proﬁt over public service, 104–105recent changes to global media
industries, 101–102
governmentality, xxviGraham, Andrew, vi, x, 79, 104, 280Grand Canyon, 31, 32, 33Grant, Bob, 83, 84The Grand Canyon-the Hidden Secrets ( ﬁlm),
32
Great Western Railway, 246Great White Way, 31, 35Green, Nicola, vii, xv, 222, 249, 252, 280Green, Sarah, 258Greenwich Observatory, 240Gregory, Richard, 170, 171, 172Grundrisse (Marx), 238, 246Gutenberg, Johann, 12, 15Gutenberg Bible, 12, 13INDEX 315
Gutenberg Myth, 2, 11, 14, 15, 17, 18
Habermas, J., 93, 94
A Hacker Manifesto (Wark), 160Halal, W .E., 43, 49Haldane, J.B.S., 164Hall, E.T., 268Hamelink. C.J., 46Harasim, L.M., 44Hart, R.P ., 48Harvard University, 188Harvey, D., xxi, 221, 223, 244, 246, 252,
258
Hassan, Robert, iiiHawkins, A.J., 259Hawthorne, Nathaniel, 33Haywood, T., 45, 46Headrick, D.R., 248Heaton, J.A., 47Heim, M., 52Hein, Hilda, 169Heinrich, Natalie, 174Hill, E.J., 259Hiltz, S.R., 49Hines, A., 48Hobsbawm, E.J., 247, 248Hohfeld, Wesley, 120Hollerith T abulating Machine Company, 8Holmes, Oliver Wendell, 120Homo electronicus, 44Horner, V .M., 49Horrocks, R.J., 42Howard, A., 48Howe, Elias, 225Huber, Peter, 45Hudson, H.E., 50Hudson-Fulton Celebration (1909), 30The Human Use of Human Being: Cybernetics
and Society (Wiener), xx
Hunter, Ian, v, x, 63, 67, 280Hyde, H.M., 70
infobahn, 42, 58
infomedia age see information societyinformation and communication technology
(ICT), xxiii, 41, 159, 221
Information Revolution, 96, 97, 98information society, 25, 52, 53, 92, 98, 145,
175 see also infotech
beneﬁts, 45critics, 45enthusiasts, 44
information superhighway, 42information technology (IT), 42The Information Society (journal), viiinfotech, 44, 45, 47, 48, 49, 50, 52, 53, 56 see
also information society
Innis, Harold, 238Institut de Recherche et de Coordination
Acoustique/Musique (IRCAM),175
Institute of Contemporary Arts (ICA),
London, 170
integrated information environments, 42Integrated Services Digital Network, 42intelligent state see information societyInternational Business Machines Corporation
(IBM), 8
International Centre for Life, Newcastle, 167International Monetery Fund (IMF), xxiiiInternational Public Network, 44internet
and consumers, 204, 209, 210eﬀect, 108explosive growth, 42, 43government policy, 77–78security, 49and time, 266–271times of use, 254TV, 86
Internet Dreams (Cook), vThe Internet Challenge to T elevision (Owen), vIyengar, S., 48
Jacquard, J.M., 7
Janelle, D., 244, 246Jarratt, J., 48Jeﬀerson, Thomas, 137, 145, 198
Jihad versus McW orld (Barber), 193Johnson, Nicholas, 196Jones, M.G., 41, 51, 52
Kahin, B., 42, 43
Kaniss, P ., 47, 48Kant, Immanuel, 28, 30, 31, 36Kegan, P ., 45, 46Keller, J., 43Kelly, Kevin, v, ix, 3, 39, 52, 281Kennedy, J.L., 48Kennedy Space Center, 34
316 INDEX
Kern, S., 245, 246
Kernan, A., 46Keyworth, Jay, 47Kiesler, S., 48Kieve, J., 247Kimball, P ., 47Kingston, J.A., 49Klapp, O.E., 45Kline, D., 43Kling, R., 44knowledge society see information societyKnut’s Law, 273Kobrak, F ., 47Koch, T., 47Koelsch, F ., 41, 42, 45Kolko, J., xxiiKroker, A., 45, 46Kuhn, T., 2Kurtzman, J., 45, 46
La Géode (cinema), 176
La Villette, Cité des Sciences et de l’Industrie,
Paris, 165, 171, 174, 175, 176,177, 178
Lakanal, Joseph, 233LaMacchia, David, 154LaMay, C.L., 42, 47LaMendola, W ., 44Lande, N., 43Lanham, Richard, 49The Language of New Media (Manovich), v, 2Las Vegas, 34Lash, S., 249, 250, 252, 253Lasswell, Harold, 95Latman, Alan, 128Laudon, K.C., 42, 51Launch Pad at the Science Museum, 172Laurier, E., 259Law, John, 166Law, S.A., 48Lechner, F .J., 221, 223Lee, Heejin, vii, xvi, 222, 251, 254, 266, 268,
269, 271, 281
Leebaert, D., 42, 43Lefebvre, H., xxvLent, J.A., 50LeRoy Fibre Co., 120Lessig, Lawrence, vi, xiii, 112, 133, 281Letting Loose the Light (Steﬁk), 133Levy, S., 51Lewis, P .H., 48, 49Leyshon, A., 244Licklider, J.C.R., xx, xxi, xxiiiLiebenau, Jonathan, vii, xvi, 251, 254, 266,
281
Liebling, A.J., 109Liebowitz, J., 49Ling, R., 251, 255Linowes, D.F ., 51Lippman, Walter, 95, 96, 98Litman, Jessica, vi, 112, 123, 281Lloyd, P ., 48Lohr, K.N., 51Long, Huey, 76Louw, E., 48Luey, B., 47Lumière Cinématographie, 9Lundberg, O., 43Lyotard, Jean-Francois, 175, 180
MacLachlan, S.L., 43
Maes, P ., 43Makridakis, S., 42, 43Manovich, Lev, v, xiii, 1, 2, 5, 282Marconi, Guglielmo, 201Marien, Michael, ix, 3, 41, 282Markoﬀ, J., 43Marvin, C., 245Marx, Karl, 22, 40, 214, 238, 246Marx, Leo, 28, 51, 228Mason, R.O., 51Massachusetts General Court, 16Massachusetts Institute of T echnology
(MIT), xx
Massey, Doreen, 253, 259Masuda, Y ., 42, 44, 45Mattelart, A., 47Maverick, A., 229, 230Mavor, A.S., 42Mayer, Federico, 52Mayer-Kress, G., 43Mayo, J.S., 42, 43McChesney, Robert W ., vi, xi, 64, 101, 106,
282
The McGraw-Hill Encyclopedia of Science and
T echnology, 12, 18
McKay, C., 30McKibbon, B., 46McLuhan, M., 41, 44, 176, 189McLuhan, Marshal, 251
INDEX 317
McManus, M., 47
McNerney, W .J., 51McPhail, T.L., 193media transitions, 1–62
communications technology, 41–62
accelerated evolution, 52cities reshaped, 50consuming enhanced, 51culture of peace, 52democracy and governance, 47–48
cyberocracy, 47Magna Carta for the Knowledge Age,
47
Third Wave economy, 47
development potentials, 50
knowledge transfer by communication
satellites, 50
rural area networks, 50
education, 49
concern for shallow understanding, 49great potential for infotech, 49
erosion of nationalism, 50global culture, 49–50health care facilitated, 51information society, 41–46
critics, 45–46
concerns listed, 46general complaint of information
overload, 45
mainly social scientists and
humanists, 45
development, 41–42enthusiasts, 44–45
beneﬁts listed, 45enthusiasts named, 44–45mainly techno-leaders, 45
new and prospective technologies, 42–44
interrelated developments, 42–43merger of computers and
telecommunications, 42
requirement for public policies, 43–44
privacy invaded, 51
dossier society, 51
television, 46–47
arguments for and against, 46–47impact generally considered negative,
46
truth seeking, 51work, productivity and employment,
48–49four main problems, 48potential beneﬁts of infotech, 48
computational metaphor, 39–40
biological processes seen as computer
logic, 39
language of bits can explain the
behaviour of matter, 40
new metaphor as a form of universal
notation, 40
consumer’s sublime, 27–38
all senses are engaged in sublime
experiences, 29
and the atomic bomb, 33environmental threats to the Grand
Canyon, 31–32
and the Great White Way, 31Las Vegas, 34–36
exempliﬁes full development of the
consumer’s sublime, 34
intensiﬁcation of visitors experience,
36
legendary hotels, 35technology serves fantasy, 36
new technology domesticated by women,
28–29
obsolescence of new technology, 29search for the pleasure of a ’consumer’s
sublime,’, 31
some opposition to sudden technology
change, 30
sublime as preferred American
experience, 27–28
technological sublimes created by men,
28
free speech in the media, 2Kuhnian paradigm shift, 2language of new media, 1media-driven change, 1–2media revolutions, 2new media and freedom of speech, 19–26
communications policy, 24–25
availability of resources, 24–25boundary problems, 25deﬁnition of the domain, 24exercise of regulation, 25organization of access to resources,
25
electronic media regulation is the main
problem in having free speech,25–26318 INDEX
First Amendment to the American
Constitution, 19, 20, 21
modern electronic communications
more regulated than print, 20
problems of electronic transformation
are world-wide, 23–24
regulatory agencies not organized for
new developments, 23–24
right of people to communicate freely
may be in doubt, 19
separate domains of print, common
carrier and broadcasting, 20, 23
soft technological determinism, 22
traditional freedoms have been eroded,
21
technological revolutions, 11–18
Gutenberg Myth, 11–12, 17
eﬀects of mass distribution and
increasing literacy, 12
skepticism needed in understanding
new technologies, 17
traditional view, 11–12
Gutenberg revisited, 12–14
invention of moveable type, 12–13start of print revolution, 12–13use of parchment, 13
illiteracy and technology, 17–18
developing world has 40% illiteracy,
17
Gutenberg Myth misleading about the
spread of literacy, 18
technological revolutions depend on
multiple complex factors, 18
mass printing and mass society, 16–17
cheap paper made from wood pulp,
16
developments in printing, 16–17literacy 90% (1900), 17
paper and printing, 15–16
use of rags to make paper, 16
printing and mass illiteracy, 14–15
only 20% literacy (1650), 14social and political bases of the
printing revolution, 15
spread of philosophical ideas, 15use of moveable type technology, 14
what is new media, 5–10
computer media revolution, 5–6deﬁnitions of new media, 5how media became new, 6–9connection between cinematography
and computing, 8–9
connection of Jacquard loom and
Babbage Engine, 7
creation of a media synthesizer and
manipulator, 9
formation of IBM, 8start of motion pictures, 7–8
principles of new media, 9–10
diﬀerences between old and new
media, 10
numerical representation, 10
Mediated (de Zengotita), xxivMelbin, Murray, 242Merkle, Ralph, 133Metropolitan Museum, New Y ork, 166Michael, D.N., 47Michie, R.C., 245microprocessor peformance, 42Microsoft, 43, 44, 195, 274Miller, B.C., 228, 259Milton, John, 20Minoli, D., 43Minow, N.N., 42, 47Mirage Hotel, Las Vegas, 35MIT Media Lab, 45, 49Mitchell, W .J., 42, 50, 52Mitroﬀ, I.I., 48Molotch, Harvey L., 251Moore, Gordon, 273Moore, R.H., 48, 49Moore’s Law, 273Morris, Dick, 198Morrison, P ., 46Morrow, T.J., 48Morse, Samuel, 229Morton, M.S.S., 48Motion Picture Association of America
(MPAA), 77
Motwani, S., 270Mowshovitz, A., 48multimedia computing, 42Mumford, Lewis, 30, 97Murdoch, Rupert, 102, 103, 193
Naisbitt, J., 44, 45
National Art Collection Fund, 166National Convention, 233National Information Infrastructure, 42, 43,
44INDEX 319
National Lottery, 167
National Museum of Science and Industry,
London, 165
National Research Council (NRC), 44, 48Natural History Museum, 171Navarro, V ., 261, 265Negroponte, N., 43, 45, 266Netscape, 108network of networks, 42network society see information societyNeuman, S.B., 46new media theory, xvii–xxv
contemporary contexts, xviii–xxv
change in the 20th century, xixconjunction and computing, xx, xxicybernetics, xxeﬀects of the Cold War, xxhigh Fordism, xxiiman-computer symbiosis, xxnetwork society, xxiii–xxivnew media technologies, xxiv
and history, xvii–xviiimeaning of ’new,’, xviiselection of material, xviii
New Y ork Times, 16, 134, 272New Y ork World’s Fair (1939), 31, 34News Corporation, 104, 107, 109, 192Niagara Falls, 27, 301984 ( ﬁlm), 45
Noble, David, 225Nollet, Jean Antoine, 166Nowotney, H., 252, 263Nye, David E., v, ix, 2, 27, 282
O’Brien, R., 245
Obscene Publications Act:
(1857), 70(1959), 69
obscenity law, 67–71Oﬃce of T echnology Assessment, 49, 50,
51
Ogden, M.R., 47Omnimedia, 42On Pornography: Literature, Sexuality, and
Obscenity Law (Saunders, Hunter,and Williamson), v
O’Neill, J., 46Oppenheimer, Frank, 169, 171Orwell, George, 45Owen, Bruce M., vi, x, 64, 72, 282Packwood, Senator Bob, 19Palais de la Découverte, Paris, 169Paley, William S., 19Palmer, E.L., 47, 49Papert, S., 49Parker, R., 50Parris, H., 247A Passion for Democracy: American Essays
(Barber), vi
Patterson, D.A., xii, 42Patterson, Lyman Ray, vi, 112, 113Pelton, J.N., 43, 44, 45Penzias, A., 45, 48Perelman, L.J., 49Perkin, H., 246Perry, M., 262photonic lightwave transmission, 43Pickover, C.A., 51Political Machines: Governing a T echnological
Society (Barry), vi, 160
politics of new media technologies, 159–219
abstraction, 212–214
abstractions have to be explained, 213feared by all classes except hackers, 212hackers an abstract class which creates
the possibility of new things,213
history, abstraction and hackers, 213
citizens, 203–211
choices and circumstances, 204–205
beneﬁts of active citizens, 205existing practices can produce
unfreedom, 204–205
need for the right to free speech,
205
choices as citizens can be diﬀerent from
those as consumers, 203–204
consumption treadmill, 204, 209–210
consumer satisfaction is related mainly
to what neighbours have, notgeneral prosperity, 209
consumers frame of reference is set
socially, not individually, 209
despite increasing aﬄuence,
consumers are unlikely to behappier, 209–210
eﬀect of the Internet, 209–210example of 10 year old computer, 209
democracy and preferences, 210–211
consumers are not citizens, 211320 INDEX
limitless choice in communications
may not be in the interest if
citizenship, 211
democratic institutions and consumer
sovereignity, 207–208
puzzle of why citizens do not think as
consumers, 207
value of participation in collective
discussion, 208
limited options, 205–207
absence of demand is product of
deprivation, 206
foxes and sour grapes, 206importance of public forums, 207
peoples preferences come mainly from
social circumstances, 203
unanimity and majority rule, 208
diﬃculty of minority views, 208
class, 214–219
class struggle drives history into
abstraction, and abstraction intohistory, 216–217
dispossessed farmers become workers,
then are dispossessed again, 214,215
hacker class makes the diﬀerence,
216
pastoralist class and the agricultural
hack, 214
property becomes more abstract,
215–216
vectoralist class has replaced capital as
the exploiting class, 215
working class and property, 214
deﬁnition of politics, 159eﬀects of information and communication
technologies (ICT’s), 159–160
interactivity, 163–187
cyborg regime, 174–178
diﬀerent from the Beaubourg, 175interactive devices and technologies,
176
La Villette and culture of science,
174–178
questions about the eﬀectiveness of
interactive models, 177–178
empowerment, 169–174
criticism of the traditional science
museum, 172
cybernetics and art, 170democratic empowerment at the
Exploratorium, 169–171
diversity of new galleries, 173–174interactive science centres, 172interpassivity, 173perceptual experiments, 170
political anatomy, 178–180
interactivity less rigid than discipline,
178
signiﬁcance of interactivity, 179–180table of contrasts between discipline
and interactivity, 179
spirit and economy, 166–169
debate on interactivity in museums,
167
technological citizenship, 163–166
citizenship and science, 164interactivity and museum visitors, 166museum of science, 164–165responsibilities and public life, 163technology of interactivity, 164, 169
scenarios for the future of technology and
strong democracy, 188–202
increasing rates of change for human life,
188–189
Jeﬀersonian scenario,
196–198
civic communicative co-operative, 198educational potential of new
technology, 196
interactive capability, 196–197rebuilding community by technology,
196
televote experiments, 197
Pandora scenario
control by Governments, 194electronic bill of rights, 194–195potential for tyranny
control by Governments, 194
Pangloss scenario, 190–194
and cable networks, 192–193failure of the Qube system, 191’Fairness Doctrine’ abandoned, 192inequalities in information transfer,
193
upbeat and ahistorical, 190
relationship between technology and
democracy, 188–190, 201
technical changes can produce major
eﬀects, 190INDEX 321
politics of new media technologies – cont.
scenarios for the future of technology and
strong democracy – cont.
which democracy, 198–202
options for democracy and for
communications, 198–199
technology can help democracy if
programmed, 199–200
Polk, James K., 225
Pollack, A., 43Pool, Ithiel de Sola, v, ix, 2, 19, 63, 194, 251,
282
Popper, Sir Karl, 188Porter, A.L., 46Poster, Mark, 164, 180Postman, N., xxiii, 45, 46Power, Michael, 167Price, Derek de Solla, 12, 13, 14Prime Time Access Rule (PTAR), 76–77Privacy Protection Committee, 51ProCD v.Zeidenberg, 140The Production of Space (Lefebvre), xxvProgress and Freedom Foundation, 47properties and commons, 111–158
choosing metaphors, 123–132
contracting the fair use privilege,
128–129
copyright recently characterized as a
system of incentives, 125
evolution to a model for compensation,
124
original metaphor for copyright was quid
pro quo, 124
piracy, apparant expansion, 129–130repeal of the ﬁrst sales doctrine,
126–128
technological control needs legal backup,
127–128
today copyright is more a property with
control, 125–126
underlying principles of copyright law,
123
until 1970’s copyright was believed to be
not watertight by intention,124–125
copyright in historical perspective,
113–118
copyright is now a protection for the
work, not the publisher,115problem of rights between the author, the
publisher and the public,114–116
Stationers’ Company, 114, 116viewed as a legal concept, 113
copyright is a complex delicate matter,
117–118
information superhighway, 112intellectual property and the liberal state,
119–121
’bundle of rights’ of modern law, 120case of LeRoy Fibre Co., 120diﬃculties with intellectual property,
121
importance of the concept of property,
119
law changed to cover new media, 111new media seen as intellectual property,
subject to copyright law, 111
ownership of software, 154–158
advantages of free software, 157–158arguments used to enforce copyright by
Software Publishers Association,154–156
economics, 156exaggeration, 155–156name calling, 155
promise for intellectual property in
cyberspace, 133–153
anonymity that imperfection allows,
142–144
right tp read anonymously,
143–144
trusted systems depend on data,
142–143
choices, 144–145
anonymity, 145intellectual commons, 144
digital audio technology solution to
copying, 133
limits on the protection of property,
136–140
diﬀerence with intellectual property,
137–138
private law and public law, 136right of ’fair use,’, 139
network proposal by Steﬁk, 134private substitutes for public law,
140–142
better deal for authors, 141322 INDEX
code displaces the balance in
copyright law, 140
diﬀerent conceptions of ’fair use,’, 141
private law of contract displacing
copyright law, 140
problems that perfection makes, 144rights for users could be unbundled by
software, 133–134
trusted systems and copyright law, 135use of trusted systems, 134–135
Provenzo, E.F ., 52
Qube system, 191, 194
Quirk, John, 228
Radio Act, 72
Radio Act (1912), 72, 76Raine, L.P ., 48Rakow, L., 261Ramonet, I., 272Rand Corporation, 44Raphael, Adam, 97Ravetz, J.R., 42Redstone, Sumner, 103Rheingold, H., 45Rice, P .O., 49Rifkin, J., 48, 251Ritzer, G., 51Robertson, G., 70Robillard, J.A., 49Robins, Kevin, vi, xi, 46, 92, 283Robinson, D.C., 50Roe, D.B., 43Rogers, Richard, 175Rolph, C.H., 70Ronfeldt, D., 47Rose, Nikolas, 169Rosell, S.A., 47Rosenberg, R., 49Rossman, P ., 49Roszak, T., xxi, 45, 92Rousseau, Jean Jacques, 188, 189Royal Greenwich Observatory,
Herstmonceux, 171
Royal Institution, London, 170Russell, Bertrand, 188
Sale, K., 45, 46
Salomon, J.J., 50Sanders, B., 46Sardar, Z., 42Sarnoﬀ, David, 75Saunders, D., v, x, 63, 67, 281Scarr, R.W .A., 42Schaﬀer, Simon, 166Schement, J.R., 41Schepp, B., 48Schepp, D., 48Schiller, H.I., 47, 50Schivelbusch, W ., 229, 240, 246, 248Schlesinger, Arthur Jr., 188Schoof, H., 43Science Museum, London, 167, 168, 171,
172, 173
Scientiﬁc American (journal), 42Scientiﬁc Management, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98,
99
Sears, R.B., 232Sedley, Sir Charles, 68, 69Shamans, Software and Spleen (Boyle), 145Sheth, J.N., 51Shrader, W .K., 46Silverstone, Roger, 176Simmel, G., 249, 250Simon, H., 41Sims, N., 227Sisodia, R.S., 51Slaton, C.D., 47Slouka, M., 45, 46Smith, A., xxii, 47Smith, H.J., 51Smithsonian Air and Space Museum, 34Snider, J., 42, 47, 51Software and Spleens: Law and the Construction
of the Information Society (Boyle),vi
Software Publishers Association (SPA), 154Sony Walkman, 250Space Shuttle, 176–177Spring, Gardner, 228Sproull. L., 48Stallman, Richard, vi, xiii, 112, 154, 282Standage, T., 251Stationers’ Company, 114Statue of Liberty, 29, 30, 31, 33Steﬀens, Lincoln, 231Steﬁk, M., 133, 134, 140, 142Stein, Jeremy, vii, xv, xxiv, 222, 244, 248, 283Stephens, C., 48, 246Steward, B., 259
INDEX 323
Stock, G., 52
Stoll, C., 45, 46Stravinsky, Igor, 238Straw, Will, 165Sun Microsystems, 274Sunstein, Cass R., vii, xiv, 160, 203, 283SuperTube, 42, 47Sussman, V ., 42, 50
T albott, S.L., 45
T arr, J.A., 248T echnologies of Freedom (Pool), v, 2T echnology and Culture (journal), 225T elecommunications Act (1996), 76, 78T elecommunications Policy (journal), 3telecomputer, 42Third Wave civilization, 41, 42, 44, 47, 61 see
also information society
The Third W ave (T oﬄer), 44Thomas, G., 70, 171Thomas, Julian, iiiThompson, E.P ., 233, 234, 242, 251Thompson, R.L., 225, 227Thrift, N., 245, 246, 251, 253Tierney, J., 47Tiﬃn, J., 49Time and Society (journal), viitime and space in the age of information,
221–278
mobility and technology, 249–265
mobile temporality, 254–265
diﬀerent types of rhythm, 254rhythms of device use, 254–257
micro coordination, 255short text messaging (SMS),
255–256
social relationships, 257
rhythms of everyday life, 258–262
activities become time-based, 259always-availability, 258disadvantages of mobile tele-
working, 259
personalization of mobile devices,
261–262
security role, 260–261
rhythms of institutional change,
262–264
gains from mobile temporality,
263
for industry time is money, 262space, time and telecommunications
technologies, 251–254
experience of time ’intensifying,’, 252mobile devices and changes to urban
life, 251
power geometries in space-time
relations, 253
telephone as intruder in time and
space, 251
spaces and experiences of modern social
life, 249–251
car travel and mobile privatisation,
250
presence-availability, 250–251, 252technology needed for urban life, 249time measurement and travel,
249–250
shrinking world, 245–248
’annhilation of space and time,’, 246cultural eﬀects of new communications,
247
time-space compression in nineteenth
century, 245–246, 248
speed is contagious, 272–277
gains and losses tend to equal out,
273–274
changes with Macintosh, 273–274danger in complexity, 274Moore’s Law, Gilder’s Law and
Knut’s Law, 273
loss of context and understanding, 272technological change leads to side-
eﬀects, 275–277
audience fragmented with multiple
choices, 275
example of spectacles, 276simple TV channels integrated the
Norwegian audience, 275
time-saving technology has made time
scarce, 277
WAP phones epitomise everything fast,
272
technology and ideology, 225–243
importance of the telegraph, 222,
225–227
basis of ﬁrst industrial monopoly, 225nature of language, 222, 225–229start of the electrical industry, 226watershed in communication,
226–227324 INDEX
telegraph and ideas, 230–238
’cablese,’, 231–232
control of colonies, 232eﬀect of telegraph on arbitrage of
commodities, 235–236
futures contracts, 237language and journalism, 231route-mapping, 233telegraph caused separation of
transportation andcommunication, 233
time contracts changed by telegraphy,
236–237
uniform price systems, 238
telegraph and ideology, 227–230
monopoly capitalism, 227religion, 228–230
telegraph and time, 238–243
importance of the Sabbath and Sunday
newspapers, 242
proliferation of local time zones, 239standard time zones established,
240–241
time and computing, 242time set locally until arrival of railways,
239–240
time and the internet, 266–271
temporal dimensions of the internet,
268–270
accessible at all times, 268cycles, 270deadlines, 269duration, 268–269rhythms, 270sequence, 269temporal location, 269
time and computers, 266–268
automation of routine activities,
267
decision support technologies, 267electronic mail changes work rhythm,
266
global time zones, 266–268virtual reality technologies, 267
time-space
compression, 221, 222, 244, 245, 248,
252, 254
convergence, 244, 246, 254, 263distantiation, 221, 252, 254, 263
Time (magazine), 41, 47time-space concepts, 221, 222, 244, 245, 246,
248, 254, 263, 264
Time-Warner CNN, 192Times of the T echnoculture (Robins and
Webster), vi
Toﬄer, A., 41, 42, 44, 46, 47
Toﬄer, H., 42
T omlinson, 50T oulmin, S., xviiiT ownsend, A., 251, 252, 262Tschumi, Bernard, 174Tuman, M. C., 45Tunstall, Jeremy, 97Turing, Alan, 8Turner, T ed, 192, 193The T wilight of Sovereignty (Wriston), 50Tyack, D., 49Typper, Martin F ., 229T yranny of the Moment: Fast and Slow Time in
the Age of Information (Eriksen),vii, 223
ubiquitous computing/embodied reality, 42Ullman, Ellen, 258Understanding Media  (McLuhan), 44, 49
Universal Information Systems, 42, 43Universal Turing Machine, 8University of the World, 49Urry, J, 249, 250, 252, 253U.S.Supreme Court, 20, 76, 191
Vajda, S.A., 50
Valenti, Jack, 123Vandevelde, Kenneth, 119Venturi, R., 34V enus in the Cloister (Curll), 67, 69Very Large Scale integration, 42Viacom, 104, 106, 107Vinge, V ., 43Virilio, Paul, 176, 252, 263Virtual Geographics: Bodies, Space and
Relations (Stein), vii
virtual reality, 5, 35, 42, 267
erosion of reality, 52technology, 267, 280
Vivendi Universal, 103voice-access computers, 43
Wang, G., 50
WAP see wireless application protocolINDEX 325
Ware, W .H., 51
Wark, McKenzie, xiv, 160, 212Warner-Amex, 191, 194Warwick, D.R., 49Watson, Thomas J., 8Weaver, R.R., 51Weber, Max, 230websites, 206, 208, 209
amazon.com, 106compaine.com, 280freepress.net, 282manovich.net, 282opendemocracy.net, virealguide.com, 108republic.com, vii
Webster, Frank, vi, xi, 46, 92Weinstein, M.A., 45, 46Weiser, M., 42Weizer, N., 48Western Union, 225, 231, 247Wheeler, J., 39Whittle, Chris, 200Who Owns the Media? Competition and
Concentration in the Mass Media(Compaine), 106
Whole Earth (Kelly), vWicklein, John, 194Widmer, K., 70Wiebe, Robert, 239Wiener, N., xx, xxi, xxiii, 165Williams, Raymond, 250Williams Report (1979), 69Williamson, Dugald, v, x, 63, 67Wilson, L., 47, 233Wines, M., 47Winston, B., 45Wired (magazine), 45, 52, 274wireless application protocol (WAP), 272Wiring a Continent (Thompson), 225,
227
Woherem, E.E., 50World Bank, xxiiiWorld Wide Web, 42Wright, R., 47Wriston, Walter, 200
Yahoo!, xxiii
Yttri, B., 251, 255
Ziﬀ, 107
Ziporyn, T., 42, 51Zizek, Slavoj, 31, 173Zuse, Konrad, 9Zysman, G.I., 43
326 INDEX
www.openup.co.uk
The study of new media opens up some of the most fascinating issues in
contemporary culture: questions of ownership and control over informationand cultural goods; the changing experience of space and time; the politicalconsequences of new communication technologies; and the power of usersand consumers to disrupt established economic and business models. 
The New Media Theory Reader brings together key readings on new media –
what it is, where it came from, how it affects our lives, and how it is managed.
Using work from media studies, cultural history and cultural studies,economics, law, and politics, the essays encourage readers to pay closeattention to the ‘new’ in new media, as well as considering it as a historicalphenomenon. The Reader features a general introduction as well as an
editors’ introduction to each thematic section, and a useful summary of eachreading.
The New Media Theory Reader is an indispensable text for students on new
media, technology, sociology and media studies courses.
Essays by: Andrew Barry, Benjamin R. Barber, James Boyle, James Carey,
Benjamin Compaine, Noam Cook, Andrew Graham, Nicola Green,
Thomas Hylland Eriksen, Ian Hunter, Kevin Kelly, Heejin Lee, Lawrence Lessig,Jonathan Liebenau, Jessica Litman, Lev Manovich, Michael Marien,Robert W. McChesney, David E. Nye, Bruce M. Owen, Lyman Ray Patterson,Kevin Robins, Ithiel de Sola Pool, David Saunders, Richard Stallman,Jeremy Stein, Cass R. Sunstein, McKenzie Wark, Frank Webster,Dugald Williamson.
Robert Hassan is Senior Research Fellow in Media and Communications at
the Media and Communications Program, The University of Melbourne,
Australia. He is the author of The Chronoscopic Society (2003) and Media,
Politics and the Network Society (Open University Press, 2004). He is the editor
of the journal Time & Society .
Julian Thomas is Director of the Institute for Social Research at Swinburne
University, Australia and a Professorial Fellow in Media and Communications.He has written widely on the social and policy dimensions of new media.
Cover design Hybert Design •www.hybertdesign.com
THE NEW MEDIA
THEORY READER
THE NEW MEDIA THEORY READER
edited by
Robert Hassan &Julian Thomas
Hassan & Thomas (eds)
