STEPHEN RAMSAY
READING
MACHINES

Reading Machines
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   1 10/27/11   1:53 PM
Topics in The digiTal huManiTies
Humanities computing is redefining basic principles about research 
and publication. An influx of new, vibrant, and diverse communities of practitioners recognizes that computer applications are subject to continual innovation and reappraisal. This series publishes books that demonstrate the new questions, methods, and results arising in the digital humanities.
SerieS editorS
Susan SchreibmanRaymond C. Siemens
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   2 10/27/11   1:53 PM
Reading 
Machines
StePhen rAmSAY
univeRsiTy of illinois pRess
Urbana, Chicago, and Springfi  eld
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   3 10/27/11   1:54 PM
© 2011 by the Board of Trustees
of the University of IllinoisAll rights reserved
Manufactured in the United States of America
1 2 3 4 5 c p 5 4 3 2 1
∞
 This book is printed on acid-free paper.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Ramsay, Stephen.
Reading machines : toward an algorithmic criticism /  Stephen Ramsay.p. cm. — (Topics in the digital humanities)
Includes bibliographical references and index.isbn 978-0-252-03641-5 (cloth) — isbn 978-0-252-07820-0 (pbk.)1. Linguistic String Parser (Computer grammar)  
2. Discourse analysis—Data processing.  
3. Reading machines (Data processing equipment)  I. Title.p98.5.p38r36  2011
401'.41—dc22  2011006829
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   4 10/27/11   1:54 PM
For William and Mary Ramsay
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   5 10/27/11   1:54 PM
One no longer noticed the accidents of things but 
only the substance of the universe, and this is why we 
did not care whether the flawless surface was a liquid 
equilibrated according to eternal laws, or a diamond, 
impervious except under a light falling from above.
—Alfred Jarry, Exploits and Opinions 
of Dr. Faustroll, Pataphysician
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   6 10/27/11   1:54 PM
conTenTs
  Preconditions ix
 1 An Algorithmic Criticism  1
 2 Potential Literature  18
 3 Potential Readings  32
 4 The Turing Text  58
 5 ’Patacomputing  69
  Postconditions 83
  Notes 87
  Works Cited 91
  Index 95
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   7 10/27/11   1:54 PM
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   8 10/27/11   1:54 PM
pRecondi Tions
When Willard McCarty proposed that we “ask in the context of computing 
what can (and must) be known of our artefacts, how we know what we know 
about them and how new knowledge is made, ” he undoubtedly meant to lift 
our gaze above the merely practical matters suggested by the term “humani -
ties computing” (McCarty 1231). For to ask such questions “in the context of computing” is to suggest that computing belongs in the rarefied atmosphere 
of epistemology—that it is less a matter of doing (or allowing, or facilitating) 
this or that with the human record, and more a matter of providing an addi-
tional, and perhaps an uncommonly fertile, occasion for theoretical musing 
and contemplation. For McCarty, actual results are less important than the 
insights gained from the juxtaposition of mechanism and mind. The field can 
proudly and justly describe itself as “the quest for meaningful failure” (1232).
 Against this view stand those who regard computers in the humanities as 
providing a welcome relief from the radical skepticism of contemporary hu -
manistic thought. Here, after all, is a machine that not only gives answers but 
also demands them—a device that is wholly intolerant toward equivocation 
and uncertainty. In this view, the computer represents an emancipation from 
the ironic imprisonments of postmodern excess. Even without supposing 
that computation leads toward (or even begins with) objectivity, some see 
it as a way to get beyond the beached solipsism that characterizes modern 
discours  and toward its right and proper end in raison.  It is scientific method 
joined to humanistic inquiry. It is the dream of Descartes tempered by the 
dream of Leibniz.
 Computers are perhaps chief among those tools we routinely describe 
as “changing everything, ” and yet neither of the desiderata stated above are 
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   9 10/27/11   1:54 PM
x Preconditions
particularly startling when offered as descriptions of that change. Both try 
to dilate the revolution in terms of what is already familiar to us: the former, 
by installing computation within the context of present theoretical concerns; 
the latter, by claiming it for the partisans of older, surer methods. One tries 
to kick away the ladder; the other holds to it more firmly than ever. Eloquent expressions are to be found on either side. If, amid all the excitement that 
presently surrounds computing in the humanities, one still hears the two 
most dreaded of all academic judgments—“Is that all?” and “What does this 
have to do with us?”—it is undoubtedly because we have mostly chosen to 
describe ourselves either in terms that are meant to comfort the larger and 
older disciplines from which this new community of practice was formed, 
or to suggest that ours is too radical a break to be contained by them. Like 
all revolutions, digital humanities derives some of its kinetic energy from 
swinging between these two poles.
 This is a book about literary text analysis—a particular form of scholarly 
engagement within the much broader field of interests, concerns, and en -
deavors we now call digital humanities. But it is more fundamentally a book 
that tries to locate a hermeneutics at the boundary between mechanism 
and theory. The “algorithmic criticism” proposed here seeks, in the nar -
rowing forces of constraint embodied and instantiated in the strictures of programming, an analogue to the liberating potentialities of art. It proposes 
that we create tools—practical, instrumental, verifiable mechanisms—that 
enable critical engagement, interpretation, conversation, and contemplation. 
It proposes that we channel the heightened objectivity made possible by the 
machine into the cultivation of those heightened subjectivities necessary for 
critical work. The precise nature of scientific inquiry, well revised and reimagined in 
recent years by theorists and historians from a variety of disciplines, is well beyond the scope of this book. But for decades the dominant assumption 
within humanities computing—evident even in the most recent examples 
cited in these pages—has been that if the computer is to be useful to the 
humanist, its efficacy must necessarily lie in the aptness of the scientific meta -
phor for humanistic study. This work takes the contrary view and proposes that scientific method and metaphor (or, more precisely, the use of these no -
tions within the distorted epistemology we call “scientism”) is, for the most part, incompatible with the terms of humanistic endeavor. The dilation of 
algorithmic criticism begins, then, with a consideration of how that scientific 
method has been used and abused within humanities computing itself.
 Envisioning an alternative to the strictures of the scientific metaphor en-
tails reaching for other, more obviously humanistic models. Chapter 2 takes 
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   10 10/27/11   1:54 PM
 Preconditions xi
up this challenge by turning to the scientific imaginary as it appears in the 
realm of art. The variegated history of the querelle between art and science 
is, again, beyond the scope of the discussion offered here, but it will not be controversial to assert that art has very often sought either to parody science 
or to diminish its claims to truth. Within this important post-Romantic strain of critique, this work isolates another voice that has sought to find a 
common imaginative ground between art and science. The chapter begins 
with Alfred Jarry’s inauguration of the “science of ’Pataphysics” and ends 
with the literary refraction of Jarry’s Gedankenexperimenten in the work of 
the Oulipo. The latter, in which the terms of art and criticism are uniquely joined, informs algorithmic criticism’s emphasis on the liberating forces of 
(computationally enforced) constraint. I argue, moreover, that this important 
modernist genealogy points to the primacy of pattern as the basic herme-
neutical function that unites art, science, and criticism.
 Chapter 3 takes up the literary critical analogues to the poetics of con -
straint. The notion of “deformance” provides the critical framework for a discussion of conventional criticism as an activity dependent upon the no-
tions of constraint, procedure, and alternative formation. It is in this light 
that computationally enacted textual transformations reveal themselves most 
clearly as self-consciously extreme forms of those hermeneutical procedures 
found in all interpretative acts. Close analysis of several apparently diverse 
critical works—from readings of the I Ching  and Saussure’s anagrams to me -
dieval poetry and Shakespearean sonnets—reveals the essential deformative nature of critical reading.
 Programming, which algorithmic criticism reframes as the enactment 
of a critical reading strategy, undergirds all of these meditations. Chapter 4 
delves deeper into the terms of this variety of textual activity, in an attempt 
to unite the reductive calculus of computation to the broader act of critical 
narrative. Using the Turing test as a guide, I attempt to locate the theoreti-
cal components that would allow computer-assisted criticism to be situated 
within the broader context of literary study. These considerations make way 
for chapter 5, which surveys some of the newer text-analytical tools—claim-
ing them, unabashedly, as potential instruments of algorithmic criticism.
 I have many people to thank for countless hours of conversation, inspira-
tion, and insight—above all, Jerome McGann, Johanna Drucker, Willard McCarty, Martin Mueller, Mark Olsen, Geoffrey Rockwell, Stan Ruecker, 
Stéfan Sinclair, and John Unsworth, all of whom read drafts of these pages 
and whose conversation enlightened the path. Being in the company of these 
thoughtful and learned scholars did more than anything to bring this project 
to fruition. They will find their ideas deformed on every page.
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   11 10/27/11   1:54 PM
xii Preconditions
 Many thanks are also due to the members of the research groups with 
which I’ve been associated over the years, including the University of Virginia’s 
Institute for Advanced Technology in the Humanities, Virginia Center for 
Digital History, and Speculative Computing Lab; the Ivanhoe Working Group; 
the Text Analysis Developers Alliance; the University of Nebraska–Lincoln’s Center for Digital Research in the Humanities; and the MONK Project. I 
am deeply honored to have been a part of these extraordinary centers of 
activity. The dozens of scholars, engineers, digital humanists, media theo -
rists, and administrators I alias with this list have made the task of writing a book about the future they represent a pleasurable one. I am especially proud 
to have worked with Tanya Clement, Matt Kirschenbaum, Worthy Martin, 
Bethanie Nowviskie, Daniel Pitti, Ken Price, Brian Pytlik-Zillig, Sara Steger, 
Will Thomas, Kay Walter; my intrepid editors at the University of Illinois Press, 
Ray Siemens, Bill Regier, Susan Schreibman; and my copyeditor, Jill Hughes.
 I owe an enormous debt of thanks to my wife, June, who read this work 
to the point of memorization and suggested improvements with gentleness and care. My parents—to whom this work is lovingly dedicated—offered me 
a gift that in subtle ways informs this work at its core: never once did they 
ask me what I was going to do with it.
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   12 10/27/11   1:54 PM
 1 An Algorithmic critici Sm
Digital humanities, like most fields of scholarly inquiry, constituted itself 
through a long accretion of revolutionary insight, territorial rivalry, paradig -
matic rupture, and social convergence. But the field is unusual in that it has often pointed both to a founder and to a moment of creation. The founder 
is Roberto Busa, an Italian Jesuit priest who in the late 1940s undertook 
the production of an automatically generated concordance to the works of 
Thomas Aquinas using a computer. The founding moment was the creation 
of a radically transformed, reordered, disassembled, and reassembled version 
of one of the world’s most influential philosophies:
00596 in veniale peccatum non cadat; ut sic hoc verbum habemus non deter -
minatum, sed confusum praesens importet
-003(3SN)3.3.2.b.ex/56
00597 intellegit profectum scientiae christi quantum ad experientiam secundum 
novam conversionem ad sensibile praesens,-S 003(3SN)14.1.3e.ra4/4
00598 ita quot apprehenditur ut possibile adipisce, aprehenditur ut jam quo-
dammodo praesens: et ideo spec delectationem
-003(3SN)26.1.2.ra3/8
00599 operationibus: quia illud quod certudinaliter quasi praesens tenemus 
per intellectum, dicimur sentire, vel videre;
-003(3Sn)26.1.5.co/11 (Index 65129)
 Undertaking such transformations for the purpose of humanistic inquiry 
would eventually come to be called “text analysis, ” and in literary study, com -
putational text analysis has been used to study problems related to style and 
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   1 10/27/11   1:54 PM
2 chapter 1
authorship for nearly sixty years. As the field has matured, it has incorporated 
elements of some of the most advanced forms of technical endeavor, includ-
ing natural language processing, statistical computing, corpus linguistics, data 
mining, and artificial intelligence. It is easily the most quantitative approach 
to the study of literature, arguably the oldest form of digital literary study, and, in the opinion of many, the most scientific form of literary investigation.
 But “algorithmic criticism”— criticism  derived from algorithmic manipula -
tion of text—either does not exist or exists only in nascent form. The digital revolution, for all its wonders, has not penetrated the core activity of liter -
ary studies, which, despite numerous revolutions of a more epistemological nature, remains mostly concerned with the interpretative analysis of written 
cultural artifacts. Texts are browsed, searched, and disseminated by all but 
the most hardened Luddites in literary study, but seldom are they trans -
formed algorithmically as a means of gaining entry to the deliberately and self-consciously subjective act of critical interpretation. Even text analysis 
practitioners avoid bringing the hermeneutical freedom of criticism to the 
“outputted” text. Bold statements, strong readings, and broad generalizations 
(to say nothing of radical misreadings, anarchic accusations, and agonistic 
paratextual revolts) are rare, if not entirely absent from the literature of the 
field, where the emphasis is far more often placed on methodology and the 
limitations it imposes.
 It is perhaps not surprising that text analysis would begin this way. Busa’s 
own revolution was firmly rooted in the philological traditions to which modern criticism was largely a reaction. Reflecting on the creation of the 
Index  some forty years after the fact, Busa offered the following motivations:
I realized first that a philological and lexicographical inquiry into the verbal 
system of an author has to precede and prepare for a doctrinal interpretation of his works. Each writer expresses his conceptual system in and through his 
verbal system, with the consequence that the reader who masters this verbal 
system, using his own conceptual system, has to get an insight into the writer’s conceptual system. The reader should not simply attach to the words he reads the significance they have in his mind, but should try to find out what signifi-cance they had in the author’s mind. (“ Annals” 83)
Such ideas would not have seemed unusual to nineteenth-century biblical 
scholars, for whom meaning was something both knowable and recoverable 
through careful, scientific analysis of language, genre, textual recension, and 
historical context. Nor would it, with some rephrasing, have been a radical 
proposition either for Thomas himself or for the Dominican friars who pro -
duced the first concordance (to the Vulgate) in the thirteenth century. How -
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   2 10/27/11   1:54 PM
 An Algorithmic Criticism 3
ever, we do no injustice to Busa’s achievement in noting that the contemporary 
critical ethos regards Busa’s central methodological tenets as grossly naive. 
Modern criticism, increasingly skeptical of authorial intention as a normative 
principle and linguistic meaning as a stable entity, has largely abandoned the 
idea that we could ever keep from reading ourselves into the reading of an author and is no longer concerned with attempting to avoid this conundrum.
 But even in Busa’s highly conventional methodological project, with its 
atomized fragmentation of a divine text, we can discern the enormous lib-erating power of the computer. In the original formation of Thomas’s text, 
“presence” was a vague leitmotif. But on page 65,129 of the algorithmically 
transformed text, “presence” is that toward which every formation tends, 
the central feature of every utterance, and the pattern that orders all that 
surrounds it. We encounter “ut sic hoc” and “ut possibile, ” but the trans -
formed text does not permit us to complete those thoughts. Even Busa would have had to concede that the effect is not the immediate apprehension of 
knowledge, but instead what the Russian Formalists called ostranenie—the 
estrangement and defamiliarization of textuality. One might suppose that being able to see texts in such strange and unfamiliar ways would give such 
procedures an important place in the critical revolution the Russian Formal -
ists ignited—which is to say, the movement that ultimately gave rise to the hermeneutical philosophies that would supplant Busa’s own methodology.
 But text analysis would take a much more conservative path. Again and 
again in the literature of text analysis, we see a movement back toward the hermeneutics of Busa, with the analogy of science being put forth as the 
highest aspiration of digital literary study. For Roseanne Potter, writing in 
the late 1980s, “the principled use of technology and criticism” necessarily entailed criticism becoming “absolutely comfortable with scientific methods” 
(91–92). Her hope, shared by many in the field, was that the crossover might 
create a criticism “suffused with humanistic values, ” but there was never a 
suggestion that the “scientific methods” of algorithmic manipulation might 
need to establish comfort with the humanities. After all, it was the humanities 
that required deliverance from the bitter malady that had overtaken modern 
criticism: “In our own day, professors of literature indulge in what John Ellis 
(1974) somewhat mockingly called ‘wise eclecticism’—a general tendency to 
believe that if you can compose an interesting argument to support a posi-
tion, any well-argued assertion is as valid as the next one. A scientific literary 
criticism would not permit some of the most widespread of literary critical 
practices” (93). Those not openly engaged in the hermeneutics of “anything 
goes”—historicists old or new—were presented with the settling logic of 
truth and falsehood proposed by computational analysis:
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   3 10/27/11   1:54 PM
4 chapter 1
This is not to deny the historical, social, and cultural context of literature 
(Bakhtin, 1981), and of language itself (Halliday, 1978). Nor can one overlook the very rich and subtle elaborations of literary theory in the forty years since 
Barthes published Le degré zéro de l’écriture  (1953). In point of fact, most of 
these elaborations have the technical status of hypothesis, since they have not 
been confirmed empirically in terms of the data which they propose to de -
scribe—literary texts. This is where computer techniques and computer data come into their own. (Fortier 376)
Susan Hockey, in a book intended not only to survey the field of humani-
ties computing but also to “explain the intellectual rationale for electronic 
text technology in the humanities, ” later offered a vision of the role of the 
computer in literary study to which most contemporary text analysis prac-
titioners fully subscribe:
Computers can assist with the study of literature in a variety of ways, some 
more successful than others. .  . . Computer-based tools are especially good 
for comparative work, and here some simple statistical tools can help to rein-
force the interpretation of the material. These studies are particularly suitable 
for testing hypotheses or for verifying intuition. They can provide concrete evidence to support or refute hypotheses or interpretations which have in the past been based on human reading and the somewhat serendipitous noting of interesting features. (66)
It is not difficult to see why a contemporary criticism temperamentally and 
philosophically at peace with intuition and serendipity would choose to 
ignore the corrective tendencies of the computer against the deficiencies 
of “human reading. ” Text analysis arises to assist the critic, but only if the 
critic agrees to operate within the regime of scientific methodology with its 
“refutations” of hypotheses.
 Perhaps the boldest expression of these ideas comes from a 2008 editorial 
in the Boston Globe  titled “Measure for Measure. ” In it, literary critic Jonathan 
Gottschall describes the field of literary studies itself as “moribund, aimless, 
and increasingly irrelevant to the concerns not only of the ‘outside world, ’ 
but also to the world inside the ivory tower. ” The solution is one that even 
C. P . Snow would have found provocative:
I think there is a clear solution to this problem. Literary studies should become 
more like the sciences. Literature professors should apply science’s research methods, its theories, its statistical tools, and its insistence on hypothesis and 
proof. Instead of philosophical despair about the possibility of knowledge, 
they should embrace science’s spirit of intellectual optimism. If they do, liter -
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   4 10/27/11   1:54 PM
 An Algorithmic Criticism 5
ary studies can be transformed into a discipline in which real understanding 
of literature and the human experience builds up along with all of the words. This proposal may distress many of my colleagues, who may worry that 
adopting scientific methods would reduce literary study to a branch of the sci-ences. But if we are wise, we can admit that the sciences are doing many things better than we are, and gain from studying their successes, without abandoning the things that make literature special.
Gottschall offers no suggestions for how we might retain those things that 
make humanistic discourse itself “special. ” He admits to being not overly fond 
of what he presumes to be the main outlines of that discourse (the “beauty 
myth, ” the death of the author, the primacy of social and cultural influences 
in the constitution of identity, and the sexism of the Western canon), but 
his main concern is that such notions have become the unexamined ground 
truths of contemporary criticism. This in itself is hardly objectionable; it is 
difficult to imagine a healthy episteme that does not constantly question even 
its most cherished assumptions. But that these ideas were themselves the 
product of decades of humanistic reflection and debate, that they supplanted 
other ideas that had come to be regarded as similarly uncontroversial, and that 
they provide a powerful counterexample to the “philosophical despair about 
the possibility of knowledge” against which he inveighs seems not to lessen 
Gottschall’s faith in final answers. Only the methodologies of science and 
the rigor of computation can render unexamined assumptions “falsifiable. ”
 Even Franco Moretti, whose outlook on literary study is assuredly quite 
different from Gottschall’s, shows strong evidence of embracing this faith in the falsifiable: “I began this chapter by saying that quantitative data are 
useful because they are independent of interpretation; then, that they are 
challenging because they often demand an interpretation that transcends the 
quantitative realm; now, most radically, we see them falsify  existing theoreti -
cal explanations, and ask for a theory, not so much of ‘the’ novel, but of a 
whole family of novelistic forms.  A theory—of diversity” ( Graphs  30). Moretti 
is right to be excited about what he is doing. It is breathtaking to see his 
graphs, maps, and trees challenging accepted notions about the nineteenth-
century novel. But one wonders why it is necessary to speak of these insights 
as proceeding from that which is “independent of interpretation” and which 
leads to the “falsification” of ideas obtained through more conventional hu-
manistic means. It is as if everything under discussion is a rhetorical object 
except the “data. ” The data is presented to us—in all of these cases—not as 
something that is also in need of interpretation, but as Dr. Johnson’s stone 
hurtling through the space of our limited vision.
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   5 10/27/11   1:54 PM
6 chapter 1
 The procedure that Busa used to transform Thomas into an alternative text 
is, like most text-analytical procedures, algorithmic in the strictest sense. If 
science has repeatedly suggested itself as the most appropriate metaphor, it is 
undoubtedly because such algorithms are embedded in activities that appear 
to have the character of experiment. Busa, in the first instance, had formed an hypothesis concerning the importance of certain concepts in the work. 
He then sought to determine the parameters (in the form of suitable defini-
tions and abstractions) for an experiment that could adjudicate the viability 
of this hypothesis. The experiment moved through the target environment 
(the text) with the inexorability of a scientific instrument creating observ-
able effects at every turn. The observations were then used to confirm the 
hypothesis with which he began.
 Some literary-critical problems clearly find comfort within such a frame-
work. Authorship attribution, for example, seeks definitive answers to empirical questions concerning whether or not a work is by a particular 
author. Programs designed to adjudicate such questions can often be or -
ganized scientifically with hypotheses, control groups, validation routines, and reproducible methods. The same is true for any text analysis procedure 
that endeavors to expose the bare empirical facts of a text (often a necessary 
prelude to textual criticism and analytical bibliography). Hermeneutically, 
such investigations rely upon a variety of philosophical positivism in which 
the accumulation of verified, falsifiable facts forms the basis for interpretative 
judgment. In these particular discursive fields, the veracity of statements like 
“The tenth letter of The Federalist  was written by James Madison” or “The 
1597 quarto edition of Romeo and Juliet  is a memorial reconstruction” are 
understood to hinge more or less entirely on the support of concrete textual evidence. One might challenge the interpretation of the facts, or even the 
factual nature of the evidence, but from a rhetorical standpoint, facts are 
what permit or deny judgment.
 For most forms of critical endeavor, however, appeals to “the facts” prove 
far less useful. Consider, for example, Miriam Wallace’s discussion of sub-jectivity in Virginia Woolf’s novel The Waves:
In this essay I want to resituate The Waves as complexly formulating and re-
formulating subjectivity through its playful formal style and elision of cor -
poreal materiality. The Waves models an alternative subjectivity that exceeds 
the dominant (white, male, heterosexual) individual western subject through 
its stylistic usage of metaphor and metonymy. .  . . Focusing on the narrative 
construction of subjectivity reveals the pertinence of The Waves  for current 
feminist reconfigurations of the feminine subject. This focus links the novel’s visionary limitations to the historic moment of Modernism. (295–96)
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   6 10/27/11   1:54 PM
 An Algorithmic Criticism 7
Wallace frames her discourse as a “resituation” of Woolf ’s novel within 
several larger fields of critical discourse. This will presumably involve the 
marshaling of evidence and the annunciation of claims. It may even involve 
offering various “facts” in support of her conclusions. But hermeneutically, 
literary critical arguments of this sort do not stand in the same relation -
ship to facts, claims, and evidence as the more empirical forms of inquiry. 
There is no experiment that can verify the idea that Woolf’s “playful formal 
style” reformulates subjectivity or that her “elision of corporeal materiality” 
exceeds the dominant Western subject. There is no control group that can 
contain “current feminist reconfigurations. ” And surely there is no metric 
by which we may quantify “pertinence” either for Woolf or for the author’s 
own judgment.
 The hermeneutical implications of these absences invoke ancient suspicions 
toward rhetoric, and in particular, toward the rhetorical office of inventio:  the 
sophistic process of seeking truth through the dialectical interplay of trust, 
emotion, logic, and tradition, which has, since the seventeenth century, con -
tended with the promises of empiricism (Bold 543–44). In some sense, hu -
manistic discourse seems to lack methodology; it cannot describe the ground 
rules of engagement, the precise means of verification, or even the parameters 
of its subject matter. Y et as Gadamer pointed out in Truth and Method:
The hermeneutic phenomenon is basically not a problem of method at all. It 
is not concerned with a method of understanding by means of which texts are subjected to scientific investigation like all other objects of experience. It is not 
concerned primarily with amassing verified knowledge, such as would satisfy 
the methodological ideal of science—yet it too is concerned with knowledge and with truth. . . . But what kind of knowledge and what kind of truth? (544)
Gadamer’s question is not easily answered, but we may say that from a purely 
cultural standpoint, literary criticism operates at a register in which under -
standing, knowledge, and truth occur outside of the narrower denotative realm in which scientific statements are made. It is not merely the case that 
literary criticism is concerned with something other than the amassing of 
verified knowledge. Literary criticism operates within a hermeneutical frame -
work in which the specifically scientific meaning of fact, metric, verification, and evidence simply do not apply. The “facts” of Woolf—however we choose 
to construe this term—are not the principal objects of study in literary criti-
cism, and “evidence” stands as a metaphor for the delicate building blocks of 
rhetorical persuasion. We “measure” only to establish webs of interrelation 
and influence. “Verification” occurs in a social community of scholars whose 
agreement or disagreement is almost never put forth without qualification.
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   7 10/27/11   1:54 PM
8 chapter 1
 All of this leaves the project of text analysis in a difficult position. For even 
if we are willing to concede the general utility of computational methods 
for the project of humanistic inquiry, we must nonetheless contend with a 
fundamental disjunction between literary-critical method and computational 
method. The logic that underlies computation, though not scientific in the strict sense of the term, conforms easily to the methodologies of science. 
Computers are, as Hockey noted, good at counting, measuring, and (in a 
limited sense) verifying data, and we judge the tractability of data by the 
degree to which it can serve the requirements of these procedures. When it 
comes to literary criticism, however, we find that the “data” is almost entirely 
intractable from the standpoint of the computational rubric. Paper-based 
textual artifacts must either be transformed from a continuous field into 
some more quantized form (i.e., digitized), or accompanied, as in the case of 
markup, with an elaborate scaffolding by which the vagaries of continuity can 
be flattened and consistently recorded. We accept the compromises inherent 
in such transformations in order to reap the benefits of speed, automation, 
and scale that computational representations afford. But the situation is con -
siderably more complicated in the case of the analysis that is undertaken with these objects. Not a single statement in Wallace’s précis, and indeed very few 
of the statements one encounters in literary critical discourse, can be treated 
in this way. No extant computer can draw the conclusions that Wallace does 
by analyzing the links between “the novel’s visionary limitations” and “the 
historic moment of Modernism”—particularly since the Modernism being 
invoked here is not a matter of shifting consumer prices or birth statistics. 
Literary-critical interpretation is not just a qualitative matter; it is also an 
insistently subjective manner of engagement. Given the essential properties of computation, we might conclude that text 
analysis is precisely designed to frame literary-critical problems in terms of something analogous to consumer prices and birth statistics, and in general 
text analysis has chosen low-level linguistic phenomena as its primary object 
of study. Doing so would seem to demand that we assume the methodological 
posture of computational linguistics, with its (entirely appropriate) claims 
toward scientific rigor. According to this hermeneutical vision, text analysis 
is simply incapable of forming the sorts of conclusions that lie outside of a 
relatively narrow range of propositions.
 It is not at all uncommon to encounter explicit statements of such inter -
pretative limitation in text-analytical scholarship. John Burrows and D. H. Craig’s use of principal component analysis for comparing Romantic and 
Renaissance tragedy—a masterful work of text-analytical scholarship by any 
measure—is typical in how it commits itself to an essentially scientific vision 
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   8 10/27/11   1:54 PM
 An Algorithmic Criticism 9
of permissible conclusion. The goal of the study is to elucidate the stylistic 
differences between the two periods of drama—one widely considered to have 
produced some of the greatest works in English, and another that is almost 
universally regarded as one of the low points of English literary drama. They 
draw a number of conclusions from their use of sophisticated statistical clus -
tering methods, but in the end they confidently state that the sort of insight 
offered by George Steiner, who felt that the loss of a “redemptive worldview” 
had rendered Romantic tragedy an impossibility, is “well beyond the ambit 
of present computational stylistics” (Burrows and Craig 64).
 For an algorithmic criticism to emerge, it would have to come to a philo-
sophical decision concerning statements like these. But the question is less about agreement or disagreement, and more about a willingness to inquire 
into the hermeneutical foundations that make such statements seem neces-
sary. The computer is certainly incapable of offering “the shift to a redemp-
tive worldview” as a solution to the problem at hand; it is wholly incapable 
of inferring this from the data. But is it likewise the case that computational 
results—the data and visualizations that the computer generates when it seeks 
to quantize and measure textual phenomena—cannot be used to engage in 
the sort of discussion that might lead one to such a conclusion?
 It is useful to put the question this way, because in doing so we refocus 
the hermeneutical problem away from the nature and limits of computation (which is mostly a matter of methodology) and move it toward consider -
ation of the nature of the discourse in which text analysis bids participation. Burrows and Craig’s statement of limitation is valid if we consider compu-
tational stylistics to be essentially a scientific pursuit, because within this 
hermeneutical framework it makes sense to frame conclusions in terms of what the data “allows. ” But in literary criticism—and here I am thinking of 
ordinary “paper based” literary criticism—conclusions are evaluated not in 
terms of what propositions the data allows, but in terms of the nature and 
depth of the discussions that result. The scientist is right to say that the plural 
of anecdote is not data, but in literary criticism an abundance of anecdote is 
precisely what allows discussion and debate to move forward.
 Wallace’s essay concerns what many consider to be Virginia Woolf’s most 
experimental work. The novel consists of a series of monologues that trace the lives of six friends from early childhood to old age, with each monologue 
(beginning always with “Susan said” or “Bernard said”) telling the characters’ 
stories at seven distinct stages of their lives. They speak about different things 
and have different perspectives on the world, but they all speak in roughly the 
same manner, and do so from childhood to adulthood—employing, as one 
critic puts it, “the same kind of sentence rhythms and similar kinds of image 
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   9 10/27/11   1:54 PM
10 chapter 1
patterns” throughout (Rosenthal 144). Some critics have suggested that there 
are differences that lie along the axis of gender or along a rift separating the 
more social characters from the more solitary ones, but in the end one has 
the sense of an overall unity running against the perspectival conceit that 
frames the narrative. It is natural for a Modernist critic to pursue patterns of difference amid this 
apparent unity, in part because, as Wallace points out, subjectivity is a major concern for “the historic moment of Modernism. ” Are Woolf’s individuated 
characters to be understood as six sides of an individual consciousness (six 
modalities of an idealized Modernist self?), or are we meant to read against 
the fiction of unity that Woolf has created by having each of these modalities 
assume the same stylistic voice?
 It is tempting for the text analysis practitioner to view this as a problem 
to be solved—as if the question were rhetorically equivalent to “Who wrote Federalist  10?” The category error arises because we mistake questions about 
the properties of objects with questions about the phenomenal experience of observers. We may say that Woolf’s novel “is” something or that it “does” 
something, but what we mean to capture is some far less concrete interpreta -
tive possibility connected with the experience of reading. We may ask “What does it mean?” but in the context of critical discourse this is often an elliptical 
way of saying “Can I interpret (or read) it this way?”
 It is reasonable to imagine tools that can adjudicate questions about the 
properties of objects. Tools that can adjudicate the hermeneutical parameters of human reading experiences—tools that can tell you whether an interpreta -
tion is permissible—stretch considerably beyond the most ambitious fantasies of artificial intelligence. Calling computational tools “limited” because they cannot do this makes it sound as if they might one day evolve this capabil-
ity, but it is not clear that human intelligence can make this determination 
objectively or consistently. We read and interpret, and we urge others to 
accept our readings and interpretations. Were we to strike upon a reading 
or interpretation so unambiguous as to remove the hermeneutical questions 
that arise, we would cease to refer to the activity as reading and interpreta-
tion. That we might refer to such uncontested statements as “facts” hardly 
bespeaks their superiority over less certain judgments.
 If text analysis is to participate in literary critical endeavor in some manner 
beyond fact-checking, it must endeavor to assist the critic in the unfolding of interpretative possibilities. We might say that its purpose should be to 
generate further “evidence, ” though we do well to bracket the association 
that term holds in the context of less methodologically certain pursuits. The 
evidence we seek is not definitive, but suggestive of grander arguments and 
schemes. The “problem” (to bracket another term) with Woolf’s novel is that 
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   10 10/27/11   1:54 PM
 An Algorithmic Criticism 11
despite evidence of a unified style, one suspects that we can read and interpret 
it using a set of underlying distinctions. We can uncover those distinctions 
by reading carefully. We can also uncover them using a computer.
 It is possible—and indeed an easy matter—to use a computer to transform 
Woolf’s novel into lists of tokens in which each list represents the words spo -
ken by the characters ordered from most distinctive to least distinctive term. Tf – idf, one of the classic formulas from the field of information retrieval, 
endeavors to generate lists of distinctive terms for each document in a corpus. We might therefore conceive of Woolf’s novel as a “corpus” of separate docu -
ments (each speaker’s monologue representing a separate document), and use the formula to factor the presence of a word in a particular speaker’s vocabulary 
against the presence of that word in the other speakers’ vocabularies.
 Criticism drifts into the language of mathematics. Let tf equal the number 
of times a word occurs within a single document. So, for example, if the word “a” occurred 194 times in one of the monologues, the value of tf would 
be 194. A term frequency list is therefore the set of tf values for each term 
within that speaker’s vocabulary. Such lists are not without utility for certain 
applications, but they tend to follow patterns that are of limited usefulness 
for our purposes. Since the highest-frequency terms in a given document 
are almost always particles (“the” can account for as much as 7 percent of a 
corpus vocabulary), and the lower-frequency words are almost always single-
instance words (or “hapax legomena, ” as they are referred to in the field), we 
often end up with a list of words that is better at demonstrating the general properties of word distribution in a natural language than it is at showing 
us the distinctive vocabulary of an author.
 If, however, we modulate the term frequency based on how ubiquitous 
the term is in the overall set of speakers, we can diminish the importance of 
terms that occur widely in the other speakers (like particles) and raise the 
importance of terms that are peculiar to a speaker. Tf – idf accomplishes this 
using the notion of an inverse document frequency:
Let N equal the total number of documents and let df equal the number of 
documents in which the target term appears. We have six speakers. If the 
term occurs only in one speaker, we multiply tf by six over one; if it occurs 
in all speakers, we multiply it by six over six. Thus, a word that occurs 194 times, but in all documents, is multiplied by a factor of one (six over six). 
A word that occurs in one document, but nowhere else, is multiplied by a 
factor of six (six over one).
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   11 10/27/11   1:54 PM
12 chapter 1
 Here are the first twenty-five lines of output from a program designed to 
apply the tf – idf formula to the character of Louis:1
Weight Term Weight Term
5.917438 mr
5.7286577 western
5.5176187 nile
5.0021615 australian
5.0021615 beast
5.0021615 grained
5.0021615 thou
5.0021615 wilt
4.675485 pitchers
4.675485 steel
4.2756658 attempt
4.2756658 average
4.2756658 clerks4.2756658 disorder
3.9164972 accent
3.7602086 beaten
3.7602086 bobbing
3.7602086 custard
3.7602086 discord
3.7602086 eating-shop
3.7602086 england
3.7602086 eyres
3.7602086 four-thirty
3.7602086 ham
3.7602086 lesson
Few readers of The Waves  would fail to see some emergence of pattern in this 
list. Many have noted that Louis seems obsessed with Egypt and the Nile. The 
list indicates that such terms are indeed distinctive to Louis, but the second 
most distinctive term in his vocabulary is the word “western. ” Louis is also 
very conscious of his accent and his nationality (he is Australian; all the other 
characters are English), and yet the fact that “accent” is a distinctive term 
for Louis would seem to indicate that the other characters aren’t similarly 
concerned with the way he talks. Further analysis revealed that only one 
other character (Neville) mentions it. Louis is likewise the only character in 
the novel to speak of “England. ”
 This list is a paratext that now stands alongside the other, impressing itself 
upon it and upon our own sense of what is meaningful. Does this “western” stand against Louis’s “east”? Returning to the text, but with our focus narrowed 
and reframed, we discover that Louis’s fondness for the words “western, ” “wilt, ” 
and “thou” comes from his repetition of a famous sixteenth-century poem: 
“Western wind, when wilt thou blow? / The small rain down can rain. / Christ, 
if my love were in my arms, / And I in my bed again” ( Waves  203). Woolf quotes 
the poem again in the nearly contemporaneous second series of The Common 
Reader  (“How Should One Read a Book?”), noting, “Who when they read these 
four lines stops to ask who wrote them, or conjures up the thought of Donne’s house or Sidney’s secretary; or enmeshes them in the intricacy of the past and 
the succession of generations? The poet is always our contemporary” (265).
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   12 10/27/11   1:54 PM
 An Algorithmic Criticism 13
 Similar convergences appear in the other lists (see above). For Jinny, whose 
relationships with men form the liminal background of her narrative, words 
like “billowing” (a sexually charged word almost always used in reference to 
her skirts), “fiery, ” “victory, ” and “dazzle” appear in the top twenty-five. For 
Bernard, the aspiring novelist who some say is modeled on Woolf herself, the 
top word is “thinks. ” Susan becomes a housewife and frequently invokes the 
virtues of a pastoral life in the country; nearly every word in her vocabulary 
seems directly related to the domestic. For Neville, the brilliant unrequited 
lover of Percival (a mutual friend of all the characters who dies while serving 
in India), the word “doomed” is in second place.
 We might begin to wonder how vocabulary plays out along the gender 
axis. For example, we might modify the tf – idf program so that it gives us 
lists of words that are spoken (but shared) only by the women in the novel 
and another that lists words spoken only by the men. When we do that, we 
find that the women possess fourteen words in common: Bernard Louis Neville
thinks rabbit mr clerks catullus loads
letter tick western disorder doomed mallet
curiosity tooth nile accent immitigable marvel
moffat arrive australian beaten papers shoots
final bandaged beast bobbing bookcase squirting
important bowled grained custard bored waits
low brushed thou discord camel stair
simple buzzing wilt eating-shop detect abject
canopy complex pitchers england expose admirable
getting concrete steel eyres hubbub ajax
hoot deeply attempt four-thirty incredible aloud
hums detachment average ham lack bath
 Jinny Rhoda Susan
tunnel cabinet oblong immune setter cabbages
prepared coach dips many-backed washing carbolic
melancholy crag bunch minnows apron clara
billowing dazzle fuller pond pear cow
fiery deftly moonlight structure seasons cradle
game equipped party wonder squirrel eggs
native eyebrows them— tiger window-pane ernest
peers felled allowed swallow kitchen hams
quicker frightened cliffs africa baby hare
victory gaze empress amorous betty lettuce
band jump fleet attitude bitten locked
banners lockets garland bow boil maids
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   13 10/27/11   1:54 PM
14 chapter 1
shoes lambert million pirouetting antlers
bowl breath coarse cotton diamonds
rushes soften stockings wash
The men have ninety words in common:
boys possible ends church sentences
everybody larpent tortures feeling office
united felt rhythm weep heights
wheel able however banker accepted
hundred brisbane act included ourselves
alas inflict poetry approach irrelevant
power background knew arms baker
language destiny banks latin letters
became meeting lord block neat
poet board novel reason brake
observe respect burnt oppose telephone
central pointing waistcoat certainly sensations
beak chose sheer chaos cinders
story difficult clamour suffering endure
course torture forgotten crucifix troubling
friend distinctions use god distracted
waste king doctor watched notice
ease willows ordinary edges works
These are provocative results, but the provocation is as much about our sense 
of what we are doing (the hermeneutical question) as it is about how we are 
doing it (the methodological question).
 We might want to say that the purpose of these procedures is to confirm 
or deny the “serendipitous reading” of literary critics. Is Louis obsessed with his accent? Yes; the data confirms that he is. Critics who have argued for a 
deep structure of difference among the characters—one perhaps aligned 
along the gender axis—might also feel as if the program vindicates their 
impressions. Is there a gender divide? Yes; the characters are divided along 
the gender axis by a factor of 6.4285 to 1.
 To level such arguments, however, is to turn the hermeneutical question 
back into a methodological one. To speak of the procedure as “verifying” some other finding is to beg questions of the procedure itself. And here, we 
are on somewhat shaky ground. The formula tf – idf “works” in the context 
of information retrieval because it appears to match our general expecta -
tions. When we undertake a search for the term “baseball” with a search 
engine, we want to rule out passing references in favor of documents that 
are substantially about this topic. If we get back relevant hits, we could say 
that the tf – idf formula has done its job. In the case of Woolf, we might say 
that we are getting back results that conform to our general expectations of what distinguishes the characters. But tf – idf itself has no more claim to 
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   14 10/27/11   1:54 PM
 An Algorithmic Criticism 15
truth value than any ordinary reading procedure. Manning and Schütze, in 
their magisterial work on statistical natural language processing, note that 
the “the family of [tf – idf] weighting schemes is sometimes criticized because 
it is not directly derived from a mathematical model of term distribution or relevancy” (544). The full version of the formula (the one used to generate the results above) includes a log function and an addition:
The main purpose of these additions is not to bring the results into closer 
conformity with “reality, ” but merely to render the weighting numbers more 
sensible to the analyst. The logarithm dampens the function so that one term 
isn’t a full six times more important than another; the +1 keeps the end of 
the curve from trailing off into negative territory.
 Some text-analytical procedures do rely on empirical facts about language 
(or on statistical and mathematical laws in general). But even when they do, we often find ourselves unable to point to the truth of the procedure as the 
basis for judgment. We might say that this is because literary criticism is in-
sufficiently scientific. We might even long for a “scientific literary criticism. ” 
We would do better to recognize that a scientific literary criticism would 
cease to be criticism.
 It is no longer controversial to point out that science involves interpreta-
tion, rhetoric, social construction, and politics—as if this exposure of science’s hidden humanism could somehow discredit the achievements of one of the 
world’s greatest epistemological tools. No serious scientist could ever deny that interpretation, disagreement, and debate is at the core of the scientific 
method. But science differs significantly from the humanities in that it seeks 
singular answers to the problems under discussion. However far ranging a 
scientific debate might be, however varied the interpretations being offered, 
the assumption remains that there is a singular answer (or a singular set of 
answers) to the question at hand. Literary criticism has no such assumption. 
In the humanities the fecundity of any particular discussion is often judged 
precisely by the degree to which it offers ramified solutions to the problem at 
hand. We are not trying to solve Woolf. We are trying to ensure that discus-
sion of The Waves continues.
 Critics often use the word “pattern” to describe what they’re putting forth, 
and that word aptly connotes the fundamental nature of the data upon which literary insight relies. The understanding promised by the critical act arises 
not from a presentation of facts, but from the elaboration of a gestalt, and it 
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   15 10/27/11   1:54 PM
16 chapter 1
rightfully includes the vague reference, the conjectured similitude, the ironic 
twist, and the dramatic turn. In the spirit of inventio,  the critic freely employs 
the rhetorical tactics of conjecture—not so that a given matter might be definitely settled, but in order that the matter might become richer, deeper, 
and ever more complicated. The proper response to the conundrum posed by Steiner’s “redemptive worldview” is not the scientific imperative toward 
verification and falsification, but the humanistic propensity toward disagree -
ment and elaboration. If algorithmic criticism is to have a central hermeneutical tenet, it is this: 
that the narrowing constraints of computational logic—the irreducible ten-dency of the computer toward enumeration, measurement, and verification—
is fully compatible with the goals of criticism set forth above. For while it is 
possible, and in some cases useful, to confine algorithmic procedures to the 
scientific realm, such procedures can be made to conform to the method-
ological project of inventio without transforming the nature of computation 
or limiting the rhetorical range of critical inquiry. This is possible because critical reading practices already contain elements of the algorithmic.
 Any reading of a text that is not a recapitulation of that text relies on a 
heuristic of radical transformation. The critic who endeavors to put forth a “reading” puts forth not the text, but a new text in which the data has been 
paraphrased, elaborated, selected, truncated, and transduced. This basic prop -
erty of critical methodology is evident not only in the act of “close reading” but also in the more ambitious project of thematic exegesis. In the classroom 
one encounters the professor instructing his or her students to turn to page 
254, and then to page 16, and finally to page 400. They are told to consider 
just the male characters, or just the female ones, or to pay attention to the adjectives, the rhyme scheme, images of water, or the moment in which Nora 
Helmer confronts her husband. The interpreter will set a novel against the 
background of the Jacobite Rebellion, or a play amid the historical location 
of the theater. He or she will view the text through the lens of Marxism, or 
psychoanalysis, or existentialism, or postmodernism. In every case, what is 
being read is not the “original” text, but a text transformed and transduced 
into an alternative vision, in which, as Wittgenstein put it, we “see an aspect” 
that further enables discussion and debate.
 It is not that such matters as redemptive worldviews and Marxist read -
ings of texts can be arrived at algorithmically, but simply that algorithmic transformation can provide the alternative visions that give rise to such 
readings. The computer does this in a particularly useful way by carrying 
out transformations in a rigidly holistic manner. It is one thing to notice 
patterns of vocabulary, variations in line length, or images of darkness and 
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   16 10/27/11   1:54 PM
 An Algorithmic Criticism 17
light; it is another thing to employ a machine that can unerringly discover 
every instance of such features across a massive corpus of literary texts and 
then present those features in a visual format entirely foreign to the original 
organization in which these features appear. Or rather, it is the same thing at 
a different scale and with expanded powers of observation. It is in such results that the critic seeks not facts, but patterns. And from pattern the critic may 
move to the grander rhetorical formations that constitute critical reading.
 It might still make sense to speak of certain matters being “beyond the 
ambit of present computational stylistics. ” Research in text analysis continues to seek new ways to isolate features and present novel forms of organiza -
tion. But the ambit of these ways and forms need not be constrained by a hermeneutics that disallows the connotative and analogical methods of 
criticism. Algorithmic criticism would have to retain the commitment to 
methodological rigor demanded by its tools, but the emphasis would be 
less on maintaining a correspondence or a fitness between method and goal 
and more on the need to present methods in a fully transparent manner. It 
would not be averse to the idea of reproducibility, but it would perhaps be 
even more committed to the notion of “hackability. ” For just as one might 
undertake a feminist reading of a text by transporting a set of heuristics from 
one critical context to another, so might the algorithmic critic undertake a 
particular type of reading by transforming a procedure that has been defined 
in terms of that most modern text, the computer program.
 Algorithmic criticism undoubtedly requires a revolution of sorts, but that 
revolution is not one of new procedures and methods in contradistinction to the old ones. Algorithmic criticism seeks a new kind of audience for text 
analysis—one that is less concerned with fitness of method and the determina -
tion of interpretative boundaries, and one more concerned with evaluating the 
robustness of the discussion that a particular procedure annunciates. Such an 
audience exists, of course, and has existed for the better part of a century in 
the general community of literary critics from which text analysis has often 
found itself exiled. For this reason, text analysis practitioners should view the 
possibility of such a revolution as both welcome and liberating—not a critique 
of their methods, but a bold vote of confidence in the possibilities they hold.
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   17 10/27/11   1:54 PM
	2 Potenti Al literAture
The word “algorithm” is an odd neologism. Most scholars now believe that 
the word relates back to the word “algorism, ” which is in turn a corruption 
of the name of the Persian mathematician al-Kwārizmī from whose book, 
Kitāb al-jabr wa’l-muq ābala (“Rules for Restoring and Equating”), we get 
the word “algebra” (Knuth 1). Throughout its varied history, the term has more or less always borne the connotation of a method for solving some 
problem, and, as the early slide from sibilant to aspirate would imply, that 
problem was most often considered mathematical in nature. During the 
twentieth century, however, the word “algorithm” came to be associated with 
computers—a step-by-step method for solving a problem using a machine. 
To speak of algorithms is therefore usually to speak of unerring processes 
and irrefragable answers.
 If computational methods are to be useful in the context of literary study, 
however, we must consider the use of algorithms loosed from the strictures of the irrefragable and explore the possibilities of a science that can operate 
outside of the confines of the denotative. Historically, such ventures have 
been viewed with deep distrust:
The rise of scientific logic seems, indeed, to have had the effect of pushing 
back the ever-encroaching forces of dialectical invention into the margins of charlatanism and mental tricks. Descartes’s position was clear: he insisted on 
clarity against quackery. .  . . In the new scientific age, rhetoric’s calculating 
genius seemed antithetical to the search for truth. Rhetoric’s technologies were 
too random, its underlying ethos too inauthentic and artificial to contribute to a reliable description of man and the world. (Bold 544)
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   18 10/27/11   1:54 PM
 Potential Literature 19
The Cartesian legacy, in addition to valorizing science as the sine qua non 
of human inquiry, had the additional effect of validating the Athenian sen-
ate’s perception of philosophy as “making the weaker argument defeat the 
stronger” (Plato 5). Today, “rhetoric has been shown to be at the basis of what 
is called scientific ‘method’ in all but the Cartesian sense of the word, ” and yet the separation of these two faculties has persisted, and the trace of this 
once bitter opposition maintained (Bold 544).
 The reverberations of this divergence are evident in the computing hu -
manist’s ironic distrust of inventions borne of algorithmic processes. Few commentators, in fact, have been able to resist framing the movement from 
data to interpretation as one fraught with peril. Hugh Craig, an expert in 
stylometry and authorship attribution, is unusually candid in an assessment 
that bears the subtitle, “If You Can Tell Authors Apart, Have You Learned 
Anything about Them?”
The leap from frequencies to meanings must always be a risky one. The inter -
preter who is tempted to speculate about the world-view or psychology of a 
writer, based on quantitative findings, presents an easy target for dismissive 
critique (Fish, 1973). On the other hand, staying within the safe confines of the 
statistical results themselves means that one is soon left with only banalities or tautologies. Lower-level features are easy to count but impossible to interpret in terms of style; counting images or other high-level structures brings problems of excessive intervention at the categorization stage, and thus unreliability and 
circularity (Van Peer, 1989). (Craig 103–4)
Thus “quantitative findings” emerge, under the cultural burden of science, 
as entirely opposed to the imaginative work of speculation and intervention. 
The age-old charges against inventio  reemerge. Without grounding in the 
language game of denotation, we risk the “circular reasoning” of a discourse that grounds itself in further discourse—the “unreliability” of a claim that 
has nothing to recommend it but its rhetorical power to persuade. Larger 
debates are aliased through Craig’s ingenuous observations about risk, and 
those debates largely ignore the conundrum he identifies. C. P . Snow’s 1959 
Rede Lecture, “The Two Cultures and Scientific Revolution”—often cited as 
having put forth the essential terms of the debate between science and the 
humanities—figures the dichotomy as a kind of misunderstanding. If literary 
intellectuals (whom Snow refers to as “natural Luddites”) would learn more 
about science and scientists would learn more about “imaginative experi -
ence, ” we would not only enrich the episteme of academic culture, but we would also go further toward communicating the meaning of that culture 
to the larger world (23). But what to do with a scholar like Craig, who is as-
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   19 10/27/11   1:54 PM
20 chapter 2
suredly not a Luddite, and who can lay claim to having both methodologies 
well in hand?
 To the degree that algorithmic criticism tries to enter this debate, it does 
so by considering a third culture that is at once the product of both scientific and artistic investigation and has subtly suffused both cultures since the turn of the twentieth century. It begins with the “’pataphysics” of Alfred Jarry, and 
in particular with that extraordinary “neo-scientific” novel Gestes et opinions 
du docteur Faustroll, pataphysicien, in which the science of “imaginary solu-tions” is put forth.
 Faustroll  is by any measure a baffling and inscrutable work. Its conventional 
status as the ur-text of Absurdism might indeed tempt us to seek no meaning in it beyond the philosophical implications of its emphatic rejection of real-
istic portrayals and narrative forms. It describes a journey, but one that takes 
the main character “from Paris to Paris by Sea” (Jarry 177); characters die, 
but only “provisionally”; there are dialogues, but one character is incapable 
of saying anything other than “Ha ha”; there are epistolary passages, but the 
letters are delivered telepathically; proofs are offered, but they establish God 
as “the tangential point between zero and infinity” (256). In the context of this 
beguiling tale, the declaration of a new science would seem, at best, satirical. 
This view, however, obscures the seriousness of the intellectual provocation 
that lies at the center of Faustroll: the illumination of a philosophical point 
of intersection between scientific and imaginative endeavor. More than three-quarters of the novel is framed as a dunning letter writ-
ten by Rene-Isidore Panmuphle, bailiff. We are to understand, though the sense of this context is quickly obscured, that most of the novel is a narrative 
appended to a “summons Pursuant to Article 819, ” duly sealed as an “official paper” of a law court:
I, the undersigned, Rene-Isidore Panmuphle, Bailiff attached to the Civil Court 
of First Instance of the Department of Seine, in session at Paris, residing in said City, 37, rue Pavee, Do hereby summon in the name of the law and of justice , 
Monsieur Faustroll, doctor, tenant of various premises dependent upon the house aforementioned, residing at Paris, 100 bis, rue Richer, and having pro-ceeded to the aforementioned house, bearing upon its exterior the number 100, and having rung, knocked, and called the aforementioned variously and suc-cessively, no person having opened the door to us, and the next door neighbors 
declaring to us that this is indeed the residence of said M. Faustroll. (Jarry 182)
1
Faustroll  thus begins in the realm of the denotative—nearly two pages of 
introductory clauses appended to the phrase “he shall be constrained thereto” 
(182). With such legalese, Jarry illustrates the poverty that language assumes 
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   20 10/27/11   1:54 PM
 Potential Literature 21
when strained to the breaking point of an unattainable precision. Immediately 
following this farcical attempt to constrain the possibilities of language, Pan -
muphle discovers in Faustroll’s apartment twenty-seven “equivalent books” ranging from Coleridge’s The Rime of the Ancient Mariner  to The Gospel 
According to St. Luke (in Greek). The language of restriction gives way to a 
vision of language so permeated with possibility that one may argue (as Jarry 
does) that texts as apparently disparate as those enumerated might be recast 
as versions of the same underlying narrative.
 The journey that ensues is not so much from place to place as from text to 
text—or, more accurately, a journey from place to place where the places are Jarry’s transformations of textual/imaginative space into geographical space 
(Stillman, Alfred Jarry  22). Such swings, from the imaginative possibilities of 
the literal to the literal possibilities of the imaginative, characterize the general movement of the novel. In the midst of these surreal imaginings, however, 
Faustroll breaks in with a moment of extreme clarity—the enunciation of 
the new science of ’pataphysics:
definition. ’Pataphysics is the science of imaginary solutions, which symboli-
cally attributes the properties of objects, described by their virtuality, to their lineaments.
 Contemporary science is founded upon the principle of induction: most 
people have seen a certain phenomenon precede or follow some other phe -
nomenon most often, and conclude therefrom that it will ever be thus. Apart 
from other considerations, this is true only in the majority of cases, depends upon the point of view, and is codified only for convenience—if that! Instead of 
formulating the law of the fall of a body toward a center, how far more apposite 
would be the law of the ascension of a vacuum toward a periphery, a vacuum being considered a unit of non-density, a hypothesis far less arbitrary than the choice of a concrete unit of positive density such as water? (Jarry 193)
At its most fundamental level, ’pataphysics is the apotheosis of perspectival-
ism—a mode, not of inquiry, but of being, which refuses to see the relativity 
of perspective as a barrier to knowledge. For Jarry, the fact that “Questions always define in advance the regime of their answers” opens up the possibility 
of an epistemology utterly freed from the confines of the denotative (Bök 28).
 For Jarry, science requires the process of ascribing the lineaments of per -
spectival vision to the virtuality of imaginative vision. Without such anarchic vision, the scientist becomes inured to the possibilities of exception—a victim 
of common consent and habit: “Universal assent is already a quite miraculous 
and incomprehensible prejudice. Why should anyone claim that the shape of 
a watch is round—a manifestly false proposition—since it appears in profile 
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   21 10/27/11   1:54 PM
22 chapter 2
as a narrow rectangular construction, elliptic on three sides; and why the devil 
should one only have noticed its shape at the moment of looking at the time?” 
(193). If scientific knowledge is borne of ’pataphysical seeings, those seeings 
likewise aspire to a different epistemological category—not the metaphysical 
light under which science operates, but “that which is superinduced upon metaphysics, whether within or beyond the latter’s limitations, extending 
as far beyond metaphysics as the latter extends beyond physics” (192). In 
contrast to metaphysical understanding, ’pataphysical understanding can -
not be contradicted or superseded by alternative visions. As Christian Bök describes it, ’pataphysics bespeaks “not the terrorism of unified theories but 
the anarchism of ramified theories .  . . a savoir-faire economy (whose Lucre -
tian arbitration requires that nomad science bracket the truth of a defunct concept as either dormant or defiant)” (25).
 Bök correctly intuits the continuities between Jarry’s critique and the an-
archic science of Feyerabend:
Feyerabend argues that, for science to progress, the nomic truth of the as is must 
induce an escape to the ludic space of an as if: “we need a dreamworld in order 
to discover the features of the real world . . . which may actually be just another 
dream world”  (Feyerabend 32). .  . . ’Pataphysics dramatizes this principle of 
Feyerabend by arguing that however obsolete or indiscreet any theory might at 
first appear, every theory has the potential to improve knowledge in some way. Just as biodiversity can make an ecology more adaptable, so can dilettantism make an episteme more versatile. The process of science must learn to place 
its defunct concepts into a kind of suspended animation that preserves them 
for the millenary reverie of an imaginary science. The truth diverges through many truths, inducing sophisms of dissent, novelty, and paradox: “given any rule .  . . for science, there are always circumstances when it is advisable not 
only to ignore the rule, but to adopt its opposite” (Feyerabend 32). (Bök 25)
The narrative of Faustroll  is everywhere sustained by the sophisms of dissent, 
novelty, and paradox. It is inscrutable and anti-realistic because, as Linda 
Klieger Stillman has observed, “the imaginary hypothesis replaces the known 
or the probable and insinuates itself into the order of things as reality. The 
texts’ constantly shifting perspectives establish the possible, rather than the 
probable, as credible” (Alfred Jarry 16).
 All of this might seem beside the point—an artistic reverie unallied with 
the practical concerns of experimental science. But the same insinuations that characterize the imaginative lucubrations of ’pataphysics likewise capture a 
genre and method of inquiry that has come to characterize modern scientific 
inquiry. Beginning in the nineteenth century, the nomic drive of scientific 
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   22 10/27/11   1:54 PM
 Potential Literature 23
speculation began sowing the seeds of a revolutionary cosmology populated 
with particles smaller than the atomos,  universes alternative (and supplemen -
tary) to our own, and peculiar convergences between energy and matter. In the light of such marvels, we witness modern science turning to narrative—not 
merely as a way to explain complex phenomena, but as a methodology for exploring the meaning and implication of phenomena. While Jarry was for -
mulating his new science, the scientist-turned-philosopher Ernst Mach was coining the term “thought experiment” to describe these new meditations.
2
 For Kuhn, the thought experiment was “one of the essential analytic tools 
which are deployed during crisis and which then help to promote basic con-
ceptual reform” (263). The most famous examples of the genre demonstrate 
the radical difference between such experiments and the attendant genres of 
illustration and exemplar. Maxwell’s demon does not illustrate the Second 
Law of Thermodynamics, but instead attempts to imagine a universe in which 
the law cannot hold. Schrödinger’s cat likewise provides not an example of the 
principle of superposition in quantum mechanics, but an instance in which 
the principle appears flatly absurd. In both cases, the narrative amounts to 
an impossible fantasy constructed for the purpose of divining the possibili-
ties of the real. In a sense, thought experiment is the hyperbolic extreme of 
reductio ad absurdam—the ’pataphysical expansion of reality to the point 
of absurdity, which, like the ancient reductio,  has truth as its ultimate ob -
ject. Jarry’s awareness of the narrative possibilities of such experiments are everywhere apparent in Faustroll.  It is not at all fortuitous that Lucretius, 
the source from which Jarry borrowed some of the important terminology of ’pataphysics (e.g., clinamen), is likewise the source of one of the earliest 
and most elegant instances of thought experiment in Western science. More convincing still, however, are the ways in which the use of scientific narrative 
provides the framework for so much of Faustroll’s journey.
 Many critics have attempted to catalog the numerous texts that inspire 
Faustroll’s odyssey.
3 Much of the novel, in fact, may be conceived as Jarry’s 
’pataphysical transformation of existing works. Coincident with these literary journeys, however, is a set of important late-century scientific texts culled 
from the writings of Lord Kelvin, William Crookes, and Charles Vernon 
Boys—writings that, unlike the literary exemplars, permeate the entire struc -
ture of Faustroll.
4 Faustroll’s sieve, which floats upon the water despite being 
perforated with holes, comes more or less directly from Boys’s Soap Bubbles: 
Their Colours and the Forces Which Mould Them (1890):
I have a small sieve made of wire gauze sufficiently coarse to allow a common 
pin to be put through any of the holes. There are moreover about eleven thou-
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   23 10/27/11   1:54 PM
24 chapter 2
sand of these holes in the bottom of the sieve. . . . Dip the sieve in hot paraf-
fin, shake to knock out of the holes. . . . Water goes through only if forced . . . therefore, it has an elastic skin which requires force to stretch. If now I shake 
the water off the sieve I can set it to float on water, because its weight is not 
sufficient to stretch the skin of the water through all the holes. You see that it is quite possible to go to sea in a sieve—that is, if the sieve is large enough and the water is not too rough. (Boys, qtd. in Stillman, “Physics” 90)
Thus Jarry uses the science of Boys to explore the realistic possibilities of a 
nonsense poem (Lear’s “The Jumblies”) (Lear 71–74).
 One of the most impressive passages in Faustroll  is an imaginative fantasia 
on a theme drawn from a speech given by William Crookes and published in Presidential Addresses to the Society for Psychical Research 1882–1911. There, 
Crookes proposes to address “those who not only take too terrestrial a view, 
but who deny the plausibility—nay, the possibility—of the existence of an 
unseen world at all .  . . the world of the infinitely little” (qtd. in Stillman, Alfred 
Jarry  85). Crookes proposed that we imagine a homunculus perched on a cab -
bage leaf. For this creature, the molecular forces that govern surface tension 
and elasticity “occur amidst a burst of sound and light” (Stillman, “Physics” 
85), thus enabling us to apprehend these forces more clearly. Faustroll, true 
to form, wishes to experience this radical change in perspective firsthand:
For this purpose he chose the substance which is normally liquid, colorless, 
incompressible and horizontal in small quantities; having a curved surface, blue in depth and with edges that tend to ebb and flow when it is stretched; 
which Aristotle terms heavy, like earth; the enemy of fire and renascent from 
it when decomposed explosively; which vaporizes at a hundred degrees, a tem -
perature determined by this fact, and in a solid state floats upon itself—water, of course! And having shrunk along the length of a cabbage leaf, paying no attention to his fellow mites or the magnified aspect of his surroundings, until 
he encountered the Water.
 This was a globe, twice his size, through whose transparency the outlines 
of the universe appeared to him gigantically enlarged, whilst his own image, reflected dimly by the leaves’ foil was magnified to his original size. He gave the 
orb a light rap, as if knocking on a door: the deracinated eye of malleable glass 
“adapted itself ” like a living eye, became presbyopic, lengthened itself along its horizontal diameter into an ovoid myopia, repulsed Faustroll by means of this elastic inertia and became spherical once more. The doctor, taking small steps, rolled the crystal globe, with some consider -
able difficulty, toward a neighboring globe, slipping on the rails of the cabbage-leaf’s veins; coming together, the two spheres sucked each other in, tapering in the process, until suddenly a new globe of twice the size rocked placidly in front of Faustroll.
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   24 10/27/11   1:54 PM
 Potential Literature 25
 With the tip of his boot the doctor kicked out at this unexpected develop-
ment of the elements: an explosion, formidable in its fragmentation and noise, 
rang out following the projection all around of new and minute spheres, dry 
and hard as diamonds, that rolled to and fro all along the green arena, each 
one drawing along beneath it the image of the tangential point of the universe, distorting it according to the sphere’s projection and magnifying its fabulous center. (Jarry 194–95)
This extraordinary passage is more philosophy of science than science fic-
tion. The defamiliarization proposed by the alternative vision of science—the 
presbyopia and myopia of ’pataphysical exception—leads to an imaginative 
vision in which the “fabulous center” of the object is magnified. Crookes 
uses the figure to explain; Jarry, to enact the imaginative facility that led to 
the original insight.
 Imaginative use of the tools of science characterizes nearly all the move-
ments that claim ’pataphysics as its patrimony. If Jarry’s work anticipates the age of Heisenberg, Oulipo—perhaps the grandest and most enduring of 
the ’pataphysical descendants—represents a refraction of the age of Gödel. 
Oulipo, indeed, might be said to do with (and for) mathematics and structural 
linguistics what Jarry did with physics: use the terms of its vision in order to 
seek not denotative truth, but imaginative insight.
 For Oulipo, that imaginative meaning arises at the intersection of potenti -
ality and constraint.  The former represents the most obvious continuity with 
’pataphysics. For Jacques Bens (one of the founding members of the group), it 
is one of the features that place the Oulipo within the context of a modernity 
entirely distinct from the idle formalism of past movements: “ And now, if 
one begins to consider that potentiality, more than a technique of composi-
tion, is a certain way of conceiving the literary object, it would perhaps be 
allowed that the idea of potentiality opens into a perfectly authentic modern 
realism. Since reality never reveals more than a part of its totality, it thereby justifies a thousand interpretations, significations, and solutions, all equally 
probable” (Bens, qtd. in Thomas 20).
5 Oulipo thus approaches the literary 
work as Jarry approaches the watch face—as an object rife with exceptions, brimming with paths not taken and possibilities unexplored.
 The earliest works of the Oulipo tended to dramatize this notion by illus-
trating the combinatorial properties of literary forms. Raymond Queneau’s Cent Mille Milliards de Poems (100,000,000,000,000 Poems), generally con-
sidered the inaugural work of the group, consists of a sequence of ten sonnets (each a coherent work) arranged in such a way that one may interchange lines 
from each of the different sonnets to create a new sonnet.
6 The mathemati-
cal properties of the book—which are no less astonishing for being easy to 
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   25 10/27/11   1:54 PM
26 chapter 2
explain—are a major discursive element of the work. If there are ten pos -
sibilities for the first line, and any one of those lines may be followed by one 
of ten additional lines, it follows that the number of possible combinations 
is 10 × 10 (or 102 = 100). Since that number will increase by a factor of ten 
with each additional line, a fourteen-line poem becomes, in its potential state, the Cartesian product of its sets: i.e., 10
14 (100 trillion) possibilities. Queneau 
determined that a person reading the book twenty-four hours a day would need 190,258,751 years to finish it (Mathews and Brotchie 14).
 In the midst of this combinatorial explosion, however, lies the rigid con-
straint of form. As one critic has noted, “The sonnets are executed with a fine attention to detail, and in a manner which implicitly valorizes the process, 
as well as the product; in a word, they are craftsmanlike” (Motte, “Raymond 
Queneau” 201). The craftsmanship of each poem, moreover, extends to the 
concinnity necessary for facilitating combination with the other poems. The 
result is “a smoothly-functional machine for the production and dissemina-
tion of literature” (203)—literature that declares its potentiality not in spite 
of, but because of the constraints imposed.
 Here is the second sonnet in Stanley Chapman’s translation of the work:
The wild horse champs the Parthenon’s top frieze
Since Elgin left his nostrils in the stoneThe Turks said just take anything you please
And loudly sang off-key without a tone
O Parthenon you hold the charger’s stringsThe North Wind bites into his architraveTh’ outrageous Thames a troubled arrow slingsTo break a rule Britannia’s might might waive
Platonic Greece was not so talentless
A piercing wit would sprightliest horses flogSocrates watched his hemlock effervesceTheir sculptors did our best our hulks they clog
With marble souvenirs then fill a slum
For Europe’s glory while Fate’s harpies strum.
(Mathews and Brotchie 17)
Here is a poem (of my own, and perhaps also Queneau’s, creation) using that 
poem and the other nine from the sequence:
The wild horse champs the Parthenon’s top frieze
His nasal ecstasy beats best CologneHe bent right down and well what did he seize
The thumb- and finger-prints of Al Capone
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   26 10/27/11   1:54 PM
 Potential Literature 27
How it surprised us pale grey underlings
When flame a form to wrath ancestral gaveProud death quite il-le-gi-ti-mate-ly stings
Etruscan words which Greece and Rome engrave
Poetic license needs no strain or stressWith gravity at gravity’s great cogWatching manure and compost coalesceTheir sculptors did our best our hulks they clog
With marble souvenirs then fill a slum
A wise loaf always knows its humblest crumb
One does not so much write a Queneauian sonnet as implement one using 
the formal constraints of the work. Though one might create a poem using 
random selections, the physical arrangement discourages this approach. 
Jacque Bens, in fact, considered avoidance of randomness a defining char -
acteristic of the group: “The members of the Oulipo have never hidden their abhorrence of the aleatory, of bogus fortunetellers and penny-ante lotteries” 
(qtd. in Motte, Oulipo 17). Rather, one consciously and deliberately looks for 
interesting combinations of lines and poetic effects. In building my sonnet, I found myself unable to resist the urge to make the wild horse of the Elgin 
marbles seize “the thumb- and finger-prints of Al Capone. ” I was similarly 
delighted at how “pale grey underlings, ” though taken from a completely dif -
ferent poem, seemed to harmonize with the marble motif; likewise “Greece and Rome” with the Parthenon, “manure” with horses, and “nasal ecstasy” 
with the image of a horse champing at the bit. One has the clear sense of 
having discovered something with these combinations—of having liberated 
certain energies in the work—while at the same time having beat Queneau 
at his own game.
 Queneau’s unusual sonnet sequence bears an obvious resemblance to the 
Dadaist technique of cutting up poems and reassembling them into new for -
mations, but there is little of the anti-art rhetoric of Tzara in Queneau’s work. 
Tzara’s poems seek to destroy; Queneau’s to create. The Surrealists, echoing 
mythologies both of the Muse and of the artist as a conduit of “musical” energy and truthfulness, tended to stress the inspirational aspect of poetic 
creation. The Oulipians, by contrast, emphasize the original sense of poiesis 
as a “making” or “building. ” For Queneau, who sought to renounce his earlier 
affiliations with Breton and the Surrealists, “La littérateur est l’artiste et l’artiste 
est artisan” (Queneau 95). Constraint, which might at first seem to oppose 
the exuberant perspectivalism of potentiality, reveals itself in the work of the 
Oulipo as the condition under which perspective shifts and potential emerges. 
The constraints of form—like the strictures of scientific and mathematical 
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   27 10/27/11   1:54 PM
28 chapter 2
reasoning—alter one’s vision and expose the explosive potentiality of the 
subject and of subjectivity. Without such alterations, writing cannot break 
out of its conventions. “Often, the Oulipo proposes [its constraints] freely 
to other writers who are, one imagines, beached, blocked, brutalized by the 
false prophets of genius and inspiration” (Motte, “Raymond Queneau” 203). Few Oulipian works illustrate the liberation of constraint as well as Walter 
Abish’s Alphabetical Africa  (1974), which uses a series of seemingly impossible 
strictures to construct a coherent prose narrative.
7 The first chapter permits 
only the use of words that begin with the letter “a”; the second with the let-
ters “a” or “b”; the third with “a, ” “b, ” or “c”; and so on until the full range of 
letters have been employed, at which point the process reverses itself. The 
novel begins, “ Ages ago, Alex, Allen and Alva arrived at Antibes, and Alva 
allowing all, allowing anyone, against Alex’s admonition, against Allen’s an-
gry assertion: another African amusement. ” (1). Chapter 2 begins, “Before 
African adjournment, Alex, Allen and Alva arrive at Antibes, beginning a 
big bash, as August brings back a buoyancy, a belief, Ahh, and believing all 
buy books about Angolan basins and about Burundi bathhouses. ” (3). An-
thony Schirato, who sees in Abish’s work both a comic parody and a critique 
of Western imperialism, adroitly isolates the ways in which the constraints 
of the novel’s form impel the novelty of its revolution: “ Angolan attacks, 
Dogon destructions, and Eritrean erasures occur precisely because the al -
phabetical rules within which the text operates preclude much opportunity for anything but largely undifferentiated and often repetitious descriptions. 
African anthills are attacked in the first ‘ A ’ chapter; Angolans can be bombed 
in chapter ‘B’ and suffer death in chapter ‘D, ’ but until chapter ‘S, ’ they, of 
course, cannot suffer at all” (135). The intelligibility of Abish’s text—which, 
as Schirato demonstrates, extends to the richness of political metaphor—is 
not a fortuitous accident of its form, but a direct result of its constraints. As 
Jarry asks (of the objects of reality) what infinite smallness would entail, so Abish’s text asks what narrative might emerge from a text in which no one 
can “die” until chapter 4 or “suffer” until chapter 19.
 In the earlier chapters of the work, the emergence of convincing narrative 
from these strictures is perhaps the foremost feature, but the most astonish-ing chapter of all is surely the twenty-sixth, where the author allows himself 
the full use of the alphabet:
Zambia helps fill our zoos, and our doubts, and our extra-wide screens as we 
sit back. Each year we zigzag between the cages, prodding the alligators, the antelopes, the giant ants, just to see them move about a bit, just to make our 
life more authentic, help us recapture the fantasy we had while watching the 
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   28 10/27/11   1:54 PM
 Potential Literature 29
wide-screen spectacular with rock Hudson on horseback, or the African Queen 
zapping Panda the wild leopard. I stayed in Africa for a few weeks. Took the tours. Met a few people. (Abish 64)
It is almost impossible to read this paragraph, after the previous twenty-five 
chapters, without an awareness of the first letters of the words—of the rich 
liberation of writing. It is perhaps the only passage in all of English prose 
that is notable for the absence  of alliteration (if that is even the right term 
for the effect). Queneau’s work demonstrates the generative qualities of form; Abish’s, 
the performative qualities of that generation. Together, the two procedures represent a large category of Oulipian forms. There is, however, a third type 
that represents the most obvious literary analogue to computer-assisted criti -
cism—namely, poetry generated by purely algorithmic processes. One of the most famous of these is the so-called Mathews algorithm, which remaps the 
data structure of a set of linguistic units (letters of words, lines of poems, 
paragraphs of novels) into a two-dimensional tabular array. We might begin 
with four four-letter words arranged like so:
8
 T I N E
 S A L E
 M A L E
 V I N E
(tine, sale, male, vine)
The characters in each row are then shifted n – 1 places to the left, and new 
words are formed by reading the letters downward in the columns (begin-
ning with the initial letter from the previous row):
	 T I N E
 A L E S
 L E M A
 E V I N
(tale, vile, mine, sane)
Next, the words are shifted to the right in the same manner and the results 
read upward:
	 T I N E
 E S A L
 L E M A
 I N E V
(tile, sine, mane, vale)
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   29 10/27/11   1:54 PM
30 chapter 2
These maneuvers thus create a serendipitous morphology—an instantiation 
of the phonemic potentiality of ordinary words.
 The same procedure may be undertaken with tables formed from words, 
phrases, sentences, or any other identifiable linguistic unit. Here is an ex -
ample of a poem formed from a table of quatrains and couplets taken from Shakespeare, Herbert, Jonson, and Donne:
Farewell! thou art too dear for my possessing,
And like enough thou know’st thy estimate:The charter of thy worth gives thee releasing,
My bonds in thee are all determinate,
While mortal love doth all the title gain!Which sliding with invention, they togetherBear all the sway, possessing heart and brain(Thy workmanship) and give thee share in neither.
But now thy work is done, if they that view
The several figures languish in suspenseto judge which passion’s false, and which is true,Between the doubtful sway of reason and sense;
That thou remember them, some claim as debt;
I think it mercy if thou wilt forget.
 (Motte, Oulipo 134)
For Mathews, the notion of potentiality in literature consists in the realiza-
tion that alternative textualities “lie in wait to subvert and perhaps surpass” 
the original formation (126). “The fine surface unity that a piece of writing 
proposes is belied and beleaguered; behind it, in the realm of potentiality, 
a dialectic has emerged” (126). The algorithm therefore represents “a new 
means of tracking down this otherness hidden in language (and, perhaps, 
in what language talks about)” (126). Form, in other words, is both a means 
of poetic communication and an enunciation of possible procedures for 
analyzing that communication.
 On the one hand, the hybrid sonnet is a work of poetic artifice—a new 
poem created, like all poems, from previous instances of language. Yet this same act has the effect of highlighting certain formal dimensions of the poem 
that we usually associate with critical observation. We might expect an artful 
nonsense to emerge; instead, we get a poem that, if not perfectly coherent, is 
at least mimicking the aural dimension of sensefulness. As a critical work, 
the new poem makes obvious a long-standing critical intuition about sonnet 
form—namely, that the form itself has a rhetorical structure that is almost 
independent of the words themselves, insofar as the form raises expectations 
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   30 10/27/11   1:54 PM
 Potential Literature 31
that may condition us to pursue particular patterns of sense making. We 
expect a sonnet to “turn, ” to engage in a certain call-and-response pattern 
between octave and sestet, perhaps to resolve with an ironic (or witty, or 
playful) couplet. Those expectations compel us to create sense even from 
lines that literally have nothing to do with one another. The hybrid poem is therefore not just a hybrid of various sonnets, but, with the addition of 
the algorithm, a hybrid between poetical and critical acts. It is not entirely 
cogent to call the poem “an interpretation, ” if we also intend that term to 
signify language acts like the paragraph above this one. At the same time, the 
algorithmic manipulation that produced the text would seem to problematize 
our desire to consider it a purely poetical or creative act, if we also intend 
that term to signify language acts like the original sonnets that make up the 
new formation.
 ’Pataphysics, Oulipian constraint, and the tradition of thought experiment 
all gesture toward a critical vanishing point at which the distinctions between art, criticism, and science dissolve. At the practical level, these distinctions 
remain firm: Jarry’s lucubrations are not science, just as Crooke’s fantasias are 
not those of an artist. Y et the artist and the scientist both endeavor to place the 
phenomenal world into some alternative formation that will facilitate a new 
seeing. Computation, particularly as it inserts itself into fields like bioinfor -
matics or computational physics, manifests itself in much the same way as it does (naturally, almost inexorably) in the work of the Oulipo—as something 
both new and old, provocative and stabilizing, threatening and comforting. 
The computer revolutionizes, not because it proposes an alternative to the 
basic hermeneutical procedure, but because it reimagines that procedure at 
new scales, with new speeds, and among new sets of conditions. It is for this reason that one can even dare to imagine such procedures taking hold in a 
field like literary criticism.
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   31 10/27/11   1:54 PM
 3 Potenti Al reAding S
“ Algorithmic criticism”—the term I use to designate a reconceived computer-
assisted literary criticism—shares with Oulipo a desire to use the narrowing 
forces of constraint to enable the liberating visions of potentiality. Its medium 
is the computer, but it looks neither to the bare calculating facilities of the 
mechanism nor to the promise of machine intelligence for its inspiration. 
Instead, algorithmic criticism attempts to employ the rigid, inexorable, un-
compromising logic of algorithmic transformation as the constraint under 
which critical vision may flourish. The hermeneutic proposed by algorithmic 
criticism does not oppose the practice of conventional critical reading, but 
instead attempts to reenvision its logics in extreme and self-conscious forms. 
As such, it is of a piece with recent work on the notion of “textual interven-
tion” as set forth by Rob Pope; of “deformance” as proposed by Jerome Mc-
Gann and Lisa Samuels; and with the computationally enacted “tamperings” 
undertaken by Estelle Irizarry. All three set forth a bold heuresis—one that 
proposes not a radical exegesis, but a radical eisegesis (perhaps a katagesis) 
in which the graphic and semantic codes of textuality are deliberately and literally altered.
 Pope’s 1994 Textual Intervention is to criticism what The Oulipo Compen-
dium  is to poetry—not primarily a theoretical exposition, but a textbook full 
of problems, exercises, and worked examples. Were we to insert references 
to computation, its opening preface might serve not only as a description of 
algorithmic criticism but also as a general motto for much of what we already call digital humanities:
The best way to understand how a text works, I argue, is to change it: to play 
around with it, to intervene in it in some way (large or small), and then to try 
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   32 10/27/11   1:54 PM
 Potential Readings 33
to account for the exact effect of what you have done. In practice—not just in 
theory—we have the option of making changes at all levels, from the merest nuance of punctuation or intonation to total recasting in terms of genre, time, 
place, participants and medium. . . . The emphasis throughout is on exploring 
possible permutations and realizations of texts in and out of their original contexts. (Pope 1)
To ask “how a text works” is to invite a whole range of critical procedures, 
including those we normally associate with the classroom. Pope begins one 
exercise involving “My Last Duchess” in a way that will seem mostly familiar 
to anyone who has taught an introductory literature course:
As you read, ask yourself:
1.  how far you personally are prepared to adopt the Duke’s position (e.g. his 
“voice” and self image);
2. what other position(s) you feel yourself drawn to adopt (even though they 
may have no “voices” or self-images directly available). (15)
Normally we think of such questions as ways to get the discussion moving—as 
a prelude to deeper matters involving agency, reliability, what is said, and 
what is not said. Pope, though, has a totally different project in mind (or, 
rather, and I will return to this in a moment, the same project reimagined 
with a new techne). As the exercise proceeds, students are “translating” the 
poem into their own conversational idiom, making lists of who is present 
and who is excluded (including the people who built the wall and the terrace, 
made the Duchess’s mantle, and tend the orchard), and finally, rewriting the 
poem from a new center.
 Jerome McGann and Lisa Samuels refer to such procedures as instances 
of “deformance”—a word that usefully combines a number of terms, includ -
ing “form, ” “deform, ” and “performance. ” The centerpiece of their essay is a 
quote from Emily Dickinson: “Did you ever read one of her Poems backward, 
because the plunge from the front overturned you? I sometimes (often have, 
many times) have—a Something overtakes the Mind—” (qtd. in McGann 
106). The injunction attempts a disordering of our critical apprehensions 
that suggests an alignment with the disorderings of Jarry. Reading a poem 
backward is like viewing the face of a watch sideways—a way of unleashing 
the potentialities that altered perspectives may reveal:
Reading backward is a critical move that invades these unvisited precincts 
of imaginative works. It is our paradigm of any kind of deformative critical operation.
 Such a model brings to attention areas of the poetic and artifactual media 
that usually escape our scrutiny. But this enlargement of the subject matter of 
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   33 10/27/11   1:54 PM
34 chapter 3
criticism doesn’t define the most significant function of deformative operations. 
Far more important is the stochastic process it entails. Reading backward is a highly regulated method for disordering the senses of a text. It turns off the 
controls that organize the poetic system at some of its most general levels. When 
we run the deformative program through a particular work we cannot predict the results. As Dickinson elegantly put it, “ A Something overtakes the Mind, ” and we are brought to a critical position in which we can imagine things about the text that we didn’t and perhaps couldn’t otherwise know. (McGann 116)
There are several reasons why these ideas, so culturally detached from the 
mathematical rigidity of computation, should resonate with creators of 
computational tools for literary study. Anyone who has marked up a text 
in a metalanguage for machine manipulation, tokenized strings for word-
frequency analysis, or undertaken any of the dozens of allegedly pre-inter -
pretative activities that go into designing computer systems for humanistic study has already come face-to-face with “the poetic and artifactual media 
that usually escape our scrutiny. ” Encoding texts in XML (extensible markup 
language) places one in a simultaneously cooperative and antagonistic rela-
tionship with the codes that already subsist in written works. Optical charac -
ter-recognition software reveals the fragility of the grapheme. Tokenization forces us to confront the fact that the notion of a word is neither unambiguous 
nor satisfactorily definable for all circumstances. Rather than hindering the 
process of critical engagement, this relentless exactitude produces a critical 
self-consciousness that is difficult to achieve otherwise. In pouring the “well 
of English undefiled” through the thin opening of Von Neumann’s bottleneck, 
we discover strange tensions, exceptions, and potentials.
 Even the simplest of transformations yields insights about the nature of po -
etic form. Consider, for example, Emily Dickinson’s invitation to “tell it slant”:
Tell all the truth but tell it slant—
Success in Circuit liesToo bright for our infirm Delight
The Truth’s superb surprise
As lightning to the Children eased
With explanation kind
The Truth must dazzle gradually
Or every man be blind—  (506–7)
This poem puts forth a poetics, but it might also be understood as a poetical 
description of our own methodologies as critics. The critic implicitly consid -
ers the “Truth’s superb surprise” in literature—however contingent, however 
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   34 10/27/11   1:54 PM
 Potential Readings 35
distanced from notions of objectivity—as being at a slant, always behind 
or beneath the denotative meanings of the words involved. Untangling the 
Circuit, restoring it to a logical and linear pattern of meaning and deduc -
tion, constitutes one of the chief activities of criticism as such. In this sense, poetry has always demanded something like “close reading. ” Instead of let-ting words continue on (as in oral recitation), the reader pauses to consider 
the patterns that emerge from various combinations of textual information. 
Often, those patterns occur at those moments where the language seems at 
odds—at a slant—from normal usage: infirm delight, success in circuit, the 
odd semantics of “ As lightning to the Children eased, ” the capitalizations of “Truth, ” “Children, ” “Circuit, ” and “Delight” (though not “explanation, ” “light -
ning, ” “surprise” or “blind”). The backward poem deepens this engagement by revealing other forces and tensions that the forward arrangement conceals:
Or every man be blind—
The Truth must dazzle graduallyWith explanation kind
As lightning to the Children eased
The Truth’s superb surprise
Too bright for our infirm Delight
Success in Circuit lies
Tell all the truth but tell it slant—
1
We who have grown accustomed to intelligibility borne of close analysis may 
expect nonsense to emerge from this operation, but the effect (as Dickinson 
intuited) is quite different. Some phrases do seem strangely contorted. The 
first line, in fact, seems the strangest of all—as if we were coming to the 
poem in medias res. We are almost invited to read it as if it ended not with 
Dickinson’s ubiquitous em-dash, but with a colon: “Here are the things we 
must do to avoid blindness: . . . ” The next movement of the poem, though, is 
a complete sentence: “The Truth must dazzle gradually / With explanation 
kind / As lightning to the children eased. ” That it should so closely resemble 
how one might paraphrase the thought of the original serves to illuminate 
the very “slanting” that Dickinson imposed upon the ordinary language from 
which the poem draws both its strangeness and its intelligibility. The rhymes 
remain in both stanzas, but the inversion of ABCB to the somewhat hetero-
dox ABAC almost renders them invisible. The poem is as iambic backward 
as it is forward, but without the end-rhymes, the poem slips quietly into the 
cadence of prose. The appositional structure of the second stanza (or, rather, 
the first stanza) presents itself more strongly than before. The last line, as so 
often happens with this particular reading strategy, seems slightly bathetic. 
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   35 10/27/11   1:54 PM
36 chapter 3
What had been a bold announcement of the poem’s intent in the original, 
now seems almost like a limp punch line or a bon mot.
 Irizarry’s work, in what the Oulipians might gleefully call an instance 
of “anticipatory plagiary, ” enacts the principles of deformance in explicitly machinic terms. The move is inspired not by Oulipo, but by a constellation of Hispanic poets ranging from Pas and Borges to Juan-Eduardo Circlot and 
Clara Janés, all of whom “have examined substitution and permutation in 
theory and practice:”
Computer-enabled “play” can accomplish the same type of alteration which 
these writers have pursued in their works. Such poetic play, beyond the poetic products themselves, serves as a tool to increase readers’ awareness of poetry 
by a unique blend of word, structure, and pattern. By imbuing the poetic text 
with a new dimension, on-screen manipulation of what has been called “electric poetry” (Silverstein) evokes the reader’s participation in the poetic process. The interactive modality offered by the electronic medium destabilizes the text, allowing the reader to explore it more thoroughly than is possible in the 
fixed printed medium and to both appreciate and experience poetry as “play. ” 
(Irizarry 155)
Irizarry thus envisions a group of what we might call “deformance machines”: 
small programs designed to effect algorithmic transformations of poetic works.
 Irizarry suggests the transformation of a lyric poem into an “entropic poem” 
in which all word-level redundancy has been removed. Poems that rely on repetition, however subtly, are particularly suited to this method. Here is 
Dylan Thomas’s “The Force That through the Green Fuse Drives the Flower”:
The force that through the green fuse drives the flower
Drives my green age; that blasts the roots of treesIs my destroyer.
And I am dumb to tell the crooked rose
My youth is bent by the same wintry fever.
The force that drives the water through the rocks
Drives my red blood; that dries the mouthing streams
Turns mine to wax.And I am dumb to mouth unto my veinsHow at the mountain spring the same mouth sucks.
The hand that whirls the water in the pool
Stirs the quicksand; that ropes the blowing windHauls my shroud sail.
And I am dumb to tell the hanging man
How of my clay is made the hangman’s lime.
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   36 10/27/11   1:54 PM
 Potential Readings 37
The lips of time leech to the fountain head;
Love drips and gathers, but the fallen bloodShall calm her sores.
And I am dumb to tell a weather’s wind
How time has ticked a heaven round the stars.
And I am dumb to tell the lover’s tomb
How at my sheet goes the same crooked worm.
 (Thomas 90)
Here is the entropic version—a word-frequency list that retains the order of 
the words.2
25 the 5 dumb 1 mine 1 hauls 1 shall
2 force 7 to 1 wax 1 shroud 1 calm
6 that 4 tell 2 mouth 1 sail 1 her
2 through 2 crooked 1 unto 1 hanging 1 sores
2 green 1 rose 1 veins 1 man 2 a
1 fuse 1 youth 4 how 1 clay 1 weather’s
4 drives 1 bent 2 at 1 made 1 has
1 flower 1 by 1 mountain 1 hangman’s 1 ticked
8 my 3 same 1 spring 1 lime 1 heaven
1 age 1 wintry 1 sucks 1 lips 1 round
1 blasts 1 fever 1 hand 2 time 1 stars
1 roots 2 water 1 whirls 1 leech 1 lover’s
3 of 1 rocks 1 in 1 fountain 1 tomb
1 trees 1 red 1 pool 1 head 1 sheet
3 is 2 blood 1 stirs 1 love 1 goes
1 destroyer 1 dries 1 quicksand 1 drips 1 worm
6 and 1 mouthing 1 ropes 1 gathers  
5 I 1 streams 1 blowing 1 but  
5 am 1 turns 2 wind 1 fallen
The entropic poem shares a family resemblance with the output of word-frequency analysis tools, which are among the fundamental computational 
primitives of text analysis. Like the lists generated by such tools, the new for -
mation enters the space of the poem as a statistical paratext. But by retaining the order of the words, the entropic poem declares itself more forcefully to be 
what even the most apparently disinterested word-frequency list already is: a 
deformation of the original. It is a readable work that maintains its coherence 
fully until the thinning logic of compression overtakes it.
 Irizarry’s use of the word “entropy” recalls the use of that term in informa -
tion theory, where it signifies the degree of order in a system. In information theoretical terms, the program that generated the new formation strives 
to bring the poem from a state of low- to high-order entropy by reducing 
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   37 10/27/11   1:54 PM
38 chapter 3
the number of symbols necessary to encode the information. At times, that 
process is quite successful, as when the algorithm produces the cryptic “wa-
ter rocks red blood” for “The force that drives the water through the rocks 
/ Drives my red blood. ” The algorithm suggestively fails to compress at the 
ends of stanzas where a certain sense reemerges: “youth bent by same wintry fever, ” “made hangman’s lime, ” “fallen shall calm her sores, ” “ticked heaven 
round stars, ” and “lover’s tomb sheet goes worm. ” The entropic poem does 
not so much provide data about the original poem as focus our attention on 
certain energies in the original—in this case, similar movements in thought 
redescribed in new terms at the ends of stanzas.
 One is perhaps tempted to consider such possible tools of algorithmic 
criticism as mere amusements—the critical readings they engender, as her -
meneutical curiosities wholly unrelated to the practices of conventional criti -
cal reading. McGann and Samuels, however, propose that “we may usefully regard all criticism and interpretation as deformance, ” since all interpretation 
represents “the application of scientia to poiesis, or the effort to elucidate one 
discourse form in terms of another” (127).
3 In this view, deformance becomes 
not just “the best way” (as in Pope), or the new way (as in Irizarry), but an extreme form of the only way—the way it has always been done.
 To speak of algorithmic criticism is to take a further step and imagine this 
generalization as an explicit technological program for critical reading. Texts that have become proverbial among students of new media, like the Talmud 
and the I Ching, are particularly useful here. Because they are often held up 
as foreshadowings of the ergodic, the interactive, and the hypertextual—that is, as unusual and distinct forms of reading and writing—there has been a 
tendency to deemphasize their continuity with the more normative practices 
of reading and writing. They provide useful test cases for the idea that all 
criticism and interpretation is deformance.
 One consults the I Ching  in order to determine the auspiciousness or 
inauspiciousness of a course of action and to gain some sense of how that course is likely to unfold. With the question in mind, the reader/diviner 
throws three coins or yarrow stalks and arrives at a combination that will 
resolve to one of four numbers (six, seven, eight, or nine). Each of these 
numbers corresponds to one of two states for a particular line of a hexagram. 
If one throws a six or an eight, the line is a broken line; a seven or a nine 
results in a whole line. In order to determine the path and outcome of my 
writing on computation and literary criticism, I threw three coins six times 
to determine all of the lines and then stacked them on top of one another to create the following hexagram:
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   38 10/27/11   1:54 PM
 Potential Readings 39
In this case, the figure corresponds to the twenty-first hexagram, which bears 
the tag shike (“biting”). In Richard Rutt’s translation, I am led to a page with 
the following text:
Sacrifice.
Favourable in disputes.
 Base (9): Shackled with leg-fetters:
  mutilating the feet.
   no misfortune .
 (6) 2: Biting flesh:
  mutilating the nose.
   no misfortune .
 (6) 3: Biting dried meat:
  getting poison to eat.
   Little distress.
   no misfortune .
 (9) 4: Biting ham in the rind:
  a bronze arrow to find.
   Favourable in hardship augury.
   augury auspicious .
 (6) 5: Biting pemmican:
  finding golden bronze.
   Augury dangerous .
   no misfortune .
 Top (9): Shouldering a cangue:
  mutilating the ears.
   disaster .
 (Rutt 244)
The specific values for each line subdivide further into stable and changeable 
whole and broken lines. The “stack” of solid and broken lines contain certain 
lines that are understood to have complements in the opposite formation 
(certain broken lines that correspond to whole lines, and vice versa). If the 
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   39 10/27/11   1:54 PM
40 chapter 3
top (unbroken) line in the previous hexagram were “unstable” (a value de-
termined by the numeric value of the coins) and all the rest were stable, we 
would need to find another hexagram that corresponds exactly to the previ-
ous one, but with the top line broken. The visual metaphor is roughly that of 
two broken lines moving toward one another to form a whole, or conversely, a whole line stretching to the point of breaking into two. We would then 
understand the above oracle as referring to an additional text corresponding 
to hexagram 17 (sui/pursuit):
Supreme offering.
Favourable in disputes.
   no misfortune .
 Base (9): A building collapses.
   Augury auspicious .
   Being crossed on leaving home: there will be success.
 Base (9):
 (6) 2: Binding little ones, losing grown men.
 (6) 3: Binding grown men, losing little ones.
   Pursuit ends in catching the quarry.
   Augury for a dwelling: favourable.
 (9) 4: Pursuit ends in finding.
   Augury: disastrous .
   Sacrificing captives on the way;
   in a covenant, could there be misfortune?
 (9) 5: Captives at a triumph.
   auspicious .
 Top (6): Brought in bonds, let them be guarded.
   The king offers them at the West Mountain.
 (Rutt 240)
Espen Aarseth considers the I Ching  a prime example of an ergodic cybertext—
a genre that includes both Web-based hypertext and computer adventure 
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   40 10/27/11   1:54 PM
 Potential Readings 41
games. Two features make it so. First, “nontrivial effort is required to allow 
the reader to traverse the text” (1). The mantic nature of the work demands 
“a highly specialized ritual of perusal” quite different from the act of turning 
the pages of a novel (2). Second, the I Ching  constantly reminds the reader of 
“inaccessible strategies and paths not taken, voices not heard” (3).
 The first requirement is clearly met in this case. One does not ordinarily 
read narrative works by casting lots and turning to pages by chance, but in this case the stochastic element is clearly part of the nature of the work. The 
second requirement is likewise fulfilled: chance dictates only one of 4,096 
(64
2) possible “perusals” of the text at a given moment. We are left to wonder 
what a head might have revealed where a tail was cast. In both cases, however, 
we may suspect merely a more pronounced version of properties that obtain 
in any text. Aarseth anticipates these objections at the beginning of his book 
on ergodic literature:
Whenever I have had the opportunity to present the perspective of ergodic 
literature and cybertext to a fresh audience of literary critics and theorists, I have almost invariably been challenged on the same issues: that these texts 
(hypertexts, adventure games, etc.) aren’t essentially different from other liter -
ary texts, because (1) all literature is to some extent indeterminate, nonlinear, 
and different for every reading, (2) the reader has to make choices in order to make sense of the text, and finally (3) a text cannot really be nonlinear because the reader can read it only one sequence at a time, anyway. (2)
These objections suffer, as Aarseth rightly claims, from a lack of distinction 
and specification. That all texts might be nonlinear effaces the obvious distinc -
tions between a text that involves yarrow stalks and one that does not; that no text can be nonlinear reduces cognition to temporality. Aarseth’s response to 
these objections, however, underestimates the haptic nature of the critical act:
A reader, however strongly engaged in the unfolding of a narrative, is powerless. 
Like a spectator at a soccer game, he may speculate, conjecture, extrapolate, even shout abuse, but he is not a player. Like a passenger on a train, he can 
study and interpret the shifting landscape, he may rest his eyes wherever he 
pleases, even release the emergency brake and step off, but he is not free to move the tracks in a different direction. He cannot have the player’s pleasure or influence: “Let’s see what happens when I do this. ” The reader’s pleasure is the pleasure of the voyeur. Safe, but impotent. (4)
 The minute someone proposes to explain the meaning of a narrative—to 
speculate, conjecture, extrapolate, or shout abuse at it, whether in the privacy 
of one’s thoughts or in a critical journal—the narrative changes, because we 
are no longer able to read it without knowledge of the paratextual revolt. 
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   41 10/27/11   1:54 PM
42 chapter 3
Chinua Achebe’s charges of racism in Joseph Conrad’s Heart of Darkness is 
a case in point. By remapping the resonances of the characters and events 
in that narrative, Achebe alters that narrative by literally adding text to the 
document space of the novel. Achebe locates passages in which Africans are 
represented and counts the instances in which Conrad has the characters speak (twice: once to express a desire to eat a white man, and a second to say 
“Mistah Kurtz—he dead”) (Achebe 9). He gathers other writings by Conrad, 
including an appalling account of his first encounter with a “buck nigger” 
and the “blind, furious, unreasoning rage” it evoked in him ever after (13). 
The opinions of other critics are cited, including the (still prevalent) idea that 
Africa “is merely the setting for the disintegration of the mind of Mr. Kurtz” 
(12). All of these procedures—quotation, summary, paraphrase, conjecture—
come precisely as a result of having said, “Let’s see what happens when I do 
this”; the “this” is a rewritten Heart of Darkness.
 Such representations are hardly impotent. The consequences of a Heart 
of Darkness rewritten so as to expose its racism will have the tangible effect of limiting (and in some cases, destroying) many of the other narrative pos-
sibilities with which it is inextricably linked. It may even have the result of 
ensuring that this narrative, which Achebe calls “offensive and deplorable, ” 
is dropped from course syllabi—in effect guaranteeing that certain types of 
transformations are never undertaken again (14). Aarseth continues:
The effort and energy demanded by the cybertext of its reader raise the stakes of 
interpretation to those of intervention. Trying to know a cybertext is an invest -
ment of personal improvisation that can result in either intimacy or failure. The 
tensions at work in a cybertext, while not incompatible with those of narrative 
desire, are also something more: a struggle not merely for interpretative insight but also for narrative control: “I want this text to tell my story; the story could not be without me. ” In some cases this is literally true. (4)
But again, is it not literally true whenever anyone tries to explain what a nar -
rative means (such explanations being the only tangible evidence we have of 
a reading experience)? In Achebe’s article this desire to make the text tell a 
different story is palpably evident, since he proposes that Heart of Darkness 
does not tell his story and must now be made to do so. Achebe’s story does not metaphorically intervene in this case; it literally intervenes—reinscrib-
ing the words of the text of the book itself—in order to demonstrate that 
the narrative of Heart of Darkness “cannot be” without his story. Terms like 
“intervention” and “struggle for narrative control” describe perfectly those interpretative actions (which is to say, all interpretative actions) that create 
an alternative version of the text itself.
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   42 10/27/11   1:54 PM
 Potential Readings 43
 The interest that the I Ching holds for the student of new (or old) media 
lies in the singularity of form that these narrative interventions and struggles 
for control assume, not in the fact that one may (as with any text) intervene 
and attempt to control its meaning. Throwing coins to choose texts, while an 
interesting and essential feature of this particular text, remains one of the least significant elements in terms of one’s ability to engage in these practices. One 
narrative possibility of the I Ching—one that attempts to make the book tell 
my story—understands the passage of hexagram 21 to 17 as relating directly to the writing of this book. The idea for this work came in the midst of other 
work. Pursuing this project therefore meant “sacrificing” work to which I 
felt metaphorically “shackled. ” Before undertaking the project, I exchanged a 
series of e-mails with a colleague in which we “disputed” the viability of the 
topic—disputes that nonetheless had the “favorable” result of convincing me 
to pursue the work. Once I set myself to the task of explicating the relation-
ship between computer analysis of texts and literary critical practice, I found 
that I had to “bite through” a series of difficult articulations punctuated with 
what seemed like “pointed” problems I was discussing (the “bronze arrow” 
and “golden bronze” of the line statements). At one point I managed to erase 
the file I was working on (unmistakably prophesied in the final prognostic: 
“disaster ”). Hexagram 17 presumably forecasts the successful conclusion of 
the work, which, considering the lessons learned from having once erased the file, will indeed be “guarded” when it is “brought in bounds” to the printer.
 This is not essentially different from saying that Tennyson’s “In Memoriam” 
speaks to me or that Sartre’s Les Mots  is the story of my life. Nor is it fundamen -
tally different from saying that the former draws upon contemporary accounts 
of geological and evolutionary time, or that the latter is most successfully elu -
cidated with reference to Heidegger. Here I am re-presenting the text so that 
it speaks literally about my life.
4 The source of this knowledge comes either 
from my own inventiveness (or perversity) as a reader, or from the fact that the mantic qualities of the text are literally true. In either case—in all cases—I 
am presenting a new text that imputes or denies authority to the original text 
itself, legitimizing or de-legitimizing its claims to truth value, proclaiming its 
power to mean or demonstrating my own power to do the same.
 The power dynamics of the alternative text are equally visible in the hands 
of eighteenth-century Jesuit missionaries eager to demonstrate the ways in which the ancient Chinese classics might be adapted to Christianity. Jean-
François Foucquet, despite papal condemnation of such “accommodationist” 
strategies, tried to show how the I Ching parallels the Old Testament (Rutt 
63). Hexagram 13, for example, became a text about the Fall of Man (here quoted in James Legge’s 1882 translation):
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   43 10/27/11   1:54 PM
44 chapter 3
Thung Zăn (or “Union of men”) appears here (as we find it) in the (remote 
districts of the) country, indicating progress and success. It will be advanta -
geous to cross the great stream. It will be advantageous to maintain the firm 
correctness of the superior man.
1. The first nine , undivided, (shows the representative of) the union of men 
just issuing from his gate. There will be no error.
2. The second six, divided, (shows the representative of) the union of men in 
relation with his kindred. There will be occasion for regret.
3. The third nine , undivided, (shows its subject) with his arms hidden in the 
thick grass, and at the top of a high mound. (But) for three years he makes 
no demonstration.
4. The fourth nine , undivided, (shows its subject) mounted on the city wall; 
but he does not proceed to make the attack (he contemplates). There will be good fortune.
5. In the fifth nine  undivided, (the representative of) the union of men first 
wails and cries out, then laughs. His great host conquers, and he (and the subject of the second line) meet together.
6. The topmost nine , undivided, (shows the representative of) the union of 
men in the suburbs. There will be no occasion of repentance. (86–87)
If we read the hexagram within this rubric, the message seems clear. But to 
read within a rubric is precisely to impose a set of procedures upon a text. 
In this case the motives for those procedures are religious and political. The 
English Bible and the I Ching cross-fertilize each other in such a way as to 
bring “the superior man, ” “men just issuing from his gate, ” “men in relation to his kindred, ” and “There will be no occasion of repentance” to the fore-
front of our attention. Phrases like “arms hidden in the thick grass” and “the 
union of men in the suburbs, ” though perhaps eminently meaningful to a 
feudal ruler about to wage war, recede into the background of our attention.
 Even in the case of the I Ching, we can see examples of reading practices 
that strongly resemble Achebe’s attempt to alter the permissible meanings of that text. The Song philosopher Shao Y ong discovered a coherent mathemati -
cal order to the hexagrams, which was then presumed to be the original order. So effective was his attempt at authorization that it would later come to be 
known as the Xiantin—the “earlier than heaven” sequence (Rutt 90). More 
famous still are the reformations undertaken by Confucians of the late Han dynasty, who, in an effort to validate the great classic for Confucian scholars 
(no doubt hesitant, given Confucius’s legendary opposition to divination), 
came to associate the text with the golden age of Confucianism during the 
Zhou period. Eventually the story came to be told that Confucius himself 
admired the I Ching:
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   44 10/27/11   1:54 PM
 Potential Readings 45
This idea, which was current for a thousand years, depended on a single sen-
tence in the Analects, the collection of sayings that is our only source for Con-fucius’s teaching. In Legge’s translation of Analects vii. 16, this sentence reads: 
“If some years were added to my life, I would give fifty to the study of the Yi, 
and then I might come to be without great faults. ” The Lu text of the Analects, 
now preferred by most scholars, has the word yi written with another character 
of the same sound, meaning not “change, ” but “also” or “more. ” This makes the sentence mean: “If I were given a few more years, so that I might spend a whole 
fifty in study, I believe that after all I should be fairly free from error. ” (Rutt 33)
Rutt notes, “This is likely the correct reading”—and it may be, in the technical 
sense—but it must be pointed out that this scholarly reading constitutes yet 
another attempt to reform the potential textualities of the text.
 In most cases the creation of alternative textualities serves the ordinary 
purpose of allowing us to generate meaning from what we read. The patterns we generate—summaries and paraphrases, for example—serve precisely to 
select a narrow set of meanings from the field of all possible meanings. We 
may create this set either in opposition to or in cooperation with the rheto-
rics that we perceive the text itself putting forth. The I Ching is notable not 
for allowing this behavior, but for the way in which it generates a worldview from the consequences of this behavior. Whatever one might consider the 
specific contours of that worldview to be, it is a worldview (or perhaps a text 
view) liberated from the suspicion that subjectivity compromises meaning. 
We cannot avoid finding meaning in the I Ching, because our history, our 
circumstances, our desires, and our anxieties—indeed, the entire constella-tion of subjective interests we possess—form the inescapable precondition 
upon which the intelligibility of the text depends. Admirers of the I Ching 
have for centuries recognized the wisdom of this engagement. There is, of course, nothing in the text itself to contradict them.
 Both the I Ching  and the work of the Oulipo call attention to the always 
dissolving boundaries between creation and interpretation. Despite this, both productions are ordinarily considered aesthetic in nature and thus impervious to the objections often leveled against more overtly interpretative works. The 
agonistic relationship between artistic deformation and critical legitimacy 
are far more evident when a work declares itself as primarily interpretative, 
and nowhere is this anxiety more poignant than in Ferdinand de Saussure’s 
research on pre-classical Latin poetry, the details of which form the subject 
of a number of unpublished notebooks written between 1906 and 1909.
 The Greek-influenced quantitative meters of golden-age Latin—the poetry 
of Horace, Catullus, and Martial—were ordered according to a well-under -
stood set of rules governing vowel length. The formal guidelines of pre-
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   45 10/27/11   1:54 PM
46 chapter 3
classical “Saturnian” verse, however, are quite a bit more difficult to discern. 
Much of the poetry is characterized by assonance, alliteration, and parallelism 
structured in such a way as to suggest a pattern, but students of Latin poetry 
have for centuries differed over how to state that pattern programmatically, 
even debating whether the form is accentual or metrical in nature. Saussure begins his attempt at solving the “problem” of Saturnian poetry 
by focusing on those elements that seem clearly part of the prosodic archi-tecture of the verse: assonance and alliteration. But Saussure’s breakthrough 
comes from a change of focus not at all unlike the decision to read a poem 
backward or to impose Oulipian constraints upon it. Saussure sees the pho-
nemes in isolation, unmoored from the wider denotative meaning of the 
poem, and begins to count them. He soon discovers that while the pattern 
of syllabification in a Saturnian poem varies, the number of consonants and 
vowels in each line occurs according to a subtle but unmistakably patterned 
regularity. Put simply, most of the vowels and consonants in each line have 
an accompanying “counter” or repeated term. Those vowels and consonants 
that do not have a counter produce a modulo character that is then carried 
over onto the next line. Saussure deduced that the poet must be trying to 
fit the verse into a pattern of even-numbered alliterations. Failing that, the 
extra consonant or vowel would “overflow” to the next verse unit. “The result 
is so startling that one wonders how the authors of these lines .  . . would 
have found the time for such onerous and minute calculation: for Saturnian verse, quite apart from any metric considerations, is like a Chinese game in 
its complexity” (Saussure, qtd. in Starobinsky 9).
 That complexity, brought forth by the decision to see a poem in a way ut-
terly counter to what we would normally consider reading, soon yields further 
patterns. Before long, Saussure is beginning to notice graphic and phonemic 
patterns that are themselves suggestive of a much deeper order. Considered 
in isolation, the common phonemes and the unpaired consonants begin to 
re(as)semble independent words, which, Saussure concludes, must form the 
“theme word” from which the rest of the poem is formed:
Thus, if, for instance, we take as our THEME or TITLE (which is practically the 
same thing) Diis Manibus Luci Corneli Scipionis Sacrum, it will be necessary for the verse section of the inscription to leave free and unpaired, that is to say, 
in a number whose total is ODD, the letters D.M.L.C.S. |R.|
 Specifically, we have the first four letters because for proper names, and for 
consecrated formulas like Diis Manibus, it is only the INITIAL which counts. The last is R because Sacrum,  conversely, must be taken with all its letters. But 
neither the S nor the C nor the M of Sacrum  can be expressed because these let -
ters already exist in D.M.L.C.S.—and if one added a new S or C or M to the verse section, all these letters would find themselves canceled by the even number. (13)
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   46 10/27/11   1:54 PM
 Potential Readings 47
Saussure also comes upon phonemes that recapitulate the vowel structures 
of the theme word, and that further cluster around particular sets of words 
between the initial and final character of the theme. These clusters he calls 
“mannequins. ” If the theme word is “ Aphrodite, ” one will find mannequins 
like “ Amnīs ită captă lepōrE” and “ Ac montīs fluviosqvE” (63–65). In one of the more extraordinary examples of this phenomenon, Saussure finds amid 
Lucretius’s invectives against the madness of sexual passion in De Rerum 
Natura,  the word “postscenia” (backstage). As Starobinsky observed, “The 
word which distributes its phonic elements through the text of the poem is 
that in which, metaphorically, a depth of artifice, a place devoid of majesty, 
ruled by illusion, is denounced” (74).
 Saussure modifies his thesis slightly throughout the notebooks. In attempt -
ing to name the phenomenon, he suggests not only “anagram” but also “hy-pogram, ” “anaphone, ” “paragram, ” “paramine, ” “paronym, ” “paranomase, ” 
“logogram, ” and even “antigram. ” But by whatever combination of Greek 
roots, the essential features of the phenomenon remain the same. In dozens 
of examples Saussure finds an encrypted message running alongside, over, 
and against the aural and graphic elements of the text. If one needs to con-
sider the phonemic and graphic elements of the text differently in light of 
the anagrams, then this, according to Saussure, simply demonstrates that 
our conception of Latin phonology is flawed:
1. Every u for o must be assumed (in 397) to be in the condition of o. (But still, 
perhaps some internal u’s for o?)
2. Every u for oi is still oi. And of course, u for ou is ou.
3. Every i for ei is still ei, and the only question would be if, in turn, ei originat-
ing in the final oi were not kept as oi. I myself generally accept ei, and the 
anagrams seem to require it. (48)
Before long, Saussure is finding anagrams not only throughout the Saturnian 
corpus but also in golden-age Latin, Homeric Greek, and even in Latin prose.
 Saussure was well aware of the questions his findings proposed. If it is true 
that anagrams appear according to a thoroughly logical and discernible pat-tern throughout a significant portion of Latin verse, then what accounts for 
this pattern? Was it simply a method of composition well known to antiquity 
but that has failed to materialize in any of the ars poetica that have survived? 
Or do anagrams “emanate” in some way from poetical language behavior—a sort of verbal subconscious lying beneath the apparent text? Or is it merely 
the case that any significant sample of text will yield anagrams (particularly 
when the interpreter is committed to finding them)?
 Such questions seem so natural to us that we tend to overlook the obvi-
ous similarities between Saussure’s apparently eccentric inquiries and the 
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   47 10/27/11   1:54 PM
48 chapter 3
more ordinary act of literary-critical interpretation. Literary-critical insight 
begins with a change of vision—what Wittgenstein called the “dawning of 
an aspect” ( Philosophical  194). Sometimes that experience is sudden and 
slightly mysterious, as when one notices a pun only after several readings of a passage or sees a connection between a passage of text in one book and a passage in another; at other times (in literary criticism, one should say most 
other times) the noticing is the result of some sort of overt manipulation of 
the text. We read out of order, we translate and paraphrase, we look only 
at certain words or certain constellations of surrounding context. The text 
hasn’t changed its graphic content any more than the duck-rabbit changes 
between one’s seeing it one way one moment and another the next. But the 
text quite literally assumes a different organization from what it had before. 
Once a new aspect/pattern has been discovered, one immediately begins to 
test the viability of that pattern. How often does it appear? How generally 
does it apply? Further alteration of the text is unavoidable at this stage. In 
the passage quoted above, Saussure both alters his text to meet his pattern 
(“Every u for o must be assumed to be in the condition of o”) and alters his 
sense of pattern in light of the text (“the anagrams seem to require it”). Like any literary critic, Saussure deforms and reforms his text, revealing unknown 
aspects of its ontology—literally creating it anew.
 The risks of deformation are of a piece with the dangers of rhetoric itself. 
“In short, we can see outlined here the risks of an illusion—risks of which Saussure was fully aware and for which a formula might be expressed in this 
way: every complex structure furnishes an observer with a range of elements 
which will allow for him to choose a sub-ensemble apparently endowed with 
sense, and for which nothing prohibits a priori  a logical or chronological 
antecedent” (Starobinsky 44). In one sense, deformation is the only rational 
response to complexity. Nearly all deformative procedures (which include 
outline, paraphrase, translation, and even genre description) are intended 
to alleviate some difficulty, in the same way that Dickinson’s procedure is 
presented as if it were the cure to an ailment. All textual entities allow for 
deformation, and given that interpretation occurs amid a textual field that 
is by nature complex, polysemic, and multi-referential, one might say that 
most entities require it. Seen in this light, deformation is simply a part of 
our permanent capacity for sense-making. But what if, as Starobinsky sug-
gests, nothing prohibits  that sense-making? Is not the entire notion of “sense” 
called into question if complex structures will always lead to the discovery of patterns that we can then call meaningful? It is precisely this fear of an 
eviscerated objectivity that gives rise to those rhetorical structures that work 
to conceal the deformations that lie between text and interpretation. Criti-
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   48 10/27/11   1:54 PM
 Potential Readings 49
cal discourse traditionally demands that patterns correspond to the content 
of the author’s consciousness, or resonate in some way with sociohistorical 
“facts, ” or simply occur with enough frequency to merit naming. Anything 
else is open to the charge of being deemed either nonsensical or too aimless 
to qualify as critically coherent. Saussure considers a number of possible explanations for the anagram. 
Perhaps the anagram is essentially hieratic in nature. Perhaps the frequent 4–3–3-3 blocks of syllables were originally magical formulas, or prayers, or 
perhaps hymns or funerary verses that contain the name of a god or other 
sacred word out of deference to the deity (or out of necessity for the spell) 
(Starobinsky 41). Survival of the form, then, would not be the secret passing 
on of some sort of occult knowledge, but simply that familiar linguistic/
anthropological phenomenon wherein the form of a religious ritual survives 
long after the initial context has vanished. The absolute silence of the ancients 
on the subject of anagrams would therefore seem to indicate either a subject 
of extreme secrecy or a formalism too commonplace to require elucidation. 
Perhaps the anagram is merely the natural outcome of an ordinary aesthetic 
process. Beginning with the anagram, one notices a series of sounds and de-
cides to work them into the verse, or the verse yields a series of sounds that 
one recognizes anagrammatically, and thus continues the pattern throughout.
 Saussure considers the various objections at length. The question seems 
unresolvable from a historical standpoint; the ancients leave us with no refer -
ence to the practice whatsoever. Statistical analysis seems likewise futile. Too 
few anagrams in too few poems is as damaging to the validity of the theory 
as too many anagrams in too many poems. But in the end Saussure remains 
certain that his inquiries bear witness to some sort of truth:
The “rules” representing so many accumulated powers seem to tip the balance 
in favor of accepting that anagrams are illusory. I respond to that with a certain confidence, committing myself to the future: A time will come when many 
more rules will be added to those we already have, in which the present stock 
of rules will appear to be simply the skeleton or framework of the complete structure. One will, on the other hand, have had time—since at present we have only taken up the most basic elements—to appreciate that the hypogram in itself is so incontestable that there is not need for anxiety, either about its 
actual existence or its precision, because of the many possibilities available for 
its various realizations. (Starobinsky 102)
One wonders, given the nature of deformative activity, whether any critical 
act could ever be considered “incontestable, ” or if, given the rubric of objec-
tivity, the movement from text to interpretation could ever be free of anxiety.
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   49 10/27/11   1:54 PM
50 chapter 3
 Saussure’s inquiries into anagrams, written just prior to his famous lectures 
on linguistics, were never published. Apart from a few carefully worded let-
ters, he appears to have kept his research to himself. Without proof—and 
proof meant conscious deliberation on the part of an author—he couldn’t 
bring himself to announce the anagram as having critical value.
As his study of hypograms progressed, Ferdinand de Saussure showed himself 
capable of finding an increasing quantity of names hidden beneath a line of poetry. .  . . But if this approach had been further developed, it would soon have 
become a quagmire. Wave upon wave of possible names would have taken shape beneath his alert and disciplined eye. Is this the vertigo of error? It is also the discovery of the simple truth that language is an infinite resource, and that behind each phrase lies hidden the multiple clamor from which it has detached itself to appear before us in its isolated individuality. (Starobinsky 122)
The “multiple clamor” is nothing less than the text’s status as a work already 
deformed, already mediated by the accumulated experience of language that 
produced it and that the reader must have in order to read it. It lies “hidden” 
only if we believe that the new organizations that arise from deformative 
activity are revelatory of something inherent in the text before the act of 
interpretation. For Saussure, there was no satisfactory argument to be made 
for this preexistence, no line to be drawn between the deformative act and 
interpretative illumination. Sometime in the spring of 1909, Saussure’s stud-
ies of anagrams cease.
 Saussure’s anxieties are rooted in a basic assumption about text and mean -
ing. Statements of methodology, generalizations about literary significance, surmises concerning authorial intention, and various other forms of literary-
theoretical philosophizing about these engagements all give the appearance of 
existing outside or somehow above the textuality of the object under discus -
sion; even when we speak of meaning as “in” or arising “from” the text, we nonetheless proceed as if the meanings we generate and the texts themselves 
were separate entities. This same belief does not obtain for algorithmic pro-
cedures, which, because they explicitly deform their originals, tread upon 
the rhetorically maintained separation between text and reading. Reading 
strategies based substantially upon such procedures, like the ancient practice 
of gematria , the anti-art poetics of the Dadaists, the backward reading of 
Dickinson, and the “random” textuality of the I Ching,  lie entirely outside 
the reading strategies licensed by contemporary literary-critical practice. They may constitute clever forms of amusement, anarchic forms of literary 
protest, vehicles for religious insight, and perhaps even objects of serious 
anthropological study, but not serious literary criticism itself. Y et the genera -
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   50 10/27/11   1:54 PM
 Potential Readings 51
tion of literary-critical readings (as distinct from the more general activity of 
interpretation in ordinary language behavior) depends precisely upon such 
deformative procedures as that which Dickinson and Saussure suggest. To 
read a poem as postcolonial artifact, as evidence of generic protest, as cultural 
touchstone (the preposition in each case signaling the onset of deformation) 
is to present a narrative that depends upon a number of discrete (de)formal 
procedures. These procedures have the effect of creating alternative texts that 
form the basis of further elucidations.
 This principle is amply demonstrated on page eight of the nearly two-thou -
sand-page Norton Anthology of Poetry.  There, students encounter a footnote 
to the Anglo-Saxon poem commonly referred to as “The Wife’s Lament” that 
neatly captures the wonderfully beguiling duplicities upon which criticism 
depends, while at the same time echoing the combinatorial logic of the I Ching, 
the potentiality of Oulipian forms, and the anxious methodology of Saussure:
This poem appears in the Exeter Book, a tenth-century manuscript collection of 
Old English poetry, immediately following a series of riddles. Different transla -
tions offer somewhat different interpretations of the poem; the one below sug-
gests that the poem is a dramatic monologue spoken by a wife separated from 
her husband. Some critics have suggested that the poem may be an allegory in which the speaker represents either the soul or the children of Israel during the Babylonian captivity. (Ferguson, Salter, and Stallworthy 8)
The idea that a poem might have an apparent meaning in addition to other 
analogical and typological meanings constitutes one of the core principles of 
criticism as such, with a tradition stretching back to the biblical hermeneutics 
of the Patristic age. Spatial metaphors suggest themselves, and our students 
intuitively echo the language of biblical exegetes by speaking of this double-
ness in terms of meaning and “deeper” meaning. This footnote, however, sub -
tly indicates that the doubleness here is more than usually problematic, since the editors felt compelled to note the obvious fact that different translations 
yield different interpretations. In fact, the “correct” interpretation of “The 
Wife’s Lament” is one of the more hotly debated subjects in medieval studies.
 The critic Jerome Mandel, in a book that goes by the magnificent title 
Alternative Readings in Old English Poetry, suggests that the poem “suffers from too many interpretations”:
The speaker of the poem, the “I, ” may be either a man or a woman who is ei-
ther young or old. His or her lord or husband (1) is exiled as a result of a feud, (2) goes into exile voluntarily, (3) goes on a military expedition, (4) goes on a 
journey over the sea, or (5) is forced into exile by kinsmen who hate him or 
by revolutionary forces for political reasons. Either he returns or he does not 
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   51 10/27/11   1:54 PM
52 chapter 3
return. The wife is maligned to her husband or to another lord (from whom she 
has sought protection) for marital unfaithfulness, witchcraft, plotting against him, or some other crime. She is exiled once or twice, voluntarily or by force, 
into her own (or her husband’s) land or into a foreign land. He banishes her 
because he has been tricked or he has not been tricked. She looks upon him as cruel for banishing her or for plotting some evil (perhaps murder) against her; or she looks upon him as sympathetic to her, an unwilling dupe of his kinsmen. Either she bewails her husband’s altered mood (his hatred of her) or 
reveals her unqualified pity and respect for him who is guiltless and victimized. 
Or, if there are two lords, one may be cruel and one sympathetic to her. She must endure his hatred of her, or she must suffer for the hatred (probably the result of a feud) that others direct at her lord, or she must suffer persecution 
by the world in general. Her place of banishment or captivity is an eorðscrafu 
which is either (1) a ruin overgrown with briars, (2) a grove-dwelling, (3) a 
cave, (4) a succession of chambers as in natural caves, (5) a heathenish abode, (6) a prison, (7) some sort of sanctuary or monastery or nunnery, (8) an old and neglected but fortified building, (9) pit-houses or sunken huts, or (10) the 
grave (cf. The Wanderer 84). The poem closes with either a cry of despair, a 
prediction of trouble for her husband, gnomic verses suggested by reflection on her husband (or herself, or himself), an exhortation, or a curse directed either at her husband or at a third person (perhaps one of the mischievous relatives) who has come between them. (149–50)
 The existence of so many competing, perhaps incommensurable readings 
of a work of literature is part of the normal course of literary studies. Mandel’s 
extraordinary literature review, satirical yet clearly the result of a certain 
sense of frustration, captures well the ways in which minor alterations in a 
text—subtle changes of perspective and emphasis—metastasize throughout 
an interpretation. The paragraph almost resembles the control structures of 
modern programming languages: if x is true, then y is also true, or else we 
must default to a different set of variables or pursue a different procedure. The combinatorics of the interpretative field have elicited at least one plea 
of nolo contendere on the part of a critic, who, in a footnote to an article 
subtitled “‘The Wife’s Lament’ as Riddle, ” stated, “No translation of the entire 
poem has been provided because any translation is tendentious, including 
mine” (Walker-Pelkey 242).
 Mandel’s own transformation of the poem begins with the simplest of 
procedures: he interprets (which is to say, substitutes) the “Ic” of the poem as referring to a man, thus rejecting the idea that the feminine endings of 
geomorre, minre, and sylfre (“sorrowful, ” “my, ” and “self” respectively) in the 
opening lines of the poem prove that the speaker is a woman. This change in perspective—ultimately, and most importantly, a graphic change that will be 
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   52 10/27/11   1:54 PM
 Potential Readings 53
reinscribed into his article—radically alters the basic narrative of the poem. 
R. F. Leslie, an older critic often cited in the critical literature surrounding the 
poem, had called “The Wife’s Lament” “one of the few poems in Old English 
literature dealing with the relationship between a man and a woman, and the 
only comprehensive study of a woman’s thoughts and feelings”—a reading explicitly grounded in “the feminine forms in the opening lines” (3).
 Interpreting the “Ic” as a woman allows certain forms of resolution by 
relating thematic aspects of the poem, but it complicates other aspects. The chronology of the events related in the poem seems particularly problematic 
when one follows through Mandel’s exposition of the “ors” that radiate from 
that decision. This is where the rhetorical motives of criticism that seek to 
conceal deformative procedures are most evident:
Most critics search for some order in the sequence of events which, they say, 
are presented incoherently because the speaker is a distraught woman. The lack of strict chronology reflects the poet’s “attempt to portray excited feelings” 
(Chadwyk 31); or “the breaks in continuity are completely consistent with the 
ebb and flow of a woman’s feelings” (Leslie 3); or “The intense emotion of the wife and the rather unsystematic organization of the poem in general indicates that the wife’s hasty summary of antecedent action may be confused and un-chronological” (Ward 27 [ . . . ]). (Mandel 150)
Mandel’s paraphrase of the poem is completely counter to the one suggested 
in the footnote in the Norton Anthology. Instead of a wife who, having been 
placed in an “earth-cave” (eorðscræfe) by her husband’s kinsmen, pines for her exiled husband, the poem becomes a lament by a man who, having 
been placed in “earth-caves” (eorðscrafu) by his lord’s kinsmen, laments the 
tragedy of his situation. Just as a single grammatical assumption sets off this 
paraphrase, so the paraphrase alters the grammatical understanding of the 
most contested lines in the poem: the identity of the geong mon in line 42, 
the reading of the two sy clauses (lines 45–46), and the grammatical mean-
ing of þæt, which governs the main clauses of the presumably gnomic end 
of the poem. Once again, the interpretation calls for a graphical reordering of the poem itself:
I want to offer a new reading of these lines based upon the premise that the 
speaker is a thane separated from his lord. It involves identifying the geong mon (42a) as any indefinite young man with specific reference to the speaker 
of the poem. It also involves re-punctuating the sy-clauses. Heretofore, (1) 
sinsorgna gedreag  (45a) has most often been read a variation of breostceare 
(44b); (2) eol his worulde wyn (46a) has been read as the subject of sy in l. 45b; 
and (3) the subject of sy in l. 46b has been the understood subject “he. ” Thus, 
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   53 10/27/11   1:54 PM
54 chapter 3
taking sy as optative, the sy clauses become a malediction: may all his worldly 
joy be dependent upon himself, may [he] be banished into a distant land” (168).
The Norton Anthology has this same line as “ All earthly joy / Must come from 
his own self. Since my dear lord / Is outcast, far off in a distant land” (9).5
 “The Wife’s Lament” is the sum of its transformations from one text-space 
to another. It began (we presume) as a shifting set of sonic events, was in-
scribed onto the pages of a vellum manuscript, was transcribed into a diverse 
set of printed character formations, was translated into modern English, and 
now stands reconstructed in dozens of critical studies where it is commonly 
referred to by a title that does not appear in any manuscript. We might con-
clude that “The Wife’s Lament” is a testimony to the poststructuralist insight 
that textuality is a shifting pattern of signification incapable of coalescing 
into any stable textual identity. We would do better to conclude that “The 
Wife’s Lament” is a work that is always coalescing into stability by virtue of 
the readerly process of deformation.
 Mandel’s unusual candor as a deformative reader is perhaps licensed by 
the ambiguities—errors in transcription and transmission, for example—that naturally inhere in a medieval poem of uncertain provenance. But that is not 
to say that such operations are any less prevalent in readings of a less technical 
nature. Consider, for example, how Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick summarizes her 
now-famous argument concerning the dynamics of male homosocial desire 
in the English novel:
The subject of this book is a relatively short, recent, and accessible passage of 
English culture, chiefly embodied in the mid-eighteenth- to mid-nineteenth-century novel. The attraction of the period to theorists of many disciplines 
is obvious: condensed, self-reflective, and widely influential change in eco -
nomic, ideological, and gender arrangements. I will be arguing that concomitant 
changes in the structure of the continuum of male “homosocial desire” were tightly, often causally bound up with the other more visible changes; that the emerging pattern of male friendship, mentorship, entitlement, rivalry, and 
hetero- and homosexuality was in an intimate and shifting relation to class; 
and that no element of that pattern can be understood outside of its relation to women and the gender system as a whole. (1)
This passage presents general conclusions on the part of the author and 
holds out the promise of a generalized understanding for the reader. Such 
guarantees represent the most common way we communicate literary-critical 
understanding; rhetorically, the passage has the effect of letting us know 
that Sedgwick’s interpretation of gender dynamics will serve to elucidate the 
eighteenth- and nineteenth-century novel. Y et one can easily trace the linea -
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   54 10/27/11   1:54 PM
 Potential Readings 55
ments of deformative analysis that led to her conclusions. Male homosocial 
desire is a “structure, ” a “continuum, ” and a “system”—a field of “patterns” 
and “relations” that she will soon make “visible” to us. Sedgwick’s book is 
ostensibly about the English novel, but it is more fundamentally a presenta-
tion of these structures and patterns. Her reading, in fact, depends upon one of the most famous patterns in literary study: “The graphic schema on 
which I am going to be drawing most heavily in the readings that follow is 
the triangle. The triangle is useful as a figure by which the ‘commonsense’ of 
our intellectual tradition schematizes erotic relations, and because it allows us 
to condense into a juxtaposition with that folk-perception several somewhat 
different streams of recent thought” (21). The triangle indeed functions not as 
an algorithm, but as something more basic: a pattern transducer—a machine 
for mapping one symbol set onto another. Rhetorically, it asks, “Have you 
ever read one of Shakespeare’s sonnets as a triangle?”
 Sedgwick uses this particular pattern transducer to read Shakespeare’s son -
nets in a way that is both trenchant and novel. She begins by acknowledging the “notorious mysteries” that seem to set the poems (and their readers) free 
from any stable extratextual environment: “whether they are a sequence, 
when they were written, to whom and to how many people addressed, how 
autobiographical, how conventional, why published, etc. ” (29). The interpre -
tation relies upon an assumption that this absence helps to enable—namely, that the sonnets form “a continuous erotic narrative” played out among “the 
poet, a fair youth, a rival poet, and a dark lady” (29). Armed with the notion 
of a triangulation between erotic antagonists, Sedgwick is able to transform 
this perception of general pattern into a vision of these poems as erotic ne-
gotiations between men. Sedgwick’s graphical maneuver explicitly deforms the poem from one 
state to another. As an instance of language behavior, such alternate forma-tions constitute the common currency of literary-critical (and much general 
human communicative) behavior. If one were to ask Sedgwick, “What does 
Sonnet 42 mean?” and she responded by repeating the poem, we would be 
within our rights to wonder if she understood what “meaning” was. To ask 
for an interpretation is to ask for more—and different—words. To present 
the poem as a triangle, to suggest that such triangles may lie elsewhere, and 
to use the triangle as a means for clarifying and elucidating the hidden, 
nondominant motives of a text is to deform with a purpose.
 It is precisely the absence of this detail that renders Dickinson’s suggestion 
(and the algorithmic criticism from which it descends) so strange. The appar -
ent randomness with which she suggests the procedure and the implicit faith 
in that “Something” that will overtake the mind deliberately eschews those 
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   55 10/27/11   1:54 PM
56 chapter 3
rhetorical procedures that seek to conceal the status of a text as alternative. 
For a critical argument to succeed, it must present its alternative text as a 
legitimate counterpart—even a consequence—of the original. Sedgwick can 
re-form Sonnet 144 into
love #1 love #2
comfort despair
better worser
man  woman
right fair coloured ill
angel devil
purity foul pride
angel fiend
from me #1 from me #2
friend #1 friend #2
. . . . . .
(30)
because we are on the way to a justification for why the alternative text elu -
cidates the original:
The basic configuration here, then, includes a stylized female who functions 
as a subject of action but not of thought; a stylized male who functions as pure object; and a less stylized male speaker who functions as a subject of thought 
but not of action. Uncommonsensical as it may be, this conformation is very 
characteristic of the Sonnets as a whole, and is recurrent in the plays. What interests me here is not the devastating thoroughness with which the Sonnets record and thematize misogyny and gynephobia, but rather the ways in which that plays off against the range of male bonds and speaker’s programmatic as-
sertions of symmetry. (33)
Sedgwick’s deformation is indeed “uncommonsensical, ” but as she herself 
acknowledges, that deformation has led to a “conformation” now made vis-
ible throughout Shakespeare’s work.
 By one definition of the term, “deformation” suggests nothing more than 
the basic textual maneuvers by which form gives way to form—the “de” functioning not as a privative, but as relatively straightforward signifier of 
change. But any reading that undertakes such changes (as all reading must) 
remains threatened with the possibility that deformation signals loss, cor -
ruption, and illegitimacy. Even now, in our poststructuralist age, we speak of “faithfulness” to a text, of “flawed” or “misguided” readings, but any marking 
of a text, any statement that is not a re-performance of a statement, must break 
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   56 10/27/11   1:54 PM
 Potential Readings 57
faith with the ability of the text to mean and re-guide form into alternative 
intelligibilities.
 Algorithmic criticism is, in this sense, nothing more than a self-conscious 
attempt to place such re-performances into a computational environment. But within this move there lies a fundamental remonstration against our anxiety about the relationship between text and reading. Those activities that are usu -
ally seen as anathema to the essential goal of literary criticism—quantitative analysis chief among them—will need to be reconsidered if it turns out that 
backward poems lie at the root of our forward endeavors. Our fear of breaking 
faith with the text may also need to give way to a renewed faith in the capacity 
of subjective engagement for liberating the potentialities of meaning.
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   57 10/27/11   1:54 PM
 4 the turing text
Even scholars working far outside the disciplines that make up the field of 
artificial intelligence are familiar with the basic elements of the Turing test, 
in which the machine’s ability to mimic human language is presented as the 
touchstone of intelligent behavior. It is usually presented in the following 
way: A human being and an entity that is either a human being or a machine 
are separated from each other by a wall. The first human is allowed to pose 
questions to the unseen entity by means of a teleprompter. If that human 
being is unable to determine from the responses given whether the entity 
on the other side is a machine or a human being, that entity is for all intents 
and purposes intelligent.1
 Turing’s thought experiment has led to innumerable meditations on the 
possibilities for intelligent machines. But at the heart of the Turing test lies a 
brilliant, if unsuccessful, attempt to move attention away from the “how” of 
imperative process toward the results of rhetorical persuasion. Rather than 
having humans compete against machines in their ability to generate correct 
utterances, the test sets the machine’s ability to generate intelligibility against 
the human’s capacity to generate theories by which the origins and form of 
that intelligibility may be explained. Even if it fails to persuade (and many 
have suggested that the test is too easy), it fails in an entirely spectacular 
way. Our attention becomes focused not merely on whether its utterances 
are true, but on whether its utterances are possible. The “text” of the test is 
one in which we move from the already potentialized valences of dialogue 
to ruminations about the origins of that dialogue.
 That one can move fruitfully between these two registers is amply, if ironi -
cally, illustrated in the case of Joseph Weizenbaum’s 1960 program ELIZA, 
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   58 10/27/11   1:54 PM
 The Turing Text 59
which imitates (Weizenbaum would say “parodies”) the behavior of a Rog-
erian psychiatrist:2
ELIZA:  Hello, I am a computer program.
you:  Are you?
ELIZA:  You’re not really talking about me—are you?
you:  Can you help me?
ELIZA:  Does someone else believe I help you?
you:  I’m thinking you might be able to help me!
ELIZA:  Do you wish to believe I might be able to help you?
you:  Yes.
ELIZA:  Please go on.
you:  I’m concerned about my computer.
ELIZA:  What do you think about machines?
you:  I think machines can be very useful for scholars.
ELIZA:  Why do you mention computers?
you:  I don’t know.
ELIZA:  Don’t you really know? (Chatbot::ELIZA)
Weizenbaum made no pretensions toward setting aside the “how” of his pro -
gram. Behind ELIZA ’s dialogue lies a fairly rudimentary keyword substitu -
tion algorithm that mostly parrots back the user’s responses (while trying to 
avoid repetition). The effect, though, is legendary. There are several anecdotes 
(some undoubtedly apocryphal, all plausible), in which ELIZA tricks some -
one’s employer or colleague into thinking that ELIZA is a real person, and Weizenbaum himself observed (to his horror and astonishment) that people 
regularly developed strong emotional bonds with the program. In one in -
stance he found that his secretary would insist that he leave the room while she used the program; others were offended when asked to view transcripts 
of their interactions with the program, claiming it was an invasion of their 
privacy. According to Weizenbaum, “ A number of practicing psychiatrists 
seriously believed the DOCTOR computer program could grow into a nearly 
completely automatic form of psychotherapy” (5).
 ELIZA ’s obvious association with the Turing test tends to transform dis-
cussion of it into debates over Turing’s definition of intelligence. And since ELIZA operates within a realm normally considered part of medical therapy 
for mental disorders experienced by real human beings, the program adds to 
this a set of obvious ethical questions. Weizenbaum was undoubtedly correct 
in stating his objection to the idea that therapists might one day be replaced 
with machines: “I had thought it essential, as a prerequisite to the very pos-
sibility that one person might help another learn to cope with his emotional problems, that the helper himself participate in the other’s experience of 
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   59 10/27/11   1:54 PM
60 chapter 4
those problems and, in large part by way of his own empathetic recognition 
of them, himself come to understand them” (7). The fact that such an argu-
ment seemed necessary indicates that at least some users believed ELIZA 
was capable of helping them. The program has been cited as an example of 
what Karl Mannheim called the “documentary method” of interpretation, in which appearances are understood to account for an underlying reality 
that is then used as a source for interpretation of that reality (Suchman 23). 
But while this might account for the occasions when ELIZA fools people 
into thinking that their interlocutor is a human, it does not explain instances 
when the “underlying reality” is understood by everyone involved (including 
the famous secretary) to be a piece of software wholly incapable of empa -
thetic recognition or understanding. Even if one is fooled by the Turing test, the interaction is permeated with artifice. From the start, the entity on the 
other side of the wall is “a creature simultaneously animal and machine, who 
populates worlds ambiguously natural and crafted” (Haraway 150).
 In the mid-1960s the American ethnomethodologist Harold Garfinkel 
conducted an experiment that gives some insight into the specific contours of how one might be fooled by the mingling of text and machine. He asked 
a group of American college students to agree to be counseled over an inter -
com. Students could pose questions to the human interlocutor in the form of yes/no responses. What the students did not know is that the pattern of 
responses was essentially random; that is, an imperative algorithm of the 
most rudimentary kind—a script that, though read by a human, consisted 
of a preset pattern of “yes” and “no” for each of the subjects. Here is a partial 
transcript of one of the interactions in which a male Jewish student asks the 
“counselor” whether he should continue dating a non-Jewish girl:
SUBJECT:  Okay, this is a situation that I am presented with. I happen to be of 
the Jewish faith and I have been dating a Gentile girl now for about two 
months. My dad is not directly opposed to this situation, but I feel at the 
same time that he is not exactly pleased with it. Mother feels that as long 
as Dad is not directly opposed to this situation that I should go ahead and continue dating until he makes some direct statement to the contrary. My reason for feeling why he is not too pleased with this is that he will come up with digs and sayings that make me feel very ill at ease about dating the girl. 
My question is, do you feel under the present circumstances that I should 
continue or stop dating this girl? Let me put that in a positive way. Do you feel that I should continue dating this girl?
EXPERIMENTER:  My answer is no.
SUBJECT:  No. Well, that is kind of interesting. I kinda feel that there is really no 
great animosity between Dad and I but, well, perhaps he feels that greater 
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   60 10/27/11   1:54 PM
 The Turing Text 61
dislike will grow out of this. I suppose or maybe it is easier for an outsider 
to see certain things that I am blind to at this moment.
  I would like to ask my second question now.
EXPERIMENTER:  Okay.
SUBJECT:  Do you feel that I should have a further discussion with Dad about 
this situation or not? Should I have further discussion with Dad over this subject about dating the Gentile girl?
EXPERIMENTER:  My answer is yes.
SUBJECT:  Well I feel that is reasonable but I really don’t know what to say to 
him. I mean he seems to be not really too understanding. In other words he seems to be afraid really to discuss the situation. I mean at least it appears that way to me so far. But I guess if it is worthwhile to me, if I really want 
to continue to date her that I will go on and have this discussion with Dad. 
I really don’t know what to say because I mean I am dating her. I am not in love with her or anything but I really never know what is going to come out. I guess we should have a discussion based on what the future possibilities might be and how he would feel about that. He may not be too strongly 
opposed now because we are only dating, but perhaps he sees future com-
plications that he would really like to get off his chest at the moment. I am ready for my third question now.
  If after having my conversation with Dad and he says to continue dating 
her, but at the same time he gives me an impression that he is really not, he 
really does not want me to date her, but he is only doing it because he wants 
to be a good Dad, should under these conditions, should I still date the girl?
EXPERIMENTER:  My answer is yes.
SUBJECT:  Well I am actually surprised at the answer. I expected a no answer 
on that. Perhaps this is because you are not quite aware of my dad and his 
reactions and he seems to be the type of person that is sensitive and therefore 
he is very careful in the way that he will handle things. Even though he might have said go ahead and date her I perhaps would feel guilty in knowing that he really did not want me to continue to date her. Though I don’t know that 
it would actually help the situation any. So, well, perhaps we will look into 
this further and that is another question. (Garfinkel 80–81)
Garfinkel noticed that “Present answers provide answers to further questions 
that will never be asked, ” that “Where answers are unsatisfying or incomplete, 
the subjects are willing to wait for later answers in order to decide the sense 
of previous ones, ” and that “When answers are incongruous or contradictory, 
subjects are able to continue by finding that the ‘advisor’ has learned more 
in the meantime, or that he has changed his mind, or that perhaps he is not 
sufficiently acquainted with the intricacies of the problem, or the fault was 
in the question so that another phrasing is necessary” (90–91). Even com-
pound questions that are not logically tractable in terms of yes/no answers 
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   61 10/27/11   1:54 PM
62 chapter 4
were interpreted as appropriate (90). The subject strives at all costs to make 
sense of the exchange.
 One investigator describes Garfinkel’s experimental methodology as 
“cold-blooded” (Zeitlyn 192), and, as with ELIZA, the possibility is raised of something unethical and duplicitous having occurred. Y et it is clear that real knowledge was gained. One witnesses the subject turning the matter over in 
his mind—exploring options, considering alternatives, and generally seeking 
a solution to his dilemma. One might argue that a real psychologist capable 
of empathy (and permitted to pose questions and answer at length) would be 
preferable, but one might also argue that it is precisely the arbitrary nature 
of the answers—and their informational paucity—that probes the subject 
into considering questions from new angles. Garfinkel’s program might even 
be thought of, following Marshall McLuhan, as a “cooling off ” of the hot 
medium of therapy. The inclusive and highly participatory regime of “yes” 
and “no” serves to weaken the dominating intensity of interactions, which, 
like a loquacious therapist, are more focused on leaving us “well filled with 
data” (McLuhan 23). The counselor (or, better, the “program”) is incapable of 
empathy and therefore impervious to influence flowing in the other direction. 
It cannot tell the student what it thinks the student wants to hear. It cannot 
avoid uncomfortable or stressful moments in the midst of the exchange. 
And because there is very little narrative to the patterns of “yes” and “no, ” 
the student has to work harder to construct narratives of explanation. Yet it 
would be difficult to argue that the student had thought of things “that way” 
before entering into the exchange.
 Something like this occurs when one considers text-analytical results 
generated using imperative routines. If something is known from a word-
frequency list or a data visualization, it is undoubtedly a function of our desire 
to make sense of what has been presented. We fill in gaps, make connections 
backward and forward, explain inconsistencies, resolve contradictions, and, 
above all, generate additional narratives in the form of declarative realiza-
tions. Like any reading, readings of imperatively generated results allege 
numerous outside contexts and prompt various forms of cathexis. Like all 
textual artifacts, they rely upon a prior experience of language and a will 
toward sense-making. But like a therapy session with ELIZA, they are suf-
fused with the certain knowledge of something crude lying beneath—a bare 
algorithm that cannot allege anything. As with the Turing test, the reader 
invariably engages not one text, but two texts operating within an orbit of 
fruitful antagonism: the text that creates the results (the code) and the results 
themselves. The self-conscious “reader” of ELIZA or the Turing test is not 
only responding to the computer’s prompts but also evaluating the logic and 
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   62 10/27/11   1:54 PM
 The Turing Text 63
appropriateness of those responses. Even if one succumbs to momentary 
belief, it is not in the same way that one succumbs to the illusions of a horror 
movie. “It’s only a movie” serves to break us out of the dominating force of 
illusion; “it’s only a machine” breaks us in to the doubleness—the divided 
textual field—that undergirds all computational engagements. Algorithmic criticism is easily conceived as the form of engagement that 
results when imperative routines are inserted into the wider constellation of texts stipulated by critical reading. But it is also to be understood as the cre -
ation of interactive programs in which readers are forced to contend not only with deformed texts, but with the “how” of those deformations. Algorithmic 
criticism therefore begins with the machinic inflection of programming—a 
form of textual creation that, despite the apparent determinism of the un-
derlying machine, proceeds always in organic and unexpected ways. Gilles 
Deleuze and Félix Guattari might have been describing the creation of such 
programs in their ethical injunctions toward the Body without Organs (BwO):
Lodge yourself on a stratum, experiment with the opportunities it offers, find 
an advantageous place on it, find potential movements of deterritorialization, possible lines of flight, experience them, produce flow conjunctions here and 
there, try out continuums of intensities segment by segment, have a small 
plot of new land at all times. It is through meticulous relation with the strata that one succeeds in freeing lines of flight, causing conjugation flows to pass and escape and bringing forth continuous intensities for a BwO. . . . You have constructed your own little machine, ready when needed to be plunged into 
other collective machines. (161)
The stratum that we lodge ourselves upon with algorithmic criticism is one 
in which both results and the textual generation of results are systemati -
cally manipulated and transformed, connected and reconnected with unlike things. It is by nature a “meticulous” process, since to program is to move 
within a highly constrained language that is wholly intolerant toward devia-
tion from its own internal rules. But the goal of such constraint is always 
unexpected forms of knowing within the larger framework of more collec -
tive understandings. The algorithmic critic, as the author of the deformation machine from which he or she hopes to draw insight, becomes both the 
analyst and the analysand—ELIZA ’s interlocutor and its creator. It is nei -
ther immoderate nor facile to suggest that the encroachment of such “little machines” into the space of literary-critical work represents a revolution -
ary provocation against the methodologies that have guided criticism and philosophy for centuries. The hermeneutics of “what is” becomes mingled 
with the hermeneutics of “how to. ”
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   63 10/27/11   1:54 PM
64 chapter 4
 Students being initiated into the precise discipline in which machines are 
created and discussed are often asked to write a program that can generate 
a list of numbers in which each successive number is the sum of the two 
previous numbers in the sequence:
1 1 2 3 5 8 13 21 34 55 89 144 233 . . .
That this arrangement, which is commonly known as the Fibonacci sequence, 
would come to be associated with computation—that it would occupy a 
place only slightly beneath “Hello, world” in the first lispings of computer 
programmers—is perhaps ironic, given that the sequence first came to light 
in Europe in a book largely concerned with teaching others how to perform 
calculations effectively by hand. The name comes from the nickname of the 
author, Leonardo Pisano (c. 1170-c. 1250), whose Liber Abaci  contains not only 
the famous sequence (embedded in a fanciful problem involving the breeding of rabbits) but also the first successful popularization of the modus Indorum: 
the nine “Indian figures” that form the elementary units of the base-ten number system.
3 It is an ancient observation. The great Hindu grammarian 
Pingala, who called it mātrāmeru, or “the mountain of cadence, ” observed 
it in the metrical rhythms of Sanskrit more than two thousand years ago, 
and it has been rediscovered many times since. Over the centuries, the ratios 
implicit in the sequence (which, in a strange bit of mathematical serendip-
ity, converge toward the “golden ratio” of 1.6180339887) have been observed 
in everything from the pattern of spirals on a pine cone to the long-term 
behavior of the stock market.
 Before computers, most people would have understood the “how to” of 
the sequence as a text that descends in part from Fibonacci’s vital moment of cultural appropriation. Today it is a trivial matter to represent the general-
ized form of the Fibonacci sequence using standard mathematical notation:
 But this apparently simple equation contains a deeply subtle and difficult-
to-understand relationship that becomes evident only when one notices that 
F is part of the definition of F. In order to “solve” F for any value of n greater 
than 1, we need to apply the equation to itself. But how can one begin the process of understanding an equation that requires an understanding of the 
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   64 10/27/11   1:54 PM
 The Turing Text 65
equation? We could work it out on paper by substituting various numbers 
for n and trying to figure out how the equation works. That would perhaps 
convince us that the equation is correct, but our scribblings would not have the character of generalization evident in the formula. What is needed, then, 
is not a mathematical text, but an algorithmic text:
(define (fib n)
 (cond ((= n 0) 0)
  ((= n 1) 1)
  (else (+ (fib (– n 1))
   (fib (– n 2))))))
In one sense the difference is merely notational; even someone who is not 
familiar with the syntax of Scheme (the dialect of Lisp in which this program 
is written) can discern some of the same relationships that are expressed in 
the standard equation. As with the equation, the function (fib n) is defined 
in terms of (fib n).  But this notation possesses an explanatory power that 
is difficult to achieve with mathematical notation. The former tells us that 
the definition of F for numbers greater than 1 is related to F in a particular 
way; the latter describes a process in which we move step-by-step through the relationship itself. At a certain point, while reading the program, we 
find ourselves needing to go back to where we started in order to continue. 
At another point, we can no longer continue. And as we move through the 
notation, we generate the sequence in question.
 One might be tempted to say that what becomes known in the process of 
computing the Fibonacci sequence is simply a method by which one may generate the sequence. “Learning to program” is undoubtedly the process 
of learning such methods, and recursion is simply one way of accomplish-
ing the stated goal. But while both the equation and the program lead one 
ultimately toward appreciation of a pattern implicit in the natural numbers 
(the formal definition of which is also recursive), the two notations differ 
profoundly in terms of the type of knowing that each one both illuminates 
and demands. Harold Abelson and Gerald Sussman, in The Structure and 
Interpretation of Computer Programs,  explain: “The contrast between function 
and procedure is a reflection of the general distinction between describing properties of things and describing how to do things, or, as it is sometimes 
referred to, the distinction between declarative knowledge and imperative 
knowledge. In mathematics, we are usually concerned with declarative (what 
is) descriptions, whereas in computer science we are usually concerned with 
imperative (how to) descriptions” (26). Mathematics undergirds computing 
at every turn, and yet “executable mathematics” is more dream than reality 
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   65 10/27/11   1:54 PM
66 chapter 4
for designers of programming languages. Even Scheme, which is frequently 
thought of as a “functional” language (as opposed to a mostly imperative 
language like C), cannot but make plain the difference between a text that 
describes a relationship and one that can perform the relationships it de -
scribes. Y et the difference remains an epistemological one. If code represents 
a radical form of textuality, it is not merely because of what it allows us to do 
but also because of the way it allows us to think.
 Writing software that deforms texts in order to facilitate interpretation 
therefore places the critic in the midst of a peculiar form of textual appre-hension. In order to write the program, the critic must consider the “how 
to” of a deformative operation, but once that text is written, the output will 
be one that places the same critic into a critical relationship not only with 
the text of the result but with the text of the program as well. It is one thing 
to suspect (as with ELIZA) that something not quite human lies beneath the 
text from which one is drawing insight; it is another thing entirely to be the 
creator of that same monster. On the one hand, the process is iterative. The 
results modify our conceptions, which in turn help to modify the program 
that generated them. But in another sense it is a recursive process. In order 
to understand the text we must create another text that requires an under -
standing of the first text. The former might suggest analogies with science, but the latter suggests analogy with the deepest philosophical questions of 
the humanities, including the hermeneutic circle that has so preoccupied 
poststructuralist thought.
 That these recursions might represent useful critical engagements, apart 
from any definitive result they might yield, was driven home to me a few years ago. I was attempting to write a program that could draw directed graphs of the scene changes in Shakespeare’s plays. The program needed to divide the 
text of the plays into their constituent scenes so the program could render a 
visualization in which each scene was a node in a network (with lines between 
the nodes indicating the passage from one location in a play to another). It 
was not long before I began to realize that even the simplest aspects of this 
operation were fraught with ambiguity:
Things are easy, when, as in Twelfth Night, Shakespeare proceeds from the 
Duke’s palace (Act I, Scene i) to the Seacoast (Act I, Scene ii). It’s a lot more 
difficult to say what a scene is when Shakespeare says (as he does in The Tem-
pest) that it takes place in “another part of island” or (as in As You Like It) “a 
room in the palace. ” Is it the same part of the island we were looking at the last time we were at the other part of the island, or a new part? Can we assume that the Duke is speaking to his Lords in the same place where Celia and Rosalind have lately had their tête-á-tête, or would it make more sense to have it occur 
in a different place? What, after all, is a “place” in a play? A nineteenth-century 
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   66 10/27/11   1:54 PM
 The Turing Text 67
performance on the proscenium stage at Covent Garden might have let us 
know by a physical change of scenery (or perhaps not, in a production of Love’s 
Labour’s Lost where the entire play takes place in various parts of “The King of 
Navarre’s Park”). What we know of Shakespeare’s own stage would lead us to 
believe that such matters were left mainly to the audience, there being noth-ing but changes in character and costume to suggest a change of scene. And, of course, editors of Shakespeare’s plays do not uniformly agree on the scene divisions. Antony and Cleopatra, a play notable for its rapid scene changes and 
wide-ranging settings, had no typographical indications of scene divisions at all until 1709. (Ramsay 181–82)
Such conundrums are not unique either to Shakespeare’s plays or to criticism 
itself. The confusing nature of Shakespeare’s scene divisions are (and have 
been) an obvious occasion for reflection, since such apparently straightfor -
ward matters as “where does the scene start?” have a palpable effect on the way we read and understand them. A careful editor has the ability to facili-
tate that discussion by noting the “instability” of the text itself in a critical 
apparatus. Both activities allow for—and, indeed, thrive upon—ambiguity.
 The computer, though, demands an answer. And while many have argued 
that the computer’s demand is a reasonable one—a chance for literary critics to “get the facts straight”—such a vision of the computer tends to mistake the 
nature of critical inquiry. Neither the critic nor the editor (to say nothing of 
the theorist or the teacher) seeks a definitive answer to the questions posed 
by the apparently simple matter of where scenes begin and end, because 
criticism is concerned not with determining the facts of the text, but with 
the implications of the text in its potentialized form. The computer, if it is 
to participate at all, can only serve to broaden that potentiality. Even if the 
computer proposes facts, they will be relegated by the episteme of humanistic 
inquiry to the status of further evidence (which is to say, further opportunity 
for reflection). Questions will be raised about any possible choice. Suspicions 
will arise about the machinic text that underlies the apparent. Yet even as we 
consider such matters, the computer waits. It still demands an answer.
 The computer’s role is only to ask how our engagements might be fa -
cilitated, but it does so with a staggering range of provisos and conditions. 
Upon opening a programming manual, one discovers that all data must be 
expressed as strings or numbers; that ontologies may only take the form of 
lists, trees, or matrices; that everything is an object of a certain class. And over 
and above these, the computer demands abstraction and encapsulation of its 
components. The computer wants to know whether Jane Eyre is an object of 
type Novel with composed objects of type Chapter, Paragraph, Sentence, and Word, or whether Jane Eyre is a data stream that can act as the parameter to 
a function. Even if we are loath to regard texts as being, in the words of one 
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   67 10/27/11   1:54 PM
68 chapter 4
commentator, “ordered hierarchies of content objects” (DeRose), we must 
acknowledge that this is the way the computer would prefer to have it. Dino 
Buzetti, in pondering the nature of computational representations like XML, 
rightly concludes that “the computational notion of a text as a type of data 
does not coincide with the notion of the text as a product of literary activity” (61), and though he confidently calls for a digital content model that would 
achieve such a correspondence, it is not at all clear, assuming the present 
theory of computation, that such a model exists. We murder to compute.
 We sometimes imagine that if computers are to participate in human dis-
course, they must evince the freedom of that discourse. Yet that discourse—much like the dialogues generated by Turing and Weizenbaum—is suffused 
with constraint and stricture. Upon preparing to compose a sonnet, one 
discovers that it must be written in iambic pentameter and must adhere to 
a rigid rhyme scheme. On preparing to write a novel, one notices that con-
vention—historically a mighty, almost irrepressible constraint—imposes the 
existence of characters, dialogue, and plot. If one is to write, one is perforce 
constrained to words. One might argue that literary history is as much about 
rebellion from such strictures as compliance, but one could also say that the 
history of programming is likewise the history of rebellions that occur not 
in spite of the constraints but because of them. The word processor or Web 
browser does not inhere in the material. It is not, as Michelangelo is said 
to have believed, a matter of chipping away all that is not the sculpture. To 
contend with the “how to” of programming is to discover the potentialities 
of constraint. To read the outputted text is to do the same.
 Few texts illustrate this principle better than the Turing test itself, which 
proposes a set of rigid boundaries upon the otherwise open-ended question, 
“Can machines think?” That we have been debating that question in terms of 
the parameters set forth by the test for half a century is testament enough to 
its power to provoke discussion and debate. But for Turing, the conceptual 
spirit behind the wall was the Turing machine—the result of another thought 
experiment, which, if less well known, has nonetheless had a still greater 
impact on the development of the idea of computation. That machine, after 
all, had falsified the Entscheidungsproblem  and declared insuperable limits to 
mathematics itself. It is difficult to imagine that Turing’s test for intelligence was not itself borne of the earth-shattering limitations of this primal, primi-
tive machine. Given that this failure is largely responsible for the revolution 
that ensued, algorithmic criticism might well eschew the question of success 
and instead ask how much more gloriously and fruitfully it might fail. The 
goal, after all, is not to arrive at the truth, as science strives to do. In literary 
criticism, as in the humanities more generally, the goal has always been to 
arrive at the question.
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   68 10/27/11   1:54 PM
 5 ’PAtAcom Puting
A few years ago, Martin Mueller, the animating force behind the text analysis 
system WordHoard , decided to perform what we might call an experiment but 
would better be thought of as the fulfillment of a brief moment of curiosity. Us -
ing the system’s powerful word-counting and lemmatization features, Mueller 
was able to create lists of the most frequent words in Homer and Shakespeare:
Homer Shakespeare
man (ἀνήρ) lord
ship (ναὗς) man
god (θἐος) sir
heart (θῦμός) love
hand (χείρ) king
son (υἱός) heart
horse (ἳππος) eye
father (πᾶτήρ) time
word (ἒπος) hand
companion (ἑταἷρος) father
I call attention to the spur-of-the-moment character of his investigations, 
not to suggest that one could not conduct elaborate experiments involving 
word frequency (many have done so), but simply to point out the ways in 
which this operation has been made virtually effortless by digital technology. 
The creation of WordHoard required many hours of careful programming 
and design, but that effort is minimal in comparison to what was required of those who created the first dictionaries and concordances—or even, for that 
matter, the first books. If Alfred North Whitehead was correct, the result of 
such effortlessness represents not just the formation of a new convenience 
but also an epochal moment for civilization, which, he thought, “advances 
by adding to the number of important operations which we can perform 
without thinking about them” (42).
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   69 10/27/11   1:54 PM
70 chapter 5
 It is appropriate, of course, that we ask whether Mueller’s lists are the 
result of an “important operation. ” They do not contain anything that one 
might call, at first glance, an astonishing result, and one immediately intuits 
facile lines of argument proceeding from them. Homer’s Iliad, after all, is a 
book “about ships” only in the way that the old bromide figures Moby Dick 
to be a book “about fishing. ” It comes as a surprise to no one that God and man are subjects of concern to both Homer and Shakespeare. The lists seem 
“right, ” but the knowledge we gain by their revelation might be thought of 
as confirming what we already know. For Mueller, it is both more and less 
than what we expect: “Given the fact that writers spend endless hours putting 
their words into the right order, it is disconcerting that a list of their most 
commonly used nouns will tell you quite a bit about what they are up to. 
This grossly reductive model of a text works much better than it should. . . . 
Homer is about ‘man, ship, and god’ in that order. Stop reading right there” 
(“Digital Shakespeare” 12). That we can arrive at a three-word précis of the 
Iliad “without thinking” seems of little moment if the result of such critical 
operations leads to “grossly reductive models. ” In every way, the un-deformed 
text seems preferable to its atomized form.
 Still, it is unlikely that a human being, even if asked to name only the top 
three words in each text, would produce these lists precisely as the machine gives them to us. And for this reason, our explanations must assume the char -
acter of narrative. Perhaps “eye” figures prominently in Shakespeare because, as Maurice Charney observed, “Love enters through the eye” (122), with the 
result that romantic protagonists in Shakespeare are no longer masters of 
themselves but instead subject to forces not of their own making—forces 
different from, but related to, the forces that perturb the lives of Achilles, Hector, and Odysseus. One might also observe that the “heart” of Homer is 
not at all the “heart” of Shakespeare. Thumos  is soul, vitality, spiritedness—the 
animus of the body. It is also the will to distinguish oneself—the horse that runs alongside eros in the Plato’s Phaedrus  and that will appear centuries later 
in Evagrius’s description of the “passions. ” At some point we must contend with the anomalies. Why is “hand” so prominent in both lists? “Love” and 
“time” seem right for a Renaissance dramatist, but the explanation of both 
words will require much more elaborate explanations. Mueller notes that 
“‘love’ and ‘time’ mark out important semantic domains of Shakespeare and 
indeed of ‘modern’ literature as it has been theorized since the Quarrel of 
the Ancients and Moderns” (“Digital Shakespeare” 13). But what are these 
semantic domains?
 Other algorithmic processes suggest themselves. WordHoard can unerr -
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   70 10/27/11   1:54 PM
 ’Patacomputing 71
ingly (and instantaneously) locate every instance of “love” and “time” in both 
texts—even distinguishing the noun from the verb in the case of the former. 
Given such marvels, it is tempting to suppose that one might even settle the 
Quarrel, as it were, by using tools that were unavailable to any scholar before 
now. But in fact, further transformative operations are most likely to follow the same course that Mueller’s lists set for us. The results (the new lists) would 
first hit us with the force of the obvious while at the same time causing us 
to construct narratives that, despite the “obviousness” of the results, must 
at a certain point adjust to the parts that don’t quite fit or that require more 
elaborate explanations. An analogy with science suggests itself, but not the 
usual analogy. Throughout the process, and largely in spite of ourselves, we 
would teeter between confirming our own theories and forming new ones. 
At a certain point our narrative could no longer be said to resemble the one 
that supposedly explained the very thing that threatened to make us “stop 
reading right there. ”
 Algorithmic criticism is born at that moment, but it need not be born. Da -
vid Hoover—a skilled stylometrist, and therefore a great lover of lists—likes to play a game with his students in which he shows them a list of novels and 
asks them to rank them according to “vocabulary richness” (defined as the 
largest number of different words per fifty-thousand-word block):
1
Faulkner Light in August
Henry James The Ambassadors
Bram Stoker Dracula
D. H. Lawrence Sons and Lovers
Oscar Wilde The Picture of Dorian Gray
Virginia Woolf To the Lighthouse
Willa Cather My Ántonia
H. G. Wells The War of the Worlds
Jack London The Sea Wolf
Mark Twain Pudd’nhead Wilson
Rudyard Kipling Kim
Sinclair Lewis Main Street
A few years ago, in an e-mail in which he offered this list for the edification of my own students, Hoover suggested that I “see how they react to the fact 
that they are listed in ASCENDING order of vocabulary richness. ” “What 
always really astonishes them, ” he wrote, “is that Sinclair Lewis has double the 
vocabulary of Faulkner” (“Face of Text”). My students are indeed astonished 
by this. Faulkner, as every undergraduate student knows, is hard; Main Street 
is straightforward. James is notoriously “wordy” (more so even than Wilde); 
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   71 10/27/11   1:54 PM
72 chapter 5
The Sea Wolf  is simple and fun; Kim is a children’s book. The professional 
scholars to whom I have shown this list, however, are eager to point out how 
un-astonished they are. Mostly they complain about “richness”—sometimes 
accusing me of having rigged the game (though I am careful to explain the 
precise definition of “richness” being stipulated). Not one of them has ever gotten the order remotely correct.
 As with Mueller’s lists, one is behooved to go further by examining the 
language from which these results are drawn. Here is the prologue to Main 
Street, which, Hoover assured me, “helps explain it”:
The town is, in our tale, called “Gopher Prairie, Minnesota. ” But its Main Street 
is the continuation of Main Streets everywhere. The story would be the same in Ohio or Montana, in Kansas or Kentucky or Illinois, and not very differently 
would it be told Up York State or in the Carolina hills.
 Main Street is the climax of civilization. That this Ford car might stand 
in front of the Bon Ton Store, Hannibal invaded Rome and Erasmus wrote in Oxford cloisters. What Ole Jenson the grocer says to Ezra Stowbody the banker is the new law for London, Prague, and the unprofitable isles of the sea; 
whatsoever Ezra does not know and sanction, that thing is heresy, worthless 
for knowing and wicked to consider. Our railway station is the final aspiration of architecture. Sam Clark’s an -
nual hardware turnover is the envy of the four counties which constitute God’s 
Country. In the sensitive art of the Rosebud Movie Palace there is a Message, 
and humor strictly moral. Such is our comfortable tradition and sure faith. Would he not betray himself 
an alien cynic who should otherwise portray Main Street, or distress the citizens by speculating whether there may not be other faiths? (Lewis 4)
And here are the second and third paragraphs of Faulkner’s Light in August:
She had never even been to Doane’s Mill until after her father and mother died, though six or eight times a year she went to town on Saturday, in the wagon, in a mail-order dress and her bare feet flat in the wagon bed and her shoes 
wrapped in a piece of paper beside her on the seat. She would put on the shoes 
just before the wagon reached town. After she got to be a big girl she would ask her father to stop the wagon at the edge of town and she would get down and walk. She would not tell her father why she wanted to walk in instead of riding. He thought that it was because of the smooth streets, the sidewalks. But 
it was because she believed that the people who saw her and whom she passed 
on foot would believe that she lived in the town too. When she was twelve years old her father and mother died in the same 
summer, in a log house of three rooms and a hall, without screens, in a room 
lighted by a bug-swirled kerosene lamp, the naked floor worn smooth as old 
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   72 10/27/11   1:54 PM
 ’Patacomputing 73
silver by naked feet. She was the youngest living child. Her mother died first. 
Then he died. McKinley, the brother, arrived in a wagon. They buried the father in a grove behind a country church one afternoon, with a pine headstone. The 
next morning she departed forever, though it is possible that she did not know 
this at the time, in the wagon with McKinley, for Doane’s Mill. The wagon was borrowed and the brother had promised to return it by nightfall. (3–4)
There is no sense in which these excerpts “explain” the lists; at best, they dem -
onstrate more clearly what the lists tell us. That is undoubtedly all that Hoover 
meant to convey. What needs explaining is not the fact that the vocabularies 
differ, or even that our perceptions differ from some supposed textual reality. 
The explanations we need run instead along two opposite poles separating 
the astonishment of the students from the skepticism of the scholars.
 My students have no trouble explaining why the lists surprise them, but 
their reactions—unencumbered by the professional consequences of er -
ror—give us the seeds of a kind of exploration seldom associated with text 
analysis. They have arrayed the objects of their intellectual life in categories 
that correspond, among other things, to the cultural penumbras in which 
texts are disseminated and taught. Books come to them as high or low, deep 
or shallow, hard or easy, read “for pleasure” or read “for class, ” with dozens 
of gradations in between, and they assume (rightly) that words are somehow, 
though not exclusively, implicated in this arrangement. The scholars, by con -
trast, are eager to construct a narrative by which the new results can fit with what they already know—an activity they undertake confidently and with 
ease. For the students, the game has not risen to the level of criticism. For 
the scholars, it has not descended far enough toward circumspection. The 
scholars are right to interrogate the admittedly crude notion of “richness” 
stipulated by the game, but to stop there is to avoid algorithmic criticism. 
What is needed is a definition of “richness” that can account not merely for the professional reaction but also for the reactions of the students. The 
result of such investigations might be a better game (or a better algorithm), 
but it is just as likely to involve critical investigations that, like the confusing 
confluence of words and culture, do not involve computational analysis. The 
ultimate result, in other words, is the conversation itself, which is neither 
content with the “imagine that” of disrupted expectations nor too eager to 
explain it all away.
 Bolder methods are required if we are to break away from these two im-
pulses, and in recent years a number of new tools have appeared that aim to negotiate such territory. One of the more elaborate ones is the Text Analysis 
Portal for Research (TAPoR), which cheerfully employs metaphors that are entirely foreign to contemporary humanistic inquiry. Methods for analyzing 
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   73 10/27/11   1:54 PM
74 chapter 5
“the theoretical basis of texts, ” “exploring themes, ” and “comparing concepts” 
are presented as “recipes” with numbered steps (Rockwell, “TAPoR Recipes”). 
We’re invited to “try it” as if the thing to try were a new car or a new pill. 
Again and again, the language of TAPoR  points not to methods or procedures, 
but to “tools”—things to be wielded against any text on the Web (the default 
examples optimistically include both a corpus of French medieval poetry and 
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights ). Y et despite these metaphors, all of 
which mingle marketing with mechanization in a way that suggests anything other than the sober, meandering parole  of humanistic discourse, TAPoR  con-
fidently asserts a rhetoric of self-interrogation. In one of TAPoR’s apologias, 
we read that text analysis involves “asking questions of a text and retrieving 
passages that help one think through the questions” (Rockwell “What Is Text 
Analysis?”; emphasis mine). Concordances, keyword-in-context displays, frequency generators, and even a “word cloud” that sets the tokens adrift  
in a two-dimensional space are presented as provocations designed to force 
users into “think[ing] about their interpretative practices. ” However foreign 
its interface might be, text analysis is insistently put forth by TAPoR as “an 
interactive practice of discovery with its own serendipitous paths comparable to, but not identical to, the serendipitous discovery that happens in rereading 
a text. ” (Rockwell, “What Is Text Analysis?”)
 Few tools better illustrate these serendipitous paths than Stéfan Sinclair’s 
HyperPo, one of the tools for which TAPoR acts as a portal. From the first 
moment a text is loaded into HyperPo, it is transformed into data points and 
visualizations. The very first screen is a kind of neoteric frontispiece in which the text—in this case, Christina Rossetti’s Goblin Market—is presented as a 
series of critical statistics:
Report on the Text
• Text Source: goblin.txt
• Text Title: Goblin Market
• Language of text: English
• Total words (tokens): 3107
• Unique words (types): 1130
• Highest word frequency: 124
• Average word frequency: 2.75
• Standard Deviation of word frequencies: 7.58
• Average word length: 4.30
• Standard Deviation of word lengths: 1.82
• Number of sentences: 77
• Average words per sentence: 40.4
• Number of paragraphs: 568
• Average words per paragraph: 5.5
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   74 10/27/11   1:54 PM
 ’Patacomputing 75
Such numbers are seldom meaningful without context, but they invite us 
into contexts that are possible only with digital tools. One would like to ask 
whether Rossetti’s average word length is long or short relative to other poems 
written by her, other poems of the period, or to other poems in the English 
language, even though it is not at all clear where such investigations would lead or what the results might mean. Even so, seeing some trend or sudden 
spike in the graph along any of these vectors would prompt further questions 
that extend beyond the linguistic or even the stylistic. Goblin Market, after 
all, is not merely an example of nineteenth-century word usage. It is, within the widening context of critical thought, a children’s poem, an erotic poem, a 
Victorian poem, a feminist poem, a pre-Raphaelite poem, and a poem about 
market forces at mid-century. We cannot avoid reading such considerations 
“into the data. ” If algorithmic criticism is to occur, we must insist upon it.
 If crossing the broad terms of textual discussion with frequencies and de-
viations has not yet invited critics to such speculation, it is perhaps because such lists as these evoke critical procedures that are long out of fashion. This 
is perhaps why HyperPo,  true to its name, presents them only briefly as a 
kind of parlor trick. It is the last moment in which confident assertions of fact prevail. At the bottom of the list we are invited to “Continue” on to an 
interface in which there is no way to encounter the text on its own. In the 
upper left is a box in which the words of the texts—now better thought of 
as “tokens”—have been colorized by frequency. In the upper right is a box 
for word frequency lists, which are always connected back to the deformed 
text through hyperlinks. The lower box displays graphs and charts, and they, 
too, are linked to the other windows. Clicking on any word in any part of 
the interface tends to set off chain reactions in others. So while we might try to read Goblin Market, that reading will soon be interrupted by a “weighted 
centroid”—a visualization in which each word is pulled off from a center point, as if by a gravitational force, by the words that surround it. Dozens of 
interruptions are offered. The strangest (whimsically labeled as an “advanced 
option”) is undoubtedly the one that lets the user generate all anagrams 
contained within the text:
• ache (2), each (6)
• any (3), nay (3)
• are (2), ear (2)
• ate (3), eat (5)
• bore (1), robe (1)
• dare (1), dear (2)
• felt (2), left (1)
• for (22), fro (1)
• golden (11), longed (2)
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   75 10/27/11   1:54 PM
76 chapter 5
• how (5), who (3)
• its (5), sit (1)
• lemons (1), melons (3)
• listen (1), silent (1)
• made (1), mead (1)
• mane (1), name (1)
• nails (1), snail (3)
• night (11), thing (1)
• owls (1), slow (1)
• rose (1), sore (3)
• saw (1), was (11)
• stone (5), tones (2)
As with Saussure’s anagrams, we are likely to view such results with a mix-
ture of suspicion and fascination. Taken alone, they seem either to repre -
sent evidence of a peculiar but undeniable property of English orthography (and therefore are essentially meaningless as a set of collocates), or as the 
gateway to a dubious mysticism. In the context of HyperPo, however, such 
results serve to deepen a relationship with the text that governs the entire experience of using the tool. For all its concern with numerical information, 
HyperPo  consciously works against the realization of “results. ” Instead, we 
engage in a kind of “microscopic reading, ” which, like the close reading it both analogizes and contradicts, draws us into certain kinds of noticings. 
Clicking through various collocates and word properties, for example, one 
notices that “Laura” collocates with “should” and “Lizzie” collocates with 
“not”; that the word “evil” appears in the poem, but not the word “good”; 
that “suck” is strongly collocated not only with “me, ” but also with “them”; 
that there is a steady upward increase (punctuated with various gaps) in 
instances of the word “eyes. ”
 We might think of these as the “facts” of the text, but whatever knowledge 
is gained from their perusal stands at a marked distance from the quest for factuality that usually motivates linguistic and philological inquiry. Lizzie’s 
sexually charged experiences and the refrain of the goblin men (“Come buy, 
come buy”) might lead one to focus on these features, but even as one tries 
to follow these threads, the frames blink in and out with patterns and as -
sociations that lead in other (often contradictory) directions. Explication de 
texte is surely one possible outcome from these procedures, but the texte of HyperPo  does not allow one to rest upon any straightforward set of heuristic 
prompts or frameworks. There are too many gaps—too many incentives for narrative—to allow one to ignore the extratextual valences that had once 
been rejected by the New Criticism. Goblin Market becomes what Jacques 
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   76 10/27/11   1:54 PM
 ’Patacomputing 77
Derrida, in “ Ulysses  Gramophone, ” called an “overpotentialized text”: “We are 
caught in the net. All the gestures sketched in to allow an initiatory movement 
are already announced in an overpotentialized text that will remind you, 
at a given moment, that you are captive in a language, writing, knowledge, 
and even narration network” (48). In the end, it is this text that constitutes the “result” produced by HyperPo: the text reframed by the “serendipitous 
discovery” of rereading. Text analysis of the sort put forth by WordHoard,  TAPoR,  and HyperPo 
suggests other antonyms to close reading, including what Franco Moretti has called “distant reading. ” For Moretti, such reading is not merely a new 
possibility suggested by the sudden abundance of digitized texts, but, rather, 
a necessity for any coherent study of world literature:
[T]he trouble with close reading (in all of its incarnations, from the new criti-
cism to deconstruction) is that it necessarily depends on an extremely small canon. This may have become an unconscious and invisible premiss [ sic] by 
now, but it is an iron one nonetheless: you invest so much in individual texts only if you think that very few of them really matter. Otherwise, it doesn’t make 
sense. And if you want to look beyond the canon (and of course, world literature will do so: it would be absurd if it didn’t!) close reading will not do it. It’s not designed to do it, it’s designed to do the opposite. At bottom, it’s a theological ex -
ercise—very solemn treatment of very few texts taken very seriously—whereas what we really need is a little pact with the devil: we know how to read texts, now let’s learn how not to read them. Distant reading: where distance, let me 
repeat it, is a condition of knowledge:  it allows you to focus on units that are 
much smaller or much larger than the text: devices, themes, tropes—or genres and systems. And if, between the very small and the very large, the text itself disappears, well, it is one of those cases when one can justifiably say, Less is more. If we want to understand the system in its entirety, we must accept losing something. We always pay a price for theoretical knowledge: reality is infinitely 
rich; concepts are abstract, are poor. But it’s precisely this ‘poverty’ that makes 
it possible to handle them, and therefore to know. This is why less is actually more. (“Conjectures” 57)
That we might “lose the text” undoubtedly frightens many. But as Moretti 
makes clear, this fear is simply the inverse of the one in which we place our 
faith. To say that the gypsy interlude in book 12 of Tom Jones  metaphori -
cally encapsulates a vast network of political tensions in eighteenth-century England strikes us as a responsible use of literature; a spreadsheet full of 
numerical information on the appearance of “gypsies” in English novels 
provokes fear of a criticism ungrounded in the particularities of language 
and textuality. Neither one avoids the hermeneutical circle that has worried 
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   77 10/27/11   1:54 PM
78 chapter 5
every critical theorist since Schleiermacher, but the latter touches not only 
on fears of an inhumanistic technology but also on our (historically recent) 
sense of reading as a pious, wholesome activity that can serve to better us.
 Most horrifying of all, of course, is the “not reading” that serves as the 
center of Pierre Bayard’s How to Talk about Books You Haven’t Read.  For 
Martin Mueller, though, this most indecent of all literary anti-procedures becomes an important part of “the query potential of the digital surrogate”:
A book sits in a network of transactions that involve a reader, his interlocutors, 
and a “collective library” of things one knows or is supposed to know. Felicitous reading—I adapt the term from John Austin’s definition of felicitous speech 
acts—is the art of locating with sufficient precision the place a given book occu -
pies in that network at a given moment. Y our skill as a reader, then, is measured 
by the speed and accuracy with which you can do that. Ideally you should do it in “no time at all. ” Once you have oriented a book in the right place of its network, you can stop reading. In fact, you should stop reading. . . . ”Close read -
ing” has . . . always been an exceptional activity. (“Digital Shakespeare ” 9–10)
Many have observed that the affordances offered by digital text archives 
represent a radical break with conventional reading practices. For Mueller, 
however, those affordances may represent an enhancement of older forms 
of “not reading, ” since large digital corpora “do exactly what older forms 
of ‘not-reading’ were supposed to do: orient a text or set of texts in a larger 
document space” (“Digital Shakespeare” 10). Performing text analysis on a 
larger document space achieves both objectives simultaneously, since what-
ever orientation we achieve is largely the result of disorientation.
 It is manifestly impossible to read everything, and it has always been so. 
The utility of the digital corpus—despite its vaunted claims of “increased access”—only serves to make the impossibility of comprehensive reading 
more apparent (though a stroll through the stacks of even a modest library 
serves to illustrate the same point). What is different about digital archives 
is the way in which text analytical procedures (including that most primitive 
of procedures: the keyword search) has the potential to draw unexpected 
paths through a documentary space that is distinguished by its overall in-
comprehensibility. Even Vannevar Bush, amid a conception of hypertext 
still more sophisticated than that offered by the World Wide Web, imagines 
the negotiation of the document space as it has been for centuries. Paths 
are drawn through books that have already been read by others using a 
relatively weak framework of citation and hearsay. Text analysis, because it 
allows navigation of the unread and the unknown, focuses the energies of not reading upon structures that lie outside and beneath the spare, if still 
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   78 10/27/11   1:54 PM
 ’Patacomputing 79
massive, structures of knowledge represented by the index, the bibliography, 
and the annotation. Mueller’s “top ten words, ” Hoover’s “vocabulary richness, ” 
and Sinclair’s “weighted centroids” are able to disrupt not because they lay 
claim to deep textual truths, but because they are capable of presenting the 
bare, trivial truths of textuality in a way that allows connection with other narratives—in particular, those narratives that seek to install the text into a 
network of critical activity.
 One of the most challenging—and necessary—modulations occurs when 
the “bare facts” of textuality are self-consciously connected to the insistently subjective aspects of rereading. One experiment, conducted a few years ago 
as part of the MONK (Metadata Offer New Knowledge) Project used a num -
ber of text-mining algorithms to try to discern patterns of “sentimentality” in a group of American novels. The MONK interface presented users with 
five texts: Uncle Tom’s Cabin, Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl, Charlotte: 
A Tale of Truth, Charlotte’s Daughter, and The Minister’s Wooing. A number 
of literary critics were then asked to rate passages on a scale in terms of the degree to which they exemplified “sentimentality. ” The system then analyzed 
the low-level features of those texts to construct a model that could predict 
unknown instances. It would not be inaccurate to refer to such a system as 
a “sentimentality detector, ” and in general such algorithms (to quote Muel-
ler again) work better than they should. It is the same technology that can 
locate, with eerie prescience, the books or movies that one “might also like” 
on websites like Amazon.com and Netflix. But whenever I have had the op-
portunity to present such systems to my colleagues, I have been confronted 
with the same question: who decides what sentimentality is?
 That question goes a long way toward explaining the social and cultural 
obstacles to algorithmic criticism. On the one hand, it would seem to imply 
that “sentimentality” is something that needs to be succinctly defined before 
attempting to identify it in a particular passage—we define “sentimentality” 
and then we go find it in texts. Yet at the same time, the question would 
seem to indicate anxiety over the possibility of succinct definition. Do the 
people using MONK—the “domain experts, ” as a computer scientist or us-
ability expert might call them—come to the system with a definition already in place, or is that definition itself the result of reading the texts and “rat -
ing” the passages? Won’t the definition of “sentimentality” be colored by the dispositions of individual scholars? And who gets to be one of the scholars 
magisterially defining “sentimentality” for the detector? Isn’t the entire idea 
of a “sentimentality detector” flawed from the start, since “meaning” is it -
self a shifting, culturally located concept incapable of precise definition or stable articulation? Such questions represent a “stop right there” of a different 
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   79 10/27/11   1:54 PM
80 chapter 5
sort. For in this moment of disbelief and worry, the philosophical insights 
and anxieties of poststructuralism threaten to do what they rarely do in the 
normative context of a critical article or scholarly debate. In those contexts, 
concerns about definition, bias, power, and exception do not halt debate, but 
guide it more fruitfully. Here, they threaten to dismiss a critical procedure that is distinguished only by the presence of a computer. For surely there is 
nothing in the procedure that makes any claim to truth value beyond what 
is already stipulated by any critical act.
 The “result” of a system like MONK is the same as that for virtually any 
text-analytical procedure: a textual artifact that, even if recapitulated in the form of an elaborate interactive visualization, remains essentially a list. The 
algorithm determined that “die, ” “sorrow, ” “beloved, ” and “agony” were in-
dicative of sentimentality. It also isolated “tomorrow, ” “paternal, ” and “pay-
ment. ” The first list assures us that there’s some validity to the model; like 
“man, ship, god, ” it tells us what we already know. The second list, though, is 
the crucial one. We might say that it reveals what we didn’t know; however, 
that is only a momentary condition. As with any text-analytical result, we 
can weave a narrative through the gaps. For this reason, we would do better 
to say that it carves a new path through the document space, which in turn 
allows us to reread and rethink sentimentality. New definitions are one pos-
sible outcome of that rethinking, but the iterative nature of text-analytical 
tools and the disruptive nature of hyperpoetic texts mirror the iterations and 
disruptions of critical debate itself. There is no end to our understanding of 
sentimentality. There are only new noticings, which in this case are practi-
cally discernible only through algorithmic means.
 It may be that the tools of algorithmic criticism are like Wittgenstein’s 
ladder. When we have used them to “climb up beyond, ” we recognize them 
as nonsensical and cast the ladder aside ( Tractatus  74). The hyperpoetic text, 
after all, is less concerned with results than with experiences, and for a dis-cipline not especially focused on methodology, it seems tedious—perhaps 
even pedantic—to detail the terms of that experience as if one were dutifully 
reporting the parameters of an experimental protocol. Geoffrey Rockwell 
and Stéfan Sinclair, in an essay titled “There’s a Toy in My Essay! Problems 
with the Rhetoric of Text Analysis, ” suggest that text analysis “may have to 
abandon the essay and monograph for an interactive hybrid that can sus -
tain two threads, showing both conclusions and the processes used to reach them. ” It is not difficult to imagine such a machine; no technical revolution 
is necessary before we can embed tools like HyperPo  into a narrative. But 
neither would it require a rhetorical revolution. The interactive nature of the embedded artifact would allow the reader to arrive at conclusions that 
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   80 10/27/11   1:54 PM
 ’Patacomputing 81
are contrary to those being put forth by the narrative that surrounds it. The 
instant availability of the hyperpoetic text would sew the seeds of the essay’s 
own destruction. The text would become a hybridized offshoot of the larger 
document space within which it is already implicated. And in that moment, 
algorithmic criticism would reveal itself most clearly as literary criticism. If algorithmic criticism does not exist, or exists only in nascent form, it is 
not because our critical practices are computationally intractable, but because our computational practices have not yet been made critically tractable. To 
the degree that WordHoard,  TAPoR,  HyperPo,  and MONK  show the way for -
ward, they do so largely by embracing the contingencies that once threatened the discipline of rhetoric, but that, like rhetoric, may come to form the basis 
for new kinds of critical acts. In an age when the computer itself has gone 
from being a cold arbiter of numerical facts to being a platform for social 
networking and self-expression, we may well wonder whether those new 
kinds of critical acts are in fact already implicit in the many interfaces that 
seek only to facilitate thought, self expression, and community. As with such 
recent inventions, the transforming effect will come through “the change of 
scale, or pace, or pattern that it introduces into human affairs” (McLuhan 8). 
Once those changes are acknowledged, the bare facts of the tools themselves 
will seem, like the technical details of automobiles or telephones, not to be 
the main thing at all. In this sense, algorithmic criticism looks forward not 
to the widespread acknowledgment of its utility but to the day when “algo-
rithmic criticism” seems as odd a term as “library-based criticism. ” For by 
then we will have understood computer-based criticism to be what it has 
always been: human-based criticism with computers.
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   81 10/27/11   1:54 PM
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   82 10/27/11   1:54 PM
posTcondiTions
In many respects, digital humanities is a scholarly discipline like any other. 
It has, first and foremost, a community with a history. It also has books 
and journals, scholarly societies, yearly conferences, sources of funding, 
programs, curricula, students, faculty, and a vast network of scholars both 
traditional and nontraditional. In this respect, it is more or less like history, 
or English, or philosophy, or mathematics. In the early 1990s, when debates 
raged over whether digital humanities (or humanities computing, as it was 
then called) was, in fact, its own discipline, those who wished to reply affir -
matively pointed to these institutional signs as evidence. We are a discipline, they argued, because we are just like all the others.
 Some, though, felt certain that we were not at all like the others. To start 
with, we were radically interdisciplinary. Our conferences, journals, pro -
grams, and networks consisted not only of people with backgrounds in all 
of the traditional humanities disciplines but from engineering, mathematics, 
and the sciences as well. What’s more, the community contained a great num -
ber of people who were not traditional research faculty at all (librarians and technical support staff, for example), many of whom were important leaders 
and innovators in the field. Humanities computing might be a meta-field, 
or a methodological commons, or a temporary vector for interdisciplinary 
collaboration, but it surely was not what most of us, in one way or another, 
had left behind.
 That we might have left something behind—with all the fear and uncer -
tainty but also with the joy and liberation that entails—was undoubtedly one 
of the unacknowledged reasons for this discussion. Some people, who felt 
betrayed in one way or another by the disciplines in which they had been 
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   83 10/27/11   1:54 PM
84 Postconditions
trained, were eager to plant a flag on the new shore. Others saw this as a way 
to revivify the tired discourses to which they still felt deeply attached. No 
one thought that what they were doing was a side interest or a sub-specialty. 
Embracing humanities computing was not the same as declaring a new theory 
to be central, redefining a canon, altering institutional constructs, or embrac -
ing a new methodology. It was not like distinguishing American History 
from European History or English Studies from Comparative Literature. 
Nor was it a purely methodological separation (though, as I have argued, 
strenuous attempts were made—and continue to be made—to represent the 
field as bringing the methodologies of science to the humanities). Humanities 
computing was part of—and, indeed, the result of—the same set of epochal 
changes that had produced the personal computer and at that very moment 
were in the process of producing the World Wide Web.
 What brought people together from across a startlingly diverse set of dis-
ciplines and professional roles was the shift from criticism to creation, from writing to coding, from book to tool. Humanities computing had its theorists, 
its administrators, its teachers, and its historians, but nearly everyone in the 
field was involved, in one way or another, with building something.
 The conceptual leap required to move from talking about novels to talk-
ing about Web sites or computer games requires subtle shifts in thinking and reappraisals of one’s assumptions. This remains a vital and fascinating 
area of investigation for students of new media. But it is nowhere near as 
jarring—or, frankly, as radical—as the shift from theorizing about games 
and Web sites to building them. It is true that text encoders often describe 
working with TEI (Text Encoding Initiative) as an act of interpretation and 
that builders of software systems have been known to describe their tools as enactments of theories. Yet there remains a world of difference between 
talking about the different parts of a text and physically separating them with 
XML tags—between talking about software and writing it. Neither using a 
map nor considering its status as a cultural representation is to be confused 
with GIS (geographic information system). The development meeting is not 
a seminar.
 At the same time, people who engage in this kind of building have the 
clear sense that they have not stopped being humanists or abandoned any of the concerns of the disciplines in which they work and were trained. Most of 
them came into the field because nothing provided the kind of affordances 
that are to be found in coding, marking, designing, and building. It is easy 
enough to describe digital humanities in practical terms as the creation of 
assistive technologies for use by humanists, but few practitioners would 
describe their attachment to the field as motivated by utilitarian motives. 
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   84 10/27/11   1:54 PM
 Postconditions 85
Humanists concern themselves with the study of the human experience; 
digital humanists find that building deepens and enriches that engagement.
 “ Algorithmic criticism” sounds for all the world like a set of methods for 
exploiting the sudden abundance of digital material related to the humanities. If not a method, then perhaps—and this would be better—a methodology  for 
coping with it, handling, it, comprehending it. But in the end, it is simply 
an attitude toward the relationship between mechanism and meaning that 
is expansive enough to imagine building as a form of thinking. It resists any 
approach to computationally assisted literary study that sees the positivistic 
claims of pure computationalism—the either/or of bare calculation—as the 
method by which humanistic inquiry may finally, after centuries of insecurity, 
claim its rightful place as a form of knowledge. At the same time, it rejects 
the idea that computers, fundamentally incapable of participating fully in the 
most deeply humane of all scholarly reflections, can only offer “meaningful 
failure” or object lessons in the limits of computer science. Algorithmic criti -
cism offers a vision of the hacker/scholar as unperturbed by the tension these two words elicit. Its partisans neither worry that criticism is being naively 
mechanized, nor that algorithms are being pressed beyond their inability. 
The algorithmic critic imagines the artifacts of human culture as radically 
transformed, reordered, disassembled, and reassembled. Then he or she, as 
Father Busa once put it, looks around “for some type of machinery. ”
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   85 10/27/11   1:54 PM
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   86 10/27/11   1:54 PM
noTes
Chapter 1. An Algorithmic Criticism
 1. I am indebted to Sara Steger at the University of Georgia, who was a coinvestigator in 
the work on computational analysis of Woolf’s novel that forms the basis of the following 
examples. The electronic edition used is from the University of Adelaide Library (http://
etext.library.adelaide.edu.au/w/woolf/virginia/w91w).
Chapter 2. Potential Literature
 1. All English quotations from Faustroll are from Roger Shattuck and Simon Watson 
Taylor’s translation, Exploits and Opinions of Doctor Faustroll, Pataphysician,  in Jarry, 
Selected Works of Alfred Jarry. 2. The term Gedankenexperiment  appears in Mach’s The Science of Mechanics: A Critical 
and Historical Exposition of Its Principles.
 3. Ben Fisher’s The Pataphysician’s Library  is a particularly comprehensive study of Jarry’s 
livres pairs,  which, among other features, participates in the incestuous intertextuality 
for which Symbolism was particularly famous. As Fisher notes, “It is obvious from an early stage that this novel follows contemporary manners by eulogizing its literary peer group—at length, and in considerable if oblique detail” (4). 4. To which we might add, via Kelvin’s Popular Lectures and Addresses (1855–1887), the 
physics of James Clerk Maxwell, Werner von Siemens, Humphry Davy, Rayleigh (John 
William Strutt, 3rd Baron Rayleigh), Adam Sedgwick, James Dewer, and Michael Faraday, 
and the mathematics of Claude-Louis Navier, Siméon Denis Poisson, and Augustin-Louis Cauchy. See Stillman’s “Physics and Pataphysics: The Sources of Faustroll. ” 5. See Oulipo: Atlas de littérature potentielle.
 6. The work in codex form was originally laid out so that each poem was printed on 
the recto of the leaf and cut into separate strips for each line. The reader could therefore lift up a line to reveal another one beneath.
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   87 10/27/11   1:54 PM
88 Notes
 7. Abish was not a member of Oulipo, though as Harry Mathews and Alastair Brotchie 
note, “The work must be qualified an Oulipian masterpiece. . . . The method he has used, 
of his own devising, is Oulipian both in its axiomatic simplicity and in the extent to 
which it determines both the ingenious narrative and its beguiling linguistic texture” (48).
 8. In order for the algorithm to work, the number of rows and columns must be equal. 
Mathews further notes that a certain amount of heterogeneity is necessary in the data: “The rule is that in a table of n elements, n2 – (n – 2) elements must be different” (Motte, 
Oulipo  127). The examples that follow are all drawn from “Mathews’s Algorithm, ” in 
Motte,Oulipo.
Chapter 3. Potential Readings
 1. Dickinson herself does not precisely define the notion of backwardness in this case, 
and it may be that we are meant to come at the poem in quite another way:
—blind be man every Orgradually dazzle must Truth Thekind explanation With
eased Children the to lightning As
surprise superb Truth’s The
Delight infirm our for bright Too
lies Circuit in Success—slant it tell but truth the all Tell
Either procedure can be generated programmatically. 2. The entropic poem is meant to be read column by column.
 3. McGann and Samuels go to considerable lengths to demonstrate that the historical 
antecedents to the notion of deformance are by no means confined to the twentieth-century avant garde. The chapter, in fact, considers deformative procedures “perhaps as ancient as our more normative practices, ” and draws its chief examples from Dante and Shelley (106). 4. Students and devotees of the I Ching will note that my reading of the hexagrams—
somewhat after the manner of a tarot card reading—is not consistent with the usual way in which “divination” is understood in the context of this work. Most would say that the ancients regarded the I Ching not as a fortune-telling device in the Western sense, but 
as a book that one consults in order to determine (through poetic means, as it were) the 
proper strategy for reaching some goal. In the words of the great French explicator of the 
I Ching, “The old Classic of Changes speaks to us because we ask it to. We are the ones who give it this capability” (Javary 116). 5. “sy æt him sylfum gelong; / eal his worulde wyn, / sy ful wide fah / feorres folclondes”
Chapter 4. The Turing Text
 1. This standard description differs from the one offered in Turing’s 1957 article, “Com -
puting Machinery and Intelligence”:
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   88 10/27/11   1:54 PM
 Notes 89
It is played with three people, a man (A), a woman (B), and an interrogator (C) who 
may be of either sex. The interrogator stands in a room apart from the other two. The object of the game for the interrogator is to determine which of the other two is the 
man and which is the woman. He knows them by labels X and Y, and at the end of the 
game he says either “X is A and Y is B” or “X is B and Y is A. ” (153)
The familiar form of the Turing test comes about when Turing asks a question that he proposes as the equivalent to “Can a machine think?”: “What will happen when a machine takes the part of A in this game?” 2. ELIZA (named after the character Eliza Doolittle in Shaw’s Pygmalion ) properly 
refers to the underlying language-analysis engine that Weizenbaum used to construct DOCTOR. However, the name ELIZA has persisted as a name for the program, and I follow this convention here. 3. See Sigler.
Chapter 5. ’Patacomputing
 1. A more detailed discussion of these results, particularly as they relate to authorship 
attribution, can be found in Hoover’s article “ Another Perspective on Vocabulary Rich-ness. ”
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   89 10/27/11   1:54 PM
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   90 10/27/11   1:54 PM
WoRks ciTed
Aarseth, Espen J. Cybertext: Perspectives on Ergodic Literature. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins 
University Press, 1997.
Abelson, Harold, and Gerald Jay Sussman. Structure and Interpretation of Computer Pro-
grams. 2nd ed. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1996.
Abish, Walter. Alphabetical Africa. New York: New Directions, 1974.
Achebe, Chinua. “ An Image of Africa: Racism in Conrad’s Heart of Darkness.” Hopes and 
Impediments: Selected Essays. New York: Doubleday, 1989. 1–20.
Bayard, Pierre. How to Talk about Books You Haven’t Read. New York: Bloomsbury USA, 
2007.
Bök, Christian. ’Pataphysics: The Poetics of an Imaginary Science. Evanston, Ill.: North-
western University Press, 2002.
Bold, Stephen C. “Labyrinths of Invention from the New Novel to OuLiPo. ” Neophilologus 
82 (1988): 543–57.
Burrows, J. F., and D. H. Craig. “Lyrical Drama and the ‘Turbid Montebanks’: Styles of 
Dialogue in Romantic and Renaissance Tragedy. ” Computers and the Humanities  28 
(1994): 63–86.
Busa, Roberto. “The Annals of Humanities Computing: The Index Thomisticus. ” Computer 
and the Humanities 14 (1980): 83–90.
———. Index Thomisticus. Stuttgart: Frommann-Holzboog, 1974.Bush, Vannevar. “ As We May Think. ” Atlantic Monthly July 1945: 101–8. Print.Buzetti, Dino. “Digital Representation and the Text Model. ” New Literary History  33.1 
(2002): 61–88.
Charney, Maurice. All of Shakespeare. New York: Columbia University Press, 1993.Chatbot::ELIZA.  Vers. 1.04. 1 March 2008. http://search.cpan.org/CPAN/authors/id/J/
JN/JNOLAN/Chatbot-Eliza-1.04.tar.gz.
Craig, Hugh. “ Authorial Attribution and Computational Stylistics: If Y ou Can Tell Authors 
Apart, Have You Learned Anything about Them?” Literary and Linguistic Computing 
14 (1999): 103–13.
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   91 10/27/11   1:54 PM
92 Works Cited
Deleuze, Gilles, and Félix Guattari. A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia. 
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1987.
DeRose, Stephen J., Elli Mylonas, David Durand, and Allen Renear. “What Is Test, Re-
ally?” Journal of Computing in Higher Education 1 (1990): 3–26.
Derrida, Jacques. “ Ulysses  Gramophone: Hear Say Yes in Joyce. ” James Joyce: The Aug -
mented Ninth. Ed. Bernard Benstock. Syracuse, N.Y.: Syracuse University Press, 1988.
Dickinson, Emily. Complete Poems of Emily Dickinson. Ed. Thomas H. Johnson. Boston: 
Little, Brown, 1960.
Faulkner, William. Light in August. New York: Vintage, 1987.
Ferguson, Margaret, Mary Jo Salter, and Jon Stallworthy, eds. The Norton Anthology of 
Poetry. 4th ed. New York: Norton, 1996.
Fisher, Ben. The Pataphysician’s Library: An Exploration of Alfred Jarry’s “Livres Pairs. ” 
Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 2000.
Fortier, Paul A. “Babies, Bathwater and the Study of Literature. ” Computers and the Hu-
manities 27 (1993): 375–85.
Gadamer, Hans-Georg. Truth and Method.  Trans. Joel Weinsheimer and Donald G. Mar -
shall. New York: Continuum International, 1996.
Garfinkel, Harold. Studies in Ethnomethodology.  Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 
1967.
Gottschall, Jonathan. “Measure for Measure. ” Boston Globe. 11 May 2008, 3rd ed.: D1.Haraway, Donna. “ A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, Technology, and Socialist-Feminism in 
the Late Twentieth Century. ” Simians, Cyborgs, and Women: The Reinvention of Nature. 
New York: Routledge, 1991. 149–81.
Hockey, Susan. Electronic Texts in the Humanities.  Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000.
Hoover, David. “ Another Perspective on Vocabulary Richness. ” Computers and the Hu-
manities 37.2 (2003): 151–78.
———. “Face of Text. ” E-mail to Stephen Ramsay. 23 November 2004.Irizarry, Estelle. “Tampering with the Text to Increase Awareness of Poetry’s Art. (Theory 
and Practice with a Hispanic Perspective). ” Literary and Linguistic Computing  11 (1996): 
155–62.
Jarry, Alfred. Selected Works of Alfred Jarry.  Eds. Roger Shattuck and Simon Watson 
Taylor. New York: Grove, 1965.
Javary, Cyrille. Understanding the I Ching. Boston: Shambhala, 1997.Kelvin, William Thomson. Popular Lectures and Addresses. Vols. 1–3. London: Macmil-
lan, 1891.
Knuth, Donald. Fundamental Algorithms.  Vol. 1 of The Art of Computer Programming. 
Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1997.
Kuhn, Thomas S. The Essential Tension: Selected Studies in Scientific Tradition and Change. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1977.
Lear, Edward. The Complete Nonsense of Edward Lear. Ed. Holbrook Jackson. Mattituck, 
N.Y.: Amereon, 1947.
Legge, James, trans. The Sacred Books of China.  Vol. 2. Sacred Books of the East  16. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1882.
Leslie, R. F. Three Old English Elegies: The Wife’s Lament, The Husband’s Message, The 
Ruin. New York: Barnes, 1961.
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   92 10/27/11   1:54 PM
 Works Cited 93
Lewis, Sinclair. Main Street and Babbitt. New York: Library of America, 1992.
Lucretius. On the Nature of Things. Trans. Martin Ferguson Smith. New York: Hackett, 
2001.
Mach, Ernst. The Science of Mechanics: A Critical and Historical Exposition of Its Principles. 
Chicago: Open Court, 1893.
Mandel, Jerome. Alternative Readings in Old English Poetry.  American University Studies 
4.43. New York: Lang, 1987.
Manning, Christopher D., and Hinrich Schütze. Foundations of Statistical Natural Lan-
guage Processing. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1999.
Mathews, Harry, and Alastair Brotchie. Oulipo Compendium. London: Atlas, 1998.McCarty, Willard. Encyclopedia of Library and Information Science. Vol. 2. 2nd ed. New 
York: Dekker, 2003.
McGann, Jerome J., and Lisa Samuels. “Deformance and Interpretation. ” Chapter 4 of 
Radiant Textuality: Literature after the World Wide Web. New York: Palgrave, 2001.
McLuhan, Marshall. Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man.  1964. Cambridge: 
MIT Press, 1994.
Moretti, Franco. “Conjectures on World Literature. ” New Left Review 1 (2000): 54–68.———. Graphs, Maps, Trees: Abstract Models of Literary History. London: Verso, 2005.Motte, Warren F., ed. and trans. Oulipo: A Primer of Potential Literature. Lincoln: Uni-
versity of Nebraska Press, 1986.
———. “Raymond Queneau and the Aesthetic of Formal Constraint. ” Romanic Review 
82.2 (1991): 192–209.
Mueller, Martin. “Digital Shakespeare or Toward a Literary Informatics. ” Shakespeare 
4.3 (2008): 284–301.
———. WordHoard. Vers. 1.2.8. 29 May 2008. http://wordhoard.northwestern.edu/user -
man/index.html
Oulipo. Atlas de littérature potentielle. Paris: Gallimard, 1981.Plato. Plato: The Collected Dialogues.  Ed. Edith Hamilton and Huntington Cairns. Prince -
ton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1989.
Pope, Rob. Textual Intervention: Critical and Creative Strategies for Literary Studies. Lon-
don: Routledge, 1995.
Potter, Roseanne G. “Literary Criticism and Literary Computing: The Difficulties of a 
Synthesis. ” Computers and the Humanities 22 (1988): 91–97.
Queneau, Raymond. Le Voyage en Gréce. Paris: Gallimard, 1973.
Ramsay, Stephen. “In Praise of Pattern. ” TEXT Technology 14.2 (2005): 177–90.
Rockwell, Geoffrey. TAPoR (Text Analysis Portal for Research). Vers. 1, rev. 1201. 29 May 
2008. http://portal.tapor.ca/portal/portal.
———. “TAPoR Portal Recipes. ” 29 May 2008. Text Analysis Developers Alliance. http://
tada.mcmaster.ca/Main/TaporRecipes.
———. “What Is Text Analysis?” 29 May 2008. Text Analysis Developers Alliance. http://
tada.mcmaster.ca/Main/WhatTA.
Rockwell, Geoffrey, and Stéfan Sinclair. “There’s a Toy in My Essay! Problems with the 
Rhetoric of Text Analysis. ” 29 May 2008. GeoffreyRockwell.com. http://www.philoso-
phi.ca/pmwiki.php/Main/TheRhetoricOfTextAnalysis.
Rosenthal, Michael. Virginia Woolf. London: Routledge, 1979.
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   93 10/27/11   1:54 PM
94 Works Cited
Rutt, Richard, ed. The Book of Changes (Zhouyi). Durham East-Asia Series 1. Richmond, 
U.K.: Routledge-Curzon Press, 1996.
Schirato, Anthony. “Comic Politics and Politics of the Comic: Walter Abish’s Alphabetical 
Africa. ” Critique 33.2 (1992): 133–34.>
Sedgwick, Eve Kosofsky. Between Men: English Literature and Male Homosocial Desire. 
New York: Columbia University Press, 1985.
Sigler, L. E. Fibonacci’s  Liber Abaci: A Translation into Modern English of Leonardo Pisano’s 
Book of Calculation. New York: Springer, 2002.
Sinclair, Stéfan. HyperPo.  Vers. 6.0. 29 May 2008. HyperPo: Text Analysis and Exploration 
Tools. http://tapor.mcmaster.ca/~hyperpo/Versions/6.0.
Snow, Charles Percy. The Cultures and Scientific Revolution.  Cambridge: Cambridge Uni -
versity Press, 1959.
Starobinsky, Jean. Words upon Words: The Anagrams of Ferdinand de Saussure.  Trans. 
Olivia Emmet. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1979.
Stillman, Linda Klieger. Alfred Jarry. Twayne World Author Series 681. Boston: Twayne, 
1983.
———. “Physics and Pataphysics: The Sources of Faustroll. ” Kentucky Romance Quarterly 
26 (1979): 81–92.
Suchman, Lucy A. Plans and Situated Actions: The Problem of Human-Machine Com -
munication. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987.
Thomas, Dylan. The Poems of Dylan Thomas. New York: New Directions, 2003.
Thomas, Jean-Jacques. “README.DOC: On Oulipo. ” Substance 56 (1988): 18–28.
Turing, A. M. “Computing Machinery and Intelligence. ” Mind 59.236 (1950): 433–60.
Walker-Pelkey, Faye. “‘Frige hwæt ic hatte:’ ‘The Wife’s Lament’ as Riddle. ” Papers on 
Language and Literature 28.3 (1992).
Wallace, Miriam L. “Theorizing Relational Subjects: Metonymic Narrative in The Waves. ” 
Narrative 8.3 (2000): 294–323.
Weizenbaum, Joseph. Computer Power and Human Reason: From Judgment to Calcula-
tion. San Francisco: Freeman, 1976.
Whitehead, Alfred North. An Introduction to Mathematics.  Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1997.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. Philosophical Investigations. Trans. G. E. M. Anscombe. Oxford: 
Blackwell, 1992.
———. Tractatus Logico-Philisophicus. London: Routledge, 1974.
Woolf, Virginia. “How Should One Read a Book?” The Second Common Reader: Annotated 
Edition. 1932. San Diego: Harvest-HBJ, 1986.
———. The Waves. San Diego: Harvest-HBJ, 1931.
Zeitlyn, David. “Divination as Dialogue: Negotiation of Meaning with Random Re -
sponses. ” Social Intelligence and Interaction: Expressions and Implications of the Social 
Bias in Human Intelligence. Ed. Esther N. Goody. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995.
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   94 10/27/11   1:54 PM
index
Aarseth, Espen, 40-41
Abelson, Harold, 65Abish, Walter, 28-29absurdism, 20Achebe, Chinua, 42, 44Alfred Jarry, 21, 24algorithmic criticism, 2-3, 6, 32, 55-56, 85; 
central hermeneutical tenet of, 16; defor -
mance in, 33, 36, 38-41; entropic poetry 
and, 36-38; ergodic cybertexts and, 40-42; 
hermeneutical framework in, 9; inter -
pretive methods, 10-11; laddered, 80-81; machines, 63-65; mathematics of, 11-15; of narratives, 41-43; radical transformation in, 16-17; science versus humanities and, 19-20; social and cultural obstacles to, 79-80; textbook on, 32-33; verification in, 7-8; vocabulary richness and, 71-73. See also digital humanities
algorithms: distrust of, 18-19; origins of, 18al-Kwarizmì, 18alliteration, 29, 46Alphabetical Africa, 28-29Alternative Readings in Old English Poetry, 
51-52
alternative text, 43-45, 51, 56
Ambassadors, The, 71
anagrams, 47, 49-50anticipatory plagiary, 36authorship attribution, 6, 10, 19Bayard, Pierre, 78Bens, Jacques, 25Bök, Christian, 22
Bold, Stephen C., 18, 19
Boys, Charles Vernon, 23Brotchie, Alastair, 26Burrows, John, 8-9Busa, Roberto, 1-3, 6Bush, Vannevar, 78Buzetti, Dino, 68
Cather, Willa, 71
Cent Mille Milliards de Poems, 25Chapman, Stanley, 26Charlotte: A Tale of Truth, 79
Charlotte’s Daughter, 79
Charney, Maurice, 70Christianity, 43-44Circlot, Juan-Eduardo, 36circular reasoning, 19
Common Reader, The, 12
computing: algorithmic criticism, 63-65; 
counseling by, 60-62; deformation, 66; Fibonacci sequence and, 64-66; textual analysis through, 66-68. See also digital humanities
“Computing Machinery and Intelligence, ” 
88-89n1
Confucianism, 44Conrad, Joseph, 42
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   95 10/27/11   1:54 PM
96 Index
constraint, 25, 28
counseling by machine, 60-62Craig, D. H., 8-9Craig, Hugh, 19Crookes, William, 23, 24-25cybertexts, ergodic, 40-42
Dadaism, 27, 50
deformance/deformation, 33, 36, 53, 54-55; I 
Ching and, 38-41; patterns and, 48-49
De Rerum Natura, 47DeRose, Stephen J., 68Derrida, Jacques, 76-77Dickinson, Emily, 33-35, 48, 50, 51, 55, 88n1digital humanities: criticisms of, 4-5; intel-
lectual rationale for, 4; literary criticism in, 8; modern, 3-5, 83-84; origins of, 1-3; supporters of, 5. See also computing
“Digital Shakespeare, ” 70, 78distant reading, 77Dracula, 71
eisegesis, 32
ELIZA, 58-59, 89n2; counseling test, 60-62Ellis, John, 3entropic poetry, 36-38
ergodic cybertexts, 40-42
Faulkner, William, 71, 72-73
Faustroll, 20-24Federalist, The, 6, 10Fibonacci sequence, 64-66Fisher, Ben, 87n3“Force That through the Green Fuse Drives 
the Flower, The, ” 36-37
Foucquet, Jean-François, 43
Gadamer, Hans-Georg, 7
Garfinkel, Harold, 60-62Gestes et opinions du docteur Faustroll, pata-
physcien, 20-24
Goblin Market, 74-77Gottschall, Jonathan, 4-5
Greek poetry, 45-47
hapax legomena, 11
Haraway, Donna, 60Heart of Darkness, 42hermeneutical framework of literary criti-
cism, 7-8, 77-78
Hockey, Susan, 4, 8Homer, 69-71Hoover, David, 71, 72, 73How to Talk about Books You Haven’t 
Read, 78
hybrid sonnets, 30-31HyperPo, 74-77, 80, 81hypertext, 78
I Ching, 38-41, 50, 51, 88n4; alternative 
textualities of, 43-45; English Bible and, 
43-44
imaginary solutions, 20-21Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl, 79
interpretive text analysis, 10-11, 51-54inventio, 7, 16, 19Irizarry, Estelle, 32, 36
James, Henry, 71
Jane Eyre, 67Janés, Clara, 36Jarry, Alfred, 20-25, 31, 87n3
katagesis, 32
Kelvin, Lord, 23Kim, 71, 72Kipling, Rudyard, 71
Kitab al-jabr wa’l-muqabala, 18
Kuhn, Thomas S., 23
Latin poetry, 45-47
Lawrence, D. H., 71Legge, James, 43-44Leslie, R. F., 53Lewis, Sinclair, 71Liber Abaci, 64Light in August, 71, 72-73limitations of textual analysis, 9-10London, Jack, 71
Mach, Ernst, 23
Madison, James, 6Main Street, 71, 72Mandel, Jerome, 51-54
mannequins, 47
Mannheim, Karl, 60Manning, Christopher D., 15mathematics: computing and, 65-66; of 
poetry, 25-28; of text analysis, 11-15
Mathews, Harry, 26, 30Mathews algorithm, 29-30, 88n8McGann, Jerome, 32, 33, 38, 88n3
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   96 10/27/11   1:54 PM
 Index 97
McLuhan, Marshall, 62, 81
meaning, 50-51metaphors, 73-74Michelangelo, 68Minister’s Wooing, The, 79Moby Dick, 69Modernism, 8, 10MONK (Metadata Offer New Knowledge), 
79-80, 81
Moretti, Franco, 5, 77Motte, Warren F., 26, 27, 28, 30Mueller, Martin, 69-71, 78, 79My Ántonia, 71
narratives, 41-43
Norton Anthology of Poetry, 51, 53-54
objectivity in textual analysis, 34-35, 79-80
ostranenie, 3Oulipo, 25, 27-31, 32, 45, 46, 51, 88n7Oulipo Compendium, The, 32
Pataphysician’s Library, The, 87n3
pataphysics, 20-25, 31patterns, 48-49, 55-57Picture of Dorian Gray, The, 71
Pingala, 64
Pisano, Leonardo, 64Plato, 19, 70poetry, 51; anagrams, 47, 49-50; deformation 
of, 48-49, 53-54; hybrid, 30-31; interpreta-tion, 51-54; Latin and Greek form, 45-46; mathematical properties of, 25-28; mean-ings, 50-51; metaphors, 73-74; objectivity in analysis of, 34-35; Oulipian form, 29-31, 46, 51; patterns, 48-49, 55-57; realistic pos-sibilities of nonsense, 23-24; Saturnian, 46-47; theme words, 46-47; transforma-tion into entropic, 36-38
Pope, Rob, 32-33, 38potentiality, 25, 27, 30-31Potter, Roseanne, 3Presidential Addresses to the Society for Psy-
chical Research 1882-1911, 24
principal component analysis, 8-9Pudd’nhead Wilson, 71
Queneau, Raymond, 25-28reading: distant, 77; subjectivity in, 6-7, 79
reductio, 23rhetoric, 19, 54-55, 80-81richness, vocabulary, 71-73Rockwell, Geoffrey, 74, 80Romeo and Juliet, 6
Rosenthal, Michael, 10Rossetti, Christina, 74-75Rutt, Richard, 39, 44-45
Samuels, Lisa, 32, 33, 38, 88n3
Saturnian poetry, 46-47
Saussure, Ferdinand de, 45-51Scheme, 66Schütze, Hinrich, 15science: experimental, 22-23; imaginative vi-
sion in, 21-22, 25; pataphysics and, 20-25; philosophy of, 25; thought experiments in, 23-24, 31
Sea Wolf, The, 71, 72Sedgwick, Eve Kosofsky, 54-56Shakespeare, William, 55-56, 66-67, 69-71Shao Yong, 44Sinclair, Stéfan, 74, 80Snow, C. P ., 4, 19Soap Bubbles: Their Colours and the Forces 
Which Mould Them, 23-24
sonnets, 55-56. See also poetry
Sons and Lovers, 71
Starobinsky, Jean, 47, 48Stillman, Linda Klieger, 21, 22, 24Stoker, Bram, 71Structure and Interpretation of Computer 
Programs, The, 65
stylometry, 19subjectivity in reading, 6-7, 79Sussman, Gerald, 65
text analysis: alternative text, 43-45, 51, 56; 
authorship attribution, 6, 10; distant read-
ing, 77; hermeneutical framework of, 7-8, 77-78; humanistic discourse in, 4-5, 74; intellectual rationale for technology use in, 4; interpretive, 10-11, 51-54; limitations of, 9-10; mathematics of, 11-15; meaning 
and, 50; metaphors in, 73-74; objectivity 
in, 34-35, 79-80; origins of, 1-3; principal component analysis in, 8-9; subjectivity in, 6-7, 79-80; technology in, 3-5; through computing, 66-68; verification in, 7-8, 14-15; word frequency and, 69-71, 74-76; WordHoard, 69. See also algorithmic criticism
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   97 10/27/11   1:54 PM
98 Index
Text Analysis Portal for Research (TAPoR), 
73-74, 77, 81
Textual Intervention, 32
theme words, 46-47“There’s a Toy in My Essay! Problems with 
the Rhetoric of Text Analysis, ” 80
Thomas, Dylan, 36-37Thomas Aquinas, 1, 2-3, 6thought experiments, 23, 31
Tom Jones, 77
To the Lighthouse, 71Tractatus, 80Truth and Method, 7Turing test, 68; basic elements, 58, 88-89n1; 
counseling of students and, 60-62; ELIZA and, 58-63, 89n2
Twain, Mark, 71“Two Culture and Scientific Revolution, 
The, ” 19
Uncle Tom’s Cabin, 79verification, 7-8, 14-15vocabulary: patterns, 11-14; richness, 71-73
Walker-Pelkey, Faye, 52
Wallace, Miriam, 6-7, 8, 9-10War of the Worlds, The, 71
Waves, The, 6-7, 12-14Weizenbaum, Joseph, 58-59, 68Wells, H. G., 71
Whitehead, Alfred North, 69
“Wife’s Lament, The, ” 51-54Wilde, Oscar, 71wise eclecticism, 3Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 16, 48, 80Woolf, Virginia, 6-7, 9-11, 15, 71word frequency, 69-71, 74-76WordHoard, 69-71, 77, 81
Xiantin, 44Zeitlyn, David, 62
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   98 10/27/11   1:54 PM
Topics in The digiT al huManiTies
From Papyrus to Hypertext: Toward the Universal Digital Library  
Christian Vandendorpe, translated from the French  
by Phyllis Aronoff and Howard Scott
Reading Machines: Toward an Algorithmic Criticism Stephen Ramsay
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   99 10/27/11   1:54 PM
 The univeRsiTy of illinois pRess
is a founding member of the Association of 
American University Presses.
Title page graphics by Alex DeArmond.Written using LaTeX (on the command-line 
of a Linux machine using Vim), edited in 
Microsoft Word, designed and composed in 
Adobe InDesign, and reinstantiated with an offset lithographic printing press.
Composed in 10.5/13 Adobe Minion Pro  
with Trade Gothic display at the University  
of Illinois Press.  
Manufactured by Thomson-Shore, Inc.
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820-6903
www.press.uillinois.edu
sTephen RaMsay  is an associate professor 
of English at the University of Nebraska and has 
written and lectured widely on subjects related to 
literary theory and software design for humanities.
i-xii_1-100_Rams.indd   100 10/27/11   1:54 PM
